
      
         
            
            
            The Booke of Faulconrie or HauKING, FOR THE ONELY DE
               light
and pleaſure of all Noblemen and Gentlemen: Collected out of the beſt aucthors, aſvvell Italians as Frenchmen, and ſome Engliſh practiſes withall concernyng Faulconrie, the contentes whereof are to be ſeene in the next page folowyng. By George Turberuile Gentleman.
            NOCET EMPTA DOLORE VOLVPTAS.
            
               depiction of three men with falcon and dogs.
            
            Imprinted at London for Chriſtopher Barker, at the ſigne of the Graſhopper in Paules Churchyarde. Anno. 1575.
         
         
            
            The Contentes of the Booke.
            
               A deſcription of all kindes of Haukes that are in vſe, and theyr properties.
               The reclayming, imping, mevving, and fleyng, both the fielde and riuer of the ſame Haukes.
               Their diſeaſes and cures, and all ſuche ſpeciall points as in any vviſe appertaine to that moſt excellent and Gentlemanlike qualitie.
               Alſo a littell treatiſe tranſlated out of the Italian tongue, touchyng the diſeaſes happening to Spaniels, vvith their cures.
            
         
         
            
            To the right Honourable, my verie good Lord, Ambroſe, Earle of Warwicke, Baron Liſle, Maiſter of hir Maieſties Ordinance, Knight of the moſt honourable order of the
Garter, and of hir highneſſe priuie Counſell: George Turberuile wiſheth encreaſe of honoure, with all good fortune.
            
            
               RIght Honorable, if a man oughte of dutie to offer gretest recōpence where he lies moſt deeply indetted, and that all ſeruices are due to thoſe, from whome we receyue our only countenance and ayde: Truly of force then must J yeeld all my endeuours and ſeruice to your Honour, and my good Ladie Warwike, (the duetie reſerued to my great Lorde and Maſter) towardes the requitall of the leaſt part of your Honourable goodneſſe, whome J haue euer

though J know and confeſſe farre to baſe for your worthie mind and calling: yet for that it beſt fitteth a melancholike heade, ſurcharged with penſiue and ſullen humors, my earneſt ſute muſt be for good acceptance at your honors hands, and withall, to craue that it may boldly paſſe vnder the ſhielde and ſafetie of your garde, the better to brooke the hatefull encounter of ſwelling enuy, a common foe to ſuch, as either ſeeke by well doing, to win good will from equals, or by painful writing, to purchaſe prayſe from Peeres. The deuice is none of mine, but a collection out of ſundry Authors, aſwell Italians, as French, from whom J haue gathered ſome chiefe points of Falconrie, to pleaſure my Country men withall: In part for that I neuer found hitherto any booke treating of the ſame matter, in part, bicauſe J know ſundry Gentlemen (my great friends) deeply

addicted to that commendable ſport of hawking, whom if I may find as gratefull, as I haue framed my ſelfe painfull, I haue the hoped hire of my trauell, and they aſſured to beſtowe no more on mee for my forepaſſed induſtrie, than they are to receiue frō me for their after curteſie. So as there doth reſt no more vpon my hands at this time, but to intreat your Honor to beſtow your good liking, and lawful fauour vpon it, and me: For which as I haue alwayes beene by deſert bounde, ſo will I by franke good will, reſt moſt ready to the expence of my dutiful ſeruice vpon your noble line and houſe, during the remainder of my life: wiſhing vnto your Honor, and my verye good Ladie, (Ladie Counteſſe Warwicke) all good ſucceſſe and fortune, with maintenance and encreaſe of your Honorable ſtate and preſent felicitie.
            
               
                  Your Honors moſt bounden Orator George Turberuile.
            
         
         
            
            
            In commendation of Hawking
            
               George Turberuile.
            
            I Deeme that no man doubts, but games and al our chiefe delights,
            VVere firſt deuiſde to daūt the dumps of pēſiue payned ſprights.
            To cleare the clowds of drowping cares, and miſts of mournful mind,
            And baniſh bale, that heauy harts in cheerleſſe chaines did bind.
            And more than that, to further health, by mouing to and froe,
            That in our lumpiſh luſtleſſe limmes, no dire diſeaſe might groe:
            VVhich otherwiſe (ſet ſport aſide, and ſweete delightfull glee)
            In idle bodies breedes of force, as we by proofe do ſee,
            Not much vnlike the ſtanding lakes, in durtie dampiſh groundes,
            VVhere water hath no power to paſſe, moſt noiſome filth aboundes.
            If games were thus found out at firſt, for minde and bodies eaſe,
            Aſwell to quit that one of griefes, as th' other of diſeaſe:
            VVhy then? of force it follow muſt, that thoſe delights are chiefe,
            And moſt to be imbraſte, that lend to either part reliefe.
            VVhich if be ſo, I neede not bluſh; or deeme it my diſgrace,
            If Hawkes and Spanels I preferre, and ſet in hieſt place.
            For truly no deuiſe delights, the minde of man ſo much,
            No game ſo gladſome to the limmes, there is no pleaſure ſuch,
            No Phiſicke fitter to remoue the dregges of direfull paine,
            And to reſtore to former life, the feeble force againe.
            Of Spanels first I meane to ſpeake, for they begin the glee,
            VVho being once vncoupled, when they feele their collers free,
            In royſting wiſe about they raunge, with cheerfull chappes to ground,
            To ſee where in the champion may, ſome lurking fowle be found.
            A ſport to vew them ſtirre their ſternes, in hunting to and fro,
            And to beholde how nature doth hir power in Spanels ſho:
            VVho ſcoure the fields with wōdrous skil, and deale in cunning ſort,
            As though indeed they had conſpirde, to make their maſter ſport.
            VVhat merier muſicke can you craue? what note but halfe ſo good?
            As when the Spanels croſſe the ronne, of Feaſants in the wood?
            Or light vpon the little Poutes, where they haue lately bene?
            Aſſuredly no better glee, is either heard or ſeene.
            
               So as by Hawkes doth pleaſure grow, vnto the gazing eie,
            And dogges delight the liſtning eares, before the hawkes do flie.
            VVhat dolt ſo dull but takes delight, when once the Spanell ſprings
            The fearfull fowle, and when the hawke lies long vpon hir wings?
            VVhat ſenſe ſo ſad, what minde ſo mazde, but ſettes his ſorowes by,
            VVhen once the Falcon free begins, to ſcud amid the skie?
            To turne and winde a birde by ſleight, and eke at last to ſlay
            VVith ſtrong encounter, doues and duckes, and euery other pray?
            The pretty Partridge, Rayles and Quayles, that haunt the open field?
            And from hir mountey to enforce the Hearon haught to yeeld?
            By binding with hir cloſe in cloudes, in maner out of ſight?
            For noble Peeres and cheefeſt States, a paſsing pleaſant flight?
            So ſmall a birde, ſo large a fowle, at ſuch a loftie gate,
            To reach and rappe, and force to fall, it is a game of ſtate.
            No fellow to the flight at Brooke, that game is full of glee,
            It is a ſport the ſtowping of, a royſting Hawke to ſee.
            And if ſhe miſſe, to marke hir how ſhe then gettes vp amaine,
            For beſt aduauntage, to eneaw the ſpringing fowle againe.
            VVho if be landed as it ought, then is it ſure to die.
            Or if ſhe ſlippe, a ioy to ſee, the Hawke at randon flie,
            And ſo for head to ſlea the fowle, a noble ſport to vew,
            In my conceyt no pleaſure like to Hawkes, I tell you trew.
            It ſettes the ſenſes all to worke, there may none idle bee,
            The tung it lures, the legges they leape, the eie beholdes the glee:
            The eares are buſied eke to heare, the calling Spanels queſt,
            Do tell me then what ſenſe it is, that reſpite hath to reſt?
            And more than that, the hart it leapes, and laughes for ioy to think
            How ſuch a ſlender hawke ſhould cauſe, ſo huge a fowle to ſhrink.
            This kinde of ſport doth baniſh vice, and vile deuiſes quight,
            VVhen other games do foſter faults, and breede but baſe delight.
            No idle thought can harbor well within the Falconers braine,
            For though his ſportes right pleaſant be, yet are they mixt with paine.
            The toile he takes to find the fowle, his greedy luſt to ſlay,
            The fowle once found cuts off cōceits, & driues il thoughts away.
            
               He lures, he leapes, he calles, he cries, he ioyes, he waxeth ſad,
            and frames his moode, according as his hawke doth well or bad.
            Dame Venus harbors not in holtes, no Cupide haunts the hilles,
            Diana dwelles in open place, with bow hir game ſhe killes.
            In wooddes no wanton Goddeſſe woonnes: in Cities ſoiournes ſinne,
            There vice in vawts & dungeon dwelles, the lecher lurks within.
            Dianas traine doth loue the laundes, they long abrode to rome,
            But bawdie Venus ympes embrace, the loitring life at home.
            To dice, to daunce, to coll, to kiſſe, to carde the time away,
            To prate, to prancke, to bowle, to bowſe, and ripple out the day.
            To checke at Cheſſe, to heaue at Maw, at Macke to paſſe the time,
            At Coſes, or at Saunt to ſit, or ſet their reſt at Prime.
            Both Ticktacke and the Iriſh game, are ſportes but made to ſpende,
            I wote not I, to what auaile thoſe trifling games do tende,
            Vnleſſe to force a man to chaufe, to chide, to ſweate, to ſweare,
            To brawle, to ban, to curſſe, and God in thouſand parts to teare.
            At cockepit ſome their pleaſures place, to wager wealth away,
            VVhere Falkners only force the fields, to heare their ſpanels bay.
            VVhat greater glee can man deſire, than by his cunning skill,
            So to reclaime a haggarde hawke, as ſhe the fowle ſhall kill.
            To make and man hir in ſuch ſort, as toſsing out a traine,
            Or but the lewre, when ſhe is at large, to whoup hir in againe?
            VVhere birds, & beaſts, & ech thing elſe, their fredom ſo embrace,
            As let them looſe, they will be thralde no more in any caſe.
            VVhat finer feate than ſo to ympe a feather, as in vew,
            A man would ſweare it were the olde, and not ſet on anew?
            VVhen hawkes are hurt and brooſde, by raſh encounter in the skies,
            VVhat better skill, than for their harmes a powder to deuiſe,
            To drie the bloud within the bulcke, and make his Mummie ſo,
            As no Phiſition greater Arte, on pacients can beſtow?
            To cure the crampe, and eke the cray, the ſtone that lies within,
            The Philanders, the Frounce, the Goute, the Panthas, & the pin,
            The Rie, the Rhewme, the Canker, and both lice and mytes to marre,
            And all ſuch wormes, as with your hawks do wage cōtinual war:
            
               To make hir mewe when time requires, to bowſe and eke to bath.
            By cunning skill to cauſe hir caſt, ſuch glit as breedes hir skath.
            To cut hir hoodes, to ſhape hir geſſe, hir tyrets, and hir line,
            VVith Belles, and Bewets, Veruels eke, to make the Falcon fine:
            Beleue me is no common skill, no bare or baſe deuiſe,
            But meet, for ciuill courtly men, that are reputed wiſe.
            VVhich if be ſo, then yeelde me thankes, that beate my buſie brow,
            And tooke this toile for thine auaile, to teach thee when & how
            To worke this practiſe and deuice. Accept the Printers paine,
            VVho ſhewes thee ſundry ſhapes of hawks, though litle to his gain.
            Both he and I can do no more, than offer our good will,
            And all to further thy delight, and adde vnto thy skill.
            VVhich if we do, we haue the hire, of both our meanings than,
            You cannot do a better deede than thanke the painfull man.
            
               George Turberuile.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Induction or proeme to this diſcourſe, and treatiſe of Hawking.
            
               WE find this a generall rule and obſeruation, and doe holde it for good, in all Artes and Sciences, wherein men do trauell and buſie them ſelues, eyther to the benefite of others, or to their owne pryuate pleaſure, and humores, in the beginning of their workes to lay downe the ſubiecte of that whereof they meane to treate, whiche in verie deede is nothing elſe, but the ground and matter which doth moue them to write: which doth not only fall out in all liberall ſciences, and ſtudies greatly accompted and reuerenced of the learned of all ages, but alſo in the baſe and groſſer trades of men, dayly practiſed with the hande. As when the Goldſmithe doth determine with him ſelfe by curious and cunning arte, to faſhion a Iewell of any price and value, he is driuen to make choyce of his mettall, either golde or ſiluer, whereon to beſtowe the excellencie of his arte, which cannot be named by a more fit or conuenient terme, than to be called the Subiecte of his ſcience. Likewiſe here myne Author, in this treatiſe, and booke of Falconrie, following the accuſtomed order of the learned, and common practiſe of ſuch as doe write, hath layde downe a Hawke, the Subiect of his deuiſe, of which he is determined at large to ſpeake, with full ſhewe and declaration of the true nature and properties of all Hawkes, as alſo ſuch other matter as is incident, and appertayning in any reſpecte to that ſkill, of all other gentlemanly ſportes and practiſes, the moſt pleaſant and commendable. But before he doth aduenture too deale ſpecially of any matter concerning Falconrie, to giue the Reader a perfite and abſolute vnderſtanding, both of his conceite, and of the knowledge of the thing, hee thinketh it not beſides his purpoſe, but a matter moſt neceſſarie to the attaynment

of his deuiſe, to frame a generall diuiſion of all Hawkes and Birdes of praye, racking (as it were) and deuiding that one entyre and generall name of a Hawke into many members and partes, the better thereby to diſplay the true nature, qualitie, and condition of a Hawke, as alſo the ſkill of Falconrie: for the whole being layde out into his members and partes, it ſhall bee the more eaſie to come to the notyce of that, whereof he is reſolued to write, whoſe nature and ſubſtance is included in his particular members. Wherfore myne Author following that order and preſcribed rule of knowledge, hath vſed this methode, ſetting downe to the viewe of the reader, in the verie entrie and proeme of his worke, a manifeſt and generall diuiſion of Hawkes, the better to decypher the ſpeciall nature, of eache one Hawke in his own proper kynd, which otherwiſe were verie hard to do, by meane of confuſion of ſundrie names and termes, as alſo, the number of byrdes of praye.
         
         
            
            A generall diuiſion of Hawkes, and Birdes of praie, after the opinion of one Franceſco Sforzino Vycentino, an
Italyan Gentleman Falconer.
            
            Firſt (ſayth hee) you ſhall vnderſtand, that of Hawkes, that doe liue by praye, and are in knowledge and vſe of men, there are nyne kindes.
            
               1 The Egle.
               2 The Mylyon.
               3 The Gerfalcon.
               4 The Falcon.
               5 The Merlyn.
               6 The Hobbye.
               7 The Goſehawke.
               8 The Sparowhawke.
               9 The Matagaſſe.
            
            This Hawke whome I terme a Matagaſſe, after the French is in the Italian tounge, called, Regestola Falconera, and among the Germās, Thornkretzera, Hawke not in vſe with vs, and in trouth of ſlēder regard and eſtimation in nature. Yet neuertheleſſe, both to followe myne Author, and to make my diuiſion perfect, I holde it needefull to recken that kynde of Hawke among the reſt: and in the latter ende of the firſt part of this treatiſe, I will briefly deſcribe you his nature, which is no leſſe baſe than ſtraunge.
            You muſt note, that all theſe kynde of Hawkes, haue their Tyercelles, whiche are the male byrdes and cockes of euerie ſorte and gender: And further, that the female of all byrdes of praye and rauyne, is euer more huge than the male, more ventrous, hardie, and watchfull, but of ſuche byrdes as do not liue by rauyne and pray, the male is more large than the female.
            
               A ſecond or ſubdiuiſion.
               MOreouer, you ſhall know, that thoſe nyne ſortes of hawkes, may againe be deuided into two kyndes, and eyther differing from the other in condition.
               For ſome of them do pray vpon the foule, by ſtouping down from their winges, and ſo ſeazing on the foule with their foote, doe breake in ſunder with their beakes, the necke bone, beeing of

more force and ſtrength in that part, than in the foote or talons. And this ſorte of Hawkes, do neuer vſe to plume or tyre vppon the foul whom they haue ſeazed, vntill ſuch time as they perceiue it to leaue buſking and bating in the foote: of which kynde and qualitie are,

                     1 The Egle.
                     2 The Mylyon.
                     3 The Gerfalcon.
                     4 The Falcon.
                     5 The Merlyn.
                     6 The Hobbye.
                     7 The Matagaſſe.
                  
               
               Nowe that other ſort which I ſpeake of, do ſlay their praye and game by mayne force of wing, at randon and before head, not ſtowping at all from their wings, as the other hawkes doe, whom I made mention of before. And theſe hawkes haue their chiefe force and ſtrength in the foote, and not in the beake, and therefore no ſoner do ſeaze vpon the pray, but preſently they giue them ſelues to plume and tyre thereon. Of this ſort are

                     1 The Goſſehawke.
                     2 The Tiercle of the Goſſehawke.
                     3 The Sparowhawke.
                  
               
               Thus farre haue I made a generall diuiſion of all kyndes of Hawkes that do liue by pray, & againe (as you ſee) haue deuided thoſe kynds into two partes. Wherefore nowe do I purpoſe to deale more ſpecially in the matter, and more particularly to proceede to the natures of euerie of them, to yeelde you a more perfect knowledge, and light therein.
            
            
               Of the names of Hawkes of praye.
               AL Hawkes and byrdes of pray, be compryſed, and included, vnder theſe two names.
               
                  
                     1 Aetos. or,
                     2 Hierax.
                     
                   which is to ſay,

                     1 Aquila. or,
                     2 Accipiter.
                     
                   which is ye,

                     1 Eagle. or
                     2 Falcon.
                  
               
               
                  Theſe two kindes doe ſerue to flye the praye, for mans pleaſure and paſtime, of which only hawkes, my purpoſe is to treate and ſpeake in this diſcourſe here following.
               For all hawkes and byrdes of praye, do not ſerue the Falconers vſe, but onely ſuch as are hardie and free of mettall, able to flye the fielde and ryuer. And therefore thoſe onely kyndes ſhall be the Subiect of my booke, and not thoſe baſe, baſtardly refuſe hawkes, which are ſomewhat in name, and nothing in deede.
               As the Greekes would, that Hierax, & the Latyns that Accipiter, which is a ſpeciall terme to one hawke and byrde of pray, ſhoulde giue the generall name and title to all Hawkes and byrdes of praye, bycauſe of his excellencie: So in like manner, the Frenchmen of our age, haue ordained that the Falcon, which is a terme peculiar and proper to one kinde of byrde of praye, ſhall giue generall name and appellation to all hawkes, and byrdes of praye, what ſo euer they bee, bycauſe the Falcon doth paſſe all other hawkes in boldneſſe and curteſie, and is moſt familiar to man, of all other byrdes of praye. And thereof it proceedeth, that we ſay, the Falcon Gentle, the Haggart Falcon, the Falcon Sacre, and ſo likewiſe of the other hawkes, calling them all by the name of Falcon.
               Moreouer, as the Falcon, whiche is a ſpeciall name of one kynd of hawkes, hath giuen name to all other hawkes and birds of praye. So hath it beſtowed the name and tytle of a Falconer, to euerie one of what ſtate or calling ſoeuer hee bee, that doth deale with any kinde of Hawkes: and the terme of Falconrie, to the arte, profeſſion, and knowledge of luring and manning thoſe byrdes of praye, by which ſingular ſkyll, they are made to flee all other foules, as well thoſe foules of ayre, as of the lande and ryuer. Whiche in my conceite, deſerueth no ſlender commendation and prayſe, being a matter almoſt quite againſt the lawes of nature and kynde, for one foule ſo artificially to vndertake and ſo cruelly to murther another, and hauing atchieued his enterpriſe, with greedie and willing minde, to repaire to man againe, hauing the whole ſcope of the heauens, and the circuite of the earth at their pleaſure to range and peruſe: and to

yeelde them ſelues in ſuch franke maner to the pryſon and cuſtodie of man, being by kinde ſet free and at libertie to praye, and diſpoſe them ſelues. Suche and ſo great is the ſingular ſkill of man, when by arte he is reſolued, to alter the preſcribed order of nature, which by induſtrie and payne we ſee is brought to paſſe and effect.
            
            
               Of the kyndes of Eagles.
               HAuing deuided all thoſe byrdes of praye and rauine, whiche ſerue to Falconrie & Hawking, into Eagles and Falcons, I mean firſt of al to decypher you the Eagle and Vulture, whom ſome haue thought to be compriſed vnder the kynd of an Eagle. And ſo conſequently after that, to ſpeake of Falcons which are byrdes of pray, ſeruing to the vſe and myſterie of Hawking, and taking their names of the Falcon.
               
                  Aristotle was of opinion, that there was ſixe kynds of Eagles, which are named by him, according as it pleaſed the inhabitantes of Greece to enforme him.
               
                  Plinie in making the ſame deuiſion of Eagles, hath varied in that poynt altogether from Aristotle, as touching the names and termes of Eagles, for that they were of diuers countries, and did write in ſeuerall languages. But for that I meane in this booke onely to ſpeake of thoſe kyndes of Eagles which ſerue to Falconrie, I will deale but with two ſortes of Eagles, for at theſe dayes we haue the vſe and experience but of the browne Eagle, whiche is the Eagle Royall, and the blacke Eagle, the other kyndes being of a baſe and ſlender courage, as no Falconer will payne him ſelfe to lure them, or manne them for vſe or pleaſure.
               
                  
                  Firſt of the browne or yellowe Eagle.
                  
                     depiction of brown or yellow eagle
                  
                  THe brown or yellow Egle after Aristotles opinion is called in Greeke Guyſeon, which doth ſignifie in the Frenche tong (kindly & no baſtard borne) bicauſe it is of all other kynds of Eagles the true & right Eagle, & he doth cal him by ye greeke word
Chriſaitos, by reaſon of his goldē mayle, & in Latin he is termed

                     Stellaris, and Herodus. This is that Eagle whome we call the Egle royall, king of byrdes, and ſometimes the byrde of Iupiter, and that Egle, which ought to be taken and accompted the principall beſt, being more huge and large than the reſt, and beſides more rare and daintie to be ſeene. For ſhee doth haunt moſte commonlye the toppes of highe and craggie mountaines, and doth there praye vpon all ſortes of foules, as alſo Hares, Kyddes Gotes, and ſuch other like wilde, and ſauage beaſtes of the field.
                  This Eagle dothe liue alwayes ſolitarie and alone, vnleſſe happily ſhe haue hir broode with hir, whome ſhe doth conducte and guyde from place to place, the better to inſtruct them howe to kyll their praye, and feede them ſelues. But no ſoner hath ſhe made thē perfit, and throughly ſcooled them therin, but preſently ſhe chaſeth them out of that coaſte, and doth abandon them the place where they were eyred, and will in no wiſe brooke them to abide neare hir, to the ende (that the countrey where ſhe diſcloſeth) and maketh her Eyrie, bee not vnfurniſhed of conuenient pray, which by the number and exceſſiue ſtore of Eagles, might otherwiſe be ſpoyled and made bare. For it is verie likely, that if hir broode and increaſe ſhould there make ſtay, beeing ſo huge byrdes, and of ſo great rauyne, there woulde in ſhort ſpace lacke praye for hir ſelfe, and by meane thereof breede hir to a farther euill and miſchiefe: for the auoyding of whiche, this prouident and carefull foule doth preſently force hir broode to depart into ſome other part and region.
                  This Egle maye with eaſe be diſcerned from the Vulture, bycauſe this Eagle Royall, being browne or yellowe maylde, hath not hir armes or feete in any cōdition couered with plume, as the Vulture hath.
                  True it is, that the arme of the Eagle is ſhort, yellow mayld & all beſet with ſcales, the pounces large, her beake blacke, long, and crooked at the toppe. The trayne of the Egle Royall, as alſo the trayne of the ſlender blacke Egle, is ſhort and ſtiffe at the poynt, euen as the traine of the Vulture is.
                  The Egle is alwayes of one ſelf hugeneſſe, in reſpect of hir nature, and it can not be ſaid, in that ſhe is an Eagle, that ſhe is

either larger or leſſer, at any one time or other, vnleſſe you will giue hir the ſurname and addition of blacke, yellowe, or ſome other ſuch proper name and terme, which doth alter hir according to hir accydentes, but nothing at all in regarde of hir ſubſtance and nature. And were it not that ſhe is ſo maſſy a foule, and not portable on the fiſte (as in troth ſhe is exceeding huge) and beſides, it is ſo harde and difficulte a matter, to prouide hir pray and foode, Princes, and puiſſant ſtates, would more vſually haue hir, and hawke with hir, for their ſolace and pleaſure, than they nowe doe. But by reaſon ſhe is ſo huge and ventrous, ſhe might happily offer force and violence to the eyes and face of hir keper, if at any time ſhe ſhould conceiue diſpleaſure againſt him. And for this cauſe in chiefe, the Egle is not in vſe, as other meaner hawkes and of leſſe force be in theſe dayes.
                  He that will haue the Egle to be good and tractable, muſte deuiſe to take her an Eyeſſe in the Eyrie, mannyng and accuſtoming hir among houndes and greyhoundes, to the end that when he goeth and addreſſeth him to the fielde, the Egle ſoaring aloft ouer the houndes ſtarting the game, Foxe, Hare, Gote, or ſuch like beaſtes of the wood, ſhee making hir downecōme, and ſtouping from hir wings, may ſo ſtay and ſeaze vpon the game, vntill the dogges come in and procure the fall thereof. A man may feede hir with any kynde of fleſh, and chiefly of ſuch game and praye as ſhe ſlayeth in the fielde by flight.
                  Tawnye, or browne mayle in an Eagle, deepe and hollow eyes, ſpecially if ſhe be bred in the weaſt partes of the worlde, is an aſſured ſigne of hir goodneſſe: for the tawnye Egle is euer founde good in proofe.
                  Alſo the whitneſſe on the head of an Eagle, or on hir backe, is a ſingular token of an excellent Eagle.
                  That Eagle, that when ſhe fleeth from the fiſte of hir keeper will either flee vpon the man, ſoaring round about him, or light on the grounde, and take the ſtand, is by al probabilitie and coniecture, no inwarde Eagle, but a fugitiue, and a rangler.
                  At what time the Egle, diſplayes hir trayne in hir flight, and makes a turne in hir mountie, it is a verie great ſigne that ſhee

determineth to flye on head and gadde: the nexte remedie for which miſchiefe is to throwe hir out hir meate, and lure hir with as loude a voyce as you poſſible may. And if it be ſo that ſhe then ſtoupe not to that which is caſte out vnto hir, then eyther hath ſhe ouer gorged hir ſelfe, or otherwiſe ſhe is to hye and too full of fleſhe. A meane to auoyde this inconuenience, is to ſowe the feathers of hir trayne together, to the end ſhe may not ſpread them abroade, nor vſe the benefite of hir trayne feathers in hir flight. Or elſe another way is, to deplume and make bare hir tuell and fundament ſo as it may appeare, and then certainely for feare of the colde ayre ſhe will not aduenture to mounte ſo hie: but feeling hir trayne feathers faſt ſowed together, ſhe will ſtande in awe of other Eagles, whome by the meane of that deuice and practiſe, ſhe ſhall in no wiſe be able to auoyde.
                  When the Eagle maketh a ſhort turne vpon hir keeper in hir flight, and flyeth not out aforehead, that is one principal good token that ſhe will not away.
                  It hath beene ſayde, that an Eagle is of force to areſt and cauſe a woulfe to ſtay, and will take him, with the ayde and aſſiſtance of dogges, making into hir reſcue, and that it hath bene ſeene and experimented. But for my part I finde the oddes of them ſo great, as I leaue the beliefe of it to the reader, not recyting it as a troth, but a thing written, to ſhewe the great hardineſſe and vndaunted nature of the Eagle.
                  It is reported that the men of the countrey where the Eagle eyreth, knowing thereof, and intending to bereaue hir young broode, doe arme and well furniſh their heades, for feare leaſt the Eagle doe offer them force and violence. And if ſo they ſhewe the old breeder one of hir chickens, or tye it to the bough of a tree neare the place where ſhe buildeth, ſhe will call and cauſe the damme to repayre thether by continuall cleping, who findeth hir, and pitying hir cryes, will bring it ſo much prouiſion and praye, as he that commeth to take hir from the eyrie, ſhall there dayly be ſped of as muche fleſhe and prouiſion as will verie reaſonably ſerue him and ſixe others. For the olde Eagle will conuey thyther Hares, Conies, foules, and ſuch other like vittell, and

viandes, for the ſupplye of hir neceſſitie.
                  The Eagle doth not commonly vſe to praye neare vnto his eyrie, but to kyll hir prouiſion abroade as farre off as ſhe maye. And if ſo it happen, ſhe leaue any fleſhe after ſhe is full gorged, that doth ſhe reſerue carefully for the nexte day, to the ende that if foule weather ſhould happily growe to hinder hir flight, yet ſhe might be ſtored of ſufficient praye for the daye following, without any further trauell.
                  An Eagle doth not forſake or chaunge hir Eyrie all hir life time, but of cuſtome doth yearely returne and make repayre to one ſelf place, and there buildeth moſt aſſuredly, by meane where of it hath ben noted and obſerued in time paſt, that an Egle doth lyue verie many yeares. Before hir olde age, hir beake waxeth ſo exceeding long and croked at the toppe, as ſhe is much hindered thereby of hir feeding: in ſort as ſhe dyeth not of diſeaſe or by extremetie of age, but only by reaſon ſhe can not poſſible vſe the benefite of hir beake, being accrewde and growne to ſuch an exceeding length and diſproportion. Whereof commeth the prouerbe as I take it. Aquilae ſenectus the age of an Eagle, which is properly applyed to men that do lyue only by drinke, as olde men are wont to do.
                  The Eagle doth euer wage warre with the little Roytelet, whome the Frenche men doe ſo terme, for that this foule is thought to be a little king among byrdes, as the Etimologie of the worde doth ſeeme to importe, the Latines likewiſe they call him Regulus, and the Germans a Goldhenlyne. The occaſion and chiefe grounde of this controuerſie betwixte the Eagle and the Goldhenlyne, is (by the report of Aristotle) onely vpon the name, for that ſhe is called the king of birdes, of which title and preheminence the Eagle would willingly bereaue hir.
                  Againe there is one other kind of litle foule whom Ariſtotle calleth a Sitta, the Latines Reptitatrix or Scandulaca, and the Frenchmen Grimpereau, that doth ye Egle verie great outrage & offence. For no ſoner perceiueth ſhe the Eagle to be abſent from the eyrie, but preſently in great diſpite ſhe breaketh all hir egges in pieces.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           This little foule is called.
                           In French.
                           
                              Roytelet.
                           
                           Theſe two being in a maner ye leſt birds of all other, are the greteſt and deadlieſt enimies to the Egle and do cōtend with hir vpon poyntes of principalitie & rule.
                        
                        
                           In Latine.
                           
                              Regulus.
                           
                        
                        
                           In the German tong.
                           Goldhenlyne.
                        
                        
                           That other.
                           In Greeke.
                           
                              Sitta.
                           
                        
                        
                           In Latine.
                           
                              Scandulaca.
                           
                        
                        
                           In French.
                           
                              Grimpereau.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  When I ſayde before, that the Eagle royall was of a yellow mayle, I meant nothing elſe by that ſpeach, but that the Eagle was maylde, of the verie coloure of a Deares haire, which is in deede not yellowe, but browne or tawnie. And albeit Aristotle for his pleaſure, termed it by the Greeke worde, Chriſaitos, which is as much in effect, as to ſay, the golden Egle: yet muſt it not therefore bee concluded, that this Eagle is of a right golden mayle, but of a more browne or tawnie mayle, than the other kinde of Eagle is.
                  The Paynters, and Statuaries of Rome, haue diſguiſed this Egle in their portraytours, for euery man knoweth, that it is farre otherwiſe, than they haue drawne it.
                  As well the browne Eagles as the blacke, are ſkynned and vncaſed, as the Vultures be, and their ſkynnes ſent to the furryers and pellytours of Fraunce, with their winges, heades, and talons, and euen of the ſame verie coloure, as I haue here ſet it downe, and declared it vnto you.
               
               
                  
                  Of the blacke Eagle.
                  
                     depiction of black eagle
                  
                  I Haue ſignified vnto, you that there are only two ſortes of Eagles which ſerue for Falconrie, which are the yellow or tawnie Eagle, whome I haue hitherto treated of, and the blacke Eagle whome I muſt now decypher vnto you.
                  
                     
                     Aristotle doth terme the blacke Eagle Melauratus, and Lagophanos, bycauſe ſhe taketh the Hare: and this Eagle the Latines call Pulla, Fuluia, Leporaria, and Valeria, the oddes and difference betwixte theſe two Eagles is eaſie to be founde, for this blacke Eagle is leſſe than the Eagle royall, which is the yellow and tawnie Eagle, and the blacke Eagle doth as muche differ from the yellowe Eagle, as the blacke Mylion doth from the Mylion Royall.
                  
                     Plinie hath placed this blacke Eagle in the firſte order and rancke of Eagles, as one that would willingly prefer hir before all other kyndes of Eagles. And here Aristotle hath ſet hir but in the thirde order and place.
                  The blacke Eagle (ſayth he) being leſſe huge and corpulent than the other, is of farre more force and excellencie.
                  Moreouer he affirmeth that the Eagles doe towre vppe and mount ſo hye, of purpoſe for proſpect, and to ſee from farre. And by reaſon that their ſight is ſo cleare and perfect, men haue reported them of all others, to be the only byrdes that doe participate with the diuine nature.
                  Moreouer, for the feare the Eagle hath of hir excellent eyes, ſhe maketh not hir ſtowping from hir gate at once, and raſhly, as other kynd of long winged hawkes do, but by litle and litle.
                  The Hare is a praye in whome ſhe taketh great pleaſure, yet when ſhe findeth the Hare running, ſhe offereth not forth with to ſeaze on him vpon the mountaine, but can forbeare and ſtaye hir time, vntil he be on the playne champion, and then ſeazing on him, ſhe preſently caryeth him not away, but doth firſt make trial and experience of him, poyſing and weying him in hir pounces, and after that lifting vp the ſillie beaſt, doth beare him cleane away, and prayeth on him at hir beſt will and pleaſure.
               
            
            
               
               Nowe as touching the Vultures, and firſt of the large aſhe coloured or blacke Vulture.
               
                  depiction of black vulture
               
               
                  THere are two ſortes of Vultures, to wit, the aſhe mayld, or blacke Vulture, and the browne or whitiſh Vulture. Firſt will I ſpeake of the blacke or aſhmaylde Vulture, who is in deede more huge than the browne, for the aſhe-coloured Vulture is the moſt large byrde of praye that is to be founde, and the female Vulture more large than the male, euen as it falleth out by experience in all kyndes of byrdes of praye and rauyne.
               The Greekes, they call the Vulture Gips, and the Latines
Vulture.
               
               This Hawke is a paſſenger in Egipt, more knowne by hir coate and caſe than otherwiſe, bycauſe the furryers doe vſe their ſkynnes for ſtomackgers, to guard and defend the breſt againſt the force of feruent colde.
               All other byrdes of praye do differ from the Vulture, in that they are deſtitute and voyde of plumage vnder their winges, whereas the Vultures be there veſted and couered with an excellent fyne downe. Their ſkinne is thicke like a Goats ſkinne, and namely you ſhall finde vnder their gorge, a certayne patche of the breadth of your hande, where the plume is ſomewhat inclining to a redde, like the haire of a Calf, for that kind of plume hath not a webbe faſhioned, as other feathers are vſually ſhapte and proportioned, but are like vnto the downe which is to be founde on eyther ſide the necke, and on the vpper part of the plye and bent of the wyng, in which parts the down is ſo white, that it gliſtereth and is as ſoft as ſilke.
               The Vultures haue this one poynt ſpeciall, and peculiar to them ſelues, in that they are rough legged, a thing that hapneth not to any other kynd of Eagles or byrdes of praye.
            
            
               
               Of the leſſe Vulture, whiche is the browne or whitiſh Vulture.
               
                  depiction of brown or whitish vulture
               
               
                  THe browne or whitiſhe Vulture, doeth differ from the blacke maylde Vulture, in that hee is ſomewhat leſſe, than the blacke Vulture is, hauing the plumage of hir throte or gorge, of hir backe, the fethers vnder the belly neare the pannell, and of the whole bodie tawnie, or browne of colour: but the brayle fethers, and of the trayne, like to thoſe of the blacke maylde Vulture: whiche induceth ſome to thinke that there is no difference at all betwixte theſe twoo kindes, ſaue that the one is male, and that other female, in the ſame gender & kind. But this is moſt certaine & aſſured, that with Noble perſonages you ſhal ſee as wel the one kind as the other. Eyther ſort hath a ſhort trayne in regard of ye largeneſſe of their wings, whiche is not the nature and ſhape of other birdes of rauine and praye, ſaue onely that fowle whome the Frenche terme (Piſcuerd,) the Italians, Pigozo, and in our mother ſpeache I may call the Woodwall.
               You ſhal euer finde the Vultures rough, and heary legged, whiche is an euident ſigne that they frotte and rubbe them agaynſte the rockes, where their chiefe abode and ſtaye is. And further you ſhall note that the browne or blancke Vultures are more rare and dayntie to bee ſeene, than the blacke or aſhemaylde bee.
               Agayne this is peculiar to them in their kinde, that the fethers on their heades bee ſhorte in reſpect of the Eagles fethers, which hath bin ſome cauſe, that they haue bene thought to be balde and without plume, thoughe in verie deede it bee nothing ſo.
               The Vulture that is aſhecoloured or blacke maylde, hathe ſhorte armes all beſet with plume, euen to the very Talons, whiche is a ſpeciall note among all thoſe birdes of rauine, only peculiar to them, and not to any other fowle, hauing crooked Talōs, vnleſſe it be the Owle, who is roughlegged, euen in ſorte as theſe Vultures be.
               To diſcerne the browne from ye aſhemayled Vulture, you muſte note, that the browne Vulture hath hir necke fethers very ſtrayght & long, muche like to thoſe that the Cocke hath

or the Stare. In regard of thoſe feathers on hir backe, ſides, and the corner of the plye of hir wings, whiche are little and ſlender, in manner of ſcales, but the breaſte feathers as alſo thoſe on the backe, and the couert feathers of the trayne, are to the redde Vulture redde, and to the black Vulture blacke, and to bothe kindes verye large, by meane of their hugeneſſe they can not be vppon their wings, nor ryſe from the ſtande without ſome aduauntage.
               A man ſhall ſeldome ſee them vpō the playnes, and champion of Italie, Almanie, and Fraunce, vnleſſe happily ſometime in the winter, for then they rangle and wander into euery parte, for at that tyme in chiefe they abandone and forſake the toppes of the ſtately and high mountaines, to auoide the extremitie of cold, & doo take their paſſage into more hote regions and countries, where the clymate dothe better ſerue their purpoſe, and better agree with their nature.
               The Vultures at the moſte, doo not diſcloſe aboue twoo or three chickens or yong birdes, and it is a very harde matter and almoſte impoſſible for any man to robbe their eyrie, for that moſte commonly they buyld in ſome hanging cliffe whether there is very harde and daungerous acceſſe. They may bee nouriſhed and fedde with tripes, offell, and inwardes of beaſtes. And bycauſe they doo vſuallye haunte the fieldes of purpoſe to deuoure the offell and refuſe partes of ſuche beaſtes as men haue ſlaughtered and ſlayne, and ſuche like carrion, ſome men are of opinion, that they doe preſage and betoken greate murther and bloudy ſpoyle of men that are in armes.
            
            
               
                  The opinion of William Tardiffe a Frencheman, concerning the diuiſion of birdes of praye, and other
things woorthe the obſeruation.
               
               BIrdes of pray (ſayeth he) which we vſe in Falconrie, be of three kindes,

                     The Eagle,
                     The Falcon,
                     The Goſhawke.
                  
               
               
                  Of Eagles there are two kindes, the one is abſolutely called the Eagle, the other Zimiech.
                  
                     
                        Aquila,
                     
                     
                        Zimiech.
                     
                  
               
               A redde mayle in an Eagle, and deepe eyes, ſpecially if the be bred in the weſt mountaines, (as is before ſayd) is one ſpeciall ſigne of hir goodneſſe.
               Whiteneſſe vpon the head or backe of an Eagle, betokeneth the excellencie of the Eagle, whiche in the Arabian tongue is termed,

                     
                        Zimiach,
in the Syrian language.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           ,
in the Greeke.
                     
                        Philadelph
among the Latines.
                     
                        Mylyon.
                     
                  
               
               The Eagle muſt euer be taken when ſhe is in the eyrie, for hir condition is to waxe afterwards very bold & outrageous. It is ſayde, that when the Eagle beginneth to growe to lyking, neare cawking or calling time, ſhe cōmonly flyeth with other Eagles, bearing with them to their ſtande where they vſe to praye, a peece of Arſenicke, otherwiſe called Orpiment, whiche doth delay and mortifie their luſte and deſire.
               The Eagle will ſeaze vpon the Goſhawke and any other fowle of rauine, or pray yt doth flye with Ieſſes, making ſure accompt that it is a fitte pray for hir. And for that only cauſe and none other, coueteth to apprehend and take them in their flight, for when they are wilde and ramage, vſing the deſerts, ſhe offereth them not any ſuche violence.
               A meane to auoyde the Eagle, when a man is determined to flye with his hawke, is to plucke of the hawkes Ieſſes before ſhee flye, for otherwiſe let hir do hir beſte, ſhee ſhall not eſcape the Eagle.
               That Eagle, which is the kindly and right Eagle in deede, will ſlaye the Hare, the Foxe, and ſuche like beaſtes of the Foreſt and fielde.
               The Eagle called Zimiech, will kill the Crane, and other leſſe fowles.
            
            
               
               A deuiſe and remedie for you, when the Eagle doth moleſte and hinder your game in hawking.
               Fynde the meanes to get an Eagle, and ſeele vp hir eyes, but yet in ſuche ſorte, as ſhee may haue a little ſighte to aſpire and clyme to hir mowntee, into whoſe tuell and fundamente conueye a little Aſſa fetidà, and ſowe vp the place. Then tye to hir legges, eyther a wing, a peece of fleſhe, or a redde clothe, whiche the other Eagles maye coniecture to bee fleſhe, and ſo lette hir flye. For then will ſhee in hir flyghte, for hir owne ſafetie and aſſuraunce, pull downe all the other Eagles from their ſtately gate and pitche, which otherwiſe ſhe woulde neuer do, were it not for the payne of that whiche is conueyed into hir tuell.
            
            
               Now will I laye you downe the report of Frauncis Sforzino Vicentino, an Italian, as touching the diuiſion and nature of Eagles, and ſo proceede to the Falcon.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of eagle
                  
               
               THere are twoo ſortes of Eagles, that is to ſaye, the huge & royall Eagle, whiche is the Haggart or Paſſenger.
               And a leſſe Eagle, whiche is a baſe and baſtarde Eagle in reſpect of the other.
               
                  The ryghte Eagle is bredde in the hygheſt clyues of Leuante, and ſpeciallye in thoſe of Cyprus. They are as large as a wylde Gooſe, and more. Some of them are of a browne mayle, and ſome other of a ſpotted mayle, their gorges and breaſtes are full of ſtraked lynes, tending to redde, they haue long heades, greate beakes, and very muche crookte, ſtrong armes, and roughe large ſtretchers, in a manner as greate as the palme of a mans hande, boyſteous talons, and a reaſonable long trayne.
               Theſe Eagles, in the mayne fielde wyll take the Hare, and by force holde him, and carrye him in the ayre as they flee, vntyll they eſpye ſome rocke or other fitte ſtande, where they maye praye vppon him. In lyke ſorte they take other beaſtes, and ſundrye tymes doe roue and rangle abroade to beate and ſeaze on Gotes, Kyddes, and Fawnes. They are in vſe and price with ſundry noble men, as hath bene reported vnto mee credibly.
               The greate Turke of all other Princes, doth moſte vſe to flee with the Eagle, and dothe gyue his Falconers in charge, to man and lure them, as they doe the Goſhawke: and beeing throughly manned, hath a caſte of Eagles at one tyme, vpon one pearche betwixte twoo of his people into the fielde, when they are there, they flee bothe togither, the one at the mowntee, a very ſtately pitche, and the other more baſe and lowe, and that Eagle that dothe flye the baſe pitche, is taught to make a greate noyſe as ſhee roueth too and fro, ouer the Foreſte, not muche vnlike the queſting or calling of a dogge, by meane of whiche ſodayne crye and noyſe, diuers tymes there iſſue out of the couerte, ſome wylde and ſauage beaſts, whiche are no ſooner diſcryed by that high fleeing Eagle, but ſodaynly ſhe bateth of hir pitche, & ſtoupeth from hir wings, & at the downecome either ſeazeth or rifleth ſome one of them, ſlaying them by force, vntill the dogges maye make in to hir reſkewe. And thus betwixt the Eagle and curres, the praye

is taken not without the greate pleaſure and lyking of that mightie Prince the Turke. You maye geſſe of the excellencie of this gallante paſtime, if it bee trewe, as it is vouched by report. Heerein I can affirme nothing of my ſelfe, but do folowe mine authour, from whome I collected this kinde of hawking, and ambolde to make recytall of it in this place, bothe for the hugeneſſe of the fowle, as alſo the ſtraungeneſſe of the practiſe.
               All theſe kindes of Eagles, haue their Tyercelles or male birdes, of whome ſome huge, ſome of myddle ſyſe, and other ſome leſſe, whiche are called Baſtarde Eagles, not had in any accompte.
               Thus (as you ſee) haue I layde downe to your vewe and iudgements, the kindes and ſortes of Eagles, with their proper deſcriptions due to them, and other poyntes incident to their natures: and haue ſtayed more aboute the matter, than needed, in mine owne opinion, beeing a fowle ſo little in vſe with vs, but I haue done it as well to make my diuiſion perfectly, as alſo to decipher that, whiche euery one perhappes hath not read, as touching the naturall inclination of this royall birde, who for that ſhee is Queene and chiefe of all hawkes, deſerueth ſome larger diſcourſe than the reſte, whiche are in nature more baſe, though in vſe more familiar and ordinarie.
            
            
               
               Of the Falcon, and how many ſortes of Falcons there are.
               
                  depiction of falcon
               
               THere are ſeauen kindes of Falcons, and among them all for hir nobleſſe & hardy courage, & withall the franckneſſe

of hir mettell, I may, & do meane to place the Falcon Gentle in chiefe.
               1 This Falcon is called the Falcon Gentle, for hir gentle and curteous condition and faſhions. In hart and courage ſhe is valiant, ventrous, ſtrong, and good to brooke both heate and colde, as to whome there commeth no weather amiſſe at any time, whereas the moſt part of other Hawkes, eyther are lightlie offended with the one or the other, and muſte haue a hand kept vpon them accordingly, or otherwiſe, there is no great pleaſure to be taken in them.
               
                  The Haggart Falcon.
2 The ſeconde is the Haggart Falcon, whiche is otherwiſe tearmed the Peregrine Falcon. The Haggart is an excellent good byrd, but (as my Authour affirmeth) very choyce, and tē
                  der to endure hard weather: but in mine owne conceyte ſhe is in nature farre otherwiſe. And my reaſon is this, that ſhee ſhould be better able to endure colde than the Falcon Gentle, bycauſe ſhe dothe come from forayne partes a ſtraunger, and a paſſenger, and doth winne all hir pray and meate at the hardeſt by mayne wing, and doth ariue in thoſe parts where ſhe is taken when the fowles do come in greate flockes, whiche is the very hardeſt parte of the yeare. Moreouer being a whote Hawke by kinde, ſhe ſhoulde the better ſuſtayne the force of weather, and that ſhee is a whot Hawke of nature, may bee gathered by hir flying ſo high a pitche, which I take to be, for that in the higher parts, ſhe findeth the colder ayre, for ye midle Region is more cold, than the reſt, bycauſe thither commeth no reflexion. And agayne, ſhee meweth with more expedition (if ſhe once begin to caſt hir feathers) than the other Falcons do. But theſe poyntes of controuerſie I leaue to the learned, and ſuch as haue the experience of the matter.
               
                  The Barberie, or Tartaret Falcon.
3 The third is that Falcon which is called the Tartaret, or Barbary Falcon, whome they doe chiefly vſe in Barbary, and

moſt accompt of.
               
                  The Gerfalcon.
4 The fourth is the Gerfalcon, which is generall, and common ynough, as well in Fraunce, as in other places.
               
                  The Sacre.
5 The fifte, is the Falcon Sacre.
               
                  The Laner.
6 The ſixte, the Laner, common as well in Fraunce, as in other Regions.
               
                  The Tunician.
7 The ſeauenth is the Tunician Falcon. Theſe ſeuē kinds of Falcons, are al hardie and good, according to the pray that belongeth to their force and nature. For they are diuers in nature, and of ſeuerall plumes, and beſides that, diſcloſed and eyried in diuers countries. Wherefore, I meane to touche euery one of their natures, and to declare you, wherevnto eche is enclined, according as they are māned, and gouerned, and firſt of all I will treate of the Falcon Gentle.
               But before I ſpeake of the Falcon Gentle, I will ſomewhat touch the Etimologie of the name, and lay downe the opinions of two learned men, and auncient writers as touching that matter.
               Firſte Suidas a Greeke Authour dothe affirme that Falco which in our mother ſpeach doth import a Falcon, is a generall name to all Hawkes of pray and rauine, as Accipiter is in Latine, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
in Greeke.
               
                  Feſtus, he is of opinion, that the Falcon is ſo named, bycauſe of hir pownces and crooked Talons, which do bend like vnto a ſyth, or ſickle, which in Latine is called Falx.
               
               But wherehence ſoeuer the name is deriued, this is moſte aſſured, that of all other birds of pray, the Falcon is moſt excellent and the very prince of all other Hawkes, both for hir goodneſſe of wing, and great hardineſſe and courage.
            
            
               
               Of the Falcon gentle and hir propertie.
               
                  
                     depiction of falcon
                  
               
               THe Falcon Gentle, by nature doth loue to flee the Hearon euery way, and is a very good Hearoner as well from hir

wings at the downe come, as from the fiſte, and aforehead, and will flee all other kindes of greater fowles, as thoſe which are tearmed birdes of Paradiſe, fowles more large than the Hearon. Moreouer ſhe is good to flee the ſhoueler a fowle like the Hearon, but ſomewhat leſſe, the wilde Gooſe, and ſuch other like fowles, and therefore is excellente at the Riuer or Brooke. If you take the Falcon gentle an eyeſſe, you maye boldly flee the Crane with hir, but if ſhe be not an eyeſſe, ſhe wil neuer be ſo hardie as to venture on the Crane. And therfore being an eyeſſe, and neuer ſeing, nor knowing any other leſſe fowle than the Crane. If you caſt hir off to the Crane, ſhe foorthwith thinketh it to be a fowle fitte for hir, and by meane thereof fleeth the Crane very well, and becommeth a very good Crane fleer, for Hawkes commonly proue eyther cowards, or hardie after that they are firſt quarred.
            
            
               An Obſeruation.
               IF a man doe well, he ſhoulde neuer take the Falcons out of the eyrie, till time they be full ſummed, and hard penned, or if he do happily committe that errour, he ſhould not man hir, but preſentlie cauſe hir to be conueyed and placed in an eyrie, that moſt doth reſemble the eyrie of a Hawke, if he maye conueniently come by any ſuch, and ther breede hir, and feede hir with good fleaſh, ſuch as is the fleaſh of Pullets, Chickens, Pigeons, & ſuch like, for otherwiſe hir wings will not grow to any perfection, and hir legges and other partes woulde quickly be broken and waxe crooked, and hir traine feathers, and for the moſt part, all hir long feathers and flagges be ful of taints.
            
            
               The good ſhape of a Falcon.
               THat you may the better make choyce of your Falcon, and know a good Falcon from a refuſe, I will deſcribe you the perfecte ſhape of a right good Falcon, ſuche a one as is very like to be good, though many times we ſee, that in proofe, the moſt likely things to ſhew, & to the eye, become in proofe, the worſte and of leaſt regard.
               
                  The ſhape of a good Falcon therefore is, firſt to haue wyde nares, high and large eyeliddes, a greate blacke eye, a rounde head ſomewhat full on the toppe, a ſhorte thicke beake blewe as azure, a reaſonable highe necke, barbe feathers vnder the clappe of the beake, a good large breaſte, rounde, fleſhy, ſtrong, harde, and ſtiffe bended. And that is the true cauſe, why the Falcon doth greatlye affye in hir breaſte, and ſtriketh with it, and gageth it moſte at hir encounter. And by meane ſhe is very ſtrong armed, ſhee vſeth the more freely alſo to ſtryke a fowle with hir pownces and talons. Moreouer ſhe muſte be broade ſhouldered, ſhee muſte haue ſlender ſayles, full ſides, long and greate thighes, ſhe muſt be ſtrong and ſhort armed, large footed, with the ſeare of the foote ſofte, and all one for hewe with the ſeare of the beake and nares, blacke pownces, long wings and croſſing the trayne, whiche trayne ought to be ſhort, and apte to bende and bowe to euery ſide. For in the trayne of a hauke doth conſiſt a greate helpe, when ſhe flyeth. And therefore (as well as for beautie) if a trayne feather or couert feather be broken, or bruſed, we do couet to ympe them agayne, or ſet them to right, bicauſe it may be the leſſe hinderaunce to the hawke in hir flighte.
               You muſte note that thoſe verye Falcons, that are of one kinde and ſort, haue very greate difference and oddes betwixt them, and are called by diuers names, according to the tyme that a man beginneth to deale with them, & doth vndertake them, according to the places where they haunte, and according to the countries whence they come.
               They are diuided into Mewed hawkes, Rammage hawkes, Sore hawkes, and Eyeſſes, into large hawkes, meane hawkes, and ſlender hawkes, all whiche are of diuers and ſeuerall plumes and mayles, according to the diuerſitie of the regions. Alſo they are of diuers prices, according to the goodneſſe and eſtimation of them. Agayne, ſome are blacke Falcons, ſome ruſſet Falcons, ſome other blancke Falcons: ſome of whiche are riuer Hawkes, to ſlaye the fowle at the brooke, and other ſome fielde hawkes, to flye the lande, and there to

kill the Feſant, Partridge, and ſuch like fowles. Thus you ſee howe diuers and many they be, according to their outwarde accidentes, & yet in nature, all Falcons. Therefore, bicauſe I am to treate of euery kinde ſeuerall, I will not longer holde you in this place, with deſcription of the Falcon Gentle, but hereafter when I write in another place of the diſeaſes, cures and the manning of theſe hawkes, I will as neare I may, let paſſe nothing, that ſhall belong in any reſpect vnto the Falcō, but that in one place or other you ſhall finde it.
            
            
               Of the names of a Falcon, according to hirage and taking.
               THe firſte name and terme that they beſtowe on a Falcon, is an Eyeſſe, and this name dothe laſte as long as ſhe is in the eyrie, & for that ſhe is taken from the eyrie.
               Thoſe Falcons are tedious, and do vſe to crye very muche, in their feeding they are troubleſome, and paynfull to bee entred: but beyng once well entred and quarred, they leaue a greate parte of that vice, and do proue very good to the Heaton, and to the ryuer, and all other kindes of fowle. They are hardy, and naturally full of good mettall.
               2 The ſeconde name is a ramage Falcon, and ſo ſhe is called when ſhe hath departed and left the eyrie, that name doth laſte, and ſhe is called a ramage hawke, May, Iune, Iulie, and Auguſt. Theſe Falcons are harde to be māned by reaſon of the heate, and for that they can ill brooke hunger, or to ſtand emptie panneld: but who ſo can vſe them with pacience and iudgemente, ſhall finde them paſſing good, for that they are without faulte.
               3 Thirdlie they are called ſore Hawkes, from the ende of Auguſt, to the laſte of September, October, and Nouember.
               Thoſe hawkes are of good diſpoſition, they will doe verye well, and are in their prime and full pryde for beawtie and goodneſſe. Neuertheleſſe thoſe firſte plumes that they haue, when they forſake the eyrie, thoſe doe they keepe one whole

yeare, before they caſt or mew them, and that kind of feather, is called the Sore feather. According to the diuerſitie of theſe tearmes, and times, theſe Hawkes do become better and better to be manned and kept.
               4 The fourth ſpeach and tearme that is beſtowed on them (as my Italian Author doth call them) is, that they are tearmed
Marzaroli, and ſo are they called from Ianuary, February, Marche, Aprill, vntill the middeſt of May. I haue no proper engliſhe phrase for them, but they are very tedious and paynefull, and the reaſon is, for that they muſt be kept on the fiſte al that ſpace. Diuers of them are great baters, and therfore not very greedy of meate or hungrie, they are but badde Hawkes muche ſubiect to Filanders, and the wormes: who lookes to win credite or good by keeping them, muſt be of good experience and no leſſe pacience.
               5 Fiftly, they are called (Entermewers) or Hawkes of the firſt cote, that is from the middle of May, till Iune, Iuly, Auguſt, September, October, Nouember, December.
               Thoſe Hawkes are called Entermewers, for that they caſt the old, and haue new feathers, and they proue very good, and hardie Hawkes, but no great truſt is to be giuē them, for that they are giddy headed, and ſickle: wherefore he that lookes to haue good, or credite by keeping of them, muſt be very circumſpect, and regarde their natures very well, and muſt keepe a good hard hande on them, and muſte make his fiſte theyr pearche, and neuer in a manner lette them bee from the fiſte.
               Beſides, in thoſe ſeuen kyndes of Falcons, whiche I ſpake of in the firſt deuiſion, there are included ſundrie ſortes tearmed according to the Countries and places where they are eyried and whence they come, the ſpeciall names and properties of all whiche, I holde it not ſo needefull to diſcourſe vppon, ſpeaking fullie and ſufficiently of thoſe ſeauen kyndes of Falcons in theyr tymes and places, as they ſhall offer them ſelues in order vnto me to be deciphered vnto the Reader, to whoſe good iudgement and induſtrie I meane

to referre and leaue ſundry things whiche I leaue vnſpoken of, for that there is no man that is deſirous of ſkill, but, may with eaſe and will with diligence, (I doubt not) flee ouer to thoſe very Authours in Frenche and Italian, from whence I haue made this briefe collection, where he ſhall be aſſured to fynde things more at large ſet out: but the effect (vnleſſe I be deceyued) compryſed in theſe fewe pages of paper, aſwell concernyng the kyndes of Hawkes, as alſo their mannyng, luring, flightes, mewing, diſeaſes and cures in euery condition, as (I truſt) to the pleaſure and profite of the gentle and willing reader. Wherfore I wil now proceede to the Haggart Falcon, a moſt excellent byrde, if hir nature and propertie be obſerued in dewe maner.
            
            
               Of the Haggart Falcon, and why ſhe is called the Peregrine, or Haggart.
               
                  I Haue many times ſtudied with my ſelfe, for what cauſe the Haggart Falcons, the moſt excellent byrdes of all other Falcons, haue bene termed Haggart or Peregrin Hawkes. And at firſt was of opinion that men ſo called them, for that they are brought vnto vs, from farre and forayne countries, and are in deede meere ſtrangers in Italie, and (as a man may call them) trauaylers. And this I know for truth, they are not diſcloſed or eyred in Italie, and beſides that there are few in Italie, that do take them at any time, but the greateſt ſtore of them are brought and conueyed thither from forayne regions· but if they ſhoulde be termed Peregrine or Haggart Falcons, for this onely cauſe, and onely in reſpect hereof and nothing elſe, then might we as well beſtow that name alſo vpon all other Falcons, that are not bredde in Italie, as vpon the Tunician and other Hawkes that are paſſengers. Wherfore I am of opinion, that for three cauſes principally and in chiefe, they are called Haggart, or Peregrine Falcons.
               1 Firſt, bicauſe a man can not finde, nor euer yet did any man Chriſtian or Heathen, fynde their eyrie in any Region, ſo as it

may well be thought, that for that occaſion they haue atchieued and gotten that name and terme of Peregrine or Haggart Falcons, as if a man, would call them Pilgrims or Forayners.
               2 The ſecond cauſe is, bycauſe theſe Falcons do rangle and wander more than any other ſorte of Falcons are wonte to do, ſeeking out more ſtraunge and vncouth coūtries, which in deede may giue them that title of Haggart and Peregrine Hawkes, for their excellencie, bycauſe they do ſeeke ſo many ſtraunge and forayne coaſtes, and do rangle ſo far abrode.
               3 The thirde and laſt cauſe, I do thinke, may be their beautie and excellencie, bycauſe this worde (Peregrino) or Peregrine, doth many tymes importe an honorable and choyce matter, had in great regard: but it ſkilleth not muche whiche of theſe three alleged is the true cauſe, wee will not ſtande vpon the nyce poynt, for that a good Falconer, ought much more to regarde the ſearchyng out of the true nature and propertie of Hawkes, than to haue ſo great and ſpeciall reſpect vnto their names and termes.
               Wherefore I conclude, that theſe Haggart Falcons are not of Italie, but tranſported and brought thither from forayne places, as namely from Alexandria, Cyprus and Candie. And yet this is for certayne, that in Italie there are taken of theſe Haggart Falcons, as in the dominiō of the renowned Duke of Ferrara, and in the countrie neare Rauenna, beyng brought thither by force of weather and winde. And by that meanes there are none of thoſe Haggarts founde eyeſſes, but they are all eyther ſoare Hawkes, or mewed Haggarts.
               Of ſhape and proportion they are like the other Falcons, and are of three ſortes, as touchyng their making, and moulde, that is to ſay, large, little, or Falcons of a middle ſiſe. Some of them are long ſhapte, ſome ſhorte truſſed Falcons, ſome larger, ſome leſſe.
               They are ordinarily of foure mayles, eyther blancke, ruſſet, browne, or turtle maylde, and ſome pure white maylde, without any iote or ſpotte of any other colour, but thoſe a man ſhall ver ſeldome ſee. And for that cauſe I meane not to ſay much

of that kinde of mayled Falcons, but will deale with ſuche as are more ordinarie in vſe.
               
                  Of the good ſhape of a Haggarte Falcon.
                  
                     
                        depiction of haggart falcon
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     A Good and right Haggart Falcon ought to haue hir head of a darcke or blancke plume, flatte on the toppe, with a white wreath or garlande enuironing hir head, a large blew bending beake, wide nares, a great, full, blacke eye, hie, ſtately necke, large breſt, brode ſhouldred, a great feather, in colour like the feather of a Turtle, log vanes and ſayles, but ſlēder ſhapte, long traine, hie thighes, and white on the inſide, I meane hir pendant feathers, ſhorte, and great armed, large wide foote, with ſlender ſtretchers and talons, and the ſame to be eyther pale white maylde, or pale blewyſh, tending ſomewhat to azure. Theſe are generally, the moſt aſſured tokens of an excellent Haggart Falcon.
               
               
                  How to know a Haggart by hir fleing.
                  
                     A Good ſkilfull Falconer, will quickly diſcerne a good Haggarte Falcon, from a ſleight Falcon, though he be farre of, by the ſtirring of hir wings. For that a Haggart Falcon vſeth not a thicke ſtroke, but ſtirreth hir wing by leaſure and ſeldom, and getteth vp to hir mountee, without any great making out. And although perhaps ſhe be not ſo large as the ſleight or ſore Falcon, yet to ſeeming and ſhewe ſhe is more large, which happeneth by meane of hir ſayles, which in very deede are of greater ſcope and compaſſe than the ſleight Falcons are. Contrarywiſe, the ſleight Falcon ſhe vſeth a more ſhort and quicker ſtroke with hir wing, than the Haggart dothe, and doth not deale ſo leaſurely. There are beſides this one difference, ſundrie other, betwixt theſe two kindes of Falcons, which in this place, I will deliuer you, for that you ſhal the better iudge the oddes betwixt them, being both very good Falcons, and the beſt of all other, both for field and riuer.
               
               
                  The difference and oddes betwixt the Haggart, and the Falcon Gentle.
                  FOr that diuers haue delight to know the difference betwixt the Falcon Gentle and the Haggart, I will here ſhewe you

certayne ſpeciall poynts concernyng the difference of them both. Firſt the Haggarte is a larger hawke than the Falcon gentle, and a longer armed Hawke, with a reaſonable large foote, and hyr talons more long than the Falcon gentles are, a high necke and a long, a fayre ſeaſoned head, and a more long beake than the other hath.
                  1 The beame feathers of the Haggart, as ſhe is in hyr flight, are longer than the Falcon gentles, hir trayne ſomwhat larger, the Haggart hath a flatte thighe, but the Falcon gentle a round thighe.
                  2 The Haggart will lie longer on hyr wings than the Falcon gentle, and hath a more deliberate and leaſurely ſtroke than the other Falcon hath, as I ſayd before.
                  3 From the fiſte, it is reported by ſome, that the Falcon gentle dothe flie more ſpeedely than the Haggarte, but at a long flight the Haggarte is farre the better of both, and doth excell all other kinde of Hawkes both for good wing, and maynteynance of hir flighte. Which is a perfite proofe of a very good backe.
                  4 The Falcon gentle is more haſtie and whote in all hyr doings than the Haggarte, and is thought more raſhe and outragious of nature than the Haggart is. And whē they flee togither, the Falcon gentle will make hir ſtowping and downecome more vnaduiſedly, and will vſe the greater haſte to be at hir pitche agayne than the other, and miſſing the fowle at the ſtowping, the Falcon gentle is in the greater chafe, and will preſently flee on head at the checke, ſo as many times ſhe is harde to come by agayne. Whereas the Haggarte is more deliberate and better aduiſed, whiche proceedeth in my opinion, for that ſhe better knoweth the aduantage of hir flight, than the Falcon gentle, bycauſe ſhe hath bene forced often to praye for hir ſelfe, and hath not bene ſubiect to the order of any keper, neyther hath had any hande kepte vpon hir, to make hir eger and greedie of the praye, more than naturally ſhe is accuſtomed to flee at hyr ſeaſons, to gorge hir ſelfe, whiche ſhe doth both aduiſedly and to great aduantage.
                  5 The Haggarte Falcon is taken in Candie, Rhodes, and

many other places, of that Sea whiche is called Archipelagus, or the Iegean Sea.
                  6 The beſt ſorte of thoſe Haggart Falcons, haue their beakes of the colour of Azure.
                  7 Thoſe of Cyprus whiche are ſmall Hawkes and of a ruſſet mayle, they are the moſte hardie and ventrous Hawkes of all others.
                  Much more might be ſayde, as touchyng the Haggarte and Falcon gentle, but, for that the Hawkes are dayly in hand and vewe, and bycauſe I haue a larger field to eare, whiche is, to lay you downe the mannyng of them, and ſuch things as are more neceſſarie to a good Falconer. I leaue it, and will proceede to the next kinde of Falcon, whiche is the Tartaret or Barbarie Falcon. As touchyng whoſe name and nature I meane to deliuer you, what I haue gathered as well out of the French copie, as alſo borowed from the Italian, whom I do much reuerence as well for his language, as for his rare and deepe deuiſe in all things wherein he doth deale. (∴)
               
            
            
               
               Of the Barbarie Falcon.
               
                  depiction of Barbary falcon
               
               THe Barbarie or Tartaret Falcon, is a hawke not very cō
                  mon in any countrie, and ſhe is called a paſſenger or paſſebie, euen as the Haggart Falcon is.
               
                  They are not full ſo large as the Haggart Falcon, though ſome mē do write otherwiſe of them, they are red plumed vnder the wing, ſtrong armed with long talons and ſtretchers. They are very ventrous vpon all kindes of fowles, and will flie at any game that the Haggart doth. With this Tartarot, or Barbarie Falcon, and the Haggart alſo, you may flee all Maye and Iune, for they are Hawkes, that are very ſlacke in mewyng at the firſt, but when they once beginne, they mew and ſhedde their feathers very faſte.
               
                  For what cauſe this Falcon is called a Barbary or Tartaret Falcon.
                  THeſe kinde of Falcons are called Barberie Falcons, for that moſt commonly they make their paſſage through Barbarie and Tunyſe, where they are taken more often than in any other place: As namely in the Iles of Leuant, Candie, Cypres and Rhodes, where theſe Hawkes do more frequent, and vſe than in any other Region, and the Countrie men will ſooner take them, by endeuour if they may, than any Hawkes that are eyreed in their countrie. And truly I doo not thinke, that in any other place there are ſo many good Craneſlayers, as there are to be had in the Ile of Candie. The reaſon of it is, for that the Nobilitie and ſtates of the countrie, are much more enclined to keepe thoſe kinde of Hawkes that will kill the Crane, than any other people are elſewhere, and they do enure and make their Falcons to that kinde of game, more than to any other fowle. And ſurely you ſhall there haue excellent good hawkes.
                  Thus much it hath pleaſed mine Author to write, of and in commendaciō of the Barbarie Falcon: but here with vs in Englande, I neuer ſaw or hearde of the proofe of thoſe Hawkes, to be ſo good or excellent, as by his reporte I finde them. Sundrie other kindes of Falcons proue better with vs here, as namely the Falcon gentle, the Haggarte, and ſuch lyke, which eyther are paſſengers, or brought to vs from other countries. The Barbarie Hawke is muche leſſe than eyther the Falcon Gentle,

or the Haggart, and therefore I will only followe myne Author as touching his prayſe, and ſo proceede to the next kynde of Falcons, delyuering you both the opinion of the Italian and French Gentlemen therin.
               
            
            
               Of the Gerfalcon.
               
                  depiction of gyrfalcon
               
               
                  THe Gerfalcon is a birde of great force, a verie fayre hawke, ſpecially being mewed, ſhee is ſtrong armed, ſhee hath large ſtretchers and ſingles, ſhe is fierce and hardy of nature, by meane whereof ſhe is the more difficult and harde to be reclaymed. A Gerfalcon will looke to haue a gentle hand kepte on hir, and hir keeper to be curteous and full of patience. The Gerfalcon is a gallant hawke to beholde, more huge than any other kynde of Falcon, hir eyes and hir head are lyke the Haggart Falcon. She hath a great bending beake, large nares, a mayle like vnto a Laner, verie long ſayles, and ſharpe poynted, a trayne muche like the Laner, a large foote, marble feared, blanke, ruſſet, and browne plumed as other Falcons be, more beautifull to the eye than any other kynde of Falcon.
               Theſe kinde of hawkes are made to flee from the fiſte to the Heron, Crane, Gooſe, Buſtarde, and ſuche other like foules. When they are mewed, they doe verie much reſemble the Laner, they doe not chaunge the marble ſeare of the foote. Theyr Tiercels (whome we call Ierkyns) are had in great pryce, they are brought from Leuant, Cypres, Candy, and Alexandria by Merchantes.
               The Gerfalcons by report, doe moſt commonly eyree in the partes of Pruſſia, and vpon the borders of Ruſſia, and ſome of them come from the confines and mountaynes of Norway. But moſt commonly they are taken about Almayne Paſſebyes (as we terme them) or paſſengers.
               With the Gerfalcon you maye naturally flee all kyndes of foules, as I haue alreadie written of the Haggart, and the Barbarie Falcon.
               Let it not diſcourage or amaze you, that the Gerfalcon is ſo harde to be reclaymed and manned, for the fierceneſſe and hardineſſe of their nature is the onely cauſe thereof, but in the ende beyng once wonne, they proue excellent good hawkes.
               They will ſitte verie vpryght and ſtately on the fiſte. Theyr beakes are blewe, and ſo are the ſeares of their legges and feete, their pounces and talons are verie long, and in troth, they will lightly refuſe to flee at nothing.
               
                  At my beyng in Moſcouia, I ſawe ſundrie Gerfalcons, verie fayre and huge hawkes, and of all other kyndes of hawkes, that onely byrde is there had in accompte and regarde, and is of greater price than any other. The reaſon whereof I learned of certayne Engliſhe Merchauntes my countrey menne, who tolde me, that the Emperours Maieſtie Iuan Vazilniche, did vſe to flee the Rauen with a caſt of Gerfalcons, and tooke no ſlender pleaſure and delight therein.
               The Rauen truely is a monſtrous ſtrong flight, by meane ſhe is of ſo great force and wight of wing, and withall doth vſe to make ſo many turnes in the ayre, as you ſhall ſee no other foule do the like. Yet neuertheleſſe, as they told me, they had ſeene a caſt of Gerfalcons beate hir in ſuch wiſe, as ſhe hath bene forced to take the ſtande, and to pearche in a Pyne or Fyrre tree for hir ſuccour and ſafetie. But that ſhifte little preuayles, for no ſooner is ſhe pearched, but preſently by commaundement of the Emperoure, eache Muſcouite drawing his hatchet from his backe (without which tooke they neuer trauell in that countrey) beſtoweth his force to the felling the tree, which is lightly doone by meane of many handes, and the tenderneſſe of the tymber, the hawkes all that whyle lying vpon their winges looking for their game: who finding the tree to fayle hir, at the fall is dryuen to truſt hir winges agayne, and ſo by a freſhe flight and newe encounter, doth yeelde exceeding pleaſure to his Maieſtie and ſuch as are in the fielde, and in fyne, is ſlayne by hir mightie aduerſaries the Gerfalcons, who moſt greedily doe ſeaze vpon hir, as their kynde hath taught them to doe. I imagine the flight to be verie ſtrong, and truely the paſtime and pleaſure can not be ſmall, but a game fit for ſuch a mightie Prince as his Maieſtie is. Thus much of the Gerfalcon.
            
            
               Of the Sacre.
               THere be three kindes of Sacres, the firſt is called Sephe, after the Babylonians and Aſſyrians, that kynde of Sacre is

founde in Egypt, and in the weaſt partes, and in Babylon. She will ſlay the Hare and ſuch like.
               The ſeconde kynde is called Semy, ſhe kylles the Choughe, as hir proper game wherein ſhe taken the greateſt pleaſure.
               The thyrde is called Hynair or the Peleryn Sacre, after the Egyptians and Aſſyrians.
               She is called a Peleryn or Haggart, for that hir eyree is not knowne, and bycauſe yearely ſhe maketh hir paſſage towardes Iudea, or Media, ſhe is taken in the Iles of Leuant, Cypres, Candye, and Rhodes. And therefore ſome thinke ſhe commeth out of Ruſſia, and Tartaria, and alſo from the greate Sea. That Sacre that is taken an entermewer, is the beſt hawke,
               The Sacre is of all hawkes the moſt labourſome, and beſt able to brooke hir flight. Shee is alſo peacible and verie tractable, and a hawke that can beſt away with courſe and groſſe diet.
               The praye of the Sacre are greate foules, the Heron, the Gooſe, the Crane, Bytor, and withall the ſmall beaſtes of the fielde and foreſt.
               It is well to be ſene, that the Sacre is a hawk ſomwhat larger than the Haggart falcon, of a ruſtie and ragged plume like the Kyte, the ſeare of hir beake & foote like the Laner, hir poūces but ſhort, neuertheleſſe, ſhe is of great force, & hardie to all kynd of foule, as I haue alreadie reported of the Haggart and Barbarie Falcons, but not ſo ventrous and free to flee the Crane, or ſuch like game as the Haggart Falcon is.
               This Sacre is a paſſenger, euen as the haggart Falcon is. No man is able truly to ſay, where ſhe eireeth or diſcloſeth, but at the Rhodes they ſay they come from the parts of Ruſſia, and Tartaria, and the Ocean Sea. Theſe Sacres are taken in great number in the Iles of Leuant, Candle, Cypres, and Rhodes, & ſundry other Ilandes of the Ocean ſea. But I muſt needs confeſſe to you, that the Sacre is more diſpoſed to the fielde a great deale than to the brooke. As to flee the wilde Gooſe, the Byttor, the Feaſant, the Partridge, and all ſuch like foules. And is nothing ſo daintie of hir dyet, or to be kepte, as the long winged hawkes are.
               
                  The Sacre is much like the Falcon Gentle for largeneſſe, and the Haggart for hardineſſe, and is a paſſenger as the Haggarte is.
               She is a Hawke chiefly to flee the kite, and yet may be made and manned, to flee the field, and ſlay other game of the field as the Falcon doth.
               The Noble men that take pleaſure in the Sacre, to make a flight with hyr at the kite, do vſe this order and deuice, to bring the kite downe from hir mountee, for that in the heate of the day ſhe doth vſe to ſore and flee of an exceding height in the cloudes, to take the comforte of the colde and freſhe ayre, that is in the middle region: They tie a foxe tayle to the legge of a Mallard or Ducke, whom they cauſe to be borne on the fiſte of ſome one Falconer, and do ſo let the ducke flee in the middeſt of a playne, whom as ſone as the kite deſcries from hir pitche, ſhe preſently bateth of hir gate, and maketh hyr ſtoupyng to the grounde, and there gazeth and wōdreth at the ſtraungeneſſe and the ſhape of this fowle; then do they caſt of the Sacre to the kyte, who forthwith truſting to the goodneſſe of hyr wing, getteth vp to hyr pitche, as hie as poſſible ſhe may, by making often turnes and wrenches in the ayre, where it is a very pleaſant ſporte to behold the bickring that is betwixt them in the ayre, ſpecially if it be in a playne, where no trees or groues are, to hinder the ſight of the matter, and the day fayre and not windie, for then will the Kite and Sacre ſore ſo hie, as they will flee cleane out of ſight. But that ſerueth not the Kytes purpoſe and turne, for the Sacre neuertheleſſe doth conquere hyr in the encounter, beating hyr to the grounde by meane of the ſundrie ſtoupings and downe comes that ſhe maketh vpon hyr.
               They flee with the Sacre at twoo ſortes of Kytes, that is, to the Kite royall, which is called by the Frenche man, the (Mylan Royall) and at one other kinde of Kyte, called the Blacke Kyte, (the Mylan Noyer) whiche is farre the more nimble byrde of the twoo, and doth more buſilie trouble the Hauke in hyr flight than the other doth, by meane ſhe is the leſſe of the twoo, and vſeth hyr wings farre better. Of al Hawkes, this kind of Hawke hath the

longeſt trayne. We call the Tyercell of the Sacre, the Sacret, which is the male bird, and the Sacre the female, betwixt whom there is no oddes more than in the quantitie and proportion. For cōmonly among birds of pray, the male is leſſe than the female. The Sacre is called in Latine Buteo, and the Sacret Subuter.
               
            
            
               Of the Laner.
               
                  depiction of Lanner falcon
               
               
                  THe Laner is a hawke common in all countries, ſpecially in Fraunce and other places elſewhere, for voluntarily ſhe maketh hyr eyree, and buildeth in high trees and Foreſtes, and commonly in Crowes neſtes or in the high rockes & clyffes neare the ſea, according as the coūtrie is for the purpoſe.
               The Haggart is ſomewhat leſſe than the Falcon gentle, faire plumed when ſhe is an entermewer, but of ſhorter talons than any other kynde of Falcon. And ſome holde opinion that thoſe Laners that haue the largeſt and beſt ſeaſoned heades, and the ſeare of ye foote azure or blewiſh, be the eyeſſes or ſoare hawkes, they are the beſt and choyſeſt Laners.
               With this hawke may you flye the ryuer, as well with the Laner as the Laneret, for they are both good, and likewiſe maye you vſe them to other kindes of flightes, and ſpecially to the fielde to kyll the Partridge, the Feaſant, the Hare, the Choffe, the Dawe, and al ſuch ſort of leſſer foule.
               The Laner is not ouer daintie of hir feeding, but can better brooke groſſe and courſe vittailes, than any Falcon elſe can doe.
               Mewed Laners and Sacres, are hardely knowne from the ſoare hawkes, bycauſe they do not chaūge their plume. By theſe three ſignes you ſhall beſt know the Laner.
               They are more blanke hawkes than any other, they haue leſſe beakes than the reſt, and are leſſe armed and pounced than other Falcons be.
               
                  Out of the Italian Author.
                  THE Laners doe commonly eyree in the Alpes that deuide Italy from Almayne: ſome of them are reaſonable hawkes, ſome of a middle ſute, and ſome leſſe. Their heades are white, & flat aloft, blacke, and large eyed, ſlender nares, ſhort beake and thicke, and leſſer than the Haggart Falcons, or the Falcon gentle.
                  They are marble or ruſſet maylde, the breaſt feathers white, full of ruſſet ſpottes, the points and extremities of their feathers full of rounde white droppes. Their ſayles and trayne long,

they are ſhort legged, with a foote ſomewhat leſſe than the Falcons, marble ſeered: but beyng mewed, they chaunge the ſeere of the foote to a yelowe.
                  Theſe Hawkes will brooke to flee long on their winges after their maner, and when they eſpie one that goeth abrode with a Sparowhawke to the 
                        ••
                     elde, they preſently follow & couer the Spaniels, ſo as no ſoner is the Sparowhawke caſt of to ye Partridge, but if ſhe miſſe or come ſhorte of hyr game, the Laner ſtoupeth with great nimbleneſſe of wing, and eyther killeth the fowle, or otherwiſe enforceth it to ſtoupe and fal amid the flight to the grounde.
                  You ſhall neuer lightly ſee a Laner lie vpon the wings, after ſhe hath flien to marke, but after one ſtoupyng ſhe maketh a poynt, and then doth awayte for the fowle after the maner of a Goſehawke: for if ſhe miſſe at the firſt downecome, or kill not in the foote, ſhe is by nature ſo ſlothful and dull, as ſhe will ſeeke the aduantage, to hyr greateſt eaſe: and therfore doth commonly vſe vpon the queſting and call of the Spanels, to attend very diligently, and ſo to pray at hir pleaſure.
                  They are highly eſteemed in Fraunce, and (as they ſay) there made to the riuer, and there do they vſe to flee with a caſte or leaſhe of Laners to the brooke, and ſometimes with the Laners and Lanerets togither, and ſometimes do flee the field with the Laner: but in Italie they do not vſe this kinde of Hawke at all. With vs in England this kynde of Hawke is in price, but accompted very ſlouthfull, and hard mettelde, ſo as vnleſſe you keepe a very hard hande vpon hyr, ſhe will do little good, cleane contrarie to the nature of a Falcon gentle, who for one good vſage will ſhewe a treble curteſie, and the better ſhe is rewarded the better will ſhe flee: but vſe the Laner well, and ſhe maketh ſlender accompt thereof, but becommeth ſlouthfull, and vnapt to flee eyther field or riuer.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Tunician Falcon.
               
                  
                     depiction of Tunisian falcon
                  
               
               THe Tunician is a Falcon euen muche of the nature of a Laner, yet ſomewhat leſſe than the Laner, but verie like hyr in plume and foote, alwayes more ſluggiſh and heauie in hir flight,

and yet more creeſe than the Laner, and ſhe hath a large rounde heade.
               
                  The cauſe why ſhe is called a Tunycian.
                  THis Falcon is termed a Tunycian, for that ordinarily and moſt vſually ſhe is founde to eyree in Barbarie, euen as I haue reported to you, that the Laner doth in Fraunce and otherwhere. And bycauſe Tunyce is the head and chiefe Citie in all Barbarie, and the Prince and ſtate there, commorant and moſt abyding, holding the court there, and doe moſt chiefly vſe to flee with theſe kynde of Falcons of all others, they are moſt chiefly termed Tunycians.
                  The Tunycian may alſo be called a Punycian Falcon, for that which we reade of the warres Punicke, againſt the Carthaginenſes, beyng mainteined againſt the inhabitantes of that place, where nowe is ſituated Tunyce.
                  The Tunycian is large, approching neare the nature of a Laner, and verie like in plume and mayle, and not vnlike, for the ſeare of hir foote, but ſomewhat leſſe, and of a longe flyght: hir head is large and rounde.
                  They are excellent good for the ryuer, and will lye well vpon their winges, and flye the field well, as I haue ſayde before of the Laner. They doe naturally take pleaſure to ſtrike and ſeaze vpon the Hare, and all other kynde of pray whatſoeuer.
                  This kynde of Falcons is not ſo ordinarie or common, in all partes and regions as other hawkes are, ſaue only in Barbarie and Tunyce.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Merlyn.
               
                  depiction of merlin falcon
               
               THere is a kynde of Falcon that is called a Merlyn. Theſe Merlyns are very much like the Haggart falcon in plume, in ſeare of the foote, in beake and talons. So as there ſeemeth to be no oddes or difference at al betwixt them, ſaue onely in the bigneſſe, for ſhe hath like demeanure, like plume, and very like conditions to the Falcon, and in hir kind is of like courage, & there-muſt be kept as choycely and as daintily as the Falcon.
               Aſſuredly diuers of theſe Merlyns become paſſing good hawkes

and verie ſkilfull, their propertie by nature is to kyll Thruſſhes, Larkes, and Partridges. They flee with greater fierceneſſe and more hotely than any other hawke of praye. They are of greater pleaſure, and full of courage, but a mā muſt make greater care, and take good heede to them, for they are ſuch buſie and vnruly things with their beaks, as diuers times they eate of their owne feete and talons verie vnnaturally, ſo as they dye of it. And this is the reaſon and true cauſe, that ſildome or neuer ſhall you ſee a mewed or entermewed Merlyn. For that in the mewe they do ſpoyle themſelues, as I haue before declared.
               My Italyan Author hath theſe words, both of the ſhape and in commendation of the Merlyn.
               The Merlyn is (ſayth he) of the ſhape of a Falcon, leſſe than the Sparowhawke, more nimble and wight of wing than any other hawke, ſhe doth kyll all ſuch game and pray as the Sparowhawke doth vſe to ſlay, ſpecially ſmall byrds, namely Larks, Sparowes, and ſuch like, all which ſhe doth purſue with exceeding crueltie and courage.
               She is reported to be a hawke of the fiſte and not of the lure, albeit a man may if he will, make hir to the lure alſo. She is a verie ventrous hawke and hardie: by this we may coniecture it: For though ſhe be little bigger than a Piegon, yet notwithſtanding, ſhe will hazard hir ſelfe to flee the Partridge, the Quayle, and ſuch other like foules, more large than hir ſelfe, and wil purſue them in ſo cruell maner, as ſundry times ſhe followeth them, euen to the villages & townes, whether the ſilly birdes do flee for ayde and reſcue, from their naturall foe the hawke.
               The Merlin is the only hawke of al others in whom (as mine Author affirmeth) there is no difference betwixt the male and female, but yet by experience we finde it otherwiſe, for the female is ye larger bird of the two, and more big than ye other in ſight.
               Some are of opinion, that Lydos, Hierax, in greeke, and Leuis accipiter in Latin, is our Merlyn of whome we ſpeake, and that thoſe birdes of praye whome Aristotle termeth (Leues) to our iudgement ſhuld be the Merlyns, bicauſe they are the leſſe hawkes of all others that are to be founde.
            
            
               
               Of the Hobbye.
               
                  depiction of hobby falcon
               
               OF all birdes of praye that belong to the Falconers vſe, I know none leſſe than the Hobbye vnleſſe it be the Merlyn.
               The Hobbye is a hawke of the lure, and not of the fiſt: alſo ſhe is of the number of thoſe hawkes that are hye fleeing and towre hawkes, as the Falcon, the Laner, and the Sacre be. If a man be diſpoſed to deſcribe the Hobbye, he can not do better, nor deale more artificially, than to matche hir for ſhape with the Sacre.

For in good fayth there is but ſmall difference or inequalitie betwixt them, ſaue that the Sacre is farre the huger byrde.
               The propertie of the Hobbie in all countries and regions, where they are eyreed, or otherwiſe brought is to ſoare and flee vpon the hounteſmen and Falconers, and ſo to follow them verie watchfully, to the ende that when they ſpring or put vp any ſmal byrdes, ſhe may ſloupe from hir winges, and ſeaze on them as on hir pray. And this is ſo ordinary a hawke, and the practiſe that I ſpeake of ſo generall, as there is not the ſimpleſt bowre or peaſant but doth know it. I can make no fitter nor more apte compariſon, than to reſemble the frye and ſmall fiſh of the ſea, being had in chaſe by the huger ſort of fiſh deſirous to deuour them: to the ſmall foules and birds of the ayre, purſued by the Hobbye.
               For as ſone as the ſilly fiſhe that is chaſed by the Delphin and ſuch like, do perceiue their ſafetie to be nothing in the Element of water, where, by God and nature they are alotted to liue, eftſone haue they their recourſe to the ayre to ſaue them ſelues, choſing rather to lye at the mercie of the rauening ſea foules, ſoaring vpon the water, than to yeelde them ſelues in pray to their naturall aduerſaries the fiſh. Euen ſo the Hobbies perceiuing the hunteſmen or Falconers in the field ſo hunt the poore Leueret, or flee ye Partridge, do forthwith accompanie them, ſoring vpon them, in hope to encounter ſome one ſmal bird or other, whom ye hounds or ſpanels ſhal by fortune put vp, and ſpring by ranging ye field. Then the Larkes and ſuch like ſmall foules, whoſe nature is not to braunch or take the tree, but altogither to liue vpon ye groūd, finding themſelues purſued by the hounds and ſpanels, to begile thē, are enforſt to truſt to their wings, and to take the ayre, & being there, finding thēſelues moleſted by ye Falconers & Hobbies, do make their choyce and election to become a pray rather to the dogs, or ſeeke mercy among the horſe legges, and ſo to be ſurpriſed aliue, than to affie in the curteſie of the cruell Hobbies, and to be taken in their cruell talons, where they are moſt aſſured to dye the death.
               The Hobby is ſo nimble and wight of wing, that ſhe dares encounter the Crowe, and to giue ſouſe for ſouſe, and blowe for

blowe with him in the ayre.
               This is a naturall and ſpeciall tricke that ſhe dothe vſe, eſpying the Falconers in the field ſhe doth followe them, and attende on them, but it is but for a certaine ſpace, as though in verie deede ſhe had hyr lymites and boundes preſcribed hir, and appoynted howe farre ſhe ſhoulde flee. For as ſone as ſhe leaueth them, ſhe preſently ſcoureth along the ſyde of ſome groue or highe woode, where ſhe dothe ordinarily vſe to pearch and take the ſtande.
               The Hobbye hath a blew beake, but the ſeare of hir beake and legges is yellowe. The crynet or little blacke feathers vnder hyr eyes be verie blacke, ſo as moſte commonly they continue and proceede from the beake to the temples or eare burres, and in like manner, is there an other blacke ſtreake that deſcendeth to eyther ſide of hir gorge. As touching the top of the heade, it is betwixt blacke and yellowe, but hath two whyte ſeames vpon the necke. The plumes vnder the gorge and about the browes, are reddiſhe, without ſpot or droppe. The plumes vnder the bellie (or as I may beſt terme them) the breaſt feathers, are broune for the moſt parte, and yet poudered with whyte ſpottes, as Ermynes. All the backe, the trayne and the wyngs are blacke aloft, ſhe hath no great ſcales vpon hir legges, vnleſſe it be a fewe that beginne behinde the three ſtretchers and pouncies, which are verie large in reſpect of hir ſhort legges. Hir brayle feathers are engouted twixte red and blacke. The pendant feathers (which are thoſe behinde the thigh) are of a ruſtie and ſmokie verniſh complexion. When a man ſeeth hir ſore aloft in the ayre, he wil iudge hir vnder the wings, that hir plumage and downe, as well of hir winges as betwixt hir legges, is ruſſet and reddiſhe mayled.
               There are two foules, wherof the one is called (Ian le blancke) which I take to be the Harrohen or capped Kyte, and the other (Blanch queue) the ring tayle, who doe alwayes flee with hir for company, beating and ſouſing the Larkes, and if happily they ſpye the Hobbye encountering the Larke, whome they put and force ſo hir winges, it is a pleaſure to behold the game

that is betwixt this caſt of buſſardes and the hawke. For their deſire and intent is to bereaue the ſillye Hobbye hir praye: but ſhee being nimble and wight of wing, encountreth with them, entercepting the Larke from them, manger their might and ſundrie times they buckle ſo together, as you ſhall ſee them come tūbling down both yfeare, one faſt griping & ſeazed on the other.
               Some would haue that this Hobby of whom I write, ſhould be that byrde whome Aristotle calleth Hipotriorchis, and the Latines Subuteo: but I am not of that mynde, but that it ſhould rather be the Sacret whome Aristotle doth meane. But let the learned reader iudge the controuerſie, I am to lay downe their natures and properties, and not to decyde any matter of controuerſie which in deede doth belong to the curious Falconer, and not to him that doth imbrace more the ſporte, than the diuerſitie and oddes of ſpeache, which in euerie arte a man ſhall be aſſured to fynde. Let it ſuffice if I gyue the Reader to vnderſtande the nature of euerie hawke nowe adayes in vſe, and withall (according to my promiſe and meaning) doe let him knowe the meane to flye with them bothe the fyelde and brooke, as alſo to doe hym to witte, howe to Mewe, Ympe, and cure them beyng diſeaſed. Theſe are the ſpeciall poynts, and ſuch as deſerue thankes from me, and commendation from him. I will proceede in the deſcription of the nature of this hawke, according to the opinion of the Italian.
               
                  The Italians opinion of the Hobbye.
                  THe Hobbies are more large than the Merlyns, and for beake, eyes, plume, and foote, they verie much reſemble the Falcon. They will lye vpon their wings reaſonably wel, folowing mē, and ſpanels, fleing vpon them many turnes, to the end that whē any Partridge or Quayle is ſprong, they may the better ſtoupe from their wings, and ſo ſeaze on the foule, which ſundry times they doe.
                  Theſe kinde of hawkes are vſed of ſuch as go with nettes, and ſpanels. The order of which game is this.
                  
                     The dogges they range the field to ſpryng the fowle, and the Hobbies they accuſtome to flee alofte ouer thē, ſoring in the ayre, whom the ſellie byrdes eſpying at that aduantage, and fearyng this conſpiracie (as it were) betwixt the dogges and Hawkes, for their vndoing and cōfuſion, dare in no wiſe cōmitte themſelues to their wings, but do lie as cloſe and flat on the ground, as they poſſible may do, and ſo are taken in the nettes.
                  some Gentlemen haue made reporte, and for truth aſſured me, that the (Emperoure Ferdinando) of famous memory, did giue his Falconers in charge to keepe & reclayme ſundrie Hobbies. And his Maieſtie diuers times for recreation, would take his horſe, and into the fieldes, with a Hobbie on his fiſte, holding in his right hād a long ſlēder pole, or reede ſeuen foote in length, on the toppe whereof there was conueyed by ſleight, a ſtrong line, with a ſliding knotte: And, when happely his Maieſtie had eſpied a larcke on the ground, he would forthwith hold vp, and aduaunce his Hobbie, to the vewe of the ſellie byrde, whom as ſoone as the larcke ſawe, ſhe would in nowiſe dare to ſpryng, but lie as ſtill as a ſtone, flat vpon the earth, ſo fearefull they are of the Hobbie in chief of al other Hawkes: then would the Emperour at his good leaſure and greate pleaſure, with his long pole, and the ſliding line, take the ſellie fowle, and drawe hyr vp vnto him, and truely tooke no ſmall delight in this kinde of paſtime, and would cauſe his Falconers to do likewiſe, who by this deuiſe tooke many byrdes, and in this ſorte woulde they Hawke frō the beginning of September, to the end of October.
                  This practiſe did ſomewhat reſemble, and drawe to the nature of our deuiſe, in daring of larckes, whiche wee vſe at theſe dayes, but (in my iudgement) nothing ſo ready and fitte as our paſtime and ginne which we haue, whiche is a very good ſporte and full of delight, to ſee the fearefull nature of the ſillie Larcke, with the great awe and ſubiection that the Hobbie hath hyr in, by the lawe of kinde: for aſſuredly there is no other Hawke, no not the hugeſt, whom the larcke doth ſo much feare as ye Hobbie which may manifeſtly appeare by this that I haue written, as alſo by dayly experience and practiſe in that behalfe.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Goſhawke, after the opinion of VVilliam Tardiff a Frenchman.
               
                  
                     depiction of goshawk
                  
               
               
                  A generall deuiſion of Goſhawkes, whom the French men call Autour.
                  
                     THere are (ſayth he) fiue kindes of Autours or Goſhawkes, ſpeaking of the Goſhawke in the largeſt name and nature, compryſed in that woorde, Autour.
                  The firſt and moſte noble kinde, is the female Goſhawke, whiche is with vs moſt ordinarily in vſe.
                  The ſecond is named a demy Autour, or Goſhawke, as it were a kind betwixt twoo other ſortes, and that is a ſpare ſlender hawke and of little regard, in reſpect of any good ſhe will do.
                  The third is the Tyercle whiche is the male, or cocke to the Goſhawke, who doth ſlay the Partridge, and is not of ſufficient force to kill the Crane. He is termed a Tyerclet, for that there are moſt commonly diſcloſed three byrdes in one ſelfe eyree, two Hawkes, and one Tiercell.
                  The fourth kind of Autour is ye Sparowhawke, whoſe nature is to kill all kinde of praye that the Goſhawke dothe, ſaue onely the larger ſorte of fowles.
                  The fifth kind is called (Sabech) whom the Egiptians terme (Baydach) which doth very much reſemble the Sparowhawke, but is leſſe than the Sparowhawke, and hath a very blewe eye.
                  There are ſundrie ſortes of Goſhawkes, and thoſe brought and conueyed out of ſundrie forayne partes and regions, but among thē all, that Goſhawke that is bred & eyreed in Armenia, and Perſia, is the principall beſt hawke, and then next to hyr in goodneſſe, the hawke of Greece, and laſtly that of Afrike.
                  The hawke of Armenia hath hyr eyes greene, but ye beſt of yt kinde is ſhe that hath blacke eyes, & blacke plumes on hir backe.
                  The hawke of Perſia is large, wel plumed, cleare and deepe eyed, with hangyng and pendant eyleddes and browes.
                  The hawke of Greece hath a great head, well ſeaſoned, a ſtrong necke, and is reaſonable well plumed.
                  the Goſhawke of Afrike, hath blacke eyes in hyr ſoarage, but being a mewed hawke, hyr eyes become reddiſh and fierie.
                  At what times Hawkes begin to fall to liking, which is at Cawking time, all byrdes of pray do aſſemble themſelues with the Goſhawke, and do flocke togither. As namely the Falcon, the Sacre, and ſuch other that liue on praye and rauine.
                  
                     And hereof it proceedeth that the Goſhawkes become ſo diuers in goodneſſe, force, and hardineſſe, according to the diuerſitie of their choyce, and cawkyng.
                  The beſt Goſhawke ought to be weightie, and a heauie bird, as thoſe of great Armenia bee.
                  In Syria they make choyce of their Hawkes, by the Maſſynes and poyſe of them, & do eſteeme ye moſt weightie Hawke for the beſt: as for the mayle & conditions they do little regard or prize.
                  The blancke Goſhawke is the largeſt, the fayreſt, and moſte apt and eaſie to be reclaymed, and withall the ſtrongeſt of all Hawkes of that ſorte, for ſhe can kill the Crane. And by reaſon ſhe is eyreed in a very hie and loftie place, and cā beſt endure the colde, which is moſt frife in the middle region of the ayre, therefore is ſhe good to flee all fowles of that ſorte and condition.
                  The Goſhawke that doth encline and tend to a blacke maile, and that hath ſuperfluous plumes on hyr head, reachyng downe hir fronte or forehead, like a peruque, or borowed hayre, that is a very fayre Hawke for beauty, but nothing ſtrong.
               
               
                  The good proportion and ſhape of a Goſhawke.
                  SHe ought to haue a ſmall head, hyr face long and ſtraight like the Vultur or Eagle, a large winde pipe or throte, great eyes, deepe ſet, and the apple or middle parte of the eye blacke, nares, eares, backe and feete, large and blancke, a blacke long beake, long necke, bigge breſt, harde fleſh, long thighes, fleſhie, and diſtant one from the other, the bone of the legge and knee ſhorte, long and large pounces, and talons.
                  The ſhape from the ſterne or trayne, to the breſt forwarde, ought to grow to a roundeneſſe. The feathers of the thighes towards the trayne ſhould be large, and the trayne feathers, ſhort, ſofte, and ſomewhat tending to an yron mayle.
                  The brayle feathers ought to bee, like the breſt feathers, and the couert feathers of the trayne, ſhould be ſpotted, and full of blacke rondels, but the colour of the very extremitrie and poynt

of euery trayne feather, ought to be blacke ſtreaked. Of mayle & colour, the beſt is the red, ſomewhat tending to blacke or playne grieſeld.
                  The ſignes of a good Goſhawke, are haughtie courage, deſire and greedie luſte to feede, often tyring and plucking of hyr meate, ſuddayne ſnatching of hyr foode vpon the fiſte, good enduing, and great force in aſſayling hir game.
                  The ſigne of boldeneſſe in a Goſhawke is this, tie hyr in an open lighte place, and after a while darcken and obſcure it, by ſhutting ſome windowe or ſuch like deuice, then touche hyr vppon the ſuddayne at vnwares, if ſhe then iumpe, and leppe to the fiſte without feare or aſtoniſhment, that is an aſſured ſigne of hardineſſe in a Goſhawke.
                  The token of force in a Goſhawke, is this, tie diuers Goſhawkes in ſundrie places of one ſelfe chamber or mewe, and that Hawke that dothe ſ
                        •
                     iſe and mewte hieſt and fartheſt of from hir, vndoubtedly is the ſtrōgeſt Hawke, for that one point declareth and argueth a good ſtrong backe in the Hawke.
                  A token of goodneſſe and excellencie in thoſe demie Goſſhawkes, whom my Author doth terme (petite Autours) is to haue large and cleare eyen, a ſmall head, long necke, lowe and cloſe plume or downe, harde fleſhe, a greene ſeere of hir foote, large ſtretchers and not gowtie or fleſhie, quicke enduyng, large panell, and able to ſlyſe farre from hir when ſhe mewteth. The point of the beake to be blacke is a very good ſigne.
               
               
                  The ill ſhape of Goſhawkes.
                  ALbeit there be a generall rule, that (contraria contrarijs dinoſcuntur) which is that one contrarie is knowen ſufficiently by the other, and therefore hauing made you full ſhewe of the good ſhape of Goſhawkes, the ill proportion will eaſely thereby fall out and be deſcerned of it ſelf without any farther trauayle, yet neuertheleſſe followyng mine Authour, I think it not amiſſe to decypher you the ill forme of a Goſhawke: which is, to haue

a great head, a ſhorte necke, to be thicke and groſſe plumed, ſofte fleſhed, ſhort thighed, long armed, ſhorte talons, tawnie hewed, tending to blacke, and harde and rough vnder the foote.
                  A Goſhawke that when ſhe is looſe in the houſe, flees as though ſhe were at large and libertie, breakyng out of a mewe hauyng great groſſe feathers, eyes as redde as bloud, that is euermore batyng, and beyng ſet on the perche, offreth to flee at the face of a man, ſuche a Hawke if ſhe be kepte lowe in fleſhe can not be borne on the fiſte, if ſhe be hie and full of fleſhe, ſhe wil not then abide with hir keeper, but rangle and gadde: wherfore of ſuch Hawkes there is no accompt to be made at all.
                  A fearefull Goſhawke is hardly to be reclaymed and manned, for the feare ſhe hath will alwayes cauſe hyr to refuſe the fiſte and lure, and make hyr checke, and not willingly repayre to any deuiſe wherwith ſhe is called and rappelde, after hyr flight: whiche is a verie great inconuenience in a Goſhawke, and no ſmall hindrance to the ſporte of him that ſhall happen to haue ſuche a fearefull Hawke: for commonly vnleſſe they be firſte fonde of the keeper, and in loue with the call, they will not flee their game to the likyng of their owner, and the tediouſneſſe in commyng by them agayne after the flight, dothe breede forgetfulneſſe of the paſtime, how good and delectable ſoeuer it were before.
                  That Goſhawke, that hath pendant plumes ouer hyr eyes, and (as they ſay in the Countrie) whoſe feathers hang in hir light, the whyte of whoſe eye is very watriſhe and blancke, that is redde maylde, or bright tawnie, hath the moſte aſſured token that may be of ill condicions, and is not like to be well cōming. But if happely ſuch a Hawke fall once to be good, ſhe will then proue a paſſing Hawke.
                  Sometimes (though very ſeldome) do wee ſee a Goſhawke of badde ſhape and in condition cleane contrarie to thoſe ſignes that ought to be lookt for in a good Goſhauke, proue light, luſty, able to hold out and maintayne hir flight, and ſuch a one as will very well ſlay the greater ſorte of fowles.
                  
                     The Goſhawkes praye, is the Fezant, the Malard, the wilde Gooſe, the Hare and Conie: beſides all whiche ſhe will ſtrike ventrouſlie, and ſeaze on a Kidde or Goate, and keepe him play ſo long, as the dogges at length ſhall come in to aſſyſte hir and further the fall of it, whiche doth manifeſtly decypher the great ineſtimable courage, and valour of the Hawke.
               
               
                  Out of the French I haue collected this concerning the Goſhawke.
                  SOme men haue thought, and bene of this reſolute minde, that the (Autour) or Goſhawke hath bene of the kind of a Vultur, for the affinitie and neareneſſe of their termes and names: for (Autour) in the French, is that Hawke whom we call the Goſhawke, and (Vantour) is the Vultur, which twoo termes, as you ſee, draw very neare to one ſpeach.
                  Some other haue been of opiniō that betwixt ye Goſhawke and Sparowhawke, is no oddes or differēce in nature, ſaue only in reſpect of the hugeneſſe of that one, and the ſlenderneſſe of the other: but my purpoſe is to treate of the Goſhawke ſeuerally from the Sparowhawke, and ſo to proceede to the Sparowhawke, of whom I wil write, according to the French and Italian Authours, in a ſeuerall chapter by it ſelfe, to auoyde the cō
                     fuſion, which otherwiſe might happen in that behalf.
                  The Goſhawke is euer more regarded than hyr Tiercell, for the males, or cockes among Hawkes and byrdes of praye, do make euident proofe and ſhew to the eye, of their difference from the femals and Hawkes.
                  Againe we may with eaſe diſcerne the Goſhawke from hyr Tyercell, for that ſhe is farre larger, thā the Tiercell of hir kind.
                  The Falconers and Oſtregers, haue to theſe two ſorts, added a thirde kinde (as I ſayd before) whome they terme the Demygoſhawke, as a byrde indifferent, betwixt the other twoo.
                  Bothe kindes of them are more hie, and longer armed than eyther the Falcon, or Gerfalcon: they are Hawkes of the fiſte, and (as wee call them) rounde winged Hawkes, quite contrarie

to thoſe I wrote of before, all whiche are Hawkes of the lure, and long winged Hawkes, otherwiſe called Towre Hawkes.
                  The Hawke (I meane the female) is uery much like the Egle in mayle, and if wee may make bolde to compare the leſſe with ye larger, ſhe hath a more ſtately high necke than the Egle, and of a more redde or yron mayle, the grownde of hir plume and downe tending to a redde colour.
                  Thoſe Goſhawkes that are of Slauonia, are good at all maner of game, large, hardie, and fayre plumed, their toungs black, and their nares great and wide.
                  There are Goſhawkes, whom the Italians call, Alpiſani, or haukes of the Alpes, which are much vſed in Lombardie, and Tuſcane, they are more thicke than they are lōg, fierce & hardie.
                  But thoſe Goſhawkes that our Oſtregers haue now adaies, are chiefly conueyed out of Almayne, hauing their eyes and the feare of the beake as alſo of theyr feete and legges, yellow, contrarie to the Gerfalcon, whoſe feare is blew and azure.
                  Their traynes are garniſhed with large droppes or ſpottes, croſſing the feather, partie blacke, and partie grey, as alſo the plumes of the necke and head, are more towardes a ruſſet, and powdred with blacke, but thoſe of the thighe and vnder the bellie or pannell, are otherwiſe marked, for they are not full ſo yellowe, hauing rounde droppes on them, not muche vnlike thoſe that are on the Peacockes trayne.
                  The Goſhawkes of Almaine are not verie fayre though they be large Hawkes, redde mayled, and yet not hardie.
                  There are ſundrie of them good in their ſoarage, but beyng once mewed proue nothing worthe: there be diuers of thē taken in the foreſt of Arde, and in ſundrie places of Almaine. The Greekes haue called the Goſhawke Hierax, the Latins Accipiter ſtellaris, and the Italians, Astuy.
                  
                  Thus much haue I collected out of another French Author, as neceſſarily belonging to the deſcription of the nature of a Goſhawke, bicauſe you ſhall ſee the ſeuerall opinions of ſundrie wryters, and gather to your owne vſe, what ſhall occurre and thwarte beſt with your liking, for it is not the mayle and plume

of the Hawke that I ſo greatly regard, or do meane to ſtand vpon, as the making, reclayming, diſeaſes, and cures of the ſayd Hawkes, each one after their proper nature and qualitie, if ſo my health will giue me leaue to runne myne authors through aduiſedly, according to my meaning and reſolutiō, at what time I firſt vndertooke this collection.
               
               
                  Out of the Italian concerning the Goſhawkes and their kinds.
                  THere are ſundie ſortes of Goſhawkes, according to the diuerſitie of places and regions. There be Hawkes of
Armenia, Slauonia, Sardinia, Calament, of the Alpes, whiche they vſe in Lombardie, Tuſcan, Marca, and Puglia, ſome other of Ruſsia, Friuli, Almania, and otherſome of Lombardie, all which I will briefly touch vnto you, and not long dwell in the matter, hauing out of my french authors already deciphered the natures of the moſt part of them.
                  Firſt of al there are Goſhawkes, called Armenia Hawkes, much differing from the Goſhawke, in ſort as almoſt, they haue no reſemblance at all to the other kinds of Goſhawkes. They are very fayre and huge, the mayle of them is blancke, as ſundrie haggart Falcons be, they flee with great courage and life, all greater ſort of fowles.
                  There are others eyried in Slauonia and Dalmacia, and thence are they tearmed Slauon Goſhawkes, which indeede are good for any thing a man will employ them vnto. Very fayre & hardy Hawkes, large footed, very well penned, theyr downe and plumage excellent fine, their tungs blacke, and their nares large and wide.
                  Thoſe of Sardinia are nothing like the other Hawkes, they are browne, and ruſſet plumed, finall Hawkes, hard and not ſmall footed, and nothing ventrous.
                  
                     Thoſe of Calament are ſhort truſſed Hawkes, and large, blancke ſeared on the foote, thoſe flee the greater fowles exceeding well.
                  The Goſhawkes of the Alpes, and of Calabria, are in a manner more large than they are long, very prowde, and hardie Hawkes.
                  The Goſhawkes of Lombardie are not very large, browne mayld, and cowardly kytes to do any good.
                  The Goſhawke of Ruſsia and Sarmatia, is a large and huge Hawke, the moſt part of them are blancke Hawkes, and taken vp of great Princes and noble ſtates, they are apt and able to do any thing that may be looked for from Hawkes of that kinde. My ſelfe haue ſeene great ſtore of them in the Citie of Moſqua, which is the chiefe dukedome of all Ruſsia. The
Moſcouits & Tartarians doe vſe to flee with thoſe Goſhawkes at the brooke, & there do beate vp the fowle with ȳe drumme, without whiche you ſhall ſeldome ſee a Boyaron (as they tearme them) which is a Gentleman, ride at any time. And one ſpeciall thing which I noted among them was, that as well Moſcouites, as Tartares, do vſe to beare their Hawkes on the right fiſte, whiche is cleane contrary to our manner and guiſe heere in England, or in any other Region that I haue heard or ſeene, ſaue only in thoſe North partes, no reaſon I can yeeld for it, but that, each countrey for the moſt part hath his faſhion.
                  Thoſe of Friuli, are good Hawkes, and large, but not ſo fayre as the Slauon Hawkes.
                  Note this, that a good Goſhawke ought to be littell, and broad ſhouldred, large breſted, very round and fleſhly, hauing a long thigh, a ſhort legge or arme, and the ſame greate, and a large foote, and not gowty but ſlender. Contrariwiſe the Tiercell ſhould be large, for it is a common ſaying.
                  A little Hawke, and a large Tiercell, is euer beſt.
                  
                     All Goſhawkes are by nature greedye, and catching of whome ſome we vſe to flee the riuer, and freſh brookes, and ſome the Sea, and otherſome agayne the field, and neuer or very ſeldome the riuer or brooke.
                  The firſte ſorte for the moſt parte doe pray vppon Duckes, Geeſe, Hearons, Shouelers, and ſuch lyke fowle, as do vſuallie haunt, and liue in the Sea and riuers. And thoſe diuers times doe ſeaze and take theyr pray vppon the ſuddayne at vnwares, by fleeing lowe neare the ground, and ſtealing vppon the fowle.
                  The other, after a while that they haue vſed to flee the field, do pray on Pigeons, Pullets, Hennes, and Partridges. And being once mewed hawkes, and paſt their ſoarage, they will take the ſtand vppon ſome tree, and finding eyther Patridge, Fezant, Pullet, Henne, or ſuche other like fowle, they make their ſtowping ſo fiercely and in ſuch great haſt, and do flee them ſo farre before hed and at randon, mayntayning, and making good their flight, as in the end they kill them, and do pray vpon them.
                  Of the Goſhawkes, thoſe that bee ventrous, and hardie, will kill the Hare, and hauing kilde him, diuers times, they ſwallow in for haſt greate bones, and doe put them ouer very well, and endue them ſafely withoute anye hurte at all.
                  Thoſe that are the riuer Goſhawkes, and doe haunte the water, and brookes, are commonly the moſte hardy and ventrous Hawkes of all that kynde, and do at the riuer of theyr owne inclination and nature fall to kill the greate fowles of the Riuer, of whyche I haue before made recitall and mention.
                  Truely the Goſhawke is very muche to be regarded for hir hardie mettall and courage, for that therein ſhe is not inferiour to anye kynde of Hawke, but rather more fearce and eger. And agayne to bee kept with greater care, for that ſhee is more choyce and daynty, and doeth looke

to haue a more nice hard kept on hir, than any other kind of Falcon or Hawke, vnleſſe it be ȳe Sparowhawke, which is all one in a maner in nature with the Goſhawke, and of whom I purpoſe now to write.
               
            
            
               Of the Sparovvhawke out of the french Authors.
               
                  
                     depiction of sparrowhawk
                  
               
               
                  I Wil now write ſomewhat of the Sparhawke, for that ſhe is in hir kynde, and for that game that hir ſtrength will giue hir leaue to kill, a very good Hawke, and much vſed in Fraunce, And beſides, he that knowes well how to man, reclayme, and flee with the Sparhawke, may eaſely know how to keepe, and deale with all other Hawkes. Moreouer it is a Hawke, that ſerues both winter and ſomer, with great pleaſure, and the game that ſhe fleeth is ordinarie, and common to be had, and ſhe will generally flee at all kynde of game, more than ye Falcon, or than any other kind of Hawke will. And the winter Sparhawke, if ſhe proue good, will kill the Pye, the Iaye, the chough, the Woodcocke, the Thruſh, the blacke Birde, the Veylfare, and ſundry other ſortes of byrdes.
               
                  The diuerſitie of Sparhawkes according to their times and ages.
                  1 THe Eyaſſe hawke, is ſhe that is taken in the eyree.
                  2 The brancher, is ſhe that followeth the old Hawke, frō braunch to braunch, and tree to tree, whiche is alſo tearmed a ramage Hawke.
                  3 The Sore Hawke, is ſhe that hath flien, and prayed for hir, and is taken before ſhe mewe.
                  4 The fourth kynde, is that Hawke, that is mewed, and hath caſt hir ſoare feathers.
               
               
                  The good ſhape and proportion of a Sparhawke.
                  SParhawkes are of diuers ploumes, ſome are ſmal plumed, and blanke Hawkes, otherſome of a larger feather, whiche are not ſo good in oure opinion as for theyr ſhape. The Hawke that is well ſhapt is large and ſhort, with a ſlender heade, large, and broade ſhouldred, bigge armed, large

and wyde footed, and blacke maylde, with a good great beake, hir eyes ſomewhat hollowe, and deepe ſet, blanke eye liddes, the ſeare of hir beake twixt greene and white, a hie bigge necke, long wings, reaching quite athwart the bodie of the Hawke, ſo as the poynt of the wing meete with the toppe of the trayne very neare, and that hir trayne be not ouerlong, but of a reaſonable broade feather, ſharpe pownces, ſmall and blacke, and euermore well diſpoſed to feede hungerly & with great appetite.
                  The Nyaſſe Hawke is good, and will come to the fiſt very well, and not lightly ſoare away, or be loſt.
                  The Sore Hawke is hard to bee manned, but will prone good, if ſhe will once brooke company, this Hawke, for that ſhe hath prayed for hir ſelfe, is very ventrous and hardie.
                  The beſt Sparowhawke, is that Hawke whom we cal the brauncher.
               
               
                  What kindes of Sparowhawkes there are.
                  THere are Sparowhawkes, whome the Italians call (diventimiglia) whiche are large and long Hawkes, with a greate beake, large foote, and with thirteene feathers in the trayne. Thoſe Hawkes are excellēt to flee any kind of game.
                  There are other called Slauon Hawkes, good for all purpoſes, and full of hardineſſe, long and large Hawkes, hauing a great long beake, and blacke breſt feathers.
                  There are others of Calabria not very large, but of greate courage, plumed like the Quayle, that will do according as they are taught and manned.
                  There be ſparowhawkes eyreed in Corſica and brought frō
                     Sardinia, ſmall Hawkes, browne or canuas maylde, that will flee very well.
                  Thoſe of Almania are very ſlender, and nothing good.
                  The Hawkes of 
                        Ʋerona and 
                        Ʋicentia, are of meane ſize, and many of them do proue to be good Hawkes.
                  
                     There be Sparohawkes called Alpiſani, of the Alpes, that are large, wight of wing, and ventrous to flee any kynde of fowle.
                  Ther are others eyreed in ye bale of Sabbia, of a reaſonable liſe, ruſſet maylde, entermedled with golden ſpottes, or droppes, like the turtle, thoſe be very good to flee great fowles.
                  Ther is one other kind of Sparowhawkes, eyreed in Bergamaſca, in a vallie called the Blacke vale, neare the confines of

                        Ʋoltolina, ſlender Hawkes, browne mayld, good to be manned and reclaymed, and thoſe are the principalleſt of all other Sparowhawkes.
                  I do not here in this place deale exactly of the mayles, and plumes of theſe kinde of hawkes, in parte for that the hawkes are of ſundry and ſeuerall plumes, according to the diuerſitie of countries and regions, where they are eyreed: and parte, for that the hawkes themſelues are ſo ordinary in vſe, as it were to be eſteemed but a ſuperfluous labour, to waſte muche tyme therein, in penning of that, which is (in the opinion of men) of no greate importance. My chiefe care and induſtrie (if health allow mee leaue, and ſickneſſe too muche offende not my eaſe) ſhall conſiſt in the reclayming and māning of all theſe kindes of hawkes, according to their natures and properties, and in diſplaying the meanes to flee with them, and to keepe them, both for the fielde and brooke. And after that, in declaration of their diſeaſes, ordinarily incidente vnto their kindes, and the beſte remedies for the ſame, whiche (I doubt not) are the only and chiefeſt poyntes that the diſcrete and learned reader will accept from mee, and ſuche as will moſte ſtande him in ſteade that doeth meane to deale with hawkes. Wherefore I thus make the Epiloge and concluſion of the firſt part of my treatiſe and collection, wherein are contayned all the kindes, names, and the cauſes of thoſe names, of all ſuche Hawkes & birdes of pray as are moſt in vſe, and regarded among noble men and gentlemen at theſe dayes, crauing the Reader to beſtowe no leſſe good liking vppon the tranſlation and collection heereof (if it in anye parte deſerue it) than I

haue employed trauaile and paines in the true ſearch and examination of the ſame, both out of the Frenche and Italian Authours, where I muſt confeſſe, I haue not tranſlated 
                        Ʋerbatim, and by word of line what I founde (for then had I not dealt ſo exactly as I now haue done, for that I found ſundry thinges not ſo well agreeing to our humours and vſe,) but haue taken my pleaſure of them, in making choyce of the chiefeſt matter, whiche did occurre in them, hoping, that the more my paynes haue bin the leſſe ſhall be mine offence, and the greater the liking of the Reader, and the better hys acceptaunce: whiche if I finde, both I for my trauayle, ſhall thynke my ſelfe ſufficiently guerdoned, and the careful Printer deeme both his coſte and charge well employed, beeyng meante, to the benefyte and pleaſure of his natiue countreymen, whoſe auayle he chiefly reſpecteth herein, and not any great aduauntage that ſhall priuately fall out to him.
               
            
            
               Of the Matagaſſe.
               THough the Matagaſſe be a Hawke of none accompte, or price, neyther with vs in any vſe, yet neuertheleſſe, for that in my deuiſion I made recitall of hir name, according to the French Author, from whence, I collected ſundrie of thoſe poynts and documents, appertayning to Falconrie: I thinke it not beſide my purpoſe, briefly to deſcribe heere vnto you, though I muſt needes confeſſe, that where the Hawke is to ſo ſlender value, the definition, or rather deſcription of hir nature and name muſt be thought of no great regard.
               The ſhape of hir is this.
               She is beaked and headded like the Falcon, hir plume is of two colours, hir breſt white, hir eye, beake, and foote blacke, a long blacke trayne, hir flagges and long fethers partly black, and white, and the coloure of thoſe fethers ſhe chaungeth not, though ſhe mewe neuer ſo ofte.
               
                  Hir feeding is vpon Rattes, Squirrells, and Liſards, and ſometimes vpon certaine birdes ſhe doth vſe to praye, whome ſhe doth intrappe and deceyue by flyght, for this is hir deuiſe.
               She will ſtand at pearche vpon ſome tree or poſte, and there make an exceeding lamentable crye, and exclamation, ſuche as birdes are wonte to do, beeing wronged, or in hazarde of miſchiefe, and all to make other fowles beleeue & thinke that ſhee is verye muche diſtreſſed, and ſtandes needefull of ayde, wherevpon the credulous ſellie birdes do flocke togither preſently at hir call and voyce, at what time if any happen to approche neare hir, ſhe out of hande ſeazeth on them, and deuoureth them, (vngratefull ſubtill fowle) in requitall of their ſimplicitie and paynes.
               Theſe hawkes are in no accompt with vs, but poore ſimple fellowes and peaſantes ſometimes do make them to the fiſte, and beeyng reclaymed after their vnſkilfull manner, do beare them hooded, as Falconers doe their other kindes of hawkes whome they make to greater purpoſes.
               Heere I ende of this fowle, bicauſe I neither accompte hir worthe the name of a hawke, in whome there reſteth no valour or hardineſſe, ne yet deſeruing to haue any more written of hir propertie and nature, more than that ſhee was in mine Authour ſpecified, as a member of my deuiſion, and there reputed in the number of long winged hawkes. For truely it is not the propertie of any other hawke, by ſuche deuiſe and cowardly wile to come by their praye, but they loue to winne it by mayne force of wings at randon, as the rounde wynged hawkes do, or by free ſtowping as the hawkes of the Tower do moſte commonly vſe, as the Falcon, Gerfalcon, Sacre, Merlyn, and ſuche like, whiche do lye vpon their wing, roding in the aire, and ruffe the fowle, or kill it at the encounter.
               I cannot ſaye, that at any time I haue ſeene this kinde of hawke, neyther in any booke read of hir nature and diſpoſition, as I haue here made mention of it, ſaue onely in my authur, who writing of Falconrie, was ſo bolde as to rancke hir

among other hawkes, of greater accompt and valewe, and in
Geſner, where hee treateth of all kinde of birdes and fowles, where, I remember wel, I haue read of the name and nature of the Matagaſſe, and there haue ſeene hir proportion & ſhape ſette downe in coloures, ſuche as I haue before declared you in this chapter. and, in my iudgemente, no oddes or difference to bee founde, betwixt Geſnerus deſcription, and mine authors, in that behalfe. (∵)
            
         
         
            
            The Second parte or booke, of this collection of Falconrie.
            
               Certayne ſpeciall poyntes, neceſſarie for a Falconer, or Oſtreger, collected out of the Italian Author.
               
                  depiction of man with falcon
               
               Hauing made you ſufficient ſhewe in the former part of this booke, and collectiō, of all kinds of hawkes ſeruing to Falconrie, it ſhall not be amiſſe to deliuer you ſome ſpeciall & neceſſarie rules, due to a good Falconer.
               Firſte, it is behooueful for a Falconer to bee very diligent & inquiſitiue to learn and marke the qualitye and mettell of his hawkes, & to knowe whiche hawke he ſhal

flee withall earely, and with whiche late, bycauſe all hawkes are not diſpoſed or mettelde alike. Wherefore, the firſte and ſpeciall obſeruation is, to note the naturall inclination and diſpoſition of his hawkes in that behalfe.
               Then nexte is it neceſſarie for him to bee fonde ouer his hawke, pattēt, & withall carefull to keepe hir cleane out of liſe, mytes, and all ſuche other diſeaſes, as I ſhall hereafter treate of in the latter parte of this collection, with ſuche remedies, as I ſhall laye downe for euery griefe. And of the twoo, hee muſt rather keepe his hawke hye, and full of fleſhe, than poore and lowe. Beſides that, this is one generall rule, whiche by experience you ſhall finde to bee moſt true, that all kindes of hawkes are more ſubiect to infirmities, being poore and lowe, than when they are luſtie and full in fleſhe.
               Euery night, after he hath fleen with his hawke the daye, either at the fielde, or brooke, he muſte giue his hawke caſting, ſomewhyles plumage, ſome other while pellets of Cotton, or ſuche like, and agayne, ſometimes ſome one medicine or other, according as by hir caſting, or mewte, he ſhall perceyue hir to ſtande needefull thereof, whiche poynte I will more at large deſcribe, in another place proper and peculiar to that matter.
               Euery night, hee muſte not forgette to make the place very cleane vnder the pearche, ſo as he may bothe finde the caſting of his hawke, and be certainly aſſured whither ſhe hath already caſte or not, whereby he may the better iudge and diſcerne hir ſtate. For by the caſting is founde, whither the hawke do neede eyther vpwarde, or downward ſcowrings, or ſtones, or any ſuche like remedie.
               He muſte remember euery euening to tye out his hawke a weathering, ſaue onely in ſuche dayes, as ſhe hath bathed before, for bycauſe then the taking ouermuche moyſture, wyll breede hir a thouſande euills and inconueniences. For ſuche euenings as ſhe hath bathed the daye, ſhee ought of right to be placed in ſome warme chamber on a pearche, with a candle burning by hir, where ſhe muſt ſit vnhooded, if ſo ſhe be gentle,

and not rammage, to the ende ſhe may tricke hir ſelfe, and reioyce by enoyling hir after the water, before ſhe flee againe.
               Euery morning earely he muſte not forgette to ſet hir out to wether hir, where if ſhee haue not alreadie caſte, ſhee may caſte, and there keepe hir hooded, till ſuche tyme as ſhee go to the fielde.
               In feeding his hawke, he muſte beware of giuing hir twoo ſortes of meate at one time, to gorge hir withall, neither muſt hee gyue hir ſuche fleſhe, as hath any euill ſauour, and is not ſweete, but muſte reſpecte to allowe hir holſome meates, for breeding ill diſeaſes. For Hawkes are dayntie birdes, in their kinde, and the more to be conſidered of, when they are in hande, vnder a Falconers keeping and vſage, bycauſe they were wonte to praye for themſelues at libertie, and therein followe ſuche lawe and order, as nature had preſcribed them, but being reſtrayned, the courſe of kinde is quite altered in them, and therfore the greater arte and regard to be vſed for them. Arte muſt ſupplie the reſtraintes of kinde, by cunning.
               He muſte beware, if happily he haue occaſion of neceſſarie buſines, at his departure from home, not to leaue his hawke tyed on a pearche of any greate heyght from the grounde, for feare of bating & hanging by the heeles, for then either will ſhe caſte hir gorge, or otherwiſe ſpoyle hir ſelfe: but ſhe muſte be placed on a lowe blocke, or ſtone, and if there be mo hawkes than one, they muſte be ſundred ſo farre one from the other, as they maye not approche or reache one the other, neyther with beake, talons, or otherwiſe, bicauſe their nature is to byte, and buckle togither, if they come within reache.
               When he addreſſeth him to make his flighte with his Falcon, it is behoouefull for him to haue all hir fellow Falconers, or ſuch as haue hawkes in the field, to ſet downe their hawkes on the grounde, to be in the more readineſſe to aſſiſte him in his purpoſe, and to tye them ſure, for feare of ill accidents that may befall them.
               And againe, at the ryuer, he muſt ſkilfull to lande his fowle

ſo placing the reſidue of his company, and their hawkes, as they may flee eke without any encounter, which is not onely the loſſe of the fowle, and hinderance to their ſporte, but alſo the ruine and ſpoyle of their hawkes on both partes. He muſt be carefull that his hawke keepe hir gate, and flee it good, ſo as in no wiſe hee plucke hir not downe, nor make hir bate of hir pitche.
               He muſte alwayes be aſſured to haue mummy in powder in his bagge in a readineſſe, whatſoeuer ſhould happen, with ſuche other medicines as I ſhall hereafter treate of, for that it may ſo fall out, as his hawke may receyue a brooſe at the encounter of a fowle. Moreouer he muſte not be vnfurniſhed of Aloes waſht, Cloues, Nutmugges, Saffron, caſting, cryance, and ſuche like neceſſarie implementes. And he muſt remember that his Aloes be ſhining and cleare, for then is it of the beſte ſorte of Aloes.
               Laſtely he muſte be able to make his lures, hooddes, of all ſortes, Ieſſes, bucts, & other nedefull furniture for his hawke, and muſt not be without ſtore therof to allow his betters and ſtates in the fielde, if happily they want any ſuche deuiſes. He cannot well be without his coping yrons, to cope his hawkes beake if it be ouergrowen, whiche will be a hinderance to hir feeding, and to cope hir pownces and talons, if neede be. He muſte haue his cauterizing buttons, and other yron or ſiluer tooles, to cauterize or burne his hawkes if cauſe require ſuche cure. For hauing all theſe neceſſaries, and doing as I haue & will tell you, all his game ſhall ſucceede and ſorte wel, & he be aſſured for ye moſt part of good paſtime in ye fielde, when other ignorāt gromes ſhal both lacke ſport, & looſe their hawkes, the greateſt corſie yt may happen to a gentleman yt loues ye game.
               Let theſe fewe aduertiſementes and inſtructions ſuffice in this place, if other wynts neceſſarie not recited here, be remē
                  bred at the full in any other parte of this booke, I craue but thankes for my paines, & curteſie at the Falconers handes, for whoſe learning and pleaſure I partly and chiefly wrote this collection.
            
            
               
               The firſt inſtruction is, how to make a Falcon and other hawkes fleeing, after the opinion of Ian de Franchiers.
               FIrſt, let your hawke be taken on the fiſte, and hoodded, then let hir be watched three dayes and nightes, before you vnhoode hir, and feede hir alwayes hooded in an eaſie rufter hoode. At the ende of three dayes you may vnhoode hir, and feede hir vnhooded, and when ſhe is fedde, hoode hir againe, ſo that ſhe be not vnhooded (but whē you feede hir) vntil ſhe know hir meate: then when ſhe beginneth to be acquainted with you, hoode hir and vnhood hir oftentimes, to the end ſhe may the better abide the hoode. But vſe hir gently, and be pacient with hir at the firſt, and to the ende your hawke may be the better manned, & the ſooner reclaimed, you ſhall do wel to beare hir cōmonly in places where moſt people do frequēt, and where moſt exerciſes are vſed. And when ſhe is well manned, make hir come a little to the fiſte for hir meate. And when you haue ſhewed hir the perche or ſtocke, and tyed hir vpon it, put with hir vpon the ſayde pearche or ſtocke ſome Pullet, or other quicke fowle as often as you may, and let hir feede thereon at pleaſure vntill ſhe be reaſonably gorged, and do in like maner vpō the lewer vntill ſhe knowe it perfectly. Afterwardes you may giue hir more libertie, and lewer hir with a cryance, lewring hir twice a daye further and further of. And when ſhee is throughly lewred, you ſhall teache hir to flee vpon you, vntill ſhe know bothe howe to get to hir gate, and to flee rownde vpon you. Then ſhall you caſte hir oute ſome quicke fowle, and when ſhee hath ſtowped and ſeazed vpon it, you ſhall ſuffer hir to plume it and to foote it at hir pleaſure, giuing hir a reaſonable gorge theron, as is before ſayde, and continewing alwaies to rewarde hir vpon the ſayde lewer, in ſuch ſort, that ſhe neuer finde the lewer without ſome rewarde tyed vpon it, and by

that meanes ſhee will alwayes loue the lewer and hir keeper well, and will not lightly rangle or be loſte. Thus you may continue hir fortie dayes, or thereaboutes, and then you may flee with hir ſafe ynough. But before you ſo doo, lette hir bee ſkowred and bathed, and fedde with cleane meate, and well waſhed, gyuing hir caſting euery nyght, euen as men vſe to giue fleing hawkes.
            
            
               The manner of fleyng with hawkes, as well to the fielde as to the Ryuer, and firſte to the Ryuer, according as Martine teacheth.
               YOu muſt vnderſtande that the ryuer hawke ought to be let into the winde, and aboue hir praye to gette the vauntage of hir gate, and to be at hir pitche: then ſhall you make in towardes the praye. And when they are gotte vp to their full pitche, runne vpon the fowle, and lande them, laying them out from of the water, and if you fayle in doyng therof, then you ſhoulde take downe your hawke with ſome pullete, Pigeon. or other quicke fowle, to teache, and the better to winne ſuche hawkes as are but lately entred, vntill they knowe their praye and their fleing perfectly. (∵)
            
            
               
               To flye at the Hearon according to Martine.
               
                  
                     depiction of men, one on horseback, with dogs and birds
                  
               
               
                  THere is another manner of fleing whiche is called the flight at the Hearon, this is the nobleſt flight of all others. For the Hawke oughte to bee well lewred and well trayned to get vp to an high gate, and therewithall ſhee muſt well know a quicke fowle, and ſuch a Falcon as is apte to flee, the Hearon ſhoulde not bee flowen with, to any other kind of fowle but onely to the Hearon moſt commonly. For aſmuch as amongſt all other flights, there is no ſuche mountey made, nor ſuche force vſed as in the flight at the Hearon, and therefore reaſon would that ſuch Falcons ſhould not bee flowen withall or inured to any meaner or leſſe pray than the Hearon. For if a Hawke be a good Hearoner, it is ſufficiente, and if after your Hawke haue flowen the Hearon, you ſhould let hir flee any other ſleighter fowle or pray, She will lightly (by your owne default) become a ſlugge and take diſdayne, in ſuche ſort that (where before ſhe was a good Hearoner) ſhee will be ſo no more, and will turne to hir owne eaſe, ſo that ſhe will neuer care to flee the Hearon. For aſmuche as ſhee will giue hir ſelfe to pray vppon fowle that is more eaſy to reach, and will forget or forſlow hir valiant hardineſſe, the whiche is much to be lamēted if a man haue once a good Hearoner, and do ſo ſpill hir. Neuertheleſſe you may flee with the Sacre all maner of fowle more eaſely than with any other kind of Hawke, bycauſe ſhe is alike common to all fowle, euen ſo is ſhe hard to be made, and of a hard and dull capacitie, but deſpaire not therefore, for in the end they proue good if the Falconer take ſuche paynes with them as he ought to doe.
            
            
               For the flight to the field as Maſter Amé Caſsian teacheth.
               SOme kinde of Hawkes there bee whiche are made for the field. For aſmuche as there be ſome men which delight more to haue Hawkes for the field than for the riuer, the Hawkes

which are good to flee the field, are firſt entred by the Spaniels, and aſwell accuſtomed to knowe them by the heare and proportion, as they know their pray by the feather and flight, and ſecondarily they are alſo entred by cuſtomary knowledge of their pray, and therefore it is not lightly poſſible that this kind of paſtime ſhoulde bee perfectly handled, vnleſſe the dogges and Hawkes be ſo well aquainted and knowen one to the other, that each of them do loue others, for although naturally the Hawke be hardly entred to become familiar with the dogges, and will not lightly nor at the firſt loue them, yet maruayle you not thereat, for in the end all field Hawkes will loue them, and become familiar with them, but to bring that to paſſe, you muſt continually beare your Hawke amongſt Spanyels, and aquaint hir with them, that ſhe may the better abide them, and that beeing done, the oftner that youre Hawke flee the field, the truer you ſhall finde mine opinion: & ſurely you may eaſely haue good Hawkes to the field, if you keepe them in good order and diet as reaſon requireth, giuing them vpon their firſt, ſecond, and third pray, a reaſonable good gorge, and afterwards you may withdraw and abate youre reward by little and little, to make your Hawke the eaſlyer forget it, for by that meanes you ſhall make youre Hawke knowe hir liue fowle the better, if you rewarde hir with the head and braynes of the fowle taken, and ſo of euery one which ſhe ſhall ſlay, vntil you would giue hir a gorge, at time and houre conuenient, and by that meanes, you maye haue a good field Hawke vnleſſe the fault be your owne.
            
            
               Other flights to the field called great flights.
               THere is yet another kynde of flight to the field which is called the great flight, as to the Cranes, wilde Geeſe, Buſtarde, Bird of Paradiſe, Bittors, Shouelers,

Hearons, and many other ſuche lyke, and theſe you maye flee from the fiſte, whiche is properly tearmed the Source. Neuertheleſſe in this kinde of Hawking whiche is called the greate flighte, the Falcons or other Hawkes cannot well accompliſh their flight, at the Crane, Buſtard or ſuche lyke, vnleſſe they haue the help of ſome Spanyell or ſuche dogge, well inured and taught for that purpoſe with your Hawke. For aſmuch as great flights require pleaſant ayde and aſſiſtance, yea and that with great diligence.
            
            
               Aduertiſement giuen by Maſter Martine to make a Hawke bolde and hardy, and to loue hir pray.
               IF you woulde haue your Hawke hardy, keepe hir oftentimes all day long vpon your fiſte, and feede hir with Pullets fleſh earely in the morning aſmuch as ſhall be ſufficient for a beaching, that done ſet hir abroade in the Sunne, with water before hir, to the end ſhe may bathe when ſhe will, and bowze, as naturally they are enclined to do, and it doth them ſingular great pleaſure, for bowzing may oftentimes preſerue them from ſickneſſe, and yet ſometimes a Hawke bowzeth after ſome diſeaſe whereof ſhe hath long languiſhed, and dieth, or elſe ſhe is thereby recured: for after ſuch a diſeaſe, bowzing doth eyther cure hir or quite diſpatch hir. Nowe when you haue done as is before ſayde (whether ſhe bathe or not) you ſhall take your Hawke vppon your fiſte, and ſo keepe hir on the fiſte vntill you go to bedde, and when you go to bedde ſet a candle before hir, whiche maye laſt all the night, and in the morning (if ſhe did bath) you ſhall ſet hir in the Sunne for one houre vntill ſhe be well wetherd, and then afterwards (if ſhe did not bathe) take wine and water, and therewith beſpout hir well with your mouth three houres after, ſetting hir in the Sunne agayne, and (for lacke of Sunneſhyne)

before the fire, vntill ſhe bee very well dried, and if you bee well aſſured that ſhe is throughly enſeamed cleane, and hathe bin well manned by the ſpace of thirty or fortie dayes, then maye you flee the fielde with hir, and if you perceiue that ſhe haue good deſire to flee, let hir flee, and if ſhe kil any thing, giue hir a good gorge therevpon, but if ſhe kill nothing, then feede hir with the legge or the wing of an Henne or a Pullet, waſhed in cleane running water, keeping hir ſtill vppon the fiſte as is before ſayde: and the next day flee with hir agayne, and if ſhe kill any thing, giue hir hir rewarde, and keepe hir in this order vntill ſhe be perfectly entred and quarred: but then you muſt haue diſcretion, for ſometimes by thys order you may bring hir lowe, in ſuche ſorte that ſhe ſhoulde not eaſely be recouered to make hir flight ſtrongly. Yet Martine ſayth the contrary, but if an Hawke be very harde and ſtubborne to hir keeper in hir flight, then let hir be well ſpowted agayne with luke warme water, and ſo ſet abroade all night in the open ayre. In the morning let hir be ſet eyther in the Sunne or before the fyre, where when ſhee hathe well proyned hir you maye goe flee with hir, and if ſhe kill and flee well, then keepe hir in thys order and tune, for elſe ſhe maye take ſundrie euill toyes. And thys precepte ſerueth as well for them that deſire to haue good Hawkes for the fielde as otherwiſe: and if you woulde haue your Hawkes loue theyr pray, take Cynamon and Sugercandie, of each a lyke quantitie, and make thereof a powder, and when youre Hawke hathe kylled anye thyng, and that you come to reward hir, ſprinkle ſome of that powder vpon the parte wherewith you rewarde hir, and it ſhall make hir loue that kynde of pray the better euer afterwardes.
            
            
               
               How a man ſhould vſe an Eyaſſe Hawke.
               IF you haue Eyaſſe Hawkes, you ſhall feede them moſte with Pultrie, Beefe, or Gotes fleſhe: and thys is done to keepe them from ill toyes: and when they be well lewred and trayned, then beare them vppon the fiſte hooded, and ordred in all poyntes according to the rule preſcribed before in the fyrſte Chapiter, and after xxx. or xl. dayes paſt, bring them to the flighte, and the firſt, ſeconde, and thirde flight, you maye bee fonde ouer them, abating your fauor afterwardes by little and little, vntill they bee brought in perfect tune, ſpowting them oftentimes with wine and water. For (as Martine ſayeth) ſome Eyaſſe Hawkes wyll not muche bathe them. Neuertheleſſe you ought therein alſo to vſe diſcretion, for by often bathing or ſpowting, you maye bring youre Hawke very lowe, in ſuche ſort that ſhee ſhoulde haue more neede of a good gorge, than of bathing, or ſpowting, and eſpeciallye ſuche Hawkes as are fierce of nature, and wyll not often bathe of themſelues.
            
            
               A conſideration of the diuerſitie of Hawkes natures, according to Martine.
               THere are ſome ſortes of Falcons whyche haue thys diuerſitie of nature, that ſome of thē well flye well beyng high and full of fleſhe, and ſome other flee beſt when they are kept lowe. Wherefore a Falconer ſhould haue eſpeciall conſideration therevnto, for Falcons are fitte for all flightes, as is before ſayde, but the blanke Falcons are of one nature, and the blewe Falcons of another, and the Falcon of the reddiſh plume hathe alſo hir properties diuers from the reſt.

Neuertheleſſe to ſpeake as I haue founde, of all other Hawkes the blancke Falcon is beſte. And bothe by reaſon and experience I fynde that ſhee would be kepte higher and in better plight than other Hawkes, for you ſhall ſee the blancke Falcon keeping a lyke hand vppon hir and other Falcons proue higher and in better plight when ſhee is fleeyng than any other Hawke. And the reaſon is, bycauſe ſhee is very gentle, and with more eaſe manned than any other kynde of Falcon, and loueth hir keeper better, ſo that thereby ſhee keepeth hirſelfe higher and in better plighte than ſuche Hawkes, as bate muche and are frowarde of condition. (∵)
            
            
               
               Howe to ſeele a Sparowhauke and to make hir fleing according to Guillam Tardif.
               
                  depiction of sparrowhawk
               
               A Sparowhawke newly taken ſhould be thus vſed, take a needle thredded with vntwiſted threde, and (caſting your Hawke) take hir by the beake and put the needle through hir eye lidde, not right againſte the ſight of the eye,

but ſomewhat nearer to the beake, bicauſe ſhe may ſee backewardes. And you muſte take good heede, that you hurt not the webbe, whiche is vnder the eyelydde, or on the inſide thereof. Then put your needle alſo through that other eyelydde, drawing the endes of the thredde togither, tye them ouer the beake, not with a ſtreight knotte, but cut off the thredes endes neare to the knotte, and twiſte them togither in ſuche ſorte, that the eyeliddes may be rayſed ſo vpwardes, that the hawke maye not ſee at all, and when the threade ſhall waxe looſe or vntyed, then the hawke may ſee ſomewhat backwardes, whiche is the cauſe that the thredde is put nearer to the beake. For a Sparowhawke ſhould ſee ſomwhat backewards, and a Falcon forwards. The reaſon is, that if the Sparowhawke ſhold ſee forewardes, ſhe would beate of hir feathers, or breake them when ſhe bateth vpon the fiſte, & ſeeing the company of men, or ſuche like, ſhe would bate to muche.
               But to trimme your Sparowhawke in hir rightes, ſhee muſt haue Ieſſes of lether, the whiche muſte haue knottes at the ende, and they ſhoulde be halfe a foote long, or thereabout, at the leaſte a ſhaftmete betwene the hoſe of the Ieſſe, and the knotte at the ende, whereby you tye the hawke.
               She ſhould alſo haue twoo good belles, whereby ſhe may be the better hearde. For commonly when a Sparowhawke taketh any praye, ſhe will carry it into ſome thicke buſhe to feede thereon, in ſuche ſorte, that ſhe cannot lightly be eyther hearde or ſeene, and whiles ſhe plumeth it, the plumage doeth oftentimes couer bothe hir eyes, or one of them, then to take awaye the ſaide plumage, ſhe ſtraineth with one of hir feete, and therby hir belles diſcouer hir. Therefore if ſhee had but one bell, ſhe might happen to ſcratte with that foote whiche lacketh the bell, and ſo ſhoulde not be hearde. The Sparowhawkes which are wonted to be hooded, and whiche will gently brooke it, are muche better than they which will not be hooded. For they bate leſſe, and are with more eaſe borne in the rayne, or any euill weather. For beeing hooded, the Falconer may hyde and couer

them with his cloke, which he cannot do to the other. Furthermore they ſhall be able to flee better and more ſtrongly, that are good weather hawkes, for they ſhall be leſſe bruſed, than a hawke whiche is not hooded, whiche will weary hir ſelfe with bating, & withall a man may the better flee with thē at aduantage, bicauſe they bate not, but onely when you woulde haue them to flee, whereby they haue the greater courage, and alſo a man may beare them in all places, without bating or beating themſelues out of breath.
            
            
               Hovve a man ſhoulde manne a Sparowhavvke, and make hir fleing.
               FOr as muche as Sparowhawkes are of ſundrye ſortes of plumes, and ſundry ſhapes and proportions, there are alſo ſundry manners of manning them and making them, & there is muche leſſe paynes to bee taken with ſome one, than with ſome other. For the more eager and ſharper ſette that a Sparowhawke is, the ſooner ſhall you winne hir, and man hir.
               Firſte, to winne hir to feede, rubbe hir feete with warme fleſhe, chirping and whiſtling to hir, and ſometimes preſent the fleſhe vnto hir beake, and if ſhe will not yet feede, rubbe hir feete with a quicke birde, and the birde will crye, and if the Sparowhawke doe ſeaze it with hir feete, it is a token that ſhe will feede. Then teare off the ſkinne and feathers of the birdes breaſte, and offer it to the hawkes beake, and ſhee wyll taſte thereof. For a Sparowhawke whiche feedeth immediately after ſhe be taken, doth ſhewe that ſhe is eager, and hath good appetite. And you may giue hir as muche more at euening, yea and ſometimes in the daye time, ſo that ſhe be not gorged firſte, but that ſhe haue put ouer hir meate. When ſhe is thus well entred, and will feede when you chirpe or whiſtle to hir, then may you hoode hir with an hoode that is large

and deepe ynough, ſo that it neither hurte nor touche hir eies, When ſhe will indure to be hooded and vnhooded, without bating, and that ſhe will feede hooded, then muſt you abate hir meales, giuing hir leſſe meate, and feede hir betimes in the morning, when ſhe hath endewed, (that is to ſay, when ſhee ſhall haue put ouer hir meate, ſo as there remayneth nothing in hir gorge) then may you giue hir a beaching in the daye tyme, taking off, and putting on agayne hir hoode, to make hir the more eager. For it will not bee amiſſe, to gyue hir a bitte or twoo of meate euery time that you hoode hir. When it is euening, then ſuppe hir vp, giuing hir the heade or braines of a Henne or Pullette, vntill the morning. And if you perceyue that ſhee is becomme very eager, then looſe the threade wherewith ſhee is ſeeled, but lette it bee nyghte firſte, and that ſhee haue ſeene backewardes, as before ſayde. If ſhee maye abyde companie, yet watche hir all that nighte that you vnſeele hir, to the ende ſhee may alſo bee accuſtomed to heare people ſpeake, and bee acquaynted with them, and when you hoode hir agayne, giue hir twoo or three bittes of meate. In the morning betimes, put a birde in hir foote, whome if ſhee ſeaze hardily, and plume thereon eagerly, then may you boldely take off hir hoode, but if ſhee bate then, hoode hir agayne, and watche hir vntill ſhee bee thorowly wonne and manned: but if ſhe feede well before companie, and become familiar and quyete before them, watche hir no loger, but keepe hir on the fiſte ſome parte of the nighte amongeſt companie, making hir to plume, giuing hir nowe and then a bytte or twoo of fleſhe, and putting hir hoode on and off therewithall. When you go to bedde, ſette your hawke neare to your beddes headde, vpon ſome treſtle or ſtoole, that you may wake hir often in the nighte. Then riſe before daye, and take hir vpon your fiſte, and off with hir hoode, that ſhee may ſee the people about hir, and when ſhee beholdeth them, put a quicke birde in hir foote, as before ſayd. When ſhe feedeth thervpon, hoode hir againe, giuing hir

the reſte of your bird hooded, and when it is further forth day, you may looke whether ſhee haue any thing in hir gorge, or not. If ſhe haue nothing aboue, giue hir ſome little beaching, and beache hir oftentimes before companie, hooding and vnhooding hir. But at night ſhe ſhoulde be alwayes vnhooded, that ſhee may ſee people, & become acquainted with them, giuing hir to feede of a Hen or Pullet. To heale ye places wher ſhe was ſeeled, to the ende ſhe may ſee the better, when yu goeſt to bedde, holde hir in a darke corner, and ſpirte a little water vpon hir heade, that ſhe may frote hir eyes agaynſt the pynions of hir wings. Then in the morning when ſhe perceyueth the daye light, and hath warme meate readie vpon your fiſte, and is cleane looſed that ſhee maye ſee bothe before and behinde hir, and ſeemeth to be familiar and bolde amongſt people, then may you make hir as before ſayde. But remember that you giue hir no plumage that daye, in whiche you haue giuen hir waſht meate, yea and allowe hir no plumage vntil ſhe be well manned. For vntill ſhe be throughly manned, ſhe will not dare to caſte. Then if you woulde throughly man your Sparowhawke, and keepe hir eagre, take hir earely in the morning vpon your fiſte, and go into ſome place where no body ſhall interrupt you, where firſte cauſe hir to plume with hir beake vpon ſome quicke birde, then vnſeaze hir, and ſet hir vpon ſome thing, and reache hir your hande, and ſhew hir your ſiſte, giuing hir a bitte or two thereof. And if ſhe come therevnto willingly, then call hir agayne morning and euening, further and further of, but euer before company, to acquaynt hir the better with them, faſtning a long line or cryance vnto hir limmes: if it be faire weather, and that the Sunne ſhine, you ſhoulde then proffer hir the water, to the ende ſhee maye bathe hir. Prouided alwayes in ſo doing that ſhe be ſounde, well manned, and that ſhe be not poore, nor gorged. For bathing is a thing whiche maketh a hawke familiar and luſtie, But remember yt alwayes after ſhe haue bathed, you giue hir ſome lyue birde to feede on, and alwayes when you call hir

or feede hir, you muſte chirpe with your mouth, or whiſtle, to the ende ſhe may becomme acquainted with your whiſtle, and come therevnto. You muſt feede hir amongſt horſes & dogges, to make hir alſo the better acquainted with them. If ſhe haue flowen, and you woulde ſette hir in the Sunne to weather, ſette hir vpon the ground on ſome coodgell or truncheon, making hir faſte, and ſhe will alwayes loue the better to ſitte vpon the grounde. After ſhe hath bathed, if you perceyue your Sparowhawke luſtie, you maye flee with hir the nexte daye towardes the euening, but firſte you muſte haue reclaymed hir to come out of a tree, and called hir to you ſitting on horſe backe, being alwaies prouided of ſome Pigeon, or other quick thing, to take hir downe the more eaſily. For before a man flee with a Sparowhawke, ſhe ſhoulde be throughly well reclaimed, by watching, carying, feeding, and pluming before people, that ſhee loue hir keepers fiſte, and his countenaunce, that ſhe can abyde both horſes and dogges, that ſhe be cleane within, as well ſkowred with waſht meate, as alſo with plumage, and thaf ſhee bee ſharpe ſette, and well comming, as well from the pearche, as from of the grounde, or out of a tree. (∵)
            
            
               
               The meane to make a Sparowhawke fleeing.
               
                  
                     depiction of sparrowhawk
                  
               
               FIrſte, hee that woulde flee with a Sparowhawke lately reclaymed, muſte flee in an euening ſomewhat before Sunneſette: For at that tyme ſhee will bee moſte eager and ſharpeſt ſette. Secondarily, the heate of the Sunne (if one ſhoulde flee in the morning) doeth muche trouble the hawke,

and rayſeth and ſtirreth hir courage, making hir prowde and ramage. So that ſhe leeſeth the eagerneſſe of hir appetite, and remembreth it not, thinking on nothing elſe but to ſoare and gadde abroade, whereby ſhe may be eaſily loſte. Furthermore, towardes the euening ſhe cānot ſoare ſo far away from you, (although ſhe ſhould ſoare) as ſhe would do in the heate of the daye, bycauſe the night will enforce hir to go to the perche and ſtande. Alſo to enter your Sparowhawke, it ſhall be beſte to ſeeke out ſome champaygne countrie, farre from the wooddes, and let hir be vnhooded when the Spaniels be vncoupled, then if the Partridge ſpring, and ſhe bate, caſt hir off, if they ſpring neare you. And if ſhe kill, reward hir (vpon the grounde) of the heade, braynes, necke, and breaſte of the Partridge. When ſhe hath fedde, take it from hir, and vnſeaze hir, and gette vpon your horſe a good waye from hir. Then whiſtle and call hir, and if ſhee come vnto you, rewarde hir better. Aboue all things, you muſte take good heede that ſhe fayle not hir firſte flyghte at greate birdes, leaſte ſhee turne tayle, and accuſtome hir ſelfe to ſmaller game. But if ſhee bee once well entred at great game, you may quickly make hir flee Larkes and ſmall birdes. If you finde that ſhe haue moſt minde to flee Larkes, lette hir flee them, and rewarde hir on them. For there is no flyghte pleaſaunter than the flyghte of the Sparowhawke at the Larke. And for as muche as the fleſhe and bloude of Larkes is hotte and burning, it ſhall bee good when you flee the Larke, to gyue your hawke waſhte meate twyce in a weeke, and plumage very often. But gyue hir no plumage that daye that ſhee hath waſhte meate, nor the daye that ſhe batheth. When there is a knotte of good companie mette togither, and euery man hath his Sparowhawke, if one of thē ſee his Sparowhawke flee whē another is alſo from the fiſte, there beginneth the paſtime, & yet they may flee togither. But it is a pleaſure to take a Larke lowring, or clyming. Or if a Sparowhawke haue beatē downe a Larke, or that ye Larke be

ſlipte from hir,This flight is not vſed in Englande, neither did I euer heare of it before. and gotten vp towring as hyghe as a man maye beholde, and then an other Sparowhawke clime after hir, get ſo high that by often taynting hir, ſo as the Larke is conſtrayned to ſtowpe to the grounde, and the hawke in the tayle of hir. Then the Larke had rather flee for ſuccoure betweene the legges of the men and the horſes, than to fall in the tallauntes of hir naturall enimie: yet commonly ſhee is there taken alſo. Hee that woulde learne to make a Falcon well, lette him beginne with a Hobbie, and hee that woulde make the Gerfalcon flying, let him acquaynte himſelfe with the Merlyne. But hee that can keepe and make a Sparowhawke well, ſhall alſo be able to keepe a Goſhawke, for by the one that other is learned.
            
            
               To take lyme from of a hawkes feathers.
               TO remoue the lyme from a hawke, take dry and fine ſande and cleane aſhes mingled togither, put them vppon the place whiche is lymed, and ſuffer it ſo one nyght. Afterwarde you ſhall beate well togither three yolkes of egges, and with a feather you ſhall laye them vpon the ſayde places, and ſuffer thē ſo twoo nights. Then take as much larde as a plumme. and as muche butter with it, melt them bothe togither, and anoynte the ſayde places, and ſuffer the hawke ſo one other nyght. Then on the morrowe waſhe hir with warme water, and wype hir with a cleane lynnen clothe, vntyll you haue wyped of all the lyme, whiche by this deuiſe will eaſily bee remooued.
            
            
               Howe to ryght and make ſtrayght bruſed feathers.
               YF you woulde make ſounde a bruſed feather, then temper yt place which is bruſed, in warm water, & whē the webbe

thereof is well ſoftened, and becomme tender with the hotte water, ſette it as euen as you can out of the water. Afterwardes take a greate ſtalke of a Colewoorte, and warme it well vpon the coales, or in the flame: then cleaue it in ſunder, and within the clyfte put the bruſed feather, ſtrayning the twoo ſides of the Colewoorte ſtalke togither, vntyll it haue broughte the bruſed feather into his former eſtate. The ſtalke of the herbe called Brionie, hath the ſame vertue.
            
            
               To right and mende a feather broken on the one ſide, and to ympe a brooſed feather.
               TAke a ſlender long needle, laye it in Vineager, or ſalte water, that it maye ruſte and ſo holde the better within the feather: Afterwardes threade it with vntwiſted threade, and drawe it through bothe endes of the bruſed places, then draw it backe by the threade, vntill it may draw that one part to that other, ſo as the webbe may bee cloſe ioyned togither: and ſuffer not your hawke to flee, nor to vſe hir wings, vntill it bee cloſed and ſtrong agayne. But if it were broken on bothe ſydes, cutte it off, and take a ſquare ymping needle, like vnto a Glouers needle, laye it in Vineager and ſalte water, and thruſte it into bothe the endes of the webbe, vntill you haue brought them togither: then giue your hawke reſte vntill the needle bee ruſted in that webbe. For a feather that is broken or bruſed within the quyll, take another quill that is leſſer, that it may go into the broken or bruſed quyll, then cutte off the feather in that place, and the ſtalke of the quyll beeing put into the olde quill, force the ende of the feather into the newe quill that is cutte: Afterwardes ioyne togither the twoo peeces, with the quill that is ſo put in, couering the place where it is ſo ioyned, with Cotton or ſmall downe feathers, with glewe or Semonde, or if you woulde

not ympe it, glewe it in with Semonde or Roſen and waxe molten togither. If the feather bee dropte away cleane, then put in another of like ſyze and colour. For to bynde in a feather that were ſlipped out of the pynion, take flexe ſmall chopped, and myngled with the yolke of an egge well beaten, put them togither vppon a lynnen clothe, whiche is very neare worne, with the whiche you ſhall bynde on bothe ſides the place where the feather ſlypped, or elſe anoynt that place with Myrre and Goates bloude myngled togither. To make a feather come agayne, whiche is caſte and loſte by bruſe or otherwiſe, and eſpecially in the trayne of an hawke, take oyle of Walnuttes, and oyle of Bayes, as muche of that one as that other, myngle them togither, and droppe them into the place where the feather grewe, and it ſhall put out a newe feather ſpeedely. (∵)
            
            
               
               Howe to beare and make a Falcon.
               
                  
                     depiction of falcon
                  
               
               
                  
                  A Falcon lately taken, ſhoulde bee ſeeled in ſuche ſorte, that when the ſeeling beginnes to ſlacken, the Falcon maye ſee forwardes, to ſee the meate before hir. For ſhee is better content when ſhee ſeeth the meate plainely before hir, than if ſhee ſawe it ſidewayes, or looking backe. And ſhee ſhoulde not bee ſeeled too ſtrayght, neyther yet oughte the threede wherewith ſhee is ſeeled, be ouerſtreyght bownde or knitte aboue hir heade, but twyſted and twyrled togythers. A hawke newly taken, ſhoulde haue newe furniture, as newe Ieſſes, Leaſſe, and Bewettes, all of good leather, and the Ieſſes mayled, and the Leaſe made with a button at the end. The muſte you haue a little rownde ſtycke hanging in a little ſtring, with the whiche you ſhall oftentymes ſtroke and handle your Falcon. For the more ſhee is handled, the better ſhee wyll bee manned, and becomme the gentler, and the more familiar: and alſo if you ſhoulde ſtroke or handle hir with your hande, you myght chaunce to catche a knappe of hir beake nowe and then. She muſt haue twoo good belles, to the ende ſhe may the better be founde and hearde, when ſhe ſtirreth or ſcratteth. She muſte haue a hoode of good leather, well made and faſhioned, well rayſed and boſſed agaynſt hir eyes, deepe, and yet ſtreyght ynough beneathe, that it may the better abyde on hir heade, and yet neuer hurte hir. So muſt you alſo a little cope hir beake, and tallans, but not ſo muche that you make them bleede.
            
            
               Howe you ſhall manne a Falcon, and bring hir out of hir ramageneſſe.
               SOme ſaye, that the ſoare Falcon whiche hath bene tymely taken, & hath already paſſed the ſeas, is both the beſt Falcō, & alſo the hardeſt to be wonne & māned. Wherfore obſeruing the order which is before rehearſed, you muſt feede ſuch a Falcō wt good & warm metes (as pigeōs, & ſuch like quick birds) vntil

ſhe be full gorged twice a daye for three dayes. For you muſt not breake hir of hir accuſtomed dyet all at once, and beeyng lately taken, ſhee will more willingly feede on warme meates, than any thing elſe. When you feede hir, you muſte whoope and lewre as you do when you call a hawke, that ſhee maye knowe when you wyll gyue hir meate. You muſte vnhoode hir gently, gyuing hir twoo or three byttes, and putting on hir hoode agayne, you muſte giue hir as muche more. But take heede that ſhee bee well and cloſe ſeeled, three dayes beeyng paſſed, if you perceiue hir to bee eager and greedie of meate, and that ſhe feedeth with good appetite, then begynne to abate hir hir meate, that is to ſaye, gyue hir but lyttle at once, and often, ſo that ſhee haue not muche aboue at one time, vntill it bee euening, and beare hir late vpon your fiſte before you go to bedde, ſetting hir vpon a treſtle or ſtoole very neare you, ſo that you maye wake hir often in the nyghte. Afterwardes you ſhoulde take hir on your fiſte agayne before daye, with ſome quycke birde or ſuche like meate: and when you haue obſerued this order with hir twoo or three nyghtes, and that you perceyue ſhe beginnes to bee muche better fellowe than ſhee was wonte, and that ſhee ſeemeth to beginne to bee reclaymed, and feedeth eagerly vpon good meate, then beginne to chaunge hir dyete, gyuing hir often, and little at ones, the harte of an Hogge or a Sheepe. In the euening when it beginnes to bee late, (without caſting of hir) lette hir ſeeling threade a little looſe, ſpowting water on hir face, that ſhee maye Ieouke the leſſe, and watching hir all the nyght, holde hir vpon your fiſte vnhooded. But if ſhe ſee any thing that muſlike hir, and make ſemblaunte to bee afearde, then lette hir bee carryed into ſome darke place, where you haue no more but lyght to hoode hir agayne. And afterwardes gyue hir ſome beaching of good meate, and lette hir bee watched diuers nyghtes togither, vntill

ſhee bee reclaimed and Ieouke vpon the fiſte by daye time, although to lette hir Ieouke alſo ſometimes in the nighte, is a thing whiche maketh hir the ſooner manned. In the morning by breake of the daye, lette hir haue ſome warme meate to beginne with. And bicauſe there bee ſundrie Falcons of ſundry ſortes and conditions, (as ſome mewed at large in the wooddes, ſome other taken at ſtande, where they haue long vſed, and ſome other taken ſoare hawkes, (whereof we now treate) whither they bee Sorehawkes, mewed or Nyaſſe, yet are they of ſundrye natures and properties, and therefore they muſte bee diuerſly gouerned and entred, which is the cauſe that it is harde to giue generall rules. For thoſe whiche are gentle, eaſie to bee reclaymed, and of a good kinde and nature, ought alſo to bee the more fauoured, and the more gently handled. But when your hawke is broughte to the poynte before rehearſed, as well for the hooding, as alſo for hir eagerneſſe to feede, if you perceyue that ſhee beginne to bee acquaynted therewith, you maye vnhoode hir by daye time, farre from company, firſte gyuing hir a bytte or twoo of good meate. Afterwardes hoode hir agayne gently, gyuing hir a little meate againe hooded. Aboue all things, you muſte beware to hoode or vnhoode hir in any place, where ſhee maye bee frayed, for that were able to marre hir at the firſte. When ſhee beginneth to bee acquaynted with companie, if you perceyue that ſhee bee eager or ſharpe ſette, vnhoode hir, and giue hir a bitte or twoo of meate, holding hir right againſte your face and countenaunce. For that will cauſe hir to dreade no companie. And when it is night, cutte the thredde wherwith ſhee is ſeeled, and you ſhall not neede to watche hir, if you perceyue hir bolde ynough amongeſt companie. But yet lette hir bee ſette vpon a treſtle by you, that you may awake hir twoo or three times in the nighte, and take hir on your fiſte before daye. For ouerwatching of a hawke is not good, as long as a man may reclayme hir otherwiſe.

And if by ſuche good gouernmente, and by dealing curteouſely with hir, and keeping hir from ſodayne feare, you perceyue that ſhee beginne to bee acquaynted with you, and to knowe you aſſuredly, and that ſhee feedeth eagerly, and ſticketh to hir meate before companie, then giue hir waſhte meate, and beache hir in the morning, ſo that ſhee maye alwaies haue ſomewhat in hir gorge: whiche meate you ſhall laye in cleare water halfe a daye, and you ſhall cauſe hir to feede in companie, giuing hir in the morning aboute Sunne riſing the wing of a Henne or Pullette, and at euening, hooding hir againe, take the foote of a Conie or an Hare, whiche is cutte off aboue the ioynte, and flaye it, ſtripping awaye the clawes alſo, and temper and ſteepe the ſkinne in faire water, (preſſing and wringing it a little) the whiche you ſhall giue hir with the ioynte of the pynion of a Hennes wing. You muſte take good heede, howe you giue your hawke any feathers, vntill ſhee bee throughly reclaimed. For vntill ſhee bee throughly wonne and reclaymed, ſhee dares not caſte vpon the fiſte. And on the fiſte you muſte beare hir continually, till ſhee bee throughly manned. But when ſhee makes ſemblante to caſte, vnhoode hir gently by the taſſell of the hoode. You maye giue hir two dayes waſhte meate, and the thirde daye plumage, according as ſhee is cleane or fowle within. And when ſhee hath caſte, then hoode hir agayne, gyuing hir nothing to feede on, vntill ſhe gleame after hir caſting. But when ſhee hath caſte and gleamed, then gyue hir a beaching of hotte meate, in companie gyuing hir twoo or three byttes at once: and at euening make hir plume a Hennes wing in companie alſo. When you finde hir well reclaymed, and throughly manned, and eager, and ſharpe ſette, then it is tyme to feede hir vpon the lewer. And you muſte marke whither the feathers of your hawkes caſting be fowle or ſlymie, and whither the ſlyme thereof be

yellowe or not. For if they bee, you muſte bee very circumſpect to make hir cleane with waſhte meate and caſting, and if ſhee be cleane within, then giue hir not ſo ſtrong caſtings, as Hares feete, or Connyes feete: but giue hir the pynions of an olde Hennes wing, or the plumage that is to bee taken therevpon, or the necke bone chopped foure or fiue times betweene the ioyntes, waſhed, and ſteeped in faire water. To make an ende of this chapter, it is certayne, that it requireth more tyme to winne and to watche a Falcon once mewed in the woodde, than one whiche is taken ſore at paſſage. And likewiſe it is harder to winne a hawke taken at ſtande, when ſhe hath long time bene accuſtomed, than it is to make a hawke whiche hath bene handled before. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to lure a Falcon lately manned.
               
                  depiction of falcon
               
               
                  BEfore you ſhew the lewre to a Falcon newly reclaymed, you muſt conſider three things, Firſt, that ſhe be well aſſured and boldened in companye, well acquainted alſo with Dogges and with Horſes. Secondarily that ſhe bee ſharpe ſet and eager, hauing regarde to the houre of the morning or euening when you will lewre hir. And the third conſideratiō is, that ſhe bee cleane within, the lewre muſt bee well garniſhed with meat on both ſides, and you muſt be apart in ſome ſecrete place whē you would giue hir the length of the leaſe. You muſt firſt vnhood hir, giuing hir a bit or twayne vppon the lewre, as ſhe ſitteth on youre fiſte, afterwardes take the lewre from hir, and hide it that ſhe ſee it not, and when ſhe is vnſeazed, caſt the lewre ſo neare hir that ſhe may catche it within the length of hir leaſe, and if ſhe do ſeaze vpon it, then ſhall you vſe the voyce and accuſtomed ſpeache of a Falconer vnto his Hawke, and feede hir vpon the lewre on the ground, gyuing hir thervpon the warme thigh of an Henne or Pullet, and the hart alſo. When you haue ſo lewred hir at euening, giue hir but a little meate, & let hir be lewred ſo timely, that when ſhe is therewith accuſtomed, you maye giue hir plumage and a Iuk of a ioynt. Afterwardes, and in the morning betimes, take hir on your fiſte, and when ſhee hathe caſt and gleamed, giue hir a little beaching of good warme meate. Afterwardes when the daye is further forwardes, and that it is tyme to feede hir, take a Criance and tie it to hir leaſe, and goe into ſome fayre pleaſaunt meadowe, and giue hir a bitte or two vppon the lewre, as before ſaid, then vnſeaze hir, and if you perceyue that ſhe be ſharpe ſet, and haue ſeazed vppon the lewre eagrely, then gyue hir to holde vnto ſome man whiche may let hir off to the lewre, then ſhall you vnwinde the Criance, and drawe it after you a good way, and hee whiche holdeth the Hawke muſt holde his right hande on the taſſell of the Hawkes hood in a readineſſe, that hee maye vnhood hir as ſoone as you begin to

lewre, and if ſhe come well to the lewre, and ſtoupe vppon it roundly, and ſeaze it eagerly, let hir feede two or three bittes vppon it, and then vnſeaze hir, and take hir from off the lewre, and hood hir, and then deliuer hir agayne to hym whyche helde hir, and goe further off and lewre hir, feeding hir alwayes vpon the lewre on the grounde: and vſing the familiar voyce of Falconers as they crie when they lewre. And thus you ſhall lewre hir euery day further and further off, vntill ſhee bee well taught to come to the lewre, and to take it eagrely.
               Afterwardes let hir bee lewred in companye, hauing regarde that neyther Dogges nor other thyng come in ſuddaynly to fray hir, and when you take hir vp from the grounde, hood hir vppon the lewre, and when you haue well and often lewred hir on foote, then vſe to lewre hir on Horſebacke: the whiche you ſhall the eaſlyer winne hir too, if when you lewre hir on foote, you cauſe ſome on Horſebacke to come neare you, that ſhe may ſee them, and cauſe them to come neare hir when ſhee feedeth vppon the lewre, cauſing them alſo to turne and toſſe theyr Horſes aboute hir, but let their Horſes be ruly, leaſt they ſhoulde vppon the ſuddayne affright hir.
               Furthermore the better to acquaint hir with horſes, and that ſhe maye the better knowe them, carrie youre Falcon (whiles ſhee feedeth) on high vppon the lewre neare vnto ſome man on Horſebacke, or get your ſelfe vp on Horſebacke, and rewarde hir vpon the lewre amongſt horſemen, and when ſhee is well accuſtomed to them and well acquaynted with them, making no reſemblance to feare them, you may then lewre hir on horſebacke in this manner: Hee whiche holdeth hir to let hir come to the lewre muſt bee on foote, and you where you lewre ſhall bee on Horſebacke, and when you call and caſt the lewre about youre heade, then hee whiche holdeth hir, ſhall take

off hir hood by the taſſell, and you the meane while ſhall call and lure in the counningeſt wiſe you can, as Falconers vſe to do: and if ſhe ſeare eagerly vpon the lewre, and feare neyther people nor horſes, then take off the lewring line or Creance, and lewre hir looſe further and further off. And to make a Falcon come which is but newly reclaymed, and to make hir come in company of another Hawke, there muſt be two to hold a caſt of Falcons, and two which ſhall lewre them, but he whiche holdeth the Falcon that is but lately lewred, ſhall not let hir come ſo ſoone as the other ſhall doe: then ſhall the lewre be throwen out vnto the Falcon whiche is but lately lewred, and when ſhe is fallen thervppon, hir keeper ſhall carrie hir vppon the lewre, to feede amongſt the other make Hawkes. This being done twice or thrice, ſhee will followe them and loue them: and if you would haue hir loue dogges whiche is moſt neceſſary, you muſte call dogges about you when you feede hir, or giue hir tyring or plumage.
            
            
               How you ſhall bathe your Hawke being but lately reclaymed, how you ſhal make hir fleing, and to hate the cherke.
               WHen your Falcon is well lewred aſwell on horſebacke as on foote, and that ſhe is ready to be caſte off, and hathe bene well rewarded vpon the lewre, and is now altogither reclaymed from hir ramage toyes, and when ſhe is alſo ſomewhat recouered of the paine and trauayle which you haue put hir vnto in making and reclaiming hir, and bee yet in good plight, and haue hir thighes ploompe and well brawned, then offer hir water to bathe hir, ſpie out a fayre day when the weather is cleare and temperate, then take a baſyn ſo deepe that your Hawke may ſtand therein vp to the thighes, and fill it with water, and ſet it in ſome ſecret place: afterwards your Hawke being lewred and well rewarded in the morning with warme meate, beare hir

vp vnto ſome high place, or banke, and there hold hir in the ſunne vntill ſhee haue endued hir gorge, taking off hir hood, that ſhe may proyne and picke hir ſelfe: that being done, hood hir agayne, and ſet hir neare to the baſon, afterwards taking off hir hood agayne (if ſhe will) let hir leape downe into the baſon or vpon the graſſe by it, and to make hir know the water, flappe therein with a little wand, and let hir bathe therein as long as ſhe liſt: when ſhe commeth out of the water, take ſome meate in thy hande and proffer it vnto hir, and be well ware that ſhe come not out before thou proffer hir thy fiſte to giue hir a bit or twayne, then take hir vp and hold hir in the Sunne, and ſhe will picke and proyne hir on your fiſte, or vppon your: knee if ſhe will not bathe hir in a baſyn, then proffer hir to bathe in riuer water at ſome foord. Bathing giueth an Hawke great courage, much boldneſſe, and eager appetite: that daye that ſhe batheth, giue hir nowaſht meate. To make a new lewred Falcon, and to make hir vpwardes, the morow after ſhe hath bathed, get on horſebacke in the morning or in the euening, when ſhe is ſharpe ſet, and chooſe out ſome field or paſture, where feweſt dooues or choughes be, then take your lewre well garniſhed on both ſides, & hauing vnhooded youre Hawke, giue hir a bit or twayne vppon the lewre, then taking it away from hir, hood hir agayne, then going fayre and ſoftly againſt the winde, vnhood hir: and before ſhe bate or find any checke in hir eye, whiſtle hir from off your fiſte fayre and gently, and when ſhe flyeth about, (trotting forwards with your horſe) caſt our your lewre, and ſuffer hir not long to flee about you at the firſt. Continue this both morning and euening for a fewe dayes, and if you perceyue that your Hawke haue no great liſt to flee about you, nor to ſtoupe to the lewre, and that ſhee maketh no ſemblaunce to loue other Hawkes, then muſt you make hir flee with one which loueth other Hawkes, and which will not gadde out to any chaunge or checke: and that muſt firſt be done at the partridge, for they flee not farre before an Hawke: and if youre

Falcon haue flowen, and returne to you twice or thrice, caſt out the lewre vnto hir, and reward hir vpō your Horſebacke, and afterwards feede hir vp, on the lewre vppon the grounde with good hote meate, to make hir reſolute in hir fleing, and that ſhee may retourne to you with the better will, and if the fowle which you flew vnto be killed by any other Hawke, let your Hawke feede with the other Hawke, and when ſhe is ſo rewarded a little, take hir off, and feede hir vpon the lewre.
               If you flee to the riuer with youre Falcon, and that the flight be fayre and likely to be landed, ſtay, and drawe vnder the wind, and taking off your Hawkes hood, caſt hir off with the reſt. Whē you would haue your Hawke prooue vpwards and a high flying Hawke, you muſt let hir flee with a very high fleeing Hawke, but ſee that your Hawke be well taught to hold in the head, and that ſhe loue well to flee with the other Hawkes, and if the fowle be in a poole, or on a pitte or plaſh, you muſt firſt caſt off the high fleeing Hawke, and hee which holdeth your new lewred Hawke, ſhall do well to get him vnder the wind, and when hee ſeeth his vantage let hym vnhood hir, and if ſhee bate then it is to get vp to the other Hawke. Then let him caſt hir off and ſhe will climbe againſt the wind right vnto the high fleeing Hawke, and before ſhee weery hirſelfe too much with climbing to reache or couer that other Hawke, lay out the fowle, whē the high fleeing Hawke ſhall be at hir pitch, and lay them out behind hir, if ſhe kill the fowle, then giue your Hawke rewarde of the Harte and the breſt with the other Hawkes. If your Hawke go out to anye checke, and kill a Dooue or a Crow, or anye other checke and feede vpon it, or haue fedde vppon it before you come at hir, ſeeme not roughly to rebuke hir at firſt, but take hir downe to the lewre, giuing hir a bit of meate, and hood hir vp, and flee not with hir in two or three dayes after, but when you do flee, flee as neare as you can where there be no checke, but if by no meanes you can keepe hir from checking and going out, then for your laſt remedie, doe as followeth. If youre

Hawke haue killed a cheeke, and you come to hir before ſhee haue fedde thereon, take the gall of a Henne, and anoynte therewith the breſt of the cheeke whiche ſhe hath killed, when ſhe hath plumed it and is come to the bloud, and let hir feede but little thereon, leaſt you make hir ſicke, for ſhee will ſurely caſt it agayne, yea though ſhe ſhould not caſt it, yet woulde ſhee haue ſmall luſt to flee at ſuch a fowle againe, but wyll hate and loth the meate thereof, or put any bitter thing therevppon, as powder of mirre, or yong ſmall woormes cutte in gobbets, but take heede that the bitterneſſe be not ouer ſtrong, and if that the bitter taſt haue diſcouraged the Hawke, then weate hir meate in ſugred water. Some put on two payre of belles vppon their Hawkes legges, or ſtitch togither theyr principall long feathers of their wings, and alſo it ſhall be good when ſhe goeth from cheeke, to caſt hir out the lewre, or to lay out an hurt fowle before hir which ſhe may kill. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to flee the Hearon.
               
                  
                     depiction of men, one on horseback, with dogs and birds
                  
               
               
                  TO make youre Falcon a good Hearoner, you muſt ſet hir very ſharp, and haue a liue Hearon, wherof you ſhal make your Hawke a quarrey in this ſort. In the morning when it ſhall be time to feede your Hawke, if you perceyue that ſhe be very ſharp ſet, go to a meadow, and let the Hearon go after that you haue bruſed both his feete and his bill, and hide your ſelfe behind ſome buſh: and then he which holdeth the Hawke ſhal vnhood hir, the which ſhal be vnder the wind. And if your Hawke will not flee at the Hearon, caſt out youre lewre the whiche you ſhall hold in a readineſſe therefore: but if ſhe doe ſeaze on the Hare, make hir a quarrey thereon, giuing hir firſt the Hart, and when ſhe hath eaten it, giue the Hearon to him which helde the Hawke before, who retiring backe a little ſhall lewre, toſſing the Hearon about his head, holding hir by one of the legges or wings: then do you vnhood your Hawke againe, and let hir flee to him which lewreth ſowith the Hearon, and let him not caſt it out vnto hir but ſtay vntil ſhe take and ſeaze it in his hand as he lewreth with it: then deſpoyle the breſt of the Hearon and let your Hawke feede vpon it, and take ye marrow of the bone in the Hearons wing, and giue it your Hawke: and in this doing two or three dayes you ſhall nowſel youre Hawke therevnto and make hir loue the Hearon, the whiche you ſhall alſo bring the ſooner to paſſe, if at ye firſt you inure hir with a make Hawke a good Hearoner. Then hauing found the Hearon at ſiege, you muſt get you with your Falcon vp into ſome high place, into the wind, and let him which hath the Hearoner (that is the male Hawke) put vp the Hearon, and when he hathe caſt off his Hawke to hir, let him marke whether the Hearon do mount or not, for if ſhe mount, then caſt not off your Hawke, nor vnhood hir not, but if the Hearon ſeeme to be diſcomfited, and that ſhe fall downe into the water, and that the make Hawke do ſtoupe hir, then vnhood your yong Hawke, and aduaunce hir: if ſhe bate to bee gone, let hir flee to it.
            
            
               
               How a man ſhall make his Hawke to loue other Hawkes, when ſhe hateth to flee with them.
               THere are ſome Falcons whiche will not flee with other Hawkes, but draw backward, and ſtirre not: ſome other will crabbe with euery Hawke, and flee of purpoſe to crabbe with them: ſome Falcon hateth to ſitte or to flee with another Hawke, eyther for doubt and feare which ſhe hath of them, or els for bicauſe ſhe loueth thē not. That hawke which hateth other Hawkes doth crabbe with them, and ſhe whiche feareth them, dothe flee from them. For remedie heereof you muſte haue a gentle Lanner, whyche maye bee ſette on a pearche with that Hawke whyche hateth others, but farre ynough off, and by day light, then giue each of them a bitte of meate as you paſſe by them, and ſet them nearer and nearer, and when they bee neare one to another, put meate betweene them that both of them maye feede vppon it. Then if the Falcon make no ſemblant to crabbe with the Laner, you ſhall gorge hir vp at night with good meate, and ſet hir abroade in the froſt or colde vppon a pearche, if ſhee bee high and in good plight able to abyde it, and ſo ſhall you lette hir ſitte three or foure houres. In the meane time holde your Lanner neare to the fyre, and afterwardes take hir vppon your fiſte, then lette another bring you your Falcon hooded, and holde hir cloſe betweene your ſide and the Lanner, and when ſhee feeleth the warmth of the Lanner, ſhee will drawe to hir, and hugge to hir for the heate, and lette them ſtande ſo together without ieouking (eyther the one or the other) vntill you ſee that the Falcon doe greately deſire to ieouke, then vnhoode hir fayre and ſoftely, and let it be in ſuche a place as ſhee ſee not, but let hir ſit ſo all the night vpon your fiſte. And when day appeareth, you muſt ſet them on the pearche that one neare to the other, yet ſo as they cannot one reache to another:

That beeyng done two or three nightes togyther, lette them both be ſet abroade the third night in the cold, ſo neare that they maye ſit cloſe togyther on the pearche, and when you ſee them ſit cloſe that one to that other for warmth, then vnhood them, and afterwards feede them, pearche them, and lewre them both togither, and take payne to fynde the aduauntage.
            
            
               How you ſhall enſeame a Hawke, or giue hir caſtings, skourings. &c.
               SOme Falcons be harder to enſeame, than ſome others are, for the longer that a Falcon hath bene in the hande, the harder ſhe is to be enſeamed: and an olde mewed Falcon of the wood, whyche hath mewed but one cote in the Falconers handes, is muche eaſyer to be enſeamed, than a yonger Falcon whiche hathe bene longer in the Falconers hands: the reaſon is, bycauſe a Hawke whiche prayeth for hir ſelfe, dothe feede cleaner, and better, according to hir nature, and vppon more holeſome meates, than ſhe doth when ſhe is in mannes handes, ſo that it is no meruayle though ſhe bee not ſo fowle within when ſhe is at hir owne diet, as when another man feedeth hir. For a Hawke whyche is in oure keeping dothe feede gredily both on ſkinne, feathers and all that commes to hand. Neyther is ſhee mewed with ſo cleane and holeſome feeding, nor dothe endue hir meate ſo well, nor hath ſuche open ayree at times conuenient as a Hawke whych is at large to pray for hir ſelfe. When you draw your Hawke out of the mewe, if ſhee bee greaſie (the whiche you ſhall knowe by hir thighes if they be rounde and fatte, and alſo by hir body if ſhe be full in the hand, and that hir fleſhe bee rounde as high as hir breſt bone) and if ſhee bee well mewed, and haue all hir feathers full ſommed, then giue hir when ſhee woulde feede in the Morning a bitte or two of hote meate,

and at nighte giue hir but a little, vnleſſe it bee very colde, and if ſhe feede well without conſtreynt or forcing therevnto, then giue hir waſht meate thus prepared: take the wings of a Henne or Pullet for hir dinner, and waſh them in two waters, and if you giue hir Hares fleſh or Beefe, let it be waſht in three waters, on the morrow giue hir the legge of a Henne very hote, and at noone meate temperately warme, a good gorge, then let hir faſt vntill it be late in the euening, and if ſhe haue put ouer hir meate and that there be nothing left in hir gorge, then giue hir a little warme meate, as you dyd in the morning, and let hir thus be dietted vntill it bee time to giue hir plumage, the whiche you ſhall know by three tokens, the firſt is, that feeling the end of the pinion of the Hawkes wing, you ſhall feele the fleſh as it were tenderer, and ſofter than it was before ſhe eate waſht meate: the ſeconde, if hir mewtes bee cleane and white, and that the blacke of the mewt be right blacke and not mingled with any other fowle thing or colour: the third token is, if ſhee bee very ſharpe ſet and do plume eagerly, you maye giue hir caſting eyther of a Hares foote or a Coonnies foote, or of the ſmall feathers, which are on the ioynt of the pinion of an olde Hennes wing: take then the forefoote of a Hare, and beate it with the backe of a knife vntill the bones and clawes do fall out, bycauſe the ſmall bones may mouldre and be all to fruſhed to peeces, the which you ſhall afterwards cut and lay it in fayre freſhe water, then wring it, and giue hir it at two morſells, and when you ſet hir on the pearche, ſweepe cleane vnderneath it that you maye ſee whether the mewte bee full of ſtrakes or ſkinnes or not, and whether it bee full of ſlime and ordure or not, and if it bee, then continue this kinde of caſting three or foure nights togither with waſht meate as is before ſayd, and if you perceyue the feathers diſgeſted and ſoft, and that hir caſting be great and full of ordure, then take the necke of an olde Henne, and cut it all alongſt betweene the

ioynts; and lay the ioynts in cleare cold water, and giue it to your Falcon without any other thing: and this is done bycauſe it beareth downe before it into the pannell, the meate which is vpon the ioynts, and there in the pannell the fleſh cō
                  ſumeth and the bones remaine ſharp & pricking, which breake the kelles and ſkinnes, and the groſſe ordure, and beare them with them: and giue hir ſo three nights togither, giuing hir by day waſht meate as is before rehearſed, & afterwardes giue hir caſting or plumage agayne, according as hir ſtate dothe require. And thinke it not ſtraunge that a Falcon which is to be enſeamed, is ſometimes a fortenight or more before ſhee will take caſting: neyther yet that ſome Falcons will eaſiyer be enſeamed in a month, than ſome other in fiue weekes, according as they be ſtronger or weaker of nature, and fedde with cleaner or fowler meates, or according as they haue bin ſhorter or longer time in mennes hands and keeping. When you haue drawen your Falcon out of the mewe, and that hir principal feathers be ful ſommed, or that ſhe haue ſome yet in the quill, do not giue hir waſht meate, but quicke birdes, and good gorges thereof, and ſet hir aſmuche as may bee in open places, for otherwiſe hir feathers maye chaunce to ſhrinke in the quill, and come to nothing.
            
            
               To enter or make a Hawke, after the faſhion of Lombardy.
               WHen a Sparowhawke is māned and reclaymed, then giue hir nine or ten traynes at the leaſt, and when ſhe killeth, feede hir vp alwayes, and let the Quayle wherewithall you trayne hir, haue a feather pulled out of each wing, and caſt off the Sparowhawke to hir a farre off, ſo often yt ſhe wil recouer the Quayle farre off, and then caſt hir out a Quayle which hath hir full wings, afterwards you may flee the wilde Quayle with hir: and euermore when ſhe doth kill, feede hir

vp with a full gorge: the Almaines are of opinion that the tercell of the Goſhawke is more weightie and more valiaunt than the Hawke, both to Partridge and Feaſant. If you woulde make a Sparowhawke to the Pye, then diſmember the Pye, and caſt hir on the ground to the Hawke, and feede hir vpon hir with a hote meale, as with a Finche or ſuche lyke bird, & vſe that order with hir twice or thrice, and afterwardes you may caſt vp a Pye to your Hawke that is ſeeled, beeyng diſmembred as beforeſayd, and let hir kill hir, and feede hir vpon hir, alſo you may take a feather or two out of the Pyes wing, and ſet hir vp in ſome tree, and let your Hawke kill hir there, and make hir as good reward as you can thereof, and this beeing thus vſed, you maye flee with your Hawke to the wild Pye, but euer remember that in making theſe trayns your Pye be diſmēbred that is to ſay, hir bill and hir tallents cut off, or ſo tyed and abated that ſhe may not ſpoyle or hurte your Hawke. Goſhawkes and Tercells of Goſhawkes are better when they are taken haggards of a Cote or two Cotes out of the wood, than they are when they bee Sorehawkes, but then they muſt be kept with more delicate feede then the Soarehawkes, for they are made daungerous. For aſmuche as in the wooddes they did commonly pray vpon warme meates, and therewithall they are ſooner loſt than Sorehawkes be, by reaſon they remember their eyree, but they ſhould not be aboue one or two Cotes at the moſt. (∵)
            
            
               
               To enſeame a Falcon and to make hir.
               
                  depiction of falcon
               
               
                  TAke your Falcon and vſe hir as you vſe the Goſhawke in maner before declared, ſauing that when you feede hir you ſhall call and lewre as if you called hir to the lewre: and euery day you ſhall proffer hir water, and euery night giue hir caſting accordingly as you ſhall ſee that ſhe endeweth: and take off hir hood often times amongſt company, and to the end ſhe ſhall not bate, hold alwais the hood by the taſſell in your hand ready. And in the euening when daylight beginneth to faile, take off hir hood amongſt company of people by the candlelight vntill ſhe rowze and mewte, and then ſet hir on ye perch and not before, and ſet light before hir, and when ſhee is well woonne to know the fiſte, then begin to make hir knowe the lewre, and ſo by little and little reclayme hir, vntill you maye call hir looſe without criance. Euery Falcon hath neede of a make Hawke to teach hir to holde in the head, and eſpecially the haggart Falcon, the which may be peraduenture an haggart of two or three cotes, & yet ſhall be the better Hearoner: but if a haggart mewed will not hold in the head, then cutte off ſome part of hir two principalles in eache wing, the long feather and that which is next to it, and that ſhall force hir to hold in. You muſt alſo feate hir beake & cope hir reaſonably. They always giue their Hawkes tyring both morning and euening, but the Falconers of the Eaſt parts are of a cōtrary opinion and ſay that it weakeneth a Hawkes backe. If you would make your Hawke vpwards or high flying, then after ſhe is reclaymed and lewred and ready comming, when you lewre hir and that ſhe commeth towards you, ſtoppe ye lewre vpon hir and let hir paſſe by you, and when ſhe retourneth towards you throwe hir out the lewre, and make much of hir, and do thus oftentimes vntill you may ſuffer hir to flee lōger about you and to get vp higher, the whiche you muſt do in a plain field where no wood or trees are: and if ſhe get vp to any pitch, then let hir flee a turne or two of iollity, and when ſhe is at the higheſt and right ouer you, throwe hir foorth the lewre, or a Pigeon or Pullet, and giue hir a good gorge thereon,

making the moſte of hir that you can deuiſe, and take heede that you caſte not your lewre into the water, leaſt ſhe ſhoulde thereby be rebuked. And when ſhe is at hir gate, if percaſe ſhe gadde out after ſome checke, and kill it, then take the pray from hir angerly, and beate hir therewith about the head, and hoode hir vp without any rewarde: and hereby ſhe will the leſſe delyght to rake out after a checke. When your hawke hath killed a fowle, take it out of hir foote, and caſt hir vp againe, and when ſhe is right ouer you, caſte out the lewre, and feede hir vp vpon it, to make hir loue the lewer the better. But at the beginning rewarde hir and feede hir well vpon the quarrey, and that ſhall encourage hir and keepe hir from going out to the checke. When ſhe is well in bloude, and well quarried, then let hir flee with other hawkes, vntill ſhe be wel acquainted and inured.
               If you would make your hawke to the Crane, take a Nyaſſe Falcon gentle, and in entring of hir let hir kyll the greateſt fowle that you can finde. Hir lewre ſhould alſo be a coū
                  terfayte Crane. And when you woulde make hir fleeing, lette hir flee from the fiſte, and ſuccour hir quickely. For you muſte haue dogges made for the purpoſe, whiche may helpe and ſuccoure hir ſooner than a man can doe. And lette ſuche dogges feede alwaies with your hawke, to make them the better acquaynted. If you woulde make a Falcon to the Hare, hir lewre ſhould be then a Hares ſkinne ſtuffed with ſtrawe, and when ſhe is well lewred, & that you would enter hir, tye the ſayde Hares ſkinne to the ende of a cryance, and faſten it to your ſaddle pommell, and when you galloppe, it will be like vnto a running Hare. Then vnhoode your hawke, and crye, Backe with the Greyhoundes, backe with the Greyhoundes. And when your hawke commeth to ſeaze the ſayde Hares ſkinne, lette go your cryance, and ſuffer hir to take it, and reward hir well vpon it, and make the moſt of hir that you can deuiſe. And when you go about to enter hir ye ſecond time, let not ſlyppe your cryance at the firſte, but rather pull it from hir

by force, and afterwardes let hir ſeaze vpon it, and ſo by little and little you ſhal teach hir to beate it and ſtowpe at it. For ſo muſt ſhe do at a wilde Hare. And you muſte feede hir alwaies amongſt the dogges, and when ſhee is well nouſled and entred in this manner, take a lyue Hare, and breake one of hir hinder legges, and lette hir go in ſome fayre place amongeſt your dogges, and your Falcon wyll ſtowpe hir and ruffe hir, vntyll the dogges maye take hir. Then take hir from the dogges, & caſt hir out vnto the hawke, & crye backe, backe.
               If you woulde make your hawke fleing to the Partridge, or Feaſant, when ſhe is reclaimed and made, then euery tyme that you lewre hir, caſte your lewre into ſome lowe tree or buſhe, that ſhe may learne to take the tree, or the ſtande. And if ſhe take the ſtande before ſhee eſpie the lewre, lette hir ſtande a whyle. And after drawe the lewre out before hir, and crye,
Lo birde, lo, Hey lo birde, hey lo, and rewarde hir well. For in this manner ſhe will learne to take ſtande. But feede hir alwayes on the grounde, and in ſome thicke place, for in ſuche places ſhe muſte encounter with the Feaſant at pearche. And at the firſte flee with hir at Feaſant, or Partridge that bee yong, to gyue hir the aduauntage, and afterwardes at the olde. If a Falcon wyll not take ſtande, but wyll keepe hir on wing, then muſte you flee with hir in playne places, where you may alwayes ſee hir vpon you. Sacres and Laners will commonly take ſtande bothe in a tree, and on the grounde, but the Falcon Gentle taketh ſtande more willingly vpon the grounde. And when you drawe a hawke out of the mewe, beare hir not muche in hotte weather, for feare leaſte by muche bating in heate, ſhee may gette the Pantyſe. But if there be no remedie, then keepe hir alwayes hooded, and take as good heede to hir as you can. If your hawke be coye and daungerous, then giue hir ſalte with hir meate, I meane a dramme of the Salte called Sal Inde, or Sal geme, or Salis albi pulueri-Zati, and gyue hir water, for ſhee ſhall haue neede thereof. And make hir Ieouke all nyghte in payne, and in a moyſte

or colde place, and ſo ſhall ſhe watche moſte of the nyght, and thereby hir greace and pryde will be abated. Sacres muſt be nowſled and entred as ſoone as they bee manned, for elſe they are very harde to bee entred. Drawe your hawke out of the mewe twentie dayes before you enſeame hir. If a Falcon truſſe and carrye, to remedie the ſame, you muſte cope hir tallantes, hir powlſe, and hir petie ſingle. Neuer rewarde your hawke vpon ryuer fowle, but rewarde hir, and make muche of hir vpon the lewre, to the ende ſhe may the better knowe it and eſteeme it. The Souldane fleeth to the Crane, wilde Gooſe, and Buſtarde, with three or foure hawkes at once (or more) from the fiſte, yea and thoſe of all kinde of hawkes alſo, as Sacres, Gerfalcons, peregrine Falcons, and Vilanes. And afterwards a man may make them flee to the mowntie. You ſhoulde flee to the Crane before Sunne ryſing, for ſhe is ſluggiſhe and ſlowthfull, and you may caſte off to hir a caſte or a leaſe of Falcons, or you may hawke to hir with the Goſhawke from the fiſte without dogges. Wilde geeſe are flowen to in the ſame manner. And if you haue dogges to helpe & ſuccour your hawkes, ſee that they bee ſtanche and gentle, and well made for the purpoſe, and a Greyhounde will bee moſte readily made therevnto. You ſhall flee but once in a daye at the Crane, and therevpon rewarde hir liberally, and make as muche of hir as you can. The Vyllaine ſhoulde bee lette flee downe the winde. The Almaines doe flee at the Pye with a leaſe or twoo caſte of Falcons at once, and they make them to mownte and to ſtowpe, as they doe at the Ryuer. But this muſte be in a playne, where there be no trees nor woodde, but little ſhrubbes and buſhes. If you vſe to giue your hawke a brekefaſt or beaching very timely in ye morning, it wil make hir eager to flee at ſuche time as will be conuenient for hir to flee. And eſpecially a Falcon, whiche you woulde haue high fleeing, and thoſe ſhoulde not be highly kepte, but ſhoulde be fedde nyne dayes togyther before Sunne riſing, and at nyghte late in the freſhe or coole of the euening. So ſhall

you make them highe fleeing, and by that meanes they wyll euery daye get gate higher & higher, ſo yt they be flowen with euermore in the playne champaygne. The Falcon gentle is commonly better inwarde when ſhe hath mewed, than in hir ſoarage. The Falcon will kill the Hearne naturally, if ſhe be a peregrine Falcon, and yet you ſhall do well to giue them traynes. A Falcon may flee ten flightes at riuer in one day, if the ſeaſon be not extreme, and that is the moſte that you ſhall flee with hir. The Falcons whiche are ryuer hawkes, ſhoulde alwaies be borne vpon the fiſte. A hawke ſhall haue forty caſtings before ſhe be perfectly made. For a hawke whiche hath not caſting euery nighte, will be ſurcharged with abundance and ſuperfluitie of humors, the whiche do (from the ſtomacke) ſo ouerflow their brayne, that they cannot flee ſo high as elſe they would do. And therefore all hawkes ſhould haue caſting euery night naturally, if you woulde haue them ſounde and cleane: & it is good to giue them tyring or plumage at nighte, eſpecially field hawkes, but not ryuer hawkes, for weakening their backes. And euery thirde daye you ſhall preſent them to the water at the longeſt. Touche your hawkes fethers as litle as you can, for muche handling will make them out of order. The Vyllaine and the Lanerette may be ſette vpon the ſtone incontinently, as ſoone as they be made. When your hawke hath flowen or bated, feede hir not as long as ſhee panteth, or bloweth, nor vntill ſhe be in breath agayne. For if you ſhould it is perilous to bring hir into the diſeaſe called Astma, and (in a hawke) the Pantiſe. If a hawke (eyther Falcon or other) chaunce to be out of heart, and diſcouraged, (which happeneth oftentymes) then take ſuche paynes with hir that ſhee may kill ſome praye, and feede hir vp vpon it with a full gorge euen as long as ſhe will eate, and the ſame night ſette hir abroade, that ſhe may Ieouke in the open ayre at hir own pleaſure: and on the morrowe take hir and feede hir with ſmall birdes to enſeame hir, neyther more nor leſſe than you would do with an hawke that were newe drawen out of the mewe.

If a Falcon or other hawke will not ſeaze or gorge, take the quill of a wilde Gooſes feather, and tye it vnder hir long ſingle, and ſhe will ſeaze and grype. And when ſhe beginneth to feaze, take away the ſayde quyll, and ſhee will ſeaze long afterwards. If you cannot giue couert to your Falcon, or your Goſhawke, then caſte hir off with the Sunne in hir backe. All hawkes may be made flee at ye ſowrce or ſpring. But in what ſorte ſoeuer you flee with your Goſhawke, lette hir haue the Sunne in her backe.
            
            
               To flee all manner of fowles.
               ALl traines of Partridge, Rookes, Crowes, and Choughs, ſhoulde bee ſeeled. Nowe to enter your hawke at any of them, make a lyttle pytte or hole in the grounde, and putte your trayne therein. Then couer the hole with a little borde, the whiche you ſhall faſten to a ſmall cryaunce or corde, and that you ſhall holde in your hande to drawe away when you lyſt. Thē you ſhall make as though you vncoupled your ſpanels to hunte and put vp the game, and you ſhall carry your hawke vnhooded. And when you perceiue that your hawke looketh that way where you haue layed the trayne, then drawe of the borde, and cauſe the traine to ſpring as though the ſpanels had ſprong it. And if your hawke do take it, let hir feede thereon hir fill vpon the grounde: And thus muſt you do ſundry times. If you woulde haue a good hawke, then nowſel hir yong, for ſo will ſhe encreaſe hir force by little and little, and in the ende, ſhee will ouercomme bothe Feaſaunte and Partridge, &c. And when ſhee hath killed, lette hir grype and ſeaze the praye at hir pleaſure. And lette hir alſo plume therevpon as long as ſhe will, & euermore let hir be rewarded vpon the grounde. And when ſhee is well nowſled, then rewarde hir neuer but vpon the cockes of all prayes, bycauſe that wyll make hir loue that praye the better. And when ſhee killeth a henne of any kinde, lette hir no more but plume vpon it, and

gyue hir but the heart, and the brayne at the moſte, bicauſe ſhe ſhall not loue to flee the Henne ſo well as the Cocke. It is muche better to nouſel hawkes at yong fowles, than at the olde. For moſte commonly if a yong hawke be let flee at olde game, ſhee will turne tayle, and cowardly giue it ouer, vnleſſe you do as before is declared. If you woulde nouſel or enter a haggarde, then do not enter hir or ſette hir in bloude vpon a yong praye, or inure hir thereto. For then ſhe woulde not afterwardes paſſe muche for olde game. And likewiſe for the ſame conſideration you ſhall not nouſel nor enter a mewed hawke at yong game.
               For the Goſhawke all fowles generally are good traynes, as Crane, Buſtarde, Hearne, wilde Gooſe, Riuer fowle, Cormorantes, Choughes, Rookes, Kyghtes, and all other fowle that haunt Ryuers or plaſhes.
            
            
               Howe to make a trayne or flight for the Goſhawke.
               SEtte one of the ſayd fowles vpon the water, and betweene you and the water, let there bee ſome ſmall ſhrubbes or buſhes, ſo as the Goſhawke may haue couerte to take the ſtande if neede be, as alſo to keepe hir out of ſight of the fowle, for hir aduantage. Then aduaunce your fiſte, ſo as the hawke maye diſcrie the fowle. After whiche you may hold it lower againe, and ſo caſt off the hawke. And if ſo be yt ſhe ſeaze the fowle, lette hir feede thereon at hir pleaſure on the grounde. To make your Goſhawke to the brooke, lette hir flee thoſe traynes afore ſayde, as I haue tolde you. But when you ſee the hawke approche the fowle, & to be within daunger, then ſtrike vp your drumme before ſuch time as ye fowle do eſpie your Goſhawke. For if ſhe once ſee the hawke before ſhee ſpring, ſhe will by no meanes willingly forſake the brooke, but fall to dyuing and ducking, a defence whiche nature hath prouided & taught thē.
               Thus muſte you deale with the Goſhawke to the brooke,

but if you will flee with hir to the Hare & Lyueret, (which is a game that the Goſhawke dothe muche delyghte to kyll and praye on) then muſte you breeche hir, and at no time let hir flee without that deuiſe, for feare leaſt ſhe ſpoyle hir ſelfe. For the Hare is of ſome force, and in ſtriuing to eſcape from hir, will force hir to ſtretche hir armes, and open hir ſelfe to wide, which is the vtter vndooing of your hawke. The Sparowhawkes do vſe to kill the fowle at the Sowrce or Souſe, as the Goſhawkes do, whiche nature hath taught them, (for that beeing rounde winged hawkes,) if they dealt not vpon the aduauntage, the fowle might eaſily ſlippe from them, and eſcape their daunger. But ſo greate is the curteſie of kinde, as ſhee euer ſeeketh to recompence any defect of hirs, with ſome other better benefite, or at leaſt ſuch as ſhall ſerue the turne. Thus haue you the Frenche Falconers opinions layde downe, as touching the fleeing with eche kinde of hawke, or at leaſte, the greateſt parte of them. For the knowledge to flee with the Falcon, ſerueth for all Towre hawkes, and the Goſhawke for the rounde winged hawkes. (∵)
            
            
               
               To manne, hoode, and reclayme a hawke, after the opinion of the Italian Falconer.
               
                  depiction of man with falcon
               
               HE that will furniſhe his hawke accordingly, muſte haue Ieſſes and Bewettes of good leather, and ſhrill belles, according to the hugeneſſe or condition of his hawke. So muſt

he alſo haue a hoode for hir: and therewithall he muſt oftentymes hoode and vnhoode hir, in ſuch ſort that ſhee be not afrayde thereof, nor of hir keeper when hee handleth hir. In nine nightes hee ſhoulde not ſuffer hir to iouke at all, nor to come on any perche, but ſhoulde keepe hir continually ſo long vpon his fiſt. And when he will call hir, let him obſerue this order: Set the Falcon vpon the perche and vnhoode hir, then ſhewe hir your fiſte with ſome meate in it, and call hir ſo long till ſhe come to it. And when ſhe commeth feede hir, and rewarde hir as pleaſauntly as you can: But if ſhe come not, giue hir nothing at all vntill ſhe be verye ſharpe ſet. And this order muſt you keepe with your Hawke ſeuen or eight dayes togither.
               When you would lure hir, giue hir vnto ſome other man to holde, and call hir with a lure well garniſhed with meate on both ſydes, as you called hir to your fiſt. After you haue vſed that maner of calling ſixe dayes or thereaboutes, cauſe hir to be helde further from you, and caſt the lure about your heade, and throwing it out vpon the grounde a little from you: And if ſhe come to it roundly, then feede hir and rewarde hir bountifully. And whyles your hawke is vpon the lewre, go aboute hir fayre and ſoftly, lewring and crying: wó hó hó, as Falconers vſe. And when you haue thus done by the ſpace of certaine dayes, take your lewre garniſhed as before ſayde, and euery day call hir to you as farre as ſhee may well heare and perceyue you: and let hir be looſe from all hir furniture, that is without either loynes or cryaunce: and if ſhe come ſo farre off to you, then feed and rewarde hir well, and ſtoppe hir in hir feeding oftentymes, for that will make hir come the better: but take heede that you hurt hir not in ſo doing. You ſhall alſo ſometymes call hir on horſebacke. And when you haue vſed hir thus a moneth, or vntill ſhe come well and roundly, and that ſhee be familiar with the man without any ſtraungeneſſe or coyneſſe, then may you ſtop the lewre vpon hir, and make hir flee vpon you. But before you do ſo, it ſhall be meete to bathe hir, leaſt when ſhe is at libertie ſhe rangle to ſeeke water, and ſo you might leeſe your Hawke: and euery ſeuen or eight dayes, your Hawke ſhould be ſet to the

water, for the nature of them ſo requireth. When you haue thus manned, reclaymed, and lewred your Falcon, go out with hir into the fieldes and whiſtle hir of your fyſt, ſtanding ſtill to ſee what ſhe will do, and whether ſhe will rake out or not. But if ſhe flee rounde vpon you, as a good Hawke ſhoulde flee, then let hir flee a turne or two: whiche done, throwe hir out the lewre, and let hir foote a henne or a pullet, and kill it, and feede hir well therevppon. Vnhoode hir often as you beare hir, and ceaſe not ſo to do vntill ſhe haue endewed and mewted ſufficiently.
               When your Falcon is thus made & manned, go abrode with hir euery morning when the weather is fayre and calme, and chuſe a place for hir to flee in, where there is ſome narrow brooke or plaſhe of water. And when you caſt hir off, go into the winde ſo farre that the fowle may not deſcrie you. And when ſhe is caſt off, and beginneth to recouer hir gate, make you then towardes the brooke where the fowle lie, alwayes wyling and making your Hawke to leane in vpon you. And when you perceiue that ſhe is at a reaſonable pitche, then (hir heade being in,) lay out the fowle, and lande it if you can, and if you cannot, take downe your Hawke, and let hir kil ſome traine, as thus. Take with you a Ducke, and ſlip one of hir wing feathers, and hauing thruſt it through hir nares, throw it out vnto your Hawke, and caſt it as high as you can right vnderneath your Hawke, that ſhe may the better knowe your hande, and you. And remember that you neuer flee a yong Hawke without ſome quicke thing caryed into the field with you, that if ſhe faile at firſt to kill the wilde fowle, you may yet make hir kil that traine which you bring with you. And this you ſhall doe for a certaine time, vntill your Hawke be well entred and quarreyed, and that ſhe knowe a quarreyor ſufficiently. Some other Falcons there be of a contrarie nature, which will require great ſkill to finde their properties. And the ſame being knowne, you may keepe them high or poore, according to their conditions. So ſhal you do more good with them, than if you haue no reſpect to the diuerſitie of their nature: for then you ſhould commit great errours, and ſeldome make good Hawkes. You may traine Hawkes in this wiſe. Firſt you ſhall

feede your Hawke well vpon a fowle of the ſame kinde that you woulde traine hir withall, or haue hir flee to. And you ſhall doe ſo vntill you haue acquainted your Hawke with that kinde of fowle, the which you may do in this ſort. Take that fowle that you will make the trayne of, and ſet it on foote with meate tyed vpon the backe of it, and go ſo neare it that the Hawke maye ſee it: and when ſhe ſeeth it, let hir ſeaze therevpon, and foote the fowle and kill it. Or you may thus do better: Take a Cryance, and tye the fowle (which hath the meate tyed on hir backe) by the beake, and cauſe one to ſtande cloſe which maye holde the ſame Cryance. Then vnhoode your Hawke, and ſtande a farre off, and let him drawe the fowle and ſtirre it with his Cryance, vntill your Hawke may ſee it ſtyrre. And if ſhe foote it, then may you afterwards make hir this other kinde of traine. Take a quick fowle which can flee, and when you haue half ſeeled it, and caſt it out, let your hawke flee to it, and if ſhe kil it, reward and feed hir vp well vpon it. (∴)
            
            
               
               To keepe and make Sparhawkes.
               
                  
                     depiction of sparrowhawk
                  
               
               IF you would know howe to feed and man Sparrowhawkes that be taken tender penned out of their eyree, it is meete that you keepe them in a freſhe and ſweete place, and giue them as much as they will eate, of ſmall byrdes, as Sparrowes, Martlets,

and ſuch like. And alſo you may giue them other fleſh, but ſee that it be ſweet, cleane, and good, ſhred into ſmall pellets vpon a cleane trencher. When they beginne to waxe full ſomed, giue them Sparrowes, and other ſmall birdes whole, that they may learne to plume, foote, and tyre: and ſet them a Baſon of cleane water in a heape of ſande, that they may bathe therein and proine and picke their feathers. They that be thus dealt withall do not know how to pray and therfore you muſt enter them by traynes in this maner. Take a yong chickē which is of colour and plume like a Feaſant or Partrich, & caſt it out before your Sparhawke. But if ſhe flee not vnto it, nor do foote it, then ſtrip the ſkin vpon the head of the chicken vntil it bleed, and ſhe will lightly ſeaze it, thinking that it is fleſh to feed vpon. Then feed hir vpon it well, and thus you ſhall vſe hir vntill ſhe wil ſeaze a chicken of hirſelf. When ſhe will take a chicken of hirſelf, go into ſome fayre cloſe or medow where nothing may be to interrupt you, & take a yong chicken and throw it vp vnto your hawke vntill ſhe flee to it and foote it: then feede hir vp therevpon, and coy hir aſmuche as you can deuiſe: For Nyaſſe Sparhawkes are much more daungerous and coy than others be. When your Sparhawke will foote a chicken well as before ſayd, then you may trayne hir thus. Cauſe ſome of your ſeruants or others to ſtande cloſe in ſome ditche or other priuie corner, with a liue chicken in his hande: and ſtande your ſelfe with your Sparhawke vpon your fiſt a little diſtance from him: then crie and ſpeake as you would ſpeake, and cry to your Spaniels when they range the field. And when you thinke that your Sparhawke looketh that way as he that hath the traine ſtandeth, let him caſt vp the chicken, as highe as he can, and let your Sparhawke flee thereat, and ſeaze it. That done, rewarde hir, and feed hir therevpon, making much of hir, and cheering hir euermore among. Thus ſhall you do twice a day. When you haue thus trayned hir, mount on your horſebacke, & giue hir like traynes in the field as before ſayd. Then ſet hir ſharpe againſt an euening, and go out to ſeeke ſome game: and if you find, ſeek to make hir one flight at aduauntage, and let hir flee but once, and ſuppe hir vp vpon the pray. Thus in foure or fiue dayes at the beginning

I woulde haue you let hir flee but one flight in a day, rewarding hir well alwayes when ſhe killeth any thing, to the ende ſhe may knowe hir game the better, and take the greater delight therein, vntill ſhe be throughly nouſled. To keepe your Sparhawke in good order, ryſe early in the morning, and taking hir vpon your fyſt, tappe hir on the trayne with your two forefingers, and ſtroke on hir wings that ſhee may mantle and warble, and aduaunce hir ſelfe bolt vpright and delicately vpon your fyſt. Sometymes alſo take off hir hoode, and put it on againe fayre and ſoftly, for rebuking hir. When you haue kept hir two houres vpon the fiſt, then ſet hir in the Sunne to weather hir halfe an houre: that beeing done call hir to your fiſt wyth meate, and whiſtle to hir often, and chirpe with your lippes, that ſhe may learne to know that voyce when you call hir, and when ſhe commeth rewarde hir well. Thus you ſhoulde vſe hir dayly, vntill ſhe come well to the fyſt: remembring alwayes that you deale with hir as gently and as amiably as you can deuiſe. When ſhe is well manned, and well comming, trie if ſhe couet not the water to bathe hir. And if ſhe do bathe, then may you afterwardes flee with hir: But firſt get on horſebacke, and call hir from off the grounde with a Cryance, for feare leaſt ſhe ſhoulde thinke ſtraunge to come to you on horſebacke: and if ſhe come well to you from the ground, being on horſbacke, then may you boldly flee with hir. But remember alwayes to eſpie ſome flight with aduauntage at the firſt, for diſcouraging of your Hawke: For if ſhe be once well nouſled and entred, you may afterwards he the bolder how and when to flee with hir.
            
            
               The maner to feede a Sparhawke.
               TO feede a Sparhawke orderly, you ſhoulde giue hir good meates, as thighes of Chickens and Pullettes, yong Sparrowes, Martelettes and other ſmall byrdes. Alſo ſheepes hearts, or Lambes heartes: all theſe bee excellent meate for a Sparhawke. And thoſe you muſt gyue them cleane and hote, if it

bee poſſible: for with hote meates you ſhall keepe hir alwayes in beſt plighte, and leaſte daunger to abate. And to preuent diſeaſes, you ſhall giue hir euery nighte caſting of Cotton or Lint, or ſuche lyke. And yet ſome are of opinion, that it is not beſt to giue a Sparhawke caſting ſo often: But by theyr leaue, I thinke it meete: and my reaſon is, that when you gyue hir caſting, you ſhall alwayes perceyue the diſpoſition of hir gorge and pannell from tyme to tyme, by the ſignes whiche you ſhall ſee vppon the caſting, and in it: As ſometymes it will bee white, ſometymes blacke, ſometymes yellow, ſometymes greene, and of other colours: and by this meanes knowing the infirmitie of your Hawke, you maye the better prouide remedie for the ſame. Therefore I thinke it beſt to gyue a Sparhawke caſting, and it ſhall not bee amiſſe to put therein ſometymes a whole Cloue, in a pellet of Cotton, whiche is a tryed medicine to drawe euill humours from a Hawkes head: Or ſometymes you maye put a chyue of Saffron in hir caſting. And aboue all things, giue hir water once in three or foure dayes: For Sparhawkes doe muche couet the water, and it is the beſte thing (with other good dyet) that can bee, to keepe a Sparhawke alwayes ſounde and in good caſe.
            
            
               Of feeding a Hawke.
               TAke heede that you feede not your Hawke with two ſortes of meate at once, for that is perillous. Foraſmuche as the ſubſtaunces of them beeing diuerſe, they ſtriue in diſgeſtion or endewing, and breede euill humors and wormes in a Hawke, and ſill hir with winde. And beware alſo that you feede not youre Hawke wyth fleſhe of beaſtes that bee olde, nor that bee hurte or taynted: For ſuche meates are harde to endewe, and full of venome and corruption, breeding diſeaſes. Beware alſo that you giue not youre Hawke the fleſhe of a broode henne. And it ſhall not be amiſſe ſometimes to chaunge your Hawkes meate and feeding.
               
                  Gooſefleſh (if you vſe it oftentymes) will breede many flegmatike humors in a hawke, and the cray in hir pannell.
               The fleſh of a yong Calfe is good for a gorge or two: but if you giue it oftner,Theſe fedings are for the most part cō
                     trarie to our engliſh order in Falconrie. it ingendreth flegme and colde humors in the heade, and breadeth liſe in hir. The hart is much better for cōmon feeding than the reſt.
               The fleſh of a Ram goat, a female goat, or a gelded goat, is good to ſet vp a hawke. But ſome are of opinion that it breedeth the goute, and moyſte watrie humours, and opilations in the gorge.
               Mutton is not good, for it breedeth humours in the heade, as the Rye and ſuch like: it dries vp and enflames a Hawke, and makes hir hoſe ſit cloſe to hir legges.
               Lambes fleſhe, and the fleſhe of a Kidde, is good giuen with Goates milk, eſpecially when your hawke is poore, and hath bene hardly delt withall.
               Hares fleſh, or Conies fleſh, either colde or hote, is verie good to endew, and ſounde meate for a Hawke: but take heede that you giue hir none of the braynes, nor anie of the haires or bones, for they are perillous, and breede wormes in the gorge and in the guttes.
               Cattes fleſhe is vnholeſome, and harde to be indewed, and breedeth perillous wormes, and ſtoppeth a Hawke in the gorge, and marreth hir winde.
               Rattes fleſhe is good and wholeſome: it conſumeth choller, helpeth to looſe the head, giueth good appetite and diſgeſtion.
               Dogges fleſhe is good and verie ſound, and verie meete for thoſe kinde of Falcons, whiche are whote Hawkes of nature.
               Woolues fleſhe is naughte, and contrarie to a Hawkes nature.
               
                  This feeding we vſe not.The fleſh of a Foxe (as my Authour affirmeth) is holeſome and ſetteth vp a hawke.
               If your Hawke happen to ſit abrode in the colde ayre, and eſpecially in the night, giue hir ſmall birdes to feede vpon, bycauſe they are hote of nature and comfort much: but beware that you

vſe it not continually, for it will make hir too ſtately, and cauſe hir forget you, in ſuche ſort, that you ſhall hardly reclayme hir from hir coyneſſe.
               To feede with ryuer fowle and ſuch lyke, there are ſome of them good, and ſome bad, as I will breefly declare.
               Some hold opinion, that the bones and bloud of a Bargander, Moorehen, and ſuch like, may be giuen to an hauke: but that the ſkinne, fleſh, or feathers of them are not good, bycauſe they breede euill humours.
               The fleſh of a Ducke or of a Crane (as they report) is good and wholeſome.
               The fleſh of a Partriche is moſt excellent when a Hawke is ſicke and diſeaſed.
               The fleſh of a wylde Gooſe, or of a flecked Crowe, is good: but you muſt giue your Hawke but little thereof, and none at al of their bloud: for it is ſalt, brackiſh, and of an euill nouriſhment.
               The fleſhe of theſe fleſh Crowes, and of the Wagtayles (a Diſhwaſher as we terme them, in Latin called Motacilla) and the Cormorant, is of euill nouriſhment and diſgeſtion.
               The fleſh of a white Storke, and alſo of the blacke Storke, called (Saracineſſa) is euill of nouriſhment, and hard to be endewed, and ſtinking.
               The fleſh of the Bitter, and Sea Coote, is good and ſounde, eſpecially when the Sea Coote doth feede and ſcoure hir wyth ſande, it is good to enſeame and breath a hawke: although naturally all water fowles are colde of complexion, moyſte and hard of diſgeſtion.
               The fleſh of the white Heron, otherwiſe called the Shoueler, and of the blew or aſhe coloured Heron, is of good diſgeſtion and nouriſheth well.
               The fleſh of Finches, hedge Sparrowes, and ſuch like, are in maner all one: and you muſte beware that you giue not your hawke too much of them at once.
               The Cuckoes fleſh is indifferent good for a hawke.
               The fleſh of a Hearon royall, that is to ſay the gray Hearon, is reaſonable good, according to the opinion of many auncient

Falconers: but Ptholomeus king of Egipt doth alledge the cōtrarie, ſaying, that naturally all foules which liue vpon fiſh, frogs, or ſnakes, and ſuch like venemous wormes, are euill of diſgeſtion, and that their bloud breedeth opilations and euill humours, although they ſeeme to delight hawkes to feed on them for their delicate ſweeteneſſe and taſte.
               The fleſh of the redde Harō is good: but you muſt giue but little of it.
               The fleſh of the Swan, and many other kindes of water fowles to long here to be rehearſed, are to be vſed according to the tyme and circumſtances of occaſion.
               The fleſh of Sea Crowes, and Rauens, Cormorants, and ſuch like, are of a brackiſhe bloud, and therefore you may nowe and then giue your hawke a gorge thereof: but you muſt not vſe it often.
               The fleſh of rauening byrdes, as Kightes, Puttocks, Harpies, Eagles, Eyrons, and ſuch like, all theſe are verie contrarie to the nature of Falcons, and are ſtinking, of euil diſgeſtion, and chollericke. Their bloud and braynes are worſt of all, for they breede perillous wormes.
               The fleſh of all byrdes which feede vpon ſeedes, as Feaſants, Pertriche, Quayles, and ſuch like, are the beſt that can be, eſpecially when a falcon or any other Hawke is ſicke.
               Doues fleſh is excellent, eyther when a hawke is ſicke, or to mew withall: for it makes a hawke to mewe well & quickly.
               Pullets fleſhe, and Chickens fleſhe, is good at all times, and alwayes in ſeaſon, as the fleſh of that fayre fowle Bella Donna is.
            
            
               
               To man and make a Hawke: and firſt of a Niaſſe Falcon.
               
                  
                     depiction of Niasse falcon
                  
               
               THere are three ſortes of Falcons. viz. Niaſſes, Sorehawkes, and
Hawkes, taken praying for themſelues at large, whiche our

Falconers call ramage or ſleight Falcons. And I am of opinion that they are all made after one ſort, and are manned much a like. But by mine aduice no man ſhall much aſſure himſelfe in a Niaſſe, bycauſe ouer and beſides that (for the moſt part) they proue not well, they do alſo require great paynes and attendance with extreeme pacience, to make them kill and ſtoupe a fowle well, or to flee a high pitche. Neuertheleſſe if any man will needes be doing with them, he ſhoulde firſt make a Niaſſe to the Hearon from the fiſt, I meane both the blew and redde Hearon, and to ſuche other great fowles. For as much as the
Niaſſe hawkes are naturally good ſeazers, bold, and hardy birds. And after they be well in bloud, and entered in fleeing to thoſe fowles from the fyſt, then may you make them to the Ryuer, going into ſome fayre large field, whereas there may be eyther ſome wilde Pecockes, fleſhe Crowes, or ſome other great fowle, bearing your Falcon on your fiſt: looſe hir hood in a readineſſe, drawing as neare the fowle as you can, and the firſt fowle or byrde that ſpringeth, vnhoode hir and let hir flee from the fyſt to the ſame fowle, bycauſe they may drawe your Hawke vpwardes. And when ſhe is at a greate gate, or at a reaſonable pitche, then throwe hir out a Ducke, or a Mallarde ſeeled with a feather through the nares. And if ſhee kyll it, then rewarde hir well, and feede hir vpon it wyth as muche fauour as you can deuiſe, alwayes lewring and crying to hir to comfort and encourage hir.
            
            
               Of Ramage Falcons.
               IF a falconer chaunce to recouer a Ramage Hawke which was neuer handled before, let him immediately ſeele hir, and therewithall let him euen then alſo put on hir Ieſſes, the which muſt bee of Shameuſe leather, or ſoft Calues leather, or ſuche other leather as maye bee gentle and plyaunte to hir legge. At the ende thereof it ſhall not bee amiſſe to ſette two Veiuelles of Syluer, the one thereof maye haue the armes of the King, or Queene whom you ſerue, and the other a Scutcheon of your

owne armes. For as much as when they flee out, if they chaunce to be taken vp, they may the ſooner be returned againe and reſtored to their owners, the which muſt then remember to rewarde the taker vp of his Hawke liberally. You ſhall alſo put hir on a a paire of good Belles with two propre bewets: Being thus furniſhed, you ſhall go about to man hir, handling hir often gently, and both to auoyde the ſharpneſſe of hir beake, as alſo the better to rebuke hir from byting and nipping: you ſhall haue a ſtreight ſmooth ſticke, as bigge as your finger, and halfe a foote long or more, with the which you ſhal gently ſtroke your hawke about the pinions of hir wings, and ſo downwardes thwart all hir trayne. And if ſhe chaunce to knappe or byte at the ſticke, let hir bite hardly, for that will rebuke hir thereof, whereas your hande being twitched away fearefully, would make hir proceed the more eagerly. To man hir well you muſt watche all the nighte, and keepe hir on youre fiſte: and you muſte teache hir to feede ſeeled: and hauing a greate and eaſie rufterhoode, you muſte hoode and vnhoode hir oftentymes ſeeled as ſhee is, handling hir gently about the heade, and coying hir alwayes when you vnhoode hir, to the ende ſhe take no diſdayne or diſpleaſure agaynſt hir keeper. And alſo make hir to plume and tyre ſometimes vpon a wing, and keepe hir ſo on the fiſt day and night without perching of hir, vntill ſhe be wearie, and ſuffer you to hoode hir gentely and ſtirre not: and correct hir of hir ramage toyes, eſpecially of ſnapping and byting, ſtroking hir euermore as before ſayde with your ſticke. But if it happen (as it doth ſometimes) that your chaunce be to haue a Falcon ſo ramage and ſhrewde metteld that ſhe will not leaue hir ſnapping and byting, then take a cloue of Garlike cleane pilled, or a little
Aloes Cycatrina, and when ſhe byteth or ſnappeth at your hand or ſticke, offer hir the Garlike or Aloes, and let hir bite it: for eyther the ſtrong ſent of the Garlike, or the bitter taſte of the
Aloes, will quickely make hir leaue hir biting and ſnapping.
            
            
               To vſe a Hawke to the hoode.
               IT happeneth oftentimes that Falconers haue Hawkes which come from Cyprus, Candya, Alexandria, and other farre countreyes,

the whiche hauing beene in the handes of ſuche as coulde not well ſkill of them, become coye and verye vntowarde to be hooded, and will hardly bee woonne to abyde the Hoode by any meanes. In this caſe you muſte fyrſt ſeele youre Hawke, and beeing ſeeled, you muſte fitte hir with a large eaſie Hoode: and hoode and vnhoode hir often therewith, watching hir a nighte or twoo, and handling hir oftentymes aboute the heade as before ſayde, vntyll ſhe haue forgotten that faulte. And when ſhee once doeth leaue it, you maye vnſeale hir in an Euening by Candle lighte, handling hir ſtyll ſoftly wyth your hande aboute the heade, hooding and vnhooding hir oftentymes, vntill ſhee wyll well abyde the Hoode and brooke to bee handled. And here I thinke good to expreſſe myne opinion, that hee whiche taketh in hande to bee a Falconer, ought fyrſte to bee verye pacient, and therewythall to take ſyngular delyght in an Hawke, ſo that hee may ſeeme to bee in loue (as it were naturally) with his Hawke, euen that a man would ſay, it were a thing bredde ſo in the bone as it coulde neuer bee rooted oute of the fleſhe. For ſuche a man with neuer ſo little payne and induſtrye, will become an excellent Falconer: but hee whiche taketh not that delyght in his Hawke, but doeth rather exerciſe it for a pompe and boaſt, than vppon a naturall inſtinct: or beeyng a poore manne, doeth vſe it to get hys lyuing, ſuch a man in mine opinion ſhall ſeldome proue a perfecte Falconer, but a marrehawke, and ſhall beare the bagge after a right Falconer. To turne to my purpoſe, when your Hawke beeing ſo ſeeled, doeth feede well, and will abyde the Hoode, and to bee handled, withoute ſtryking or byting at your hande: then in an Euening by Candlelyght you ſhall vnſeele hir, and wyth youre finger and a little ſpyttle, annoynte the place where the ſeeling threade was drawne thorough. And when you haue hooded hir, take hir on youre fyſte, and holde hir ſo all nyght vntyll daye appeare agayne, doyng off hir Hoode oftentymes, and handling hir gently wyth your hande, ſtrokyng hir ſoftly aboute the wyngs and the bodye, hooding and vnhooding of hir, and giuing hir ſometymes to feede, a morſell

or twayne, or ſometymes tyring or plumage. But aboue all things, you muſte watche hir on the fyſte, ſo manye nightes togither, without ſetting hir downe on anye pearche, that ſhee may bee wearie, and ſuffer you to hoode and handle hir gently without anye maner of reſiſtaunce, and vntill ſhee haue altogither left and forgotten hir ſtryking and byting at your hande: but ſome Hawkes will bee long before they leaue that fault, as the more coy or ramage that they bee, the longer they will retayne thoſe ill tatches, and will not peraduenture be woonne from them in three, foure, or fyue dayes. When ſhee is well reclaymed from it, then you maye let hir ſitte vppon a pearche to reſt hir. But euerie night you ſhall doe well to keepe hir on the fyſte three or foure houres, handling hir, and ſtrokyng hir gently, and cauſing hir to tyre or to plume, alwayes making of hir, and hooding and vnhooding hir oftentymes as before ſayde. And the lyke maye you doe alſo by daye lyghte, but in a Chamber a part, where ſhee may ſee no great light vntil ſhe feede ſurely and eagerly without dreade.
            
            
               To make your Hawke knowe your voyce.
               IF your hawke be thus in foure or fiue dayes manned, ſo that ſhe beginne to feede eagerly and boldely, then you ſhall fyrſte beginne to make hir knowe youre whiſtle, or the chirping of your mouth: and afterwardes your voyce, in this maner. Take a quicke Pullette, and goyng into ſome ſecrete place, where your Hawke maye well perceyue the fowle, and yet ſee no great open lyght, let hir plume and feede vppon it, as ſhee ſitteth vppon your fyſt: then chyrke wyth your voyce, and vſe thoſe other ſoundes which Falconers do to their Hawkes: and feed hir ſo hooding hir gently: then afterwardes you may let hir plume a little vpon ſome wing, beeing ſtill hooded, as well to looſe hir in the heade, and to make hir caſt water, as alſo to teache hir the better howe to ſitte on the fyſte. The feeding for a Falcon ſhall bee Pullettes, not verie olde, Calues heartes,

wethers harts, and hogges harts, and to giue hir a conuenient gorge, to the ende ſhe may the better diſgeſt both the groſſe ſubſtance, and the ſlimie matter. But if your Falcon be not eager or ſharpe ſet, then ſhall you do well to waſhe hir meate ſometymes in fayre water, and ſome other whiles in vrine, wringing it a little and then feeding hir therewith, for one, two, or three gorges, and that not continually: but reſpecting a day or two betweene, and that is referred to the diſcretion of the good Falconer. For this is done ſomewhat to abate a Hawke and to enſeame hir. It ſhall not be amiſſe alſo in the morning when ſhe is emptie both in the gorge and pannel, to conuey into hir a little Sugercandie, to the quantitie of a ſmall nutte, for that diſſoluing in hir, will make hir the better to endure, and will bothe breake the groſſe ſubſtaunce, and diſgeſt the glitte in hir, and alſo will make hir eager, as ſhall be further ſayd hereafter.
            
            
               How to make a hawke know hir feeding.
               WHen your Hawke feedeth eagerly, and knoweth your whiſtle and your voyce, then may you teach hir to know hir feeding, and to bate at it in this wiſe. You ſhould with your right hande ſhewe hir meate, crying and lewring to hir aloude, and if ſhee bate or ſtrike at it, then muſt you quickly and handſomely let hir foote it and feede on it for three or foure bittes: and do thus oftentimes, to the ende ſhe may the better know hir feeding. And afterwards feede hir, and giue hir euerie night (without intermiſſion) ſome caſting eyther of feathers, or of cotton, with two Cloues, ſomtimes cut in foure peeces, and put into the caſting, or a little Aloes wrapped vp in the Cotton, according as the Falconer ſhall ſee that it is requiſite. For ſuch caſtings make a Hawke cleane and eager. (∵)
            
            
               
               To make a Falcon bolde and ventrous.
               
                  
                     depiction of falcon
                  
               
               
                  WHen a Falcon hath learned to feede, and to knowe the call of hir keeper: then to make hir hardy, you ſhal ſuffer hir to plume a pullet or good great chickē. And you ſhal go into ſome cloſe place, where ſhe may not ſee ouermuch light, as before ſayde, where looſing hir hoode in a readines, you muſt haue a liue pullet in your hande, & kneling on the ground, lewring and crying alowde vnto hir, make hir plume and pul the pullet a litle. Then wt your teeth drawing the ſtrings, vnhoode hir ſoftly, ſuffring hir to plume and pluck it wt hir beake twice or thrice more, caſte out the pullet vpon the grounde before hir. Then muſt you with rayſing or holding downe your fiſte, encourage hir vntill ſhe leape downe vpon the pullet, and ſeaze it. Then when ſhe beginneth to breake it and to take bloude, you ſhal lewre & cry alowde vnto hir, and encourage hir by all the meanes yt you can, feding hir vpō the ground. And therwithal you ſhall take hir vp gently and nymbly with the pullet in hir foote, whereon lette hir plume, and feede nowe and then a little. Then hoode hir gently, and at laſte gyue hir tyring of a wing or a foote of the ſayde pullet.
            
            
               To make a Falcon knowe the lewre.
               AFter that your Falcon hath twice or thrice thus killed a pullet in ſome ſecret place, thē muſt you make hir know ye lewre in this wiſe. Faſten a pullet vnto your lewre, and go a part. Then giue your Falcon to holde vnto ſome other man, who may draw looſe ye ſtrings of hir hoode in a readineſſe. And when you are gone a little backe frō him, take your lewre at halfe ye length of ye ſtring, and caſt it about your heade once or twice, lewring with your voice alſo. Then let yt other vnhoode your hawke, whiles you throw out ye lewre not far from your hawke, lewring & crying ſtill vnto hir. And if your hawke do ſtoupe to ye lewre, & ſeaze ye pullet, ſuffer hir to plume hir, coying hir, & lewring ſtil wt your voyce. Then let hir feede on the pullet vpon the lewre, and afterwards take hir vpon your fiſte togither with hir meate, and hoode hir, ſuffring hir to plume and tyre, as is before ſayde.
            
            
               
               How to call your Falcon looſe, and at large.
               WHen your Falcon hath come well three or foure times vnto the lewre in ſome ſecrete place, as well to a lyue pullet as to a deade, then ſhall you go abroade into ſome fayre medow, where are no trees, and faſtning a quick pullet vnto ye lewre, giue your hawke to hold vnto another man. Thē tying alſo a cryance vnto your hawkes leaſe, cauſe that other which holdeth your hawke to make ready hir hoode, and giue hir a little bytte of meate on his fiſte, chirping and cheering hir wt his voyce: Euen therwithall do you go abacke foure or fiue paces or more, lewring twice or thrice, lette him whiche holdeth the hawke, do off hir hoode, then do you take the lewre at length of the ſtring, and caſt it about your heade, crying and lewring alowde, throwing it vpon ye grounde: and if your hawke ſtoupe at the pullet, ſuffer hir to breake it, and feede hir vpon ye lewre, caſting hir to eate the braines and the heart of the pullet with the lewre alſo, alwayes crying and lewring. And this order ſhall you obſerue dayly further and further off, vntill ſhee be well lewred, entred, and manned.
            
            
               How to call a Falcon, that will come looſe.
               WHen your Falcon will come a far off vnto the lewre, and ſtoupe to it being throwen out, wtout any coyneſſe or ramageneſſe, then ſetting hir ſharpe, you ſhall get on horſebacke in a morning, and go into ſome faire playne fielde, and as neare as you can, where ther is no wood nor trees, there giuing your hawke vnto ſome other man to hold (whiche muſte alſo bee on horſebacke.) Put your cryance to your hawke in ſuche wiſe, that ſhe may not tangle hir ſelfe therwith in comming to ye lewre. Thē drawing backe a little as much as you thinke meete, gyue a ſigne to him yt holdeeth ye hawke, to make ready hir hoode, & let him hold vp his fiſt on heigth. Then lewre you three or four times as lowde as you cā, alwaies caſting ye lewr about your hed, whervnto for ye firſt time I wold haue a

Pullette faſtened ſtill. And whyle you ſo do, lette him whiche holdeth your hawke, pluck of hir hoode, and if ſhe come ſtreight to the lewre, forbeare vntil ſhe come within eight or ten paces of you, then caſt it vnto hir. And if ſhe take the lewre, lette hir plume thervpon, and lewre you ſtill with your voyce, lighting of your horſe, and draw neare to your hawke fayre & ſoftely, lewring & crying vnto hir, and ſo feede hir as afore ſayd. But after that ſhe be called two or three daies to ye lewre on horſebacke with a cryance, or more or leſſe, according to ye towardneſſe or vntowardneſſe of the hawke, if ſhee come roundely a bowe ſhot from you, you may then go out in a morning, hauing ſet hir reaſonably ſharpe for the purpoſe, & cal hir looſe on horſebacke, yt is without either leaſe or cryance, but looſe, and in cōpany. And if ſhe come to you, feede hir vpon the lewre, as beforeſayde, lewring ſtill vnto hir, to make hir acquainted with your voyce. And the nexte daye you may call hir to the drye lewre, without a Pullette, or any thing vppon it. And when ſhe is come to the lewre, caſte hir out a quicke Pullette, breaking firſte the feete and legges thereof, and let hir kill it vpon the lewre, and feede hir vp.
            
            
               To make a Falcon fleeing.
               WHen your hawke will come, and ſtoupe to the lewre roundly and without any ramagenes, thē if ſhe be a haggard, you muſt put hir on a payre of great lewring bels, and the like ſhall you do alſo to a ſoarehawke. And ſo much the greater ought your bells to be, by how much more you ſee your hawke gyddyheaded, or like to rake out at cheeke. For it cā be no hurt to clogge hir wt great bells at ye firſt, vntil hir cōditions be knowen & well perceyued. That being done, & hauing alſo ſet hir ſharp, go one morning on horſeback into ſome faire large field, wtout wood or trees, if it be poſſible, and hauing your hawke vpō your fiſt, cōſider of ye wind, & ride you vp into ye winde, or towardes that way as the winde bloweth,

halfe a bowe ſhotte. And hauing looſened your hawkes hoode, whyſtle ſoftely, as it were to prouoke your hawke to flee. Whervpon ſhe will beginne to bate, or at leaſt to flappe with hir flagges and ſayles, and to aduaunce hir ſelfe vpon your fiſt. Then ſuffer hir vntil ſhe rowſe or mewte, & when ſhe hath done either of them, vnhoode hir, and let hir flee with hir heade into the winde. For therby ſhe ſhalbe the better able to get vp on wing, and to get into the winde. Then will your Falcon naturally clyme vpwardes, rouing & fleing rounde. Therfore whē you ſee that ſhe hath flowen twoo or three times, you ſhal cry and lewre with your voyce, and caſt the lewre about your heade, whervnto firſt tye a pullette, as before ſayde, and if your Falcon come in, when ſhe approcheth neare you, thē caſt out ye lewre into the wind, & if ſhe ſtoupe to it, reward hir as before.
            
            
               To make a Falcon leaue the ſtande on the grounde.
               YF your Falcon at firſte when ſhe fleeth from the fiſte, will not get vp, but take ſtande on the grounde, as the moſt part of ſoare Falcons do commonly, you ſhall not yet therefore be diſcouraged, nor out of hope, but rather making towardes hir with your horſe, & threatning of hir, ſeeme to feare with your wande, and driue hir from the ſtande, vntill ſhe flee a turne or twoo. Then take hir downe to the lewre, and feede hir. But if ſo chaunce yt your hawke will not leaue that faulte of taking the ſtande, then muſte you ſeeke to finde out ſome Choughe, Starling, or ſome ſuche birdes, making readie your hawkes hoode, drawe as neare them as you may, vntill they riſe. Then vnhoode your hawke, and no doubte if ſhe will flee them, they will trayne hir well vpwards. Then muſt you haue in a readineſſe a Ducke ſeeled, as before ſayde, and ſo as ſhe may not ſee but backewardes, bycauſe ſhee maye thereby mownte the higher And holding hir faſte by one of the wings, neare vnto the body, in your right hande, and lewring with your voyce to

make your Falcon turne the heade, forbeare tyll ſhee be at a reaſonable pitche, then running vnder hir, caſte vp your Ducke towardes hir, that ſhe may perceyue it, and that the Ducke may be to hir in ſteede of a trayne. And if ſhee ſtrike hir, or ſtoupe hir, or truſſe hir, then ſuffer hir to kill it, and rewarde hir vpon it, taking out one of hir legges, or both, if nede require, feede hir vp with a reaſonable gorge. This being done once or twice, or oftener, according to the occaſion, your hawke will leaue the ſtande, and delight to keepe hir on wing, and become alſo the more obedient and louing.
            
            
               To make the Falcon to the Ryuer.
               WHen your Falcon is accuſtomed to flee for it, and will lye vpon you at a great gate, or at a reaſonable pitche, and will come and holde in the heade at your voyce and lewring, then may you go to the Ryuer, where you ſhall finde any fowle, and there ſhall it behooue you to vſe ſuche pollicie, that you may couer the fowle, and get your hawke to a good gate, aboue the fowle. And when hir heade is in, then laye out the fowle, and cry, Hey gar, gar, gar. And if your Falcon do ſtoupe them, and enewe them once or twice, then quickly thruſt your hande in youre hawking bagge, and make hir a trayne with a Ducke ſeeled. And if your hawke do eyther truſſe or ſtoupe it, ſuccoure your hawke immediately, croſſing the Duckes wings, and lette your hawke plume. &c. I am of opinion, that for the firſte or ſeconde tyme that you ſhewe your hawke a fowle, it ſhall not bee beſte to ſhewe hir greate fowle, but rather ſmall fowle, as the Dapchicke, or ſuche like. For if you ſhewe them the greateſt fowles at the firſte, it often happeneth that they ſlyppe from the hawke vp the winde, and the hawke cannot recouer them, (but raketh out after,) whereby the Falconer is fayne to trotte farther than hee woulde, yea and ſometymes alſo hee leeſeth his hawke. Wherefore

in my iudgement it were better at the firſte to bee merry and wiſe.
            
            
               To make a hawke inwarde at the Ryuer, when ſhe raketh out.
               YF it chaunce that your hawke rake out with a fowle, and cannot recouer it, and in the ende giues it ouer, and comes in againe directly vpon the man, then ſhall you do well to caſt hir out a ſeeled Ducke. And if ſhee ſtoupe it, or truſſe it, croſſe the wings, and ſuffer hir to take hir pleſure, rewarding hir, and giuing hir the heart, braynes, tongue, and lyuer, with a legge or two, according as you ſee occaſion. And for default of a quicke Ducke, take hir downe to the drye lewre, and lette hir plume a pullette, and feede hir vpon it. Thus doing, your hawke will learne to giue ouer a fowle that rakes out, and hearing the keeper lewre, ſhee will learne the better to holde in the heade, and to make backe againe to the Ryuer.
            
            
               To make a flight for a Haggarde.
               HE that woulde make a flyght for a Haggarde, he ſhall do well in my conceyte, to flee where there bee no Crowes, Choughes, or ſuch like, for the firſt two or three flights, bicauſe ſhe ſhall take none occaſion to rake out after ſuche cheeke. And it ſhalbe good alſo, that you let hir not flee out on heade too far at the firſt, but runne after hir, and cry to hir (VVhyloe, whyloe) make hir turne heade. And when ſhe is come in, take hir down with the lewre, vnto the whiche I woulde haue a quicke pullette faſtened, as before ſayde. And you ſhall ſuffer hir to tyre, plume, and feede as before, &c. It happeneth oftentymes, yt a Haggard through hir gadding moore & gallantneſſe of minde, doth rāgle out from hir keeper, more thā vpon any other cauſe. Then ſhal you clogge hir with greater lewring bells, & make hir a traine or two wt a ducke ſeeled, to teache hir holde in, and

knowe the man. You ſhall not neede to trayne a Haggard ſo often as a Soarehawke, bycauſe they haue bene accuſtomed to praye for themſelues, and doe by experience knowe one fowle from an other. But they doe muche better remember eyther the rebukes, or cheriſhings whiche are made to them, than Soarehawkes do: and therfore it behooueth to vſe more care and heede aboute a Haggarde, than a ſoare Falcon, and aboue all things to take hir often downe with the dry lewre, and to lette hir take hir pleaſure of hir rewarde. And (as Falconers tearme it) to bee euer well in bloude. For otherwiſe ſhe will not long be at your commaundement, but make you followe hir. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to make your Falcon kill hir fowle at the firſte.
               
                  
                     depiction of falcon
                  
               
               WHen a Soare Faulcon, or a Haggard is well lewred, and flyeth a good gate, or a reaſonable pitch, and ſtoupeth

well, then ſhall you firſt caſt off a well quarried or make Hawke, and let hir ſtoupe a fowle vpon a brooke or a plaſhe, and watch hir vntill ſhe put it to the plunge: then take downe your make Hawke, and reward hir, and hood hir vp, ſetting hir a little way off by the flight, that you may vſe hir help afterwards if neede be. This being done, take your yong hawke which is not yet entred, and going vp the wind halfe a boweſhotte, or thereabouts, looſe hir hood, and ſoftly whiſtle hir off the fiſte, vntill ſhe haue rowſed or mewted, then lette hir flee with hir head into the wind, hauing firſt giuen fhew to youre company that they be in a readineſſe againſt the Hawke bee at a good gate, and to ſhewe water, and lay out the fowle. This order being obſerued, and running and crying as Falconers vſe to do, hawke on your Faulcon, and giue hir leaue to get vp, and when ſhe is at a reaſonable pitch, and couering the fowle, giue a ſigne to youre companions that they drawe neare to the water, and all at once make in vpon the fowle on all ſides the brooke (as Falconers tearme it) to land hir: then if your Falcon ſtoupe and ſtrike or truſſe it, runne in apace to help hir, and croſſing the fowles wings, let your Hawke take hir pleaſure on it, feeding hir as cuſtome is: but if ſo chaunce that ſhe cannot ſlay it at the firſte ſtouping, then you muſte giue your Hawke reſpite and time to recouer hir gate: And when ſhe is at hir gate againe, and hir head in, then lay out the fowle agayne as before ſayd, vntill you may land it at the laſt, alwayes remembring that as ſoone as ſhee ſeaze it, you ſuccour hir quickly and reward hir according to order. True it is that to be aſſured, you ſhal do well always to haue a quick Mallard or Ducke in the Hawking bagge whenſoeuer you would make a flight: and if your Hawke kill not the fowle which is ſtouped (as often hapneth by many ouerthwart chā
                  ces) then may you quickly haue recourſe to the hawking bag, and feeling your liue Ducke (your Hawke being at hir pitche and hir head in) you may throw hir vp to your Hawke, & reward hir &c. For this order ſhal alwais maintain your hawke to be inwards, and in good life, and bloud.
            
            
               
               How to do when your riuer Hawke will take ſtand in a tree.
               IF you haue a Falcon whiche (aſſoone as ſhee hathe once or twice ſtouped & endewed a fowle) wil take ſtand on a tree, you muſt aſmuche as maye bee, eſchue to flee in places where trees be, and you muſte haue two or three liue traynes, and giue them to ſundrie Falconers, placing them all of purpoſe, ſome here, ſome there: and when your Hawke hath ſtouped and woulde goe to ſtande, then lette him vnto whome the Hawke doth moſt bend, caſt out his traine ducke, ſeeled, and if the Falcon ſlay hir, then reward hir &c. And by this meanes ſhe will leaue that fault, but if in this doing twice or thrice, ſhe will not leaue that tricke, then the beſt counſell I can giue you, is to ridde your hands of ſuch a kight.
            
            
               To make a Hawke fond of the Lewre.
               WHen your Hawke is well quarried, and fleeth well to the riuer, and fleeth a great gate, or a reaſonable pitch, then ſhall you do well alſo to make hir fond of the lewre: for when a Hawke hath ſtouped once, twice or thrice, you ſhall do well to take hir downe with the lewre, and to let hir kill a Pullet and feede hir vppon it: yea the higher fleeing that a Hawke is, the more neede to take hir downe the oftner with the lewre, and to regarde that you ouerflee hir not: For if it happen that a fowle beeing often ſtouped, will not ſpring agayne, but will rather fall to diuing (which Falconers call the ploonge) then muſt you take hir with dogges, or kill hir with Hawking poles, or vſe ſome ſuch other deuiſe, and be fayne to take down your Falcon with the lewre, and giue hir ye fowle vpon the lewre, feeding and rewarding hir with aſmuch delight as you can to make hir fond of the lewre. It hapneth oftentimes, that many Falcons will hardly become fond of the lewre, through the greate deſire they haue to kill their fowle.

To helpe that, I thinke it not ſufficiente onely to keepe hir from often killing, but ſometimes you muſte alſo take the quarrey out of hir foote as ſoone as ſhe hath fedde vpon alittle of the braynes, and hood hir vp, then giuing hir vnto another to hold: go from hir a bowſhotte, and call hir to the lewre, and ſo feede and reward hir well vppon the lewre with the fowle that ſhe killed, and this order will make hir fond of the lewre.
            
            
               How to help a Hawke when ſhe is froward and coy through the pride of greaſe.
               SOmetimes a Falcon will become very prowde and diſdaynefull by being ouer high kept, in ſort that ſhe ſhall not neede to be fedde nor rewarded according as they feede when they pray of themſelues at large: and although ſhe flee and kill, yet aſſoone as ſhe hath plumed a little, let hir keeper take a ſheepes hart colde, or the legge of a Pullet, and whiles the Hawke is buſie in pluming, let the Falconer conuey the hart of the Sheepe, or the Pullets leg into ſome part of the body of the fowle, that it maye take ſome taſt of it: and when the Hawke hath eaten the braynes, hart, and tongue of the fowle, then let him take that foorth and call his Hawke with it vnto the fiſt, let him feede hir therewith, and giue hir a little of the feathers in the necke of the ſayd fowle, to ſcowre hir & make hir caſt.
            
            
               VVhen a Falcon will not hold in the head.
               IF a Falcon vſe to rake out after checke or otherwiſe, and leane out ſo farre, as neyther for whouping, lewring, or for caſting the Hawkes gloue about your head, ſhe will come in againe to the flight, but rather ſtill more and more gad out, and ſo flee away: in this caſe you muſte followe after hir,

lewring and whouping a good, proffering hir to the lewre, to make hir put in hir head againe: and if ſhe do turne and come to ye lewre, then feede and reward hir, &c. And do not faile in any wiſe to be fond of hir, when ſhee commeth to the lewre, bycauſe ſhe may therby the better learne to know your voice, & to come to the lewre another time. Holding this order (eſpecially with ſoare Hawkes or Hawkes of the firſt Cote) they will learne to holde in at the voyce or ſight of the lewre, yea and that with ſuch readineſſe as it will breede admiration in all them that behold it, to ſee the excellencie of arte, what it is able by cunning to atchieue, whiche truely dothe appeare in nothing more than in Hawking.
            
            
               How to keepe a Hawke high fleeing.
               WHen a Hawke is well made to the riuer, you ſhoulde not flee with hir aboue two flights in a morning, but feede hir vp although ſhe kill not: but if ſhe bee a ſtately high fleeing Hawke, you ſhould not in any wiſe flee hir aboue one flight in a Forenoone, for it will bring hir downe, and make hir fall off hir ſtately pitche by often fleeing, and becomming greedy and hote of the quarrey. When a good high fleeing Hawke beeing whiſtled, or caſt off the fiſte, dothe gather vpwards to a great gate, you muſt haue regard to continue hir therein, fleeing with hir vpon broade waters and open Riuers, eſchuing little brookes and gullets, and ſuch places as lie neare vnder couert, where there be trees, ſhrubbes, and buſhes, in ſuche ſort that it will be very hard to land a fowle hanſomly from them, at leaſt not without help of dogges and great clapping and a do. Yea ſometimes eake you muſt of force alight from off your Horſe, all which things are able to marre a high fleeing Hawke. For aſmuche as crying, clapping of hands, noyſe, bawling of dogges, and alighting on foote, and furthermore when a Hawke cannot ſee the water vnder hir, al theſe things do teache hir to forget hir kindly fleeing, and to

play the Kite, houering and winding as the Kite doth in the ayre, without any ſhew of ſtate: and in twice or thrice doing ſo, ſhe abateth hir gate, and marreth hir fleing. Therefore let the Falconer take good heede to that conſideration, and keepe his Hawke alwayes as high fleeing as he can, ſuffering hir but ſeldome to kill and not to ſtoupe, beyond twice or thrice at the moſt, and euen when ſhe is at the higheſt, let him take hir downe with the lewre: where when ſhe hath plumed and broken the fowle alittle, let him feede hir vp, & by that meanes he ſhall mayntayne his Falcon high fleeing, and inward, and very fond of the lewre. Here I will not denie but that if ſhee kill euery day, although ſhe ſtoupe from a very high gate, yet if ſhe be not rebuked or hurt therewith, ſhe will doubtleſſe become euery day higher fleeing thā other, mary therwithall ſhe will ſo much forget the lewre, as the more you ſhew it hir, the more ſhe will bend from it, and flee out on head, from hir keeper: and oftentimes will teach you hot poaſting iourneys. Wherefore aboue all things, the high fleeing Hawke ſhould be made inwards, and (as we tearme it) fond of the lewre, bycauſe it is no leſſe prayſe worthy in a high fleeing Falcon to make in and turne head at ye ſecond or third toſſe of the lewre, and when ſhe powreth downe like a ſtone vpon it, than if ſhe had killed: nay rather ſuche are more eſteemed than the other. And ſo is ye Falconer more prayſe worthy which doth winne his Hawke therevnto. For to come vnto the lewre is a thyng taught by art and induſtrie, but to kill a fowle is the naturall propertie of a Hawke.
            
            
               To make a high fleeing Hawke vpwards.
               IT hapneth oftentimes that a Hawke (although ſhe bee naturally high fleeing) will yet be long before ſhe be made vpwards, but will fiſhe and play the ſlugge: for when ſhe ſhould get vp to couer the fowle, ſhe will ſtoupe before the fowle bee put out, the which may proceede through two cauſes. Firſte it maye be that ſhee is too ſharpe ſette, and the ſeconde cauſe

may be that ſhe is flowen withall out of time, eyther too ſoone or too late. So that when you ſee a Falcon vſe thoſe euill tatches without apparant cauſe, you ſhall do well to caſt hir out a dead fowle or a dead Pullet for a dead quarrey (as Falconers tearme it,) and to hood hir vp without any rewarde, to the end ſhe may take none encouragemēt to vſe thoſe vile tricks: for there is no greater ſpoyle to an high fleeing Hawke, than when ſhe killeth a fowle from a baſe and lowe pitche, and ſo much the greater is the loſſe of hir by how much the more, ſhe doth vſe thoſe vile buzardly parts. Therefore by my beſt experience, I prayſe that order, to throwe hir out a dead quarrey and hood hir vp: then afterwardes within halfe an houre, call hir to the lewre, and feede hir, and do this as often as ſhe vſeth to fiſhe or to play the baſe ſlugge on that faſhion, and to find whether it proceede of being too ſharpe ſette, or of fleeing out of time, the Falconer ſhall doe well with all diligence to note the naturall diſpoſition of his Hawkes: as, whiche will flee beeing high and in good plight, and whiche beſt, when ſhe is kepte lowe, whiche will flee beſt when ſhe is ſet moſt ſharpe and eager, and whyche contrary, and whiche in a meane betweene both, whiche earely at Sunneriſing, and whiche when the Sunne is two houres high or more, whyche ſooner, and whiche later in an euening. For the natures of Falcons are very diuers and ſundrie, in ſuche ſorte as to flee with a hawke at hir beſt houre and time, and to flee with hir out of that time, is a thing which will ſhew as great difference, as betweene an excellent good Hawke and a Kight. Therefore let the Falconer haue eſpeciall regarde therevnto, ſetting hys Hawkes to flee according to their natures and diſpoſitions, and keeping them always in good order. And here it is to be noted, yt all Hawkes aſwell Sorehawkes, as mewed hawkes and haggards, ſhould be ſet out in the euening two or three houres, ſome more and ſome leſſe, hauing cōuenient regard to their nature, as it is ſtronger or weaker: and in the morning alſo, accordingly as they caſt, hooding them firſt & then ſetting

them abroade a weathering, vntill you get vp an Horſebacke to go to field, and ſo your Hawkes will always be well weathered and in good order Theſe bee the beſt meanes and obſeruations which I can ſet downe for Riuer Hawkes, whiche if it ſucceede wel to you, then ſhall you ſtande aſſured of your ſport, and I of my deſire.
            
            
               To make a Falcon to the Hearon.
               NOw to teach you to make a flight at ye Hearon: although it be the moſt nobleſt and ſtately flight that is, and pleaſant to behold, yet is there no ſuche art or induſtrie therein as in the other flights. For the Hawke fleeth the Hearon: moued by nature, as againſt hir proper foe: but to the riuer ſhe fleeth as taught by the induſtrie and diligēce of the Falconer. Then muſt it needes follow, that (ſuche Falconers as haue flowen at the Riuer, when the end of the month of February or the beginning of Marche is come, a time when Hearnes begin to make their paſſage,) if you will make thoſe Falcons to that flight, you muſt ceaſe fleeing at the Riuer with them any lō
                  ger: but you muſt pull them downe and make them light, the which you ſhall do by feeding them with no wild meates, but the harts and fleſh of Lambes, Calues, and chickens, and calling of them to the lewre with other make Falcons, that is to ſay, a caſt at once, to the end they may accuſtom and aquaint themſelues one with another, and ſo maye the better flee the Hearon by helping one another, & by ſuccouring each other. Herin you muſt take good heede ſo to acquaint them that they crabbe not togither, for ſo would they do when they come to the flight, whereby they might be in perill to be ſpoyled or killed. When your Falcons be ſkowred and cleane, ſo as beyng ſharp ſet, they may be called hungrie Hawkes, or (as Faulconers tearme thē) eagre Hawkes, you muſt get a liue Hearon, vppon the vpper part of whoſe bill or truncke you muſt conuey the ioynt of a reede or Cane, ſo as ſhee may not hurt the

hawke therewith: that being done, tie the Hearon in a Criance, then ſetting hir vpon the ground, vnhood your Hawke, to the end that when ſhe eſpieth the Hearon ſhe may flee hir: and if ſhe do ſo, make in apace to ſuccour hir, & let hir plume, & take bloud of it, allowing hir ye braynes, the marrowe of the bones with the Hart altogether: (the Italians call it Soppa.) Hauing thus layde it vpon your hawking gloue, giue it your Hauke: and afterwardes rippe the breaſt of the Hearne, & let your hauke feede theron vntill ſhe be wel gorged. This being doone, hoode hir vp, vpon the Hearon, ſuffring hir plume theron with all the fauour that may be: then take hir vpon your fiſt, and lette hir tyre a little vppon the foote or pynion of the wing. But if a Falconer haue not ſtore of Hearons to traine withall (as often as it happeneth, by meane the fowle is rare and dayntie) then may he do thus: When he hath armed or caſed the Hearons tronke with a cane or reed, as beforeſayd, he may take a pece of a Calues ſkin, or ſuch other like, as long as the neck of a Heron, & beginning at the head continuing to the ſhulders & body of the hearon, let him ſew it in proportion and ſhape of a ſheath, that it may arme the Hearons neck and head: & afterwards with a penſill, pen and inke, or ſuch other deuice, let him paint it as like as he can to the neck and head of an Heron, with fethers & euery thing to the purpoſe. Then let him ſet the counterfeat Hearon vpon the ground, as before ſaid: and when the Hauke dothe flee it and foote it, he muſte haue a quick yong Pigeon, the which he muſt hanſomly conuey vnder the Hearons wyng, and let the Hauke plume and feede theron, reſeruing the Hearon ſafe for an other tyme, and to make trayne agayne with it the nexte daye. Then hauing thervpon rewarded youre Hauke, and coyed hir ſufficiently, you maye goe the next daye into a meadowe, or other conuenient place, with your Falcon on your fyſt: and giuing the Hearon armed, as beforeſayde, to ſome other whyche maye holde it vnder his arme a good waye off from the Hawke, as halfe an Arrowe ſhoote or more: Then your Hawke beyng

vnhooded, giue ſigne vnto him to throw vp ye Hearon on high, and if your Hawke ſeaze it, reward and feede hir with a Pigeon as beforeſayd, dealing familiarly with hir, and the third day you may do agayne in like manner, cauſing hym that holdeth the trayne to hide himſelfe as cloſe as he can, and to caſt out the Hearon as farre from him as he may All theſe being done, and the Hawke hauing thus often taken hir trayne to your liking, you may the fourth day in a fayre field, put out the Hearon without Criance or arming hir at all: and when ſhe is vp of a reaſonable height, you maye caſt off your Hawke, who if ſhee binde with the Hearon and bring it downe, thē make in apace to reſkew hir, thruſting the Hearōs bill into the grounde, breake his wings and legges that the Hawke may the more eaſily foote and plume it Then reward hir as bountifully as you can with the braynes, the marrowe of the bones and the hart as is before declared (making hir the Italiā 
                  Soppa) many vſe to make a trayne another way which doth not miſlike me, and that is this: they cauſe one to climb a tree with the Hearon, and from thence he caſteth hir out to the Hawke, and then they let their Hawkes flee as before ſayde. But as touching theſe traynes, it behoueth that the Falconer be of good Iudgement, as alſo in diuers other things. For euen as the Hawke doth flee them with better or worſe liſte and life, ſo behoueth it that the traynes prouided be ſtronger or weaker accordingly. (∵)
            
            
               
               To make your Hawke flee the wilde Hearon.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               
                  WHen youre Hawke will kill a trayne luſtely and boldly, then may you go into the field to find a wild Hearon at ſiege, and whē you haue found hir, winne in as nye to hir as you can, and go with your Hawke vnder the wind, where hauing firſt looſed hir hood in a readineſſe, as ſoone as the Hearon leaueth the ſiege, off with hir hood, and let hir flee: and if ſhee climb to the Hearon, and beate hir ſo that ſhe bring hir downe, runne in apace to reſkewe hir, thruſting the Hearons bil into the ground, and breaking hir wings and legges, (as is aforeſaid) feede hir and reward hir vpon youre hawking gloue, in maner before declared. But if your hawke ſhould fayle to beate downe the Hearon, or do giue him ouer, then ſhall you flee the Hearon no more with hir, vnleſſe it bee with ſome other make Hawke, whiche is well entred and in good fleeing. And thereby the vnſkilful Hawke ſeeing that other Hawke flee at the Hearon and binde with hir, will take courage and flee eake with that other make Hawke eyther little or much, and if they kill the Hearon, then ſhould they be fedde and rewarded togither while the quarry is hote, making them an Italian Soppa as before ſayd. And by this meanes the coward Hawke may be made bold and perfect. But if it chance that any luſty royſting Hauke wil flee the Hearon of hir ſelfe without trayne, or ye Shoueler, the Falconer, ſhold let hir foote it, plume, and breake it vntill ſhe finde bloud, and ſhold giue hir the Soppa, as Falconers do tearme it, for ſo they will become much bolder and the better Hearoners alſo. But he that will worke ſurely to enter his Hawke at the Hearon, let him helpe hir by any practiſe or meanes that he can deuiſe: and theſe be the meanes and precepts to make a Falcon a good Hearoner. (∵)
            
            
               
               Of ſuch Hawkes as flee from the fiſte, and firſt of the Sacre.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk or falcon
                  
               
               YOu muſt vnderſtande that all ſortes of Falcons are made too the Lewre after one ſelfe manner, but they are

not hawked with all alike: for the Sacres, Lanners, Gerfalcons, Millions, and Merlins, do not flee the riuer, vnleſſe happely the Laners do, which as I vnderſtand do flee the riuer in Fraunce: but they flee not ſingle, but ſundry Lanners at one time, more than a caſt or a leaſſe of them at once, and ſo peraduenture do the Gerfalcon and the Million. Whereof although there be fewe in this countrey which are made or flowen withall, yet will I not ſpare to write what I haue learned of them by hereſay, beginning with the Sacre. I ſay that they are flowen withall from the fiſte, in a playne field where there are feweſt blockes, or ſtubbes, or ſuch other impedimēts, but that a man may gallop freely: men hawke with them to the Hearon, the Kight, and ſuch like, as alſo at Feaſant, Partridge, Quayle, and ſometimes at the Hare, but with more than one ſingle Hawke atonce as I ſayd before. And in Cyprus they hawke with them to the Crane with the help of the peregrine Falcon in this order: When they haue founde the Crane, the Falconer doth looſe his Hawkes hood in a readineſſe (I meane the Peregrine Falcon) and drawing as neare to the Crane as he can vnder the winde, when ſhee riſeth, hee quickly vnhoodeth his Hawke and lets hir flee, and after hir they caſt off a caſt or a leaſe of Sacres, which follow the peregrine Falcon, that leadeth them as the more weightie and valiant Hawke: and bycauſe the Crane ſtriueth not at the encounter in defence as ye Hearon doth, but always fleeth right forthwards, therefore the Peregrine Falcon doth ſeaze vppon the Crane, and buckling with hir two or three boundes, the Sacres make in and beate hir downe to the ground vntill the Falconers come in to reſkew their Hawkes, who ſpeedely thruſting the Cranes bill into the ground, do eftſoone breake hir wings and legges (as they do the Hearnes,) bycauſe they do Hawkes moſt wrong with their legges and feete: whiche being done, they reward and feede all their Hawkes vpon the Crane, making them an Italian Soppa vppon their hawking gloue, of the braynes, marrow, and the hart, but geuing the

peregrine a greater reward than the Sacres, (yet with diſcretion) they reward them all togither. Thoſe peregrine Falcons which are good for the Crane, are muche eſteemed in Cyprus of great ſtates, and ſo much the more, by how much they are more rare and paſſing in perfection. But heere amongſte vs this flight is not vſed, as well for that we haue no ſuch ordinarie ſtore of Cranes, as alſo bycauſe our fieldes are not ſo playne and free without fewell as theirs are in Cyprus. This is the order in Cyprus, but in Fraunce, the chiefe vſe of the Sacre, is to kill the Kite as I haue touched, and partly made you ſhew in the deſcription of the Sacre, in the former part of this collection. But by this ye ſee, Euery countrie hath his cuſtome. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to flee with the Lanner from the fiſte.
               
                  
                     depiction of Lanner falcon
                  
               
               
                  LAners are muche eſteemed in Fraunce, for they flee with them (a caſte or more at once) to the Ryuer alſo. And bycauſe they are hawkes (whiche mainteyne long flightes,) they tyre a fowle in ſuche ſorte, that with dogges and hawking poles they kill many, and by that meanes they ſpoyle more wt a Laner, than with a better hawke. Thus much I haue heard by credible reports. Theſe Laners are flowen withall at Partridge alſo and Feaſant, and ſome ſaye that many of them proue very good therefore. But in Italie they vſe no ſuche fleing, peraduenture bicauſe there is no greate ſkill in it. If you would flee with a Laner, you muſt keepe hir maruelous ſhort and ſharpe ſette. For they are of the ſame nature that a Sacre, and that one (in manner) is made euen as that other is: and bicauſe they keepe their eaſtings long, by reaſon they are harde metteld hawkes, you ſhall not giue them caſting of cotton, but of towe, or knottes of hempe, or the ſhauing of a Haſell wande. And if you giue them any Cotton caſting, yet put the towe or knottes of Hempe on the outſide of it, and ſo bycauſe they take ſmall pleaſure therin, they will caſt the ſooner. Let this ſuffiſe to be ſayde of theſe kindes of hawkes, bycauſe they are ordinary, & their natures too well knowen of all men.
            
            
               To hawke with the Gerfalcon and the Mylion.
               I Will ſpeake ſome few words of the Gerfalcon and the Milion, whiche are all (in manner) of one nature, as ye hawkes laſte rehearſed, and are made to the lewre in the ſelfe ſame manner. Theſe hawkes (as far as I haue vnderſtoode) do not flee the Riuer, but alwaies from the fiſt they flee the Hearons, Shouelers, and the Kight with the forked tayle, and at ſuche other flightes. In going vp to their gate, they holde not that courſe or way whiche other Falcons do. For they clyme vp vpon the trayne, when they finde any fowle, and as ſoone as they haue reached hir, they plucke hir downe, if not at the firſt,

yet at the ſecond or thirde incounter. They are fedde and rewarded as other Falcons are: they are very craftie of nature, and couet to keepe their caſtings long through ſlouth. Therefore you ſhall not giue them caſting of Cotton, but of Towe, Haſell, or harde things, as you ſhall do the Sacre & Laner. And you muſt keepe them likewiſe very eager and ſharpe ſet. It is a hawke that is flowen withall by great ſtates, & Princes moſte commonly. And therefore I will write no more of it, as one that haue no greate practiſe thereof.
            
            
               To flee with the Merlyne at the Partridge.
               YF you will flee with the Merlyne at Partridge, chuſe the female, whiche is the larger, for they onely will proue good therevnto. And in trayning or making the Iacke, you ſhould but looſe your time. When you haue made the female Merlyne to the lewre, in maner before deſcribed, and that ſhe will likewiſe abyde the hoode, you muſte make hir a trayne with a Partridge, if you can get any, if not, then with ſome other liue birde, in ſuche order as hath bene ſet downe to trayne other hawkes. And if ſhe foote and kill it, then rewarde hir, ſuffring hir to take hir pleaſure on it, &c. This being done, you may ſtrayghtwaies flee with hir the wilde Partridge: and if ſhe take it at the firſt flight (whiche ſeldome happeneth) or if ſhe flee it to marke and take it at the ſeconde flight, beeing retryued by the Spanels, feede hir vp vpon it with a reaſonable gorge, cheering hir with your voyce, in ſuch ſort, that ſhe may know the ſame. But if ſhe proue not hardie at the firſt traine, then you ſhall do wel to proue hir with another traine, before you flee with hir at the wilde game. But if at the ſeconde trayne ſhe proue not hardie, it is a token that ſhee is cowardly, and nothing woorth. (∵)
            
            
               
               To flee with the Merlyne at the Larke and Lenet.
               
                  
                     depiction of merlin falcon
                  
               
               
                  I Like it well that men flee with a caſte of Merlynes at once at the Larke or ye Lenet. For ouer and beſides that they of themſelues loue companie, and to flee togither, they do alſo giue greater pleaſure or delyght to the lookers on. For nowe

that one (at the ſtouping) ſtrikes the birde, and then that other at hir downe come: and when that one clymeth to the mowntie aboue the Larke, then that other lyeth lowe for hir beſte aduauntage, whiche is moſte delectable to beholde. Yea and ſometimes the poore birdes becomme ſo fearefull, that they ſhrowde themſelues in the houſes & chambers of ſuche as dwell neare the fieldes. So that both the birde and the hawke are oftentimes takē both togither by the countryman. And therfore it ſhall not be amiſſe to tye vnto their Ieſſes or Bewets ſome vervile, bearing the armes of their owner & maſter (as if they were Falcons) to the ende they may be reſtored vnto thē. But to returne to my purpoſe, I ſaye that when the Merlynes are throughly manned, and made gentle, you may cary them into the fielde, where hauing founde a Larke or a Lenet, (making looſe hir hoode) you muſt go as neare as you can into ye winde to the birde. And as ſoone as the birde riſeth from the grounde, vnhoode your caſt of Merlines, and caſt them to flee vntil they haue beaten downe the Larke or Lenet, and let them feede on hir for their labour indifferently. But heerewithall note that there is a kinde of Larkes, (called cutte Larkes) whiche do not mounte as the long ſpurde fielde Larke doeth, but flee forheade before the Merlyn. In any caſe let them not flee ſuch Larkes, for neither will they make you like paſtime, nor yet cā you flee them without daunger of leeſing your Merlynes.
            
            
               Of the time to mewe a Falcon.
               LEtte vs now ſpeake of the order howe to mewe hawkes, and of the Mewes. Firſte to ſpeake of Falcons, they maye bee flowen withall vntill Sainct Georges daye, that is aboute the myddeſt of Aprill. Then ſette them downe. And you muſte diligently marke, whyther they haue any lyſe or not. And if they haue, pepper them to kyll the ſayde lyſe, and ſkowre them before you caſte them into the mewe. That beeing done, you may put them into the mewe. There

are two ſundrie ſortes of mewing, that is to ſaye, mewing looſe at large, or at the Stocke: and I will firſte ſpeake of this laſte kinde of mewing.
            
            
               Of mewing at the Stocke, or the Stone.
               THe place wherein you ſhoulde mew a hawke at the ſtocke, ſhould be a lowe parler or chamber vpon the grounde, farre from any noyſe or concourſe of people, and ſituate towarde the North or Northeaſt. Place therein a table of a conuenient length, for the number of your Falcons, and let it bee fiue or ſixe foote broade at the leaſte, with little thinne bordes or planckes all alongſt the ſides and endes, nayled on foure fingers high. And lette this table be ſette on treſtles of twoo foote high, or three foote high from the grounde, and fill theſe tables with greate Sande whiche hath pretie little rounde pebble & grauell ſtones in it: in middeſt whereof you may place ſome greate free ſtones a Cubite high, made like vnto a piller, flatte in the bottom, and playne & ſmooth aboue, growing by peccemeale leſſe and leſſe vnto the toppe of them. Wherevnto lette your hawkes be tyed, eyther Falcon, Gerfalcon, Myllion, or Merlyne. Then take a ſmall corde of the bigneſſe of a bowſtring, or little more, put it through a ring, and binde it about the ſtone, in ſuche ſorte that the ring or ſwyvle may go rounde about the ſtone, without any ſtoppe or lette: And thervnto tye the leaſe of a Falcon, which may ſo ſtand vpon the ſayd ſtone being ſette in the ſande. But you muſte haue regard, that (if you mewe moe Falcons than one at once in one roome) you ſette your ſtones one ſo farre from another, that when your hawkes bate, they maye not reache one another for crabbing. The greate ſtones are ſet, for that a Falcon feeling the freſhneſſe and coolenes of the ſtone, will delight to ſitte ſtill vpō it, & the little grauel ſtones are, bycauſe a hawke will oftētymes ſwallow them to coole hir within, and will keepe them ſome

times twoo or three houres, or more within hir. The ſand alſo is neceſſary, bicauſe when they bate, they ſhall not marre their feathers, and alſo bicauſe thereby their mewtes are the eaſſier cleanſed, and to bee remoued from them. The little corde or bende with the ring on it, are tyed about the ſtone, bicauſe the Falcon bating this way and that way, ſhe ſhall neuer twinde nor tangle, bicauſe the ring followeth hir ſtill. All daye your Falcons ſhoulde bee hooded vpon the ſtone, vnleſſe it be when they would feede, for then only you muſt take them on ye fiſte, vntill they haue fedde. At night off with their hoodes, and bicauſe ſomtimes inconueniences do happen by night, the Falconer may do well to haue his bedde in the mewe, that he may the ſooner and in tyme helpe or redreſſe any thing that ſhall happen amiſſe amongſt his hawkes.
            
            
               Of mewing at large.
               IF you woulde mewe your Falcon at libertie and at large, then muſt you mew but one at once in one roome, and yet if the circuite of your mewe be greate & capable inough, there may two, three, or four Falcons be mewed therin wel inough (with diuiſions.) The ſcope for one Falcon muſte bee twelue foote ſquare, & as muche in height, or thereabout, wt twoo windowes a foote and halfe broade, or two foote broade at the moſt. Wherof that one ſhould open towardes the North, wherby ye mewe may alwaies receyue freſhe colde ayre, and ye other towards the Eaſt, for ye heate and cōfort of the Sunne. And eche of theſe windowes ſhould haue his cloſe caſementes on ye out ſide, to ſhut when you liſt, either one or both of them, according as occaſion ſerueth. If your hawke be a madbraine Kite, & a great bater, then ſhould it be beſte that this mewe or chamber were on ye grounde, which if be ſo, you muſt couer the grounde with groſſe ſande foure fingers thicke, and therevpon ſette a ſtone in ſuche ſort as before ſayde, bicauſe Falcons do couet to ſtande vpon a ſtone. And therwithall you muſt make hir twoo handſome perches, neare to eache windowe one, that ſitting on

that one, ſhee maye haue the comforte of the Sunne, and on that other, the freſhe of the coole ayre, and euery weeke, or at leaſte euery fortnyght, you muſte ſette hir a latten baſon, or a veſſel of ſton or eartheo, and at euening fyll it with water, that your hawke may to the water, if ſhee deſire it. And if ſhee doe bathe therein, then take it awaye the nyghte following, and haue regarde that your baſon, panne, or ſuche other veſſell bee of ſuche byggeneſſe and depth, that a hawke may therein commodiouſly bathe at eaſe. Your mewe muſte alſo haue a Portall, wherein there may be a little hole bilowe to conuey in the deuiſe whereon their meate is ſerued, called amongſt Falconers, the Hacke. And that muſte bee made on this faſhion. Take a peece of thicke boorde, a foote and halfe long, and a foote broade, or thereaboutes, vnder the whiche faſten twoo little treſtles three or foure fingers hyghe. Lette them bee faſte pynned or nayled to. Then with an awger or a pearcer, boare twoo holes one eche ſide thereof, and through eche of theſe putte a ſhorte corde of the byggeneſſe of a boweſtring, with the endes downewarde, through the holes and knottes faſte knitte on them vnder the button of the borde, ſo ſtrayghte knytte, that you cannot rayſe the corde aboue the boorde more than a fingers breadth, or theraboutes. And when you would giue your hawkes meate, take a little ſticke ſomewhat longer than the Hacke, and as bigge as your finger, but let it be of ſtrong woodde, as Crabtree, Holly, or ſuch like. And vpon that ſticke binde your hawkes meate, & put the endes of ye ſticke vnder the cordes, vpon the Hacke, & ſo conuey it into the mewe to your hawkes, bicauſe ye hawke ſhall not truſſe or dragge hir meate away into ye mew, but may feede there. And aſſoone as ſhe hath gorged hir & fed, take it away againe. And it is to be vnderſtood, yt if you mew more thā one hauke ſingle, then muſt you haue for euery hauke hir ſeuerall Hacke. And it ſhalbe good to kepe one ſet hour in feeding your hawke, for ſo ſhal they mew ſooner & better: & thus may you mewe hawkes (looſe & at large.) But vnleſſe it be a Falcon which is ſo hotte

and madbrayned, that you are forced to mewe hir ſo at large. In mine opinion it ſhall be better to mewe at the Stocke or Stone, as before ſayde, or elſe to mewe them at the Grate (as we call it.) For in that kinde of mewing we take our hawkes on the fiſte euery day, and ſo may ſee in what plight and ſtate they be. And if they be ſicke, or fallen into any infirmitie, then may you giue them ſuche medicines as ſhall be declared in the next diuiſion, the whiche cannot be done when you mewe at large. And therefore I commende the mewing at the Grate, bicauſe many times our happe is to haue Haggardes, or Paſſengers, or Lentrers, the which haue flowen either to the Riuer, or prayed for themſelues. So that it ſhall be needefull to beare them often and euery morning in the coole ayre, vntyll midde Iulie, or more, or leſſe, according as you ſhall ſee them ramage and coy, yea and to call them to the lewre, and to ride abroade with them alſo ſometimes an houre or twoo, in the freſhe ayre. And it ſhall be a thing moſte neceſſarie for a haggarde or a hawke that hath prayed for hir ſelfe, eyther more or leſſe. This I haue obſerued in mine owne experience, and me thinkes it an aduertiſement woorthy the noting vnto all Falconers. Sundry Gentlemen do vſe to mewe their hawkes on the pearche, whiche truely I can moſte commende, as well for that they are then aſſured to be cleane fedde, as alſo to be dayly peruſed for liſe, wormes, and other diſeaſes, whereto they are by nature ſubiect. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to mew Marlins.
               
                  
                     depiction of merlin falcon
                  
               
               MArlins are alſo woorth the mewyng, if they bee hardie, and haue flowen well in theyr ſoreage. For although ſome men bee of opinion, that a mewed Marline is ſeldome good, and that they are not poſſible to be mewed: yet haue I had Marlins that (being good in their ſoreage) haue proued much better when

they were mewed. So that I would wiſh him that hath a good Marlyn, to mew hir: for ſurely if you can mew them, they will proue better and better. Some men in the mew doe vſe to caſt meale about their Marlyns, bycauſe they ſhoulde not eate theyr feete: but aſwel bycauſe they may eate theyr feete howſoeuer they were mewed, if that were their propertie: as alſo bycauſe in thoſe that I haue mewed, I haue found no ſuch cruelty vſed towards themſelues: therefore I count it but a fable, nor will giue any other rules in the matter, than ſuch as I haue preſcribed alreadie for the mewing of Falcons, and ſuch like long winged hawkes.
            
            
               Of Goſhawkes.
               YOu ſhall not neede to ſhew any other game to a Goſhawke for hir firſt entring, than a Partridge, bycauſe in learning to flee the Partridge they proue moſt excellent. And the firſt yeare you ſhall doe beſt to flee them to the fielde, and not to the couert, for ſo will they learne to holde out, (and not to turne tayle) in the middeſt of their flight. And when they be mewed Hawkes, you may make them do what you will: and vnderſtande you, that you ſhall not neede to take ſuch paine, nor to vſe ſuch arte in making of a Goſhawke which is taken a brauncher, as wyth a
Nyaſſe, for ſhe will alwayes knowe of hir ſelfe what to do. Yea and it ſhall be rather better to let hir bee a little rammage ſtill, than to man hir ouer much. Hir feeding woulde be good and hote meates. And if you would inſtruct hir to kill great fowles, make hir traynes thereof, as I haue ſhewed in the treatie of Falcons. And if you would haue hir continue at thoſe flightes, then you muſt not let hir flee any leſſer fowles, for that would quickly marre hir. If you woulde make hir to flee with a Spanell or Dogge to helpe and aſſiſte hir, then feede your Goſhawke with great fowles, as Cranes, Wildegeeſe, and ſuch like, and giue your Dogge fleſhe tyed vnder the wings of ſuche fowles, when you trayne your Hawke with them, and let your Dogge be rewarded with the ſayd fleſhe, when you reward your hawke vpon the traine: and alwayes acquaint the Dog and the Hawke

well togither. And this order you ſhall obſerue for a month, or vntill your dogge will throughly knowe his dutie. And euermore keepe your dogge tyed vp: for if you let him go looſe, it wil marre him if he were the beſt that euer was. And neuer giue him rewarde of fleſh, but when he maketh in at ſuch fowles to reſcue the Hawke. Call your Goſhawke to none other thing than to your fiſt. Yet ſometymes you may take hir downe with a dead Pullet, or ſuch like. And oftentymes ſpowte good wine vppon your Hawkes Seare, obſeruing the order to ſet hir to the water, as is before rehearſed in the treatiſe of Falcons. Euermore note that a Goſhawke (for that ſhe is dainty) would be cured with ſweete things miniſtred in all ſuche receytes as you ſhall giue hir. (∵)
            
            
               
               To make fleeing the Goſhawke, either Niaſſe or Ramage.
               
                  
                     depiction of goshawk
                  
               
               YOu ſhall firſte obſerue manye things alreadie written of other kindes of Hawkes: as to ſeele and watch your hawke,

winne hir to feede, to the hoode, and to the fyſt, and diuerſe other ſuch points which ſhould be but tedious to rehearſe. Therfore let me write of the order howe to make a flight with a Goſhawke, eyther Niaſſe or Ramage, the whiche is very harde to doe well. And for my part I woulde not counſell any man to trouble himſelfe much with them. But if any man haue a Niaſſe or Ramage Goſhawke, whereof he woulde ſee the proofe, let him man hir, and make hir to the fiſt: then let him enter hir firſt to yong Partridges, vntill it be Nouember. In which tyme the fieldes are rydde cleane, and become emptie, and the trees bare of leaues: then may you enter hir to the olde Rewen, ſetting hir ſhort and eager. And if ſhee kill at firſt, or ſeconde flight, feede hir vp for three or foure tymes with the Partridge whiche ſhee hath killed: by that meanes I haue ſeene ſome of them come to good perfection.
            
            
               To make the Sore Goſhawke or the Haggard Goſhawke.
               YOur Sore Goſhawkes, or your Haggardes, ſhall be trimmed with Ieſſes, Bewets and Belles, as ſoone as they come to your handes: and you ſhall by all meanes make them abyde the hoode well, the which will be beſt brought to paſſe, keeping them ſeeled, and hooding and vnhooding them oftentymes, and teaching them to feede on the fyſt three or foure dayes, more or leſſe vntill they leaue theyr ramageneſſe and coyneſſe, and become gentle: that being done, vnſeele them at night by candlelight, cauſing them to plume or tyre vpon a wing or legge of a Pullet, and vſe your Hawkes gently, and deale the beſt wyth them that you can deuiſe, vntill you haue throughly manned and woonne them, and that in ſecrete places where they may not ſee much light, ſetting them vpon a Pearche, and vſing all diligence to make them iumpe to the fiſt by little and little, vntill at laſt they will come three or foure yeardes from you, and feeding them moſt with the legges of Pullets or Calues hearts: then you may go into a Garden, or into a Cloſe abrode, and cauſing

them to feede firſt a bit or two vpon your fiſt, with their hoodes on, and afterwards aſmuch with their hoodes off, caſt them down fayre and ſoftly to ſome Pearche, and make them come from it to your fiſt eyther much or little, with calling and chirping to them, ſaying: Towe, Towe, or Stowe, Stowe, as Falconers vſe, and when they come feed them, crying and calling ſtill to make them acquainted with your voyce. The next day you may call them with a Cryance, ſetting them vpon a Pearche vntill they come vnto you further off, feeding and rewarding them liberally to make them loue you. And when they come to the fiſt redily and without checking or ramageneſſe, then lay a little from you a dead Pullet vpon the ground, the hawke ſitting vpon the Perch, and calling and chirping to hir, if ſhe come and ſeaze the Pullet, let hir plume hir and feede a bit or two thereon, walking aboute hir vntill you may without daunger or mouing of hir, come neare and take hir vpon your fiſt, and ſo feede hir: That beeing done, let hir tyre and plume. Here I muſt aduertiſe you that the wing of a Pullet colde, is not good feeding for a Hawke: for it will make a Hawke ſicke: But the legges eyther hote or colde may be giuen. And likewiſe you ſhall marke that I would haue you caſt out a Pullet to a Goſhawke deade and not aliue: for theſe kinde of Hawkes are much enclyned of nature to play the Poulters. So that if you ſhould vſe to throw thē out liue poultrie, it might make them ſometymes when they flee turne tayle to the Partridge, and ſeaze the Pullets or Chickens which they ſhall ſee in huſbandmens yardes and backſydes when they flee. Or in lyke maner when they are ſet to bathe at length of theyr loynes, the which would not onely marre them, and make them full of ill properties, but alſo might cauſe the ignorant people (as women and boyes) to kill them in ſteade of a Puttocke. When you haue thus called your Goſhawke abrode two or three dayes vntill ſhe be well cunning, you ſhall take hir on your fiſt, and get vp on horſebacke with hir, and ſo ryding with hir the ſpace of an houre or there aboutes, vnhoode and hoode hir ſometymes, and giue hir a bitte or two of meate in the preſence and ſight of your Spaniels, bicauſe ſhee ſhall not be afearde of them. That

being done, ſet hir on a tree with a little ſhort Cryance tyed to hir loynes, and going ſeuen or eight yeardes from hir on horſebacke, call hir to your fiſt with ſuch voyce and wordes, as Falconers vſe: and if ſhe come, giue hir two or three bittes for rewarde, and caſt hir vp againe to the tree, then throw out the dead Pullet eight or ten yeardes from hir. If ſhe flee to it and ſeaze it, let hir feed three or foure bittes vpon it, ryding the meane while about hir on horſebacke, and rating backe your Spaniels, bycauſe they ſhall not rebuke hir at firſt, and ſo make hir euer after fearefull of dogges. Then alight off your horſe, gently take hir vpon your fyſt, feede hir, and when you haue ſo done, hoode hir and let hir plume or tyre. Here I will ſay for mine owne opinion, that a deade Partridge, or a counterfeyte Partridge, made with the verie plumage, wings and tayle of a Partridge, were much better to throwe out vnto your Goſhawke, bycauſe it woulde make hir both know Partridge the better, and poultrie the leſſe.
            
            
               
               To make a Goſhawke flee to the Partridge.
               
                  
                     depiction of goshawk
                  
               
               WHen your Goſhawke is thus manned and cunning, then may you go into the fielde with hir, carying with you a

trayne Partridge if need be: and vnhooding your Hawke, beare hir as quietly as you can: you may lette hir plume or tyre a little to make hir eagre. And if the Partridge ſpring let hir flee: if ſhe marke one or two or more on the ground, then go to hir faire and ſoftly, and manacing hir with your hande, or with a wande, cauſe hir to take Pearche on ſome tree thereby. Then if you can retryue the Partridge with your Spaniels, as ſoone as it ſpringeth, you muſt crie Howit, Howit: and if ſhe flee it to the marke agayne, you muſt put hir to a tree, and retryue it the ſecond time, crying when it ſpringeth as before ſayde And if ſhee kill it, feed hir vp with it: but if ſo chaunce that the Spaniels ſhould take it, as oftentymes hote Spaniels light vpon the Partridge, being eyther flowen out of breath, or otherwiſe ſurcharged with feare: then alight from your Horſe quickly, and taking it from the Spaniell, caſt it out to your Hawke crying, (ware Hawke ware) and let hir feed hir fill on it. The next day you ſhall not flee with hir, bycauſe hauing fed and rewarded hir with bloudie meat, ſhe will not ſo ſoone be in good caſe to flee againe. For ſuch meate is not ſo eaſily indewed by a Hawke, as the legge of a Chicken or ſuch like. Vſing hir thus three or foure tymes, ſhe will be well in bloud, and become well fleeing at this pleaſant field flight.
            
            
               Howe to helpe a Hawke that turneth tayle to tayle, and giueth ouer hir game.
               IT happeneth oftentymes, that when you haue let your Goſhawke flee at a Partridge, ſhe will neyther kill it, nor flee it ot marke, but turneth tayle to tayle, as Falconers terme it: that is when ſhe hath flowen it a bowſhot or more, ſhe giueth it ouer, and takes a tree. Then ſhall you call in your Spaniels to the retryfe, that way that your Hawke flewe the Partridge. And the Falconer drawing himſelfe that way, may caſt hir oute a quicke Partridge which he ſhall carie for ſuche purpoſes in hys Hawking bagge, in ſuche ſort as the Hawke may ſee it, and thinke that it is the ſame whiche ſhe flewe. And ſo crying when

you caſt it out, ware Hawke ware, make hir ſeaze it and feede hir vpon it, that ſhe may be encouraged thereby to flee out with a Partridge. The day following you ſhall not flee with hir, as is before ſayde, but prepare hir agaynſt the thirde day and ſet hir ſharpe: and if then alſo your Goſhawke giue ouer, ſerue hir with a quicke Partridge againe. But if ſhee doe it the thirde tyme, I woulde not wiſhe you to trouble your ſelfe anye longer with ſuche a vile Buzarde, but ridde your handes of hir, for ſure it is great oddes that ſhee will neuer proue good. And yet if anye man wyll trye his Hawke to the vttermoſte, then let him make hir flee a Partridge whiche is flowne to the marke wyth ſome other well entered Hawke, at the firſt or ſeconde flight. And if ſhe kill that, let him feede and rewarde hir well, vſing hir to ſuch flightes three or foure tymes, and ſo peraduenture ſhee may learne to holde out, and mainteine hir flight the better.
            
            
               When a Goſhawke will not flee at all.
               FOraſmuch as the Goſhawkes which are taken in September, or October, do not know their pray ſo well as they which are taken later, ſince they haue not prayed ſo long as thoſe olde, it happeneth many tymes that when they are made to the firſt, and brought euen to the poynt to flee, if you let them flee at a Partridge, they take a tree and will not flee at all. To redreſſe that, you ſhall go into a plaine fielde where are no trees, with a quicke Partridge, the which you ſhal giue to ſome of your companie, your ſelfe ſhall ryde vp and downe halfe an houre with your hawke vpon your fiſt vnhooded: and then drawing neare to your cōpanion which hath the Partridge, when you come within ten or twelue paces of him, let him priuily caſt out the Partridge, and let your Hawke flee at it: which done, rewarde and feed hir well therevpon. If peraduenture your Goſhawke haue need of more ſuch traynes, then you may cōtinue it three or foure tymes, vntill ſhe be well in bloud with ſuch flightes. But ſurely

ſuch Hawkes are not greatly to be regarded. The ſame that is ſayde of Goſhawkes, is to be vnderſtoode alſo of Tercels. And alwayes remember that the next day after you haue rewarded and fedde your Hawke vpon the fowle or byrde that ſhe killeth, feede hir the nexte daye with ſheepes harte, or Hennes legges betymes in the morning, to bring hir in order agayne to flee.
            
            
               To make a Goſhawke flee quickly.
               SOre Goſhawkes (eſpecially Niaſſes) are commonly verye fonde of the man, and therefore ſhoulde bee flowne with a little more ramage, and before they bee throughly reclaymed, for elſe oftentymes wythin two or three ſtrokes with theyr wings, they will giue ouer the fowle that they flee, and returne ſtreight agayne to theyr keeper. Therefore remember to flee with them aſſoone as you can, and that vntill they be perfectlye nouſled and in bloud. They muſt alſo bee ſet in places where they ſee not manye folke, for feare they become verye fonde of the manne: But when they haue flowne, and haue killed twice or thrice, then ſet them where people and Dogges frequent, the whiche ſhall bee neceſſarie, to preuent the inconuenience whiche might happen, when they are at marke neare to a houſe, or vpon a high way, if then they ſhoulde bee diſcouraged wyth ſodayne ſight of any perſone that went by. And yet by this aduertiſement of fleeyng quickly with a Sore Goſhawke or a Niaſſe, I might make ſome Falconer learne a woorſe miſchiefe, if by fleeing ouer ſoone with his Hawke, hee ſhoulde pull hir downe, or make hir poore, the whiche woulde cauſe hir to become fearefull and cowardlye, and to giue ouer a Partridge, as I haue ſeene dyuerſe, that although they were at the fyrſte verye towarde Hawkes, yet after they haue beene once pulled downe, they haue loſte theyr courage and goodneſſe. And therefore by what meanes ſoeuer a Goſhawke or Tercell ſhall become poore, it ſhall bee the Falconers parte fyrſte to ſette hir vppe agayne,

before he flee with hir, vnleſſe it bee ſome Goſhawke (whereof there are but fewe) which will not flee when ſhee is hie, and in good plight. Then the Falconer may ſomewhat bate hir fleſhe, and pinche hir with ſcouring, waſht meate and ſuch like deuiſes: But let him alwayes rather keepe his Hawke in ſuch wiſe, that ſhee may flee when ſhe is luſtie: and therewithall let him ſet hir abroade (when it is not ouer colde) betymes in the morning for one houre or twaine. For beeing ſo weathered, when ſhee hath flowne a Partridge to the marke, ſhe will not away, vntill it be retryued by the Spaniels.
            
            
               That a Goſhawke being a good Partridger, be not flowen with to the Feaſant.
               IF your Goſhawke be once a good Partridger, beware that you let hir not flee the Poute, or the Feaſant, for the Feaſant fleeth not ſo long a flight as the Partridge doth. And therefore the Goſhawke being naturally more rauenous and deſirous of pray than any other Hawke, woulde more delight to flee a ſhort flight to the Feaſant, and will care leſſe to holde out at a Partridge. True it is that ſome are good for both, but thoſe are verie rare: And therefore you muſt haue conſideration thereof, as alſo to keepe them in good order with fleeing, bathing, weathering, tyring, pluming, and dyuerſe other poynts of Falconrie, the which do ſerue alſo for Tercels aſwell as for Goſhawkes.
            
            
               How to vſe a haggard Goſhawke.
               THe traynes whiche you vſe to giue Sore Goſhawkes and
Niaſſes, are not ſo requiſite for a haggarde. For the Sorehawkes and Niaſſes when they are made to the fiſt, and to ſeaze a Pullet vpon the grounde, will then abyde and neuer ſore away, and may immediately be flowen withall at a Partridge, ſo that you beare a liue traine Partridge with you to ſerue hir if neede be, as hath bene heretofore declared in entering of other hawkes.

And the principall poynt of conſideration is, that you encourage any Hawke well at the firſt. In fleeing with a Goſhawke, it happeneth oftentymes that fleeing in the Snowe, and killing their pray vpon the grounde, they fill their Belles with Snowe, ſo that the Falconer cannot tell where to finde them. At ſuche tymes then, faſten a Bell vpon the two couert feathers of your Hawkes Stearne or Trayne, and that aloft neare to hir rumpe. For ſo doe the Falconers of Dalmatia vſe at all times of the yeare to flee with their Hawkes. And it is a good meane to know at all times where, and what is become of your Hawke.
            
            
               
               To flee with a Goſhawke to the Riuer.
               
                  
                     depiction of goshawk
                  
               
               NOwe I haue (in mine owne iudgement) ſet downe as muche as is neceſſarie, to make a Goſhawke perfect in

killing of a Partridge or any other fielde flight: I will alſo declare howe you maye flee to the Ryuer with a Goſhawke, and howe you may kill greate fowles wyth hir. A Goſhawke (but no Tercell) may flee to the Ryuer at Mallacde, Ducke, Gooſe, Hearon, and ſuche lyke, whether it bee bycauſe ſhe proueth not to the fielde, or for any other delight that ſhee or hir keeper hath to the Ryuer. And you ſhal holde this order in making hir, the which doubtleſſe ſhall bring hir to perfection: For Goſhawkes do more willingly flee ſuche flightes than at any other. And yet is there great difference ſeene in the proofe of them: for ſome of them proue muche hardyer and better than ſome other doe. Well, the Falconer ſhall fyrſt make his Goſhawke to the fiſt, in ſuche ſorte as I haue preſcribed, when I taughte to flee them vnto the fielde. Then muſte hee carrie hir into the fielde wythoute Belles, with a liue Ducke gyuen vnto one of his Companions. And the Falconer muſte haue with him a little Drumme or Taberde faſtened to the Pommell of his Saddle, togither with the ſinewe of an Oxe legge dryed, whiche ſhall ſerue him to ſtrike vppon his Drumſelet or Taberde: and cauſing his Companion to hide himſelfe in a ditche,There hath bene vſed a kind of flight with a Goſhawke, called the flight made to the becke, and it is like to this, but it is much ſurer and better. or pitte, with the Ducke tyed to a Cryaunce, his Hawke beyng vnhooded vppon his fyſt, hee ſhall drawe towardes his companion whiche ſtandeth ſo hidde in couert. And when hee is neare him within two or three paces, or little more, hee ſhall ſtrike vppon his Tabarde twice or thrice: and his Companion hearing him, ſhall throwe out the Ducke aloft. And let the Falconer caſt off his Goſhawke to it, and if ſhee take it at the Sowrce, let him rewarde hir and feede hir with a reaſonable gorge, making hir all the cheare that may be: then let him take hir vpon his fyſt and hoode hir, ſuffering hir to plume or to tyre vppon a wing or a legge of the Ducke. The next day he ſhall not flee with hir, as before I haue admoniſhed. But the thirde day hee may go againe in lyke maner with hys Companion, or elſe maye ſeeke ſome water paſhet or pitte where wyldefowle lye, as Teales or ſuche lyke. Prouided alwayes that hee ſeeke the aduauntage of his flighte, where the Banckes bee

high: For the higher that the bankes be, the better he may come to make his flight: and in ſuche a place, he and his Companion, one on the one ſyde, that other on the other, maye ryde fayre and ſoftly vntill they finde fowle, and yet put them not vppe. When they haue founde them, bothe of them ſhall drawe backe along by the Bancke, and the Hawke beeing vnhooded, they ſhall trotte bothe of them ryght vppon the fowle with theyr Horſes. When they bee neare them, hee whiche hathe the Tabarde ſhall beate it, ſo that the Fowle maye ryſe, and then hee maye lette flee hys Hawke: and if ſhee take anye of them at Sowrce, let him make in to hir a pace, and croſſe the Fowles winges, ſo that ſhee maye foote it and plume it at hir pleaſure, rewarding hir as before .&c. And the better to encourage hir when hee hathe hooded hir, let him ſette hir vppon the Fowle, and let hir plume it hir fyll, and after let him take hir on his fiſt, and giue hir a wing or a legge of the Fowle to tyre on: And the next day let him not flee .&c. And when hys Hawke is throughly nouſled and in bloude, then hee maye flee twice in a day or oftner with hir, rewarding hir as before is expreſſed. Vſing his Hawke thus, hee ſhall ſo well encourage hir, that hee maye flee the oftener wyth hir at hys pleaſure.
            
            
               Of fleeing the Wildegooſe and Crane with a Goſhauke.
               SOme delight to flee Wildegeeſe and Cranes with a Goſhawke, and ſuch other great flightes. And the traine muſt bee made in this wiſe: When the hawke is made to the fiſt as before ſayde, let him go on foote abroade into the fielde with his Goſhawke on his fiſt, carying with him a Wildegooſe, or a tame Gooſe of the colour of a Wildegooſe, tyed by the tayle with a Cryaunce. And hauing ſette hir on the grounde eyght or tenne Paces from him, lette hym vnhoode the Hawke, and twitche the Gooſe wyth the Cryaunce vntyll hee, make

it ſtirre and flicker with the wings. Then if his Goſhawke bate at it, caſte hir off, and runne in to ſuccour hir, ſo that the Gooſe beate hir not with hir wings, for diſcouraging hir. And if hee haue ſtore of traynes, then he ſhall rewarde and feede hir on the braynes, hearte, and thyghe of that whiche hee trayned withall. But if hee haue no ſtore, then it ſhall bee needefull to ſaue that for another trayne. This done, lette him cloſely conuey a Pygeon vnder the wing of the trayne, and rewarde his hawke therewith, as hathe beene heeretofore declared in the traynes to the Hearon. And the nexte daye lette hir not flee, but ſette hir downe, &c. The thirde day he may giue hir another trayne, ſomewhat further off. And the thirde trayne he ſhall gyue it hir on horſebacke, fiftie or three ſcore paces off at the leaſte, or ſo farre off as hee maye come in to ſuccoure his hawke in tyme. His hawke beeing thus trayned and entred, he may ride out with his hawke (without belles, bicauſe the Geeſe ſhall not ryſe before the Falconer haue broughte his hawke to the vauntage) then with his Tabard to beate it vp, & ſo forth, whereof I haue tolde before. And hauing founde any wilde geeſe, he ſhall ſhewe them to his hawke, who being naturally mooued, will make from the fiſte to them, and will flee lowe by the grounde, vntill ſhe come neare them. Then the Falconer ſhall ryde after apace, and ſtrike vpon his Tabarde, vntill hee rayſe the Wildegeeſe. And if his hawke ſeaze any of them at Source, hee ſhall quickely ſuccoure hir, and rewarde hir, &c. But for as muche as Wildegeeſe will riſe as ſoone as they ſee any bodie. Therefore the Falconer muſte teache his hawke to take the aduauntage, whiche is thus done: As ſoone as hee hath founde them a farre off, lette him alyghte from his horſe, and carrye his hawke vnhooded behinde his horſe, ſtawking towardes them, vntill he haue gotten reaſonably neare them, holding downe his hawke couerte vnder the horſe necke or bodie, in ſuche ſorte, that ſhee maye finde the Geeſe. Then the Falconer ſhall runne

in apace, and ſtrike vppon his Tabarde, to rayſe the Geeſe. And if ſhe kill any of them, rewarde hir, &c. Vſing his hawke in this order, ſhee may be made to kill twoo or three, or more, in a daye. And in like manner maye ſhee bee made to the Crane. And in like ſorte may he creepe to flee at fowle which lye vpon pyttes, or pondes. Firſt ſhewing them to his hawke, and letting hir drawe to them, and then running in to putte them vp with his Tabarde. But the Falconer muſte take heede, that as long as hee may finde greate flightes, hee flee not at ſmaller fowle, to the ende his hawke may continewe the more boldly to flee greate flightes. For a man maye ſoone make a hawke a cowarde and a ſlugge. Yet ſome there bee, (but thoſe are very rare) whiche fleeing at all kindes of fowles, becomme ſtill hardyer and hardyer, and better and better. Nowe hauing wrytten ſufficiently of ſuche flightes, I wyll paſſe ouer to teache the meanes to mewe a Goſhawke.
            
            
               To mewe a Goſhawke.
               WHen you haue flowen either with Goſhawke or Tercell, foare, or haggarde, vntill Marche, giue hir ſome good quarrey in hir foote, and foreſeing that ſhe be cleane from lyſe, cutte off the buttons of hir Ieſſes, and throwe hir into the mewe, the whiche may bee a roome either bylowe, or on the grounde, ſet towardes the North if it be poſſible. And as for the bygneſſe, ſo that it be not too little, lette it be as large as you will, and let the pearches therein be lyned with Canuas or Cotton, ſo that the hawke hurte not hir feete therevppon: for thereby ſhee might catche eyther the gowte, or the pynne. Let the mewe alſo haue a windowe toward the Eaſt, and another towarde the North, to take freſhe ayre, and the comforte of the Sunne. You ſhall alſo prouide in the ſame mewe, a Baſon or other veſſell for water, and euery three dayes at the moſte, chaunge and ſhifte the water. And feede

your hawke eyther with Pygeons, or with Quayles, or elſe with hotte fleſhe of a Weather or gelded Goate, for that will make hir mewe well and quickly.
            
            
               To draw the Goſhawke out of the Mewe.
               ABout the beginning of October, if you perceiue your Goſhawke faire mewed, and harde penned, then gyue hir either chickens, or Lambes heartes, and Calues hearts, by the ſpace of .xx. dayes togither, to ſkowre hir and to make hir ſliſe out the ſlymie ſubſtance and glytte out of hir pannell, and to enſeame hir (as Falconers terme it.) That being done, one euening you may draw hir out of the mewe, and new furniſh hir with Ieſſes, Bells, & Bewets, and of all other things that ſhalbe nedefull. And when you haue ſeeled hir, keepe hir ſo ſeeled twoo or three dayes, vntill ſhe will be gently hooded. And therof a Falconer ought to haue a ſpeciall regarde. For commonly all mewed hawkes are as coy to be hooded, as whē they were firſt taken. But when you haue woonne hir to abyde the hoode gently, then in an euening by candle lyght you may vnſeele hir, and the nexte daye you may go aboute to ſhewe hir the fiſte and the gloue. And as I haue before aduiſed you to deale with Haggardes, or hawkes new taken from the Cage, you ſhall not forget to let hir tyre and plume morning and euening, giuing hir ſomtimes in the morning, when hir gorge is emptie, a little Suger Candie, for that will helpe hir maruelouſly to endewe. Sometimes alſo when ſhee is emptie in gorge, and panell, you ſhal giue hir ſkowrings of Aloes Cicotryne, Cloues, & Staueſaker, wrapped in a little peece of Cottō or in Towe, or lynen cloth. But hereof ſhalbe written more playnely in the treatiſe of medicines.
            
            
               To make a mewed Goſhawke fleeing.
               WHen the Falconer ſhall perceyue his Goſhawke to feede eagerly, and perceyueth by his iudgemente that

ſhee is enſeamed, and that hee may boldely flee with hir: then lette him go into the fielde, and finding Partridge, if the hawke bate at them of hir owne accorde, it is a token, that ſhee is emptie, and readie to flee: but if ſhee bate not, then doth it betoken the contrary. Therefore in ſuche caſe feede hir ſtill with waſhte meates, and things conuenient, as long as you ſhall thinke requiſite. For doubtles if ſhe be once throughly enſeamed and readie, ſhee will flee of hir owne accorde. And then if ſhee kill, feede and rewarde hir as hath bene before declared. But if ſhe flee to the marke with a Partridge, then you muſte retriue it, and ſerue hir as is alſo before expreſſed. (∵)
            
            
               
               Howe to keepe Nyaſſe Sparowhawkes.
               
                  
                     depiction of sparrowhawk
                  
               
               SParowhawkes are to be conſidered of as all other kinds of hawkes are, according to their age and diſpoſition. Some of them are named Nyaſſes, ſome Braunchers, ſome Soarehawkes, and ſome mewed hawkes: Some alſo Haggards,

beeing mewed in the woodde, they are called Nyaſſes, which are taken in the eyree. Branchers are thoſe, that hauing forſaken the eyree, are fedde by the olde hawke vpon the boughs and branches neare about the eyree, and therevpon they are called Branchers: afterwards they are called Soarehawkes. They are called Soarehawkes, bicauſe when they haue forſaken the woodde, and beginne to pray for themſelues, they flee vp aloft vpon pleaſure, which with vs Falconers is called ſoring. Mewed hawkes are all hawkes that haue once or more ſhifted their feathers: and Haggards are they whiche pray for themſelues, & do alſo mewe themſelues either in the woodde, or otherwiſe at large. To beginne with the Nyaſſe, whiche is of greateſt difficultie to bring vnto anye perfection, you muſte firſte feede hir in ſome freſhe coole chamber or parler vpon the ground. And ye ſame chamber ſhold haue two windowes not very large, wherof that one ſhould open towards the North, and that other towardes the Eaſte, to take the freſhe coole ayre, or the comforte of the Sunne at hir pleaſure. Theſe windowes muſte be open, barred ouerthwarte with lathes, or thinne bordes, ſo thicke that neyther your hawkes maye gette oute, nor your Catte maye come in. And in this chambee caſte and ſtrewe Vyne leaues, and other freſhe leaues. For it refreſheth a hawke maruellouſely to reſte vppon them. And for the ſame conſideration it ſhall not bee amiſſe, to ſette twoo or three greate free ſtones in the chamber, wherevppon the Hawkes may ſitte coole & freſh. You muſt alſo haue twoo or three pearches lyned or couered, one a little higher than another, ſo that the hawke as ſhe groweth huger and huger, may flee from one pearche to another, and neuer hurte hir feete. And whē ſhe is full ſommed, ſo as ſhe can flee, then will it be meete and moſte neceſſarie to ſette ſome large baſon, or other veſſell full of water, that ſhee maye bathe hir at pleaſure therein. For that is not onely very holeſome for hir body, but alſo will make hir put out hir feathers ye better, & the faſter. And you ſhall doe well to ſhifte hir water euery three

dayes. You ſhall feede hir with yong Sparrowes, Martelettes, and yong Pygeons, and ſometimes with Sheepes heartes: and whyles ſhee is very yong and little, you ſhoulde cutte hir meate, and ſhredde it in ſmall pellettes vpon a trencher, or a cleane borde for the purpoſe, ſetting it ſo neare hir, that ſhee maye reache it with hir beake, and feede. Thus you ſhall feede hir twice, or more euery daye, euen as you ſhall ſee hir endewe it, or (as Falconers ſaye) putte it ouer. Beware that you gyue hir not gorge vpon gorge, for that wyll make hir caſte hir gorge. But when ſhee is full ſommed, and fleeth aboute, then you ſhall doe better to gyue hir whole birdes, and ſometimes to feede hir vppon your fiſte, ſuffring hir to kill and ſtrayne the lyue birdes in your hande: Yea and ſometimes to put quycke birdes into the chamber to hir, that ſhee maye learne to knowe them, to foote them, and to kill them: and lette hir feede vppon them hir ſelfe in your preſence. For that ſhall bee very good, as well to nowſel hir, as alſo to make hir leaue that vyle condition which commonly all Nyaſſes haue, whiche is, to carry and hyde their praye in ſome hedge or ditche, or ſecrete place: and therein they will ſitte very cloſe for beeing hearde, when they heare or perceyue their keeper to ſeeke them. Wherevpon their keepers are oftentimes euill troubled and diſpleaſed. And alſo it ſhall not be amiſſe, euery morning to go into the ſayde chamber, and to call them to the fiſte, whiſtling and chirping with your mouth, for by yt meanes you ſhal both manne them throughly, and alſo you ſhall gayne the time which you ſhould elſe ſpend afterwardes, in making them when they were ready to bee drawen out of the ſayde chamber.
            
            
               To reclayme and make the Nyaſſe Sparowhawke.
               WHen your Nyaſſe Sparowhawke hath put foorthe all hir feathers, & is full ſommed, then ſhall you take hir

out of the chamber, and furniſhe hir with belles, bewets, Ieſſes, and lynes. And by my counſell you ſhall alſo feele hir at the firſte, to make hir gentle to abyde the hoode, whiche is contrarie to hir nature, and to make hir tractable to be handled, vſing hir fauourably and louingly alwayes: and at the firſte with a hoode whiche is too greate and large, to hoode and vnhoode hir oftentimes, ſtroking hir heade ſoftely with your hande, vntill ſhee wyll ſtande ſtyll, and abyde the hoode gently. Then in an euening by lyghte of a candle you ſhall vnſeele hir, gyuing hir ſomewhat to tyre vpon, handling hir and ſtroking hir feathers gently, ſometimes hooding and vnhooding hir. And bicauſe Nyaſſe Sparowhawkes are ſeldom made perfect and good without greate paynes and diligence, therfore obſerue theſe things, and vſe them accordingly, if you will haue a good Nyaſſe hawke.
            
            
               To trayne a Nyaſſe Sparowhawke.
               WHen your Nyaſſe is well wonne to the hoode, and to the fiſte, lette hir kill ſmall birdes vppon your fiſte, then call hir twoo or three dayes togyther, vntill ſhee wyll come farre off. Then you muſte take a quycke Pygeon tyed by one foote with a Cryaunce, and ſtirre it vntyll your hawke wyll bate at it, and ſeaze it, though not farre off, yet as you may, and helpe hir at the firſte, leaſte the Pygeon ſtruggling with hir, be too ſtrong, and diſcourage hir. Then lette hir plume hir and foote hir, and feede hir therevpon with as muche fauour as you maye, and whiſtle to hir, to make hir knowe your whyſtle, vntyll ſhee haue taken a reſonable gorge. Then hoode hir vp, and lette hir plume or tyre a lyttle afterwardes. They daye following you ſhall call hir to the fiſte, and ſhewe hir a lyue Pygeon, ſo neare that ſhee maye reache at it with hir beake. Then caſte it oute before hir, vntyll ſhee flee it, and take it.
               That done, rewarde hir, &c. Agayne you ſhall another

tyme throwe oute a chicken before hir, and if ſhee take and foote it, rewarde hir, &c. Afterwardes you ſhall cauſe one to hide himſelfe cloſe in a ditch or pitte, and throw hir out a Pigeon or Pullet, if ſhe take it, reward hir and feede hir vp with the braynes, hart, and a legge or a wing, whiſtling, chirping, and ſpeaking to hir to encourage hir: and this order you ſhall obſerue awhile, ſtil ſeruing hir with greater and greater traynes: for by that meanes you ſhall giue hir courage to flee, yea if it were at a Feaſant, for that chickens are ſome of them not much vnlike a Feaſant poult. As alſo vſing hir to greate chickins, ſhee will neuer couet to carry as ſhee would do if you trayned hir with ſmaller birds, which is a thing woorthy the obſeruation, as you ſhall find by experience. And when you haue giuen hir ſufficient traines of chicken and ſuch like, you ſhall one day ſet hir ſharp, then take a Quayle tied in a Criance, and in a playne meadowe: Firſt ſhew hir vnto your Sparowhawke, then throw it vp aloft and caſt your Hawke off handſomly after hir, and if ſhe take it, reward hir with the braynes to nouſſe and encourage hir, but feede hir with the legge of a chicken or Pullet, and deale daintely with hir. The next time you may trayne hir with a Quayle withoute a criance, the which hauing a legge broken, and two feathers pluckt out of each wing, giue it to another which may cloſely throwe it out to hir, and feede hir vp therevppon with a good gorge. Being thus oftentimes trayned, you may ride out into the fields about nine of the clocke, where calling your ſparowhawke to youre fiſte and giuing hir a bitte or two of meate, go with your Spaniels to ſeke ſome Beauie of yong Quayles, aduauncing your fiſte aloft, that your Hawke may ſee them when they ſpring, and let hir flee with aduauntage at the firſte. If ſhe kil, reward and feede hir, &c. but if ſhe miſſe, or that you find no yōg Quayles, then ſerue hir with a trayne of a Quayle as is often before ſayd.
            
            
               
               How to hawke with a Sparowhawke being made.
               WHen your Sparowhawke is once made, you may goe freely into the field: and if you find any yong Quaile let hir ſlee thereat with aſmuch aduauntage as you can: and if ſhe take it, reward and feede hir &c. Remember that at firſt entring of your Hawke you hold your fiſte aloft alwayes, aſwell bycauſe youre Hawke maye ſee the game ſpring, as alſo that ſhe may learne to haue an eye to the Dogges, the whyche you ſhall alwayes cauſe to hunt on your right hand whē they raunge, but eſpecially when they queſt and call, to the ende you maye the better and at more aduauntage caſt off youre Hawke whē you let hir flee. And when your Sparowhawke doth know hir game and how to flee, then may you flee more than one flight in a forenoone or an afternoone, ſo that always you giue hir ſome ſmal reward at euery flight that ſhe killeth. And bycauſe it behoueth muche alwayes to encourage youre Hawke, and to keepe hir well nouſled, you ſhall doe well euer to carrie a liue Quayle with you, that if you find none, or flee and miſſe, you may therewith trayne or ſerue youre Hawke accordingly: and you maye cauſe it ſo to be caſt out vnto hir, that ſhe will thinke it is ſprong with the Spanells. As alſo I would wiſh you euermore to keepe aliue the ſecōd Quaile that you ſhall take, and keepe it in your hawking bagge, ſo as if neede be, it may ſerue you at night or at any time to reward your Hawke with: for keeping your Hawke in this order, ſhe can neuer lightly be diſcouraged. And when youre Hawke is throughly entred and perfectly well in fleeing, and well nouſled, then you ſhall hold your hande lowe, whereas before you held it aloft. For your Hawke being much quicker ſighted thā you are, ſhe will ſooner ſee the game ſpring alſo, and bate at the whurre, as we tearme it: then before the Hawke can reeouer your fiſte, the game is flowen farre off to hir great diſaduantage: yea although you ſhould let hir go when ſhe bateth,

yet ſhall ſhe not flee with ſuch aduauntage as you might lette hir flee when ſhe and you both ſpied the game ſpring at once. He therefore that will be a perfect keeper of a Sparowhawke or ſuch like, muſt haue a quicke eye, and a good conſideration and regard to the Spanells, keeping them ſtill as neare as he can vpon his right hand, and hold his hande lowe, bycauſe hys Hawke ſhall not bate at the game before he ſee it. And alſo it ſhall not be good to be ouer neare the Dogges, but rather a little aboue them, that you maye let youre Hawke flee coaſting at the vantage when the game ſpringeth, and alwayes to be quicke of eye and nimble of hand, for he that is not ſo, nor regardeth the aduauntages of a flight, ſhall hinder hys Hawke whereas hee myghte further and helpe hir.
            
            
               How to make a Sparowhawke, being eyther Sorehavvke, ramage, or mevved Hawke.
               NOw I haue ſpoken at large of Nyaſſe Sparowhawkes, it were meete that I ſhould ſet downe ſome inſtructions alſo concerning Ramage Hawkes, and ſuche as are taken when they haue prayed for themſelues. And yet in effect the ſame precepts that ſerue for a Nyaſſe, wyll ſerue alſo for ramage Hawkes and mewed Hawkes. But yet they, (I meane ramage and mewed Hawkes) require not ſo muche payne to make them know their game nor to enter them, bycauſe they haue bene practiſed in praying for themſelues, and the Nyaſſes are altogether ignorant and ſimple: ſo that the Nyaſſes muſt be taught to knowe their game, in a manner, euen as they are taught by the breeder in the wood, the whyche (as I haue heard old Falconers tell) when hir yong Hawkes go out of the neſt and can hoppe or flecke from one bough to another, commeth in with ſome pray vnto them, and calling

them altogether, ſhe fleeth aloft and lets the bird fall amongſt them, ſo that which ſoeuer of them catcheth it with hir talēts, feedeth vppon it for that meale, and then returneth the olde Hawke for ſome pray, vntill ſhe haue fedde them all & taughte them to foote their pray And therefore when a man hath them Nyaſſe which neuer wer taught ſo by the breeder, he muſt practiſe as neare as he can like the old Hawke, to teache them to foote and to kill their pray and to know it, the which you ſhall not be troubled with in a ſoare rammage or metred Hawke. For they whiche beare thoſe names, haue learnt to praye for themſelues: and moſt of all the mewed haggard Hawkes, for they are throughly nouſled and trayned therein, yea and moſt commonly they haue learnt ſuch conditions, that with all the paynes we can take, fewe of them can be brought to any good perfection. But he whiche hathe a Haggard Sparowhawke, muſt aboue all things take paynes in weyning hir from that vile fault of carying, and that ſhall he do by ſeruing hir often with great Pullets, and other great traynes the which ſhe cā
                  not carrie, and therby, ſhe will learne to abide vpon the quarrey. Alſo they whiche delight in Haggards, muſt take greate heede that they offend them not, but rather coye them as much as they can with all deuiſes of fauor & cheriſhing, for they wil remember fauor or iniurie muche better than any other kynde of Hawke. And of the ſame condition are Lentmers for the moſt part, the whiche are called with vs March Hawkes, or Lentmers, bycauſe they are taken in Lent with lime or ſuche like meanes. And the Italians call them Marzarolli, bycauſe they are taken in March or thereabouts: ſo that the Etymologie of the name proceedeth all vpon one cauſe, and they are called ſo whether they be Soare Hawkes or mewed hawkes. Neither is there any great difference betwene them and haggards for euill conditions, but the Lentmers are more ſubiect to moyſt humors, and eſpecially in the head, and therefore you muſt plie them with caſting and ſkowring, as ſhall bee more at large declared in the treatiſe of medicines.
            
            
               
               Certayne obſeruations for an oſtreger in keeping of a Goſhawke.
               
                  depiction of man with falcon
               
               MAny times it hapneth yt a Goſhawke or a Tercell whiche was good in hir Sorage, doth become nothing ſo toward or good when ſhee is mewed: and that proceedeth bycauſe in hir ſoarage ſhe was not cheriſhed to make hir take delight in

hir flight: for in a manner all the ſkill of a Falconer or Oſtreger conſiſteth in coying and delicate vſage of his Hawke, and ſo cheriſhing hir, that ſhe may take pride and pleaſure in hir flight. Therefore I woulde not thinke it amiſſe if hee had always at the firſt entring of his Goſhawke or Tercell, a traine Partridge in his bagge, to ſerue hir with, when neede dothe require, and ſo he ſhall winne hir loue. And therewithall lette him marke theſe obſeruations, to keepe his Hawke in good tewne alwayes. Firſt let him conſider that naturally all Goſhawkes are full of moyſt humors, and eſpecially in the head: and therfore let him plie them with tiring, and plumage, both morning and euening, for that will open them in the Head, and make them caſt water therat. Let the Goſhawkes tiring be the rumpe of a beefe, or ye vppermoſt ioynt of a wing which we call the pinion, or a chickens legge, giuen by the fire or in the warme Sunne. This will not only keepe your Hawke open in the head, but alſo keepeth hir in exerciſe and vſe and frō ſlouthfulneſſe, which might marre hir & vtterly ſpoyle hir.
               It is good alſo to giue hir euery nighte caſting eyther of feathers or of cotton, and then in the morning to marke whether it be wrought round or not, whether it be ſweete or not, whether it be moyſte or drie, and of what colour the water is that droppes out of the caſting, for thereby hee ſhall iudge in what caſe his Hawke is. He ſhoulde alſo haue regarde to hir mewtes, to ſee whether they be cleane or not, and therevppon he may giue medecines accordingly, as ſhalbe hereafter declared. For the infirmitie of a Hawke being once knowen, it is the more eaſily cured. He hath alſo to conſider the ſeaſon: for in the winter and colde weather, he muſte ſette his Hawke or Tercell warme, in ſome place wher fire is made: he muſt rolle the pearch with cotton or ſome ſuche like thing, and the pearch muſt be ſet farre from the wall that his Hawke hurt not hir feathers when ſhe bateth: but if it be not colde, he may ſet hir euery morning in ſome place where the Sunne hath power for an houre or two.
               
                  Remember that no Hennes or pultrie come neare yt place where your Hawke ſhall pearch, and eſpecially in Lent when Hennes haue yong chickens commonly following them.
               Remember alſo in the ſpring to offer your Hawke to the water euery weeke, for elſe ſhe wil ſoare away whē ſhe fleeth, and make you ſeeke hir.
               If your Hawke bathe hir at any time of hir owne accorde after hir flight, go preſently to the next houſe with hir, (if it be in Winter or cold weather) and weather hir by a fire with hir backe to the fire, and not hir gorge, for that woulde make hir ſicke. And likewiſe drie youre Hawke if you haue caried hir in the Rayne. Let a good Falconer or Oſtreger alwayes keepe his Hawke luſtie and high, and yet keepe hir in ſuche tewne that ſhe may flee beſt when ſhe is high: for doubtleſſe the plucking downe of a Hawke dothe marre hir and make hir cowardly. Aboue all things an Oſtreger muſt bee patient and neuer chollerique.
               A good Oſtreger muſte alſo keepe his Hawke cleane, and hir feathers whole, and if a feather be broken or bruſed, hee muſt ympe it preſently, as ſhall be taught herafter alſo in this booke, and therefore he muſt haue his ymping needles, his Semond, and ſuche other things about him euermore in a readineſſe. (∵)
            
            
               
               Certayne obſeruations concerning Sparowhawkes.
               
                  
                     depiction of sparrowhawk
                  
               
               SEt youre Sparowhawke euery morning abroade in the Sunne two houres or neare there aboutes, and ſet hir in the water twice in a weeke at the leaſt, and eſpecially Nyaſſes, for they couet ye water more thā the reſt. Soare Sparowhawkes

would not be flowen withall too ſoone in a morning, for they ſoare willingly. Take your Sparowhawke from the pearch alwayes with ſomewhat in your hande, to make hir loue you and be fonde of you, for that is a thing of no ſmall importance and cōſideration. As alſo to make your Sparowhawke foote great fowles, to the end the may not learne nor be accuſtomed to carrein. And as touching mewing of a Sparowhawke, ſome vſe to put their Sparowhawke in the mew aſſoone as they leaue fleeing with hir, cutting off both hir bewettes, lines, and the knottes of hir Ieſſes, and leaue hir in the mewe vntill ſhe be cleane mewed. But if you will haue hir to flee at Partridge, Quayle, or Feaſant poult, then you muſte drawe hir in the beginning of Aprill, and beare hir on the fiſte till ſhe be cleane and throughly enſeamed. Some other keepe their Sparowhawkes on the pearch vntill March, and then throwe hir into the mewe being peppered for lyſe if ſhee haue any. Hir mewe ſhould be a chamber aloft from the grounde eight or nine foote long, and fiue or ſixe foote brode, with two windowes, to the Eaſt and the North, as is before declared in the deſcription of the mewe for a Goſhawke: and ſet hir perches and al other things euen as for a Goſhawke, ſauing that the mewe muſte haue one little windowe to conuey in hir meate at. And your Sparowhawke being thus prouided of hir mewe, go in to hir in Maye in an euening by candlelight, and taking hir ſoftly, giue hir to thy companion to hold, vntill thou haue pulled out all hir traine feathers one after another, holding the principall feather with thy one hand (whiche Falconers do call the couert feather) and plucking out the other feathers with that other hande, for ſo ſhalt thou doe hir leaſt hurt: and this ſhall make hir mewe the faſter, if thou feede hir with hote meate and birds, and alwayes keepe an houre certayne to giue hir hir meate. Some will ſet water in the mewe by their Sparowhawke continually, ſhifting and renewing the water euery ſecond or third day. Some ſet water before a Sparowhawke in the mewe but once in a fortnight, and then

take it away againe within .xxiiij. houres after they haue ſet it there. Some will neuer ſet water before their Sparowhawkes at all when they mewe them, ſaying that Sparowhawkes are very hote, and plucke out their owne feathers for extreame heate, and that therefore water is not to bee giuen or allowed them, bycauſe it killeth and delayeth the heate in them, which ſhould further their mewing. I like that opinion: But for mine owne part and experience, I woulde leaue the extremities and take the meane. And I woulde thinke it beſt to ſet water before a Sparowhawke in the mewe, once in xiiij. dayes at the leaſt, or oftner, if ye Hawke ſeeme to haue neede, the which you ſhall eaſely perceyue, if ſhe haue any feathers or downe that ſtand ſtaring vp on hir backe, and when ſhe ſitteth alwayes as though ſhee woulde rowze, or is twitching at hir feathers with hir beake, then ſet hir water: but to ſet it by hir continually, dothe foreſlowe hir mewing: and too keepe it alwayes from hir, doth make hir that ſhe meweth not hir feathers ſo cleane or ſo gallantly, as when ſhee may haue water once in a fortnight. As touching remedies for Hawkes that be ſlowe of mewing, it ſhall be ſet downe in the treatiſe of medicines in this booke alſo. (∵)
            
         
         
            
            The third part, or Booke, of this collection of Falconrie.
            
               depiction of man with falcon
            
            BEfore I deale with diſeaſes of Hawkes, and cures due to the ſame, (which is the ſubiect of this third, and latter parte of my Collection of Falconrie) I holde it very neceſſarye, and of importance, as well to the attaynement of the cauſe of

each particular diſeaſe, as alſo the deuiſe of remedie for eache kinde of miſcheefe, to ſpeake ſomewhat of the complexions of Falcons, vnder whoſe name and nature (you knowe) in the beginning of this Booke of Falconrie, I haue compriſed all other Hawkes, in regarde that the Falcon is cheefe, and the Queene of all other Hawkes: nothing doubting at all, but that diuers will muze at the name and tearme of the complexion of a Hawke, as though indeede there were no ſuch matter, ledde therevnto by their groſſe conceyte and blinded imagination, for that they can not in their opinions iudge ſo eaſily of the natures of Hawkes, as they can of the complexions of men, whoſe cleareneſſe and thinneſſe of ſkinne bewrayes their inclination and complexion, whereas Hawkes are not in any condition ſo to bee deemed and iudged, by meane of their plumes: whiche indeede is farre otherwiſe, for, as in man the natural complexion is truly diſcerned by the ſkinne, ſo is the naturall diſpoſition and conſtitution of a Hawke by hir cote and plume: whiche I aduenture not to reporte of my ſelfe, for that it ſtriueth ſo much with common ſenſe and ordinarie capacitie, but do follow mine Author, and thervpon am emboldned to auow it, not bluſhing to laye you downe hys ſpeaches, as touching thys matter, though not in the Frenche Phraſe, wherein he wrote it, but in the Engliſh ydiome, into which I haue tranſlated it.
            
               Artelowch mine Author, writing of the complexions of Falcons, in his treatiſe of Falconrie, medicines, and cures, and ſuch lyke matter, reporteth, and eke aduiſeth
            That the blacke Falcons are melancholicke, and therefore ſhould of right be phiſicked with hote and moyſt medicines, by meane of their complexion, which is cold and drie, as with Aloes, pepper, Cockes fleſh, Pigeons, Sparowes, Gotes fleſh, and ſuch like.
            That the blancke Falcons are flegmaticke, and to be Phiſicked with hote and drie medicines, bycauſe of their flegme, whych is cold and moiſt, as with Cinamon, Cloues, Silermont, and Cardamomum, Gotes fleſh, Choghs & ſuch like.
            
               The ruſſet Falcons be of ſanguine & cholericke complexiō, mixt indifferently, and therefore to be phiſicked with cold medicines, moderately moyſt, and drie:
            As with Myrtells, Caſſia Fiſtula, Tamarinds, Vineger, Pullets, Lambs fleſh, and ſuche like.
            Hauing ſpoken thus much of the complexions of Hawkes, a matter not long to be ſtood vpon, I will referre you ouer to the Italian Authors, as touching the diſeaſes and cures, whoſe iudgements I do very well allowe, & in many pointes preferre beyond the French Falconers, for that they ſeeme to be the more reaſonable men, and leſſe giuen to friuolous inuentions. Yet neuertheleſſe in the laſt part hereof, you ſhall at your pleaſure, peruſe the French Falconers alſo, for that I would haue you to want nothing that may be to your better knowledge and furtherance in Falconrie.
            
               Of the diſeaſes and cures of Hawkes. The opinion of maſter Franceſco Sforzino Vicentino, an Italian Gentleman Falconer.
               IT doth belong to a good and ſkilfull Falconer, not alone to knowe all kinds of Hawkes, and to haue the cunning how to reclayme, keepe ſlee, ympe, & mewe the ſayd Hawkes, with ſundry other like matters incident and appertayning to Falconrie: but it is very neceſſary and behouefull for him to haue knowledge and good experience in their diſeaſes and cures: for that they are birds ſubiect to ſundrie maladies and accidents, the cure of all whiche dothe reſt in the carefull keeper. Wherefore hauing (vnleſſe I flatter my ſelfe) in the former parts of this collection, performed my promiſe, made in the very entry and beginning of this booke, as touching Hawkes, and other matters belonging to the miſterie and ſkill of Falconrie: it is only left now, and I reſt charged, with their diſeaſes and cures, to decipher vnto you the meane to know the maladies, as alſo a methode to recouer them: wherein if happelie

any man deſire a more ample diſcourſe, of ye natures & original cauſes of thoſe diſeaſes, thā herein I ſhall bewray, let him know & bethink himſelf yt I am neither profound Philoſopher nor learned phiſitiō by profeſſiō, but yt in theſe I deale as a Falconer, manifeſting & making ſhewe of cures proper & peculiar to euery diſeaſe, wherwt I cold euer yet find a Hauke charged, & ſuch as may light vpō any kind of Hawke, by miſfortune & caſualtie. And as touching remedies for their miſcheefes, I meane to ſpeake of very few which I haue not ſundrie times approued wt very good ſucceſſe, wherefore I ſay, yt Hawkes may be diſeaſed and vnperfect, eyther in body or feathers, which I intend & meane, whē they are vnable by any euil aceidēt to performe their parts and dueties in any cōdition, as not to be able to flee, or ſtrayn ye pray wt their pownces, or any ſuch like actiō, which by nature they ought to perform.
               In body they are diſeaſed, eyther by ſome outward cauſe, as by a ſtripe, or bruſe: or elſe by ſome hiddē & inward euill, as by corrupt & contagious humors, proceeding either of too gret heate & moyſture of ye head, or otherwiſe ouermuch drought & ſiccitie of ye Liuer & inward partes, frō which procedeth many times, the Pantas, & ſhortnes of breath, & other perilous euils, whereof I meane to write in their peculiar places heereafter.
               Again, Hawkes are accuſtomed to be ill affected & diſeaſed (as I may tearme it) in their feathers, for yt diuers times being ſound of body, & in perfect ſtate of health, yet they cannot flee or ſtirre their wings, by mean of ſome brokē or ſliued feathers, & eſpecially ye flagges, lōg feathers, or ſacels, which ſundry times are broken eyther in ye quill, being bloudie feathers, or neare the top or poynt of the feather: the remedie for whiche miſchiefe & euill accidēt, I will reſerue to the laſt part of this treatiſe, as a matter meeteſt for yt place. But bycauſe the miſchiefes and diſeaſes that grow within the bodies of Hawkes, may beſt be diſcerned & knowē by their excrement, and by that which commeth frō them, as namely, by ye caſting & muet of a Hawke. Therefore I accompt it moſt expedient, to haue good iudgemēt, to diſtinguiſh & know the diuerſitie and difference

thereof, the better to come by the true knowledge of the diſeaſes, wherby, ther may in good time be had a conuenient remedie for the euill. Wherfore let vs firſt ſpeake of their caſtings.
            
            
               How to knowe the health and diſeaſe of a Hawke by hir caſting.
               FAlconers do vſe to giue two ſorts of caſting to their hauks, eyther plumage, or cotton & bicauſe moſt cōmōly they giue ye Falco pellets of cottō for hir caſting, I wil firſt ſpeak therof.
               You muſt make choyce of fine, ſoft, white cotto, & therof faſhiō & frame your caſting as big as a great nutte, & at euening cōuey it into hir gorge, after you haue inpt hir: & in ye morning betimes make diligēt ſearch to find it, to peruſe it in what maner ye hauke hath rolled, & caſt it, bycauſe thereby you ſhal perceiue hir good or euill ſtate: for if ſhe caſt it, round, white, not lothſome in ſmell, & not very moyſt or wateriſh, it is a manifeſt token yt ſhe is ſound. But otherwiſe, if ſhe rolle not hir caſting wel, but caſt it lōg, not white, ſtincking, very moiſt & ſlimie, it doth argue, yt ſhe is full of diſeaſes, as I ſhal more ſpecially declare vnto you eftſone. You muſt obſerue this, yt theſe caſtings do import & betokē ye greater euil, by how much more they do reſemble ye muet of a hauke in colour & ſmel. For by yt, they do make ſhew yt your hauke doth abound wt too much euil humor. Wherfore you muſt ye more diligētly mark it, & wring it betwixt your fingers, to ſee, how much, & what kind of moiſture doth drop frō ye caſting, & withall note the ſmell & colour therof. But now it is high time to procede to a more ſpecial declaratiō of thoſe caſtings, yt you may be ꝑfect in each cōditiō.
            
            
               Of naughty caſtings.
               IF your hawkes caſting be long, not wrought round, and be full of water, how much more long and moiſt it is,Blacke caeſting. ſo muche more it betokeneth the hauke to be diſeaſed. And againe if ſo it be blacke, & ſtincking, ſo much the more the hawke is in euill caſe & ſtate. Al, and euery of theſe ſignes, do yeeld a ſhew and proofe, that the hauke hath bin fowle fed, & with corrupt fleſhe. Wherefore, to remedie thys miſcheefe, you muſte feede hir with hote Birdes, as Swallowes, Sparrowes, yong

Doues and ſuche like, giuing them aliue, or as ſoone as they are killed.
               But if it ſo happen, for all this care and good intendaunce, that the caſting continue at one ſelfe ſtay, and be like euill in ſhewe, then muſt you needes giue your Hawke a ſkowring, according to arte, ſuch as I will teach you to make hereafter.
               
                  Greene caſting.If your Hawkes caſting be greene, it is a ſigne that ſhe is ill affected and diſeaſed in the Liuer, the cure whereof I wyll referre to a peculiar Chapter for the ſame euil. But know neuertheleſſe, that Hawkes, when they are ramage, diuers times doe caſt ſuche like greene caſtings as I ſpeake of, and make ſuche muets, by reaſon of ſome wild foule that they haue killed, and prayed vpon at their own pleaſure, or otherwiſe haue had the ſame giuen them by Falconers. And a man neade not greatly force thereof, for that with good feeding, they will lightly be recouered, and ridde of this diſeaſe.
               
                  Yellowiſh black caſting.When the caſting happeneth to bee yellowiſh blacke, and very moiſt and ſlimie, it argueth youre Hawke to bee ſtuft with euil humors, proceeding of too greate heate, or of immoderate and ouergreat flights, or too much bating. For recouerie of which euill, you muſt as ſpedelie as you maye, beſtowe good feeding vpon your Hawke, and coole hir, by waſhing hir meate in good freſhe water, as endiue water, or ſuche like, as ſhall beſt pleaſe the fancie of the Falconer, allowing hir beſides, one or two, or moe caſtings of cotton: into whiche you muſt conuey very excellent good Mummy beaten into pouder, and otherwhile among incenſe, vſed in like manner. But if it ſo fal out, that your Hawke continue hir ill caſting, for al this remedie it ſhall not be amiſſe, for twice or thrice to giue hir this kind of caſting, or vpward ſcowring euery other day.
               Take Aloes waſht, & beaten to powder, one ſcruple, powder of Cloues foure graynes, of Cubebes beaten to powder three graynes: all whiche beeing well confected, and made in mixture, enwrappe in a peece of cotton, and giue your Hauke being emptie and hauing no meate aboue or in hir pannell.

And I nothing doubte, but vſing this order which I preſcribe you, your hawke ſhall recouer in ſhort ſpace. In any caſe you muſte be circumſpect and heedefull, hauing a hawke thus diſeaſed, to marke diligently whither ſhe do mend or payre, whether ſhe waxe hye, or abate hir fleſhe. For that according as ſhe ſhall do any of theſe, it ſhall be neceſſary for you, eyther to augment or decreaſe your ſkowring, and hir feeding. And beleeue me, I knowe this by experience, that ſundry hawkes do periſhe more by being ouer poore and lowe brought, throughe negligence of ill keepers, that make ſlender regarde of them, thā by the extremitie of the diſeaſe. This ſhall be ſufficient as touching caſtings of Cotton, whiche (as I ſayde before) were peculiar to Falcons.
               Falconers are accuſtomed to giue their hawkes caſting of plumage, ſometimes being emptie aboue,Casting of plumage. and eake in feeding to ſuffer thē to take fethers, but ſpecially to Sparowhawkes. They giue them io
                     ••
                  es of wings of ſmall birdes, & Quailes, when they haue fedde them, tearing them out with their teeth, and plucking away the longeſt feathers, and ſo giue it.
               Theſe caſtings, in the morning being wrought round, and caſte without any ill ſauour or ſlinke, do make euident ſhewe that the hawke is ſounde: and howe muche more rounde and ſweete they are, the better token of the hawkes good ſtate. But contrariwiſe, if the caſting bee long, ſlimie, and rammiſh in ſmell, with ſome ſmall partes of the fleſhe vndiſgeſted, cleauing to the ſame, and withall frothie, hauing a kinde of fome ſticking on it, all theſe things togither, and euery one ſpeciall by it ſelfe, do importe the diſeaſe of the hawke, and make full ſhew of hir ill ſtate. And therefore that ſhe ſtandeth nedeful of a good ſkowring, and good intendance, as I ſayde before.
            
            
               The waye to knowe in what tune hawkes are, by their mewting.
               WIth that helpe and lighte that I haue alreadie gyuen you, by the hawkes caſting, if you diligently obſerue

the mewte, you ſhall eaſily prognoſticate and foreſee hir euill, and any ſuche diſeaſe as your hawke is affected with.The good mewte. For if the mewte be white, and not ouerthicke, nor ouercleare, and beſides not hauing any blacke ſpotte in it, or at the leaſte but little, it is an euidente proofe that the hawke is excellently in tune, and not diſeaſed. But if it be white, and very thicke in the middeſt, well it maye importe healthe, but it argueth the hawke to be ouergroſſe, and too full of greace. And therefore it ſhall be needefull to cure that miſchiefe, by gyuing hir liquide and moyſt meate, as the heart of a Calfe, Lambe, or ſuch like. And for one or twoo mornings, to allow hir (being empty and hauing nothing aboue to put ouer) a quantitie of ſuger Candie, which wil ſkowre hir, & make hir ſlyſe, or elſe a gutte of a chicken well waſht, of a conuenient length & ſize, full of good oyle Oliue, well clarified in water, in ſuche ſorte as heereafter I ſhall inſtruct you.
               It is eaſily founde, when a hawke is ouergreaſie, and not enſeamed, by hir mewte, when it is white with ſome blacke in it, whiche euill is eaſily remooued, by gyuing hir hot Sparowes, and yong Pygeons.
               
                  The euill mewte.But if hir mewte be white, entermedled with red, yellowe, grey, or ſuch like colour, it is a ſigne that the hawke is very ill and diſeaſed, and moreouer yt ſhe ſtandeth nedefull of a ſkowring, as of Mummy purified & beaten to pouder, wrapping it in cotton, or ſome ſuche like matter, to ſet the gorge & ſtomake of your hawke in tune agayne, and other inwarde partes, as hereafter I ſhall make further ſhewe of in a place meete for yt ſpeache and diſcourſe. Aſſuredly, when you ſee your hawkes mewte ſo full of diuers colours, it is very neceſſary for you to reſpect hir cure, and to endeuour your ſelfe to remedy that miſchefe, or otherwiſe ſhe muſte nedes periſhe vnder your hand, for that thoſe are very deadely ſignes and proofes of the yll ſtate of your hauke.The white and yellowe mewte.
               
               The white mewte, hauing a greater part of yellowe in it, than of any other coloure, doeth euidently make ſhewe, that

the Hawke is ſurcharged with cholericke humoures, cauſed and engendred by ouer-greate flyghtes, when you flee with your hawke in the heate of the daye, as alſo of ouermuche bating. Whiche euill you maye prouide for and eſchewe, by gyuing your hawkes meate waſht in cold waters, as Bugloſſe, Endyue, Bourage, and ſuche like holſome colde waters, very medicinable for that miſchiefe, alwayes remēbring to ſtrayne the hawkes meate, and wring it in a lynnen cloth, after you haue waſht it in the waters aforeſayde.
               And if this fall not oute in proofe to your contentmente, then if you can gyue your hawke a quantitie of Agaricke in a ſkowring, for the ſpace of one morning or twoo, not ſuffring hir to flee, or do any thing, but do ſet hir downe. There is no queſtion, but by the care and diligence of ſuche a keeper, your hawke ſhall quickly recouer.
               The mewte of a hawke, whiche is very blacke,The blacke mewte. declareth hir lyuer to bee infected, and is the moſte deadely ſigne of all others. For if it continewe three or foure dayes, moſte aſſuredlie the hawke wyll pecke ouer the pearch, and dye. But if it bee ſo but once, and no more, it greatly ſkylles not. For then may it proceede of one of theſe two cauſes: eyther for that the hawke in pluming and tyring on the fowle, hath taken of the bloude or guttes of the praye, whiche is a matter of nothing: or elſe bycauſe ſhee hath bene gorged with filthye meate. In this caſe, it behooues you to reſpect hir, and to allowe hir good warme fleſhe, and a cotton caſting, with Mummy, or the pouder of Cloues and Nutmegges, with a ſmall quantitie of Ginger, to ſet hir ſtomack in tune agayne.
               A greene mewte is alſo a ſigne of an infected and corrupte lyuer, and happely of ſome Apoſtume,The greene mewte. vnleſſe ſhee make that kinde of mewte vppon this occaſion, that ſhee hath bene gorged with ſome wylde and rammiſh meate, or hir ſelfe be a rammage hawke: for then this rule doeth not holde. You muſt looke to this euyll as ſoone and with as great ſpeede as you poſſible may, feeding hir with meate all powdered with

Mummie prepared, if ſhe will take it with hir fleſh, as diuers hawkes will do of themſelues: but if not, then muſt it be giuen hir in a caſting, or ſome ſkowring, continuing it in this manner, ſometimes after one faſhion, ſometimes after another, vntill you finde the mewte to be chaunged from the badde colour to the better. But when this miſchiefe doth procede, and continewe long ſpace, then ſhall you bee fayne to beſtowe on hir a ſkowring of Agaricke, to rydde thoſe euill and noyſome humors whiche do offende your hawke, and after that another ſkowring of Incenſe, beaten into pouder, to recomfort hir.
               
                  The mewte that is vndiſgested, and tending to redde.The mewte that is not perfectly digeſted, tending to redde, and that is full of ſmall woormes, like vnto fleſhe, not perfectly digeſted and endewed, gyues manifeſte proofe, eyther that the hawke is not well in hir gorge, or elſe that ſhe hath bene fedde with ill and corrupte meates, colde and ſtinking, and vnholſome for a hawke.
               This euill may bee cured and helped, with good warme meates: and beſides that, with ſkowrings of Woormeſeede enwrapped and conueyed into Cotton, or Lynte. And it ſhall not bee amiſſe to gyue hir a ſkowring of pouder of Cloues, Nutmegges, & Ginger, whiche doth maruelouſly ſtrengthen, and ſet the gorge in time.
               
                  Of the darke ſanguine mewte.The darke ſanguine mewte, with a blacke in it, is the moſt deadely ſigne of all other, & I do not remēber that euer I ſaw Hawke make that kind of mewte, but ſhe died. Yet neuertheleſſe a man ought not therefore in that caſe to gyue ouer his hawke, and to diſpaire of hir, but rather to allowe hir of that receyte and medicine, whiche earſte Iherom Cornerus, that noble man, and cunning Falconer made, or elſe that whiche was deuiſed by Signor Manolus the Greeke, whiche I haue manie times experimēted in Falcons, not without good ſucceſſe, and greate commendation. And therefore hereafter I will laye it downe for your better knowledge and practiſe, as the excellēt deuiſes of moſte ſkilfull men in Falconrie.
               And yet for all this, it may be, that a hawke doth make the

like mewte that I wrote of, by meane of tyring on a fowle, and taking the bloude of it, and of the raynes & guttes, which if do happen, it is a matter not to be regarded.
               I haue ſundry times ſeene the mewte of a hawke greye,The greye mewte. like mylke when it is turned and waxen ſowre, whiche truly is a deadlie token, and ſigne of greate daunger. Yet it ſhall not be amiſſe, to vſe the receyte whiche I lately ſpake of, deuiſed by thoſe Gentlemen Falconers aforeſayde.
               By this whiche I haue ſpoken, as touching the mewtes of hawkes, it maye bee gathered howe greately it doeth import, and howe behoouefull it is for a Falconer, or Oſtreger, for the better cure of his hawkes, to peruſe euery morning wt great care the mewte of his hawkes. For that it doth greatly concerne the good health and ſtate of them, to finde out at the firſte their indiſpoſition and diſeaſes, before they be too deepely rooted and confirmed in them, when truely it wyll prooue a very harde and difficult matter to remoue the euill.
               But nowe I accompte it hygh time to proceede, and deſcende to the knowledge and particular cure of the ordinarie euills and diſeaſes, whiche do plague and peſter hawkes. In whiche diſcourſe, to obſerue ſome methode and order, I wyll ſpeake generally of all infirmities and yll accidentes happening to the bodies of hawkes, as namely of the Feuer, and ſo conſequently of euery ſpeciall diſeaſe that belongeth to eache particular member of a hawke, as well thoſe that are within the bodie, as withoute: And beſides all theſe, of the gorge, guttes, and lyuer, of the ſtripes and bruſes that happen to hawkes: and laſtly of their feathers, and other euils. Laying downe to your viewe in the latter parte heereof, ſuche inſtrumentes and tooles, as Falconer do vſe to cauterize their hawkes withall, with ſuche other ordinarie remedies, as they do commonly beſtow vpon their diſeaſed and ſicke Hawkes. (∵)
            
            
               
               Of the Feuer or Ague, wherewith Hawkes are wont be moleſted and troubled.
               
                  I Haue noted and obſerued, that the Feuer happeneth vnto Hawkes, by reaſon of ſome ſmal colde, and heate enſewing the ſame. And verely in myne opinion, it doth much reſemble the Tertian, wherewith we our ſelues are dayly vexed. You may eaſily geſſe this griefe, whē you ſee your hawke ſhake & tremble, and preſently after holde hir wings cloſe vnder hir trayne, ſlouping downe with hir heade to groundewarde. And beſides all theſe tokens, you haue one more, which is, that your hawke will haue hir barbe feathers vnder hir beake ſtaring, and out of order, and ſometimes eake ſhe will-refuſe hir meate. And if happely you touche hir with your hande, you ſhall feele ſenſibly the extremitie of heate that doth ſurcharge hir. All, or the moſte part of theſe ſignes, do euidently argue your hawke to bee troubled with a Feuer, a very daungerous griefe, but not altogither deadely, for that I haue ſeene many hawkes recured of this diſeaſe. Wherfore all your care muſt bee, to coole and refreſhe hir, bycauſe in deede the Feuer is nothing elſe but an inordinate heate. In this caſe, hir feeding muſte bee, either the legge of a chicken, or a yong Pygeon, or ſome other ſmall fowle, but Sparrowes laſte of all, for they are not to be allowed in the beginning of the diſeaſe, for their great heate. And you muſt remēber to waſhe hir meate in the water of Bugloſſe, or Endiue, or in a mucillage of Pſillin, in ye iuyce of Cowcumbers or Mellons, and afterwards drye it in a cloth, & ſo giue it hir to feede on. Moreouer you muſt (if you do wel) bathe the perche, & alſo hir legges in the Sommer with Plantaine water, (or for want of ye water, with ye very iuyce of it) wt Lettice water, or Nightſhade water, and ſometimes among with the iuice of Henbane, Lettice water, Nenuphar, Howſleeke, & ſuche other cooling deuiſes, to delaye hir inordinate heate & inflamation, ſetting hir in ſome out place where the ayre is freſh, but not where ſhe may take the ayre to much,

for yt may breede a further incōuenience. If your ſicke hawke be very lowe brought in ſtate, you muſte allowe hir a gorge twice a day, but with diſcretion & iudgement, not giuing hir ouermuche at one tyme. And if ſo the Feuer ceaſe not by theſe practiſes aforeſayde, it ſhalbe well done to giue your Falcon of excellent good Reubarbe, finely beaten to pouder, twoo ſcrouples, in a Cotton caſting, to purge & ſkowre hir choler, whiche is the very originall grounde of hir feuer. There are ſome that do will and preſcribe, yt you muſt let your Falcō bloude in the thygh, whiche albeit I haue not experimented, yet doth it ſtāde with reaſon, that it may do good, if you can finely do it: but it were much better in mine opiniō, to open the vayne vnder hir right wing, bicauſe that would chiefely refrigerate & coole the lyuer out of hād, & ſo by a cōſequēt ye whole body throughout.
               This order aforeſaide is to be vſed, if ye feuer be a hotte feuer wherewith your hawke is moleſted. But if it happen to bee a colde feuer, which you ſhall perceyue, by that your hawke will be extreme colde, if you touche hir. Hir eyes looke not of their woonted hewe, and beſides all this, ſhee ſeldome mewteth, and that with greate payne.
               Then you muſt ſet hir in ſome warm place, & after hir fitte of colde is paſt, ſhe muſt be gently borne on ye fiſt. Beſides, whē ye feuer hath left hir, for yt time you ſhould let hir flee a little: it wil do hir great good. Looke yt hir meate wherwith you feede hir, be hot fleſhe, as Sparrowes, (which in this colde feuer are very wel to be allowed, though in ye hot agew I told you they were hurtful) pullets, Pigeons, & ſuch like hot fowles, the fleſh of whome you muſt waſhe in wine, wherein haue bin boyled theſe hot things folowing, as Sage, Min
                     •
                  s, Pelamountaine, Cloues, Cynamō, & ſuch other ſweete cōfortable deuiſes. Beſides you may gyue your hawke the foreſayde fleſh, if it pleaſe you, with honie, and a little pouder of Dill, Fenel, & Comin medled togither. But ſpecially you muſte obſerue this rule, & remember it well, not to giue your hawke gorge vpō gorge: & againe, if your hawke be hye in fleſh when this diſeaſe taketh hir, ſhe muſt be fed but little & ſeldome, although in deede it be

very good at all times, howſoeuer ſhe be affected, to kepe a reaſonable hande vppon hir, as touching hir dyet, whither ſhe be diſeaſed or in perfect ſtate. For of ouer greate gorges, and too full and liberall a hand, do procede a thouſand miſchiefes and diſeaſes to a hawke, as experience doth dayly inſtruct vs, both to the greate paynes of thoſe ſillie birdes, and the greate griefe and coſte of the vnſkilfull keeper, whoſe purpoſe and meaning perhaps, is by giuing his hawke liberally, to haue hir flee luſtily, and to continue in perfect healthe and ſtate, whereas in trothe nothing doth ſo muche offende a hawke, as too greate a gorge. As in all other things, ſo in this likewiſe, The meane is beſte.
               
               Some Falconers do preſcribe this methode for cure of ye feuer in a hawke, whiche I doe not greatly commende or allowe. They will you to take Reubarbe, Muſke, Suger candie, and the iuyce of Motherwoorte, and making a pylle of thoſe things aforeſayde, to gyue it your hawke, feeding hir afterwardes with Sparowes, or yong Rattes, whiche are very hotte meate.
               Other ſome appoynte a paſte or myxture to be made, as bygge as a nutte, of theſe things following, whiche being ſtieped a ſpace in Vyneger, muſte be gyuen hir, not dealing with hir in ſixe houres after, at the leaſte. They take to the compoſition of this paſte, Aloes, Muſke, and the fatte of a Henne, egall portions, giuing it the hawke in manner aforeſayde.
               The ſignes that they gyue to knowe the Feuer, are the wrything of the hawkes trayne, the coldeneſſe of hir foote, and oftentymes the caſting of hir gorge. But the firſte rules and remedies do ſatiſfie mee ſufficiently, without theſe, bycauſe I finde in them ſome more reaſon: yet doe not thinke it amiſſe, to ſette downe diuers mens opinions, bycauſe euery man maye make his choyce: for what liketh one, perhappes, contentes not another.
            
            
               
               Of diſeaſes of the heade, and firſt of the Apoplexye, or falling euill.
               HAuing in purpoſe to treate of the diſeaſes, wherewith hawkes thoſe fillie birds are vexed in their heades, I muſt do you to knowe, that vnder the name and terme of the heade, I do not only compriſe that part that contayneth the brayne, but alſo the eares, eyes, beake, or clappe, nares, and mouth of the hawke: all which partes are ſubiect to ſundry diſeaſes and euils. But firſte of all, I meane to ſpeake of the chiefeſt, and moſt principall part of all the reſt, & of ſuch maladies as light vpon the brayne, and after that, of ſuche as happen to the externall and outward parts of the hawkes head. Among all which infirmities & griefes, I account the Apoplexie (whome the Italians call Gozza) the greateſt and moſt perillous, as the which doth ordinarily cauſe and bring ſodayne death.
               This miſchiefe doth commonly befall hawkes, by meane of too muche greaſe, and ſtore of bloude, for that at that tyme there doth happely breake ſome one vayne or other in ye braine, which doth fill ſome cōcauitie or hollow Cell of the brayne wt bloude, in which Celles (as the learned do imagine & affirme) the Animall ſpirites are ingēdred, and haue their beginning. Without which Animall ſpirites, no lyuing creature can eyther haue ſenſe or moouing. Wherevpon it doth follow of very neceſſitie, and by a meere conſequent, that the paſſage of thoſe ſpirites beeing ſhutte vp, and intercluded, the creature, whatſoeuer it be, muſte dye.
               Agayne, it may happen, for that the hawke hath bene ſette too long in the heate of the Sunne, for by that occaſion there may bee ſo muche humiditie and moyſte humour drawen vp into the brayne, as may ingender this euill, and procure this miſchiefe in the hawke.
               Moreouer it may chaunce, by making a lōg flight at a Feſant, or Partridge, in the heate of the daye, by meane of which the hawke hath ſurcharged hir ſelfe with ouermuche trauaile.

Wherefore it ſhall be behoouefull and neceſſarie, ſo to vſe the matter with care and diligence, as it may be foreſeene, that hawkes incurre not this aduenture and euill. Wherevppon, for that hawkes in the mewe, are accuſtomed to gather muche greaſe, it ſhall be good, for the ſpace of fifteene or twenty daies before the drawing of them out of the mewe, to feede them with lyquide and ſlypper fleſhe, ſuch as may lyghtly be put ouer, and paſſe through them. As namely, with the heartes of Calues, Lambes, or Goates, waſhed in luke warme water, and afterwarde dryed in a lynnen clothe, before you gyue it your hawke.
               Lykewiſe may you boldly feede your hawkes before they are drawen out of the mewe, with ſmall pullettes, and yong Sparrowes. When you haue thus doone, and obſerued this order of feeding them, when the tyme is come to drawe them out of the mewe, you muſte remember to drawe them very orderly, and after that to continewe the ſame kinde of feeding, and to keepe the ſame hande vppon them, for other twentie dayes ſpace at the leaſte, to ſkowre and diſburden your hawkes of that ſlyme and glytte, whiche doth ſurcharge them, hauing them alwayes for the moſte parte on the fiſte, and eſpecially at nyghte. Neyther ſhall it be euyll to ſkowre them, (or as our Oſtregers and Falconers do terme it) to enſeame them, by gyuing them a quantitie of waſht Aloes, allowing a Falcon as muche as the byggeneſſe of a Beane, beaten into powder, wrapped in Cotton, and ſo to make hir a ſkowring thereof, and beſides to giue hir Suger Candy, twoo or three mornings. But in any condition you muſte beware not to vſe Aloes vnwaſhte, bycauſe thereof are bredde ſundry ill accidentes in hawkes. And for that occaſion is it preſcribed you, to vſe Aloes waſhe, to auoyde that vndoubted euill, whiche would otherwiſe happen.
               Moreouer, I haue happily, and with good ſucceſſe approoued this remedie. I haue gyuen ſo muche larder, or butter, as I coulde well conuey into my hawkes throte, when

ſhee hath beene emptie aboue, hauing firſte prepared the larde or butter, by waſhing it ſeuen, eyght, or moe tymes in cleare water, and afterwardes letting it ſoke in Roſe water a ſpace, and laſtely by putting vnto it of the beſte Suger that I coulde gette, or Suger Candie beaten to pouder. And my order was, euer to gyue this ſkowring euery ſeuenth or eyght daye. And this is not alone to bee vſed to hawkes in the mewe, but alſo to ſuche as are kept on the pearche and ſtocke. But if it ſo fall out, that by theſe deuiſes and ſkowrings you cannot make your hawke haue a ſtomake and gredie appetite to feede, it ſhall not bee euill to pyſſe vppon hir meate, and hauing dryed it in part againe, to giue hir a gorge ſufficient, ſo muche as may ſerue hir, and as ſhe will take. For the more liquide and ſlypper fleſhe you giue hir, the ſooner wil ſhe be enſeymed. And by this meanes doe Falconers preſerue their hawkes from the falling euill, and ſodayne miſchiefe, and beſides that from ſundry other perilous accidents, that do followe thoſe ſillie birdes.
            
            
               Of the Apoſtumes of the heade.
               FAlcons, Goſhawkes, and other birdes of praye, are woont to be muche combred and moleſted with the ſwelling of the heade, and the Apoſtume thereof, a very greuous euill, occaſioned by abundance of euill humors, & the heate of ye head. It is diſcerned by ye ſwelling of ye hawkes eyes, by the moyſture whiche ſundrie tymes iſſueth, and diſtilleth from the eares, and often eake by euyll ſauoure, and ſmell of the Apoſtume. Alſo it may bee perceyued by the ſmall deſire the hawke hath to mooue or aduaunce hir ſelfe by the wreſting of hir heade, and the little regarde ſhee hath to tyre and pull the fleſhe that ſhee feedeth on, as thoughe in deede tyring were verie paynefull to hir, and by that ſhee is ſcarce able to open hir clappe, and beaten after hir accuſtomed manner.
               
                  Agaynſt this moſte perilous euill, it ſhalbe very neceſſarie firſte of all to ſkowre your hawke throughly, and after that the heade in chiefe.
               As touching the generall ſkowring, I can commend and allowe you to gyue hir three or foure mornings, when ſhee hath no meate to put ouer, a pyll as bygge as a nut of Butter waſht ſeuen or eyght tymes in freſhe water, and ſteeped well in Roſe water, myngling it afterwarde with Hoonie of Roſes, & very good ſuger, holding your hawke on the fiſte, tyll ſhe make one or twoo mewtes. Which being done, to diſburdē and ſkowre the head, it ſhall be excellent well done to take of Rewe ſeede foure drammes, Aloes Epaticke twoo drammes, Saffron one ſcruple, reducing and forcing all theſe to fine powder, and with a quantitie cōuenient of honie of Roſes, to make a pyll of that bygneſſe and ſyze, as may well be cōueyed into the hawkes beake, by whiche hir brayne maye bee purged and ſkowred, thruſting the pyll ſo deepe into hir throte, as you may well ſee, holding hir a ſpace after it vppon the fiſte. And that done, ſetting hir downe on the pearche, in a conueniente place, for a time, and twoo houres after, to feede hir at hir accuſtomed time with good hotte meate.
               But if happely there be any of the corruption and filthe in the hawkes eare, it ſhall be very neceſſarie, carefully with an inſtrument of ſiluer, or other good mettall for the nones, that the one ende bee ſharpe poynted and edged, of purpoſe to apply lynte, and on the other ende hollowe, and faſhioned like vnto the eare of a hawke, to clenze and remooue the filth that furreth the hawkes eare. And with that ende, whereon the lynte or bombaſte is, to ſkowre it very dayntity, and preſently vppon the ſame, to infuſe and droppe in a quantitie of Oyle of ſweete Almondes, freſhe and luke warme, and after the ſame to conuey into the eare a little lynt or bombaſt, to keepe in the Oyle, till ſuche time ſhee be dreſſed agayne, to the ende the Oyle may ſupple and mollifie the filthe, ſo as

it may eaſily bee remooued, and clenzed. And this order muſte you obſerue and continue, vntil the Apoſtume be reſolued and throughly rype. But if it ſo fall out, that the Apoſtume wyll not come to maturation, or rype, in ſorte as it may growe to ſuppuration, and be mundified in manner aforeſayde, but will reſte at one ſtaye in the heade of the hawke: then muſte you be fayne to come to cauterize the heade aloft, and beſtowe a button there, to cauſe the humor to breathe, and to bring the corrupte matter thyther, remembring after this fyer and cauterie to remooue the eſcare, by beſtowing on it for the ſpace of eyght or nyne dayes, butter, by whiche you ſhall eaſily remoue the cruſte or eſcare, whiche is made by the fier.
               You muſt not forget, if it be ſo as your hawke be ſo weake, as ſhe is vnable, or ſo frowarde, as ſhe will not feede and tyre vppon hir meate whiche you gyue hir, then to cutte it in ſmall pellettes, and ſo giue it hir, eyther by fayre meanes or fowle, not leauing to vſe it ſo, if it bee poſſible, as ſhe may receyue it willingly, and feede hir ſelfe, bicauſe it may the better nouriſhe hir. For this is one vndoubted rule, that when a hawke doth refuſe to feede and tyre, ſhe is very vnluſty, and diſeaſed, and not one among a hundreth of them, that doeth recouer. And for mine owne parte, in all my time, I haue recouered but one Falcon beeing ſo diſeaſed, and that by the meane and cure aforeſayde, and by vſing the cauterie.
               Lette this ſuffiſe, as touching this monſtrous accident, for I meane to referre you to another place for the cauterie and fire, whiche you ſhall vſe to hawkes, where I will ſpeake ſpecially therof. Onely gyuing you this caueat before you go, that this euill of the heade, is infectious, and will paſſe from one hawke to another, as the maungie doeth among Spanels, or any ſuche contagious diſeaſe. Wherefore it ſhall bee very good to ſequeſter and ſunder the hawke that is thus affected, from your other hawkes, for auoyding of the ſame euyll.
            
            
               
               Of the diſtillation and ſwelling of a hawkes heade, and alſo of hir eyes and nares.
               HAwkes are accuſtomed to haue a certayne diſtillation or Catarre in their heades, bicauſe, when they are harde fleen withal, & ſet in greate heates, by long & paynefull flyghts, they eaſily take colde vppon the ſame, either through ſome vnhappy ſtormes of weather, or great windes, or by reaſon of the extreme cold of winter, and chiefely when they are full of groſſe and naughty humors.
               Of this Catarre or diſtillation, ſundry times there growe a thouſande miſchiefes to thoſe poore birdes, and ſpecially the ſwelling of the heade, with a kinde of dropping humor, which is the cauſe many times, that the hawkes eyes becomme leſſe, and are contracted in a manner togither. Beſide whiche inconuenience, the nares alſo becomme to be ſtufte and ſtopped with exceſſiue excrement, that deſcendeth from the brayne. All whiche euill accidentes do require, and ſtande needefull of ſeuerall cures, before they can be remoued, and the hawkes inioy their accuſtomed health.
               Wherefore firſte of all, it ſhall bee neceſſarie to ſkowre your hawke, beeing thus affected and diſeaſed, with butter prepared in manner aforeſayde, or with Oyle Olyue, prepared after that faſhion, as I ſhall inſtruct you in the chapter of the Pantas.
               I haue, in the Catarre of Falcons, (as alſo of other hawkes,) diuers tymes vſed with greate good fortune and ſucceſſe, to gyue them of Agaricke twoo ſcruples, of Cynamon finely beaten, of the iuyce of Lyqueriſſe, of eyther one ſcruple, beeing made alſo into powder, and with a quantitie of Honie of Roſes, to make all thoſe things aforeſayde into a pyll, as bygge as a Beane, for the largeſt ſorte of hawke, and for other leſſe hawkes, halfe as bygge. And this was I accuſtomed to gyue my Falcon, and other

hawkes in the morning, hauing nothing aboue in their gorges, holding my hawke on the fiſte, vntill ſuche tyme the medicine beganne to woorke, bycauſe ſhee ſhoulde not caſte the ſkowring, (whiche then would do hir no pleaſure at all) and after three houres, then to feede hir with ſome good meate. You muſte remember, and note this very well, that if your hawke to whome you giue this ſkowring, be greaſie, and ful of fleſh, you may boldely gyue it hir twoo or three mornings. But if ſhee be poore, and lowe, then once or twice to allowe this ſkowring will very well ſuffiſe hir. For there is euer reſpect to be had of the ſtate of a hawke, when any vpwarde or downewarde ſkowring is gyuen them, for otherwiſe it wil do them greater miſchiefe, than pleaſure.
               But when you perceiue your hawkes head to ſwell, and hir eyes to be full of dropping humors, and to waxe leſſe than naturally they were accuſtomed to be, by meane of the ſwelling of hir heade: It ſhall be good, hauing gyuen hir this generall ſkowring, that I haue ſpoken of, to ſkowre the head alone, and purge it with ſome deuiſe, to force hir ſnyte and ſnuffe, as mē do accuſtome to ſneze: & to force hir therevnto, you may take Pepper, Cloues, and Muſtard ſeede, of eache one a like quantitie, making them all into very fine pouder, as is poſſible, and then with a whiſtle of ſiluer, or other like mettal, (yea though it be but a quill, it will ſerue the turne) beeing applyed vppon hir nares, to blowe it into hir nares as ſtrongly as you may, to make it pierce 
                     〈◊〉
                   further in. And beſides that, you may rubbe and frotte the pallate of your Hawke with the ſayde powder, and not feede hir after it, vntill ſuche tyme ſhe haue lefte ſnyting and ſnuffing. If you continewe this practiſe three or foure dayes, your Hawke ſhall recouer aſſuredlie.
               To diſcharge the heade of a hawke, that is ſtuft with yll humor, Senauza, which the Apothecaries do ſellin the winter, I haue founde a very excellente thing, and of greate force, gyuing of it the byggeneſſe of a Beane vnto my hawke,

beeing emptie, & hauing nothing aboue. And withall I was accuſtomed to rubbe the pallate of hir mouthe, forcyng alſo ſome parte of the powder to aſcende vp into the heade, by the hole that goeth to the brayne: and after I had ſo doone, woulde caſte my hawke to the pearche, vnhooding hir. Which was no ſooner doone, but you ſhoulde ſee hir caſte a worlde of ſlymie filthe and moyſte humoure, and ſnyſe at hir nares as faſte.
               But if it be ſo, that the abundance of humors in the heade, by none of theſe aforſayde remedies will be remoued, applying them neuer ſo often, nor ye miſchiefe ceaſe to vexe your hawke whiche you ſhall eaſily diſcerne by hir ſlymie caſtings, and the abundaunce of filthe that will iſſewe at hir nares: then muſt you of force be dryuen vētrouſly to flee to the actuall cauterie, & with an yron button heate in the fier, to cauterize hir vpon the heade, vſing no leſſe iudgemente and diſcretion therein, than the dayntineſſe of the place requires, regarding the bone of the hawkes heade, whiche is not very ſtrong, or harde. And before you do vſe the cauterie, it is neceſſarie to cutte away thoſe feathers, that are growing about the place where you meane to beſtow your fier.
               If with this monſtrous moyſtneſſe of your hawkes heade, there be ioyned a ſwelling, or the dropping of hir eyes: in that caſe I do thinke it beſt, to beſtow your button vpon hir head, iuſte betwixte hir eyes, obſeruing the ſame order that I haue alreadie preſcribed you.
               When the nares of your hawke are ſtufte with filthe, and ſurcharged with ſuche diſtillation from the heade, as I haue ſpoken of: after a conuenient ſkowring, then ſhall it be good to take Pepper and Muſtarde ſeede beaten into fine powder, and putting it in a cleane lynnen clothe, to ſtype it a ſpace in the ſtrongeſt Vyneger you can gette: and that done, to beſtowe ſome fewe droppes thereof vppon hir nares, ſo as they may enter and pierce hir nares. For truely this

deuiſe will ſo ſcowre and drie vp the humor, as it will doe great pleaſure. But if ſo with theſe remedies and meanes you cannot reſolue it, then muſt you be fayne to vſe the cauterie, not aloft vpon the head, but round about the nares, giuing hir a little touch with the fire, ſomewhat belowe the nares, to make them more large, alwayes vſing the matter ſo carefully, as you touch not the roote or (poret) of hir nares. When you haue in this maner beſtowed your fire, and actuall cauterie, vntill ſuch time the payne do ceaſſe, and the eſcarre fall away, (whiche is nothing elſe but the cruſt that is growen there, by meane of the fire,) you muſt anoynt the place with freſh butter, and after that you haue ſo done, then proceede to the cure of it with the powder of Maſticke, or Olibanum.
               
               This is a very good remedie for the ſwelling in the head of a Hawke. Take Staueſacre, a quantitie of Pepper, and a little Aloes Epaticke, beate theſe ſayd thinges into fine powder, and put them into the water of Rew, where when it hath bin ſteeped a ſpace in the ſaid licoure, with a little bombaſt or lint, bath your Hawkes nares twice a day, and you ſhall finde it eaſe your Hawke greatly, and ridde a greate parte of the filthie matter that breadeth the ſtoppage in hir head. If all theſe remedies which I haue alleaged generally, nor any one ſpeciall medicine will preuayle, as I ſayde before: then muſte you repoſe your chiefe truſt in the cauterie, which muſt be done either on the head with a cauterizing button, or about the nares with a nedle, or ſharpe yron, fyre hotte, or ſome golden or ſiluer inſtrument, of purpoſe made, applying after the fire, for the remouing of the Eſcare, and the cure of the ſame, the remedies aforeſaid.
            
            
               Of the giddineſſe and ſhaking of a Hawkes head.
               THere doth diuers times happen vnto Falcons, and other Hawkes, a miſcheefe, whoſe nature is, to cauſe the Hawke

to ſhake hir head continually, ſo as at no time ſhe can hold it ſtill or ſteadie, but is euer mouing it to one ſide or other, holding hir eyes cloſe ſhut withall. This diſeaſe is called Soda, which in engliſh we may tearme ye Megrim or a kind of Palſie, by meane the head is in continuall mouing.
               
                  The cure.This euill may proceede, eyther by the fowleneſſe of the panell, or of a corrupt and naughtie liuer. The remedie for it is this, whichu I hae found very good, and wherewith I haue cured my hawke in times paſt. You muſt giue your ſick hauke a caſting of cotton, in whiche you ſhall enwrappe of Aloes Epaticke one ſcruple, of Cloues two graynes, making theſe into powder, before you giue it: then two houres after the taking of this ſkowring, feede your Hawke with a yong Pigeon, or a hote Pullets legge, vſing this ſelfe ſame order three or foure mornings one after another.
               One other remedie for it is this. Take as much vnwaſht Larde as the toppe of youre little finger, with a quantitie of Peper, and a little Aloes Epaticke, beate theſe two laſt into powder, and conuey them into the Larde, whiche done, thruſt them into your haukes throte, holding hir on your fiſte a ſpace after it: then tie hir on the pearch in the ſunne, and ther let hir ſtay til ſhe caſt both the ſkowring, and the ſlimie matter which is in hir gorge. And this medicine may you vſe euery thirde day once, feeding your Hawke with hote meates, as Pigeōs, and yong Sparowes, & euery time you giue hir this ſkowring, conuey into hir a little Aloes, which is an excellent thing to ſkowre hir, and quitte hir of this diſeaſe.
               If theſe receytes and ſkowrings yeelde no remedie, then muſt you to the actual cauterie, ſhearing away the plumes about that part of the head where you will applie youre fire, euer reſpecting the bone, and burning nothing but the very ſkinne, to let the miſchiefe breath, remouing the eſcare, and doing the cure after the eſcare remoued, as is before ſaid. Let this ſuffice for this monſtrous miſchiefe, whiche killes many Hawkes: yet haue I cured my Hawkes twice, by theſe remedies in my time.
            
            
               
               Of the Cataract in the eyes of a Hawke.
               BEſides thoſe other euils, ther is a Cataract which doth light vpon the eyes of a Hawke, whome we may tearme a ſuffuſion, a miſchiefe not eaſely remoued, and diuers times impoſſible to be recured, as namely whē it is growen too thicke, and ouerlong hath bin ſuffered in the eye, without ſeeking remedie for it: but if it be not confirmed, then may it well be remedied, and I my ſelfe haue cured ſundrie Hawkes affected with this euill.
               This euill accident dothe happen, by meane of groſſe humors in the head, whiche are wont to dimme and darken the ſight, and ſometimes cleane to put out the Hawkes eye without redemption.
               It maye bee, that the hood is the cauſe and grounde of this diſeaſe, for I neuer in my life remember that I ſawe any other byrd or fowle troubled with it but only the Falcon: and perhaps, it lights on hir, in chiefe, for that of all other, ſhee is moſte vſed to the hoode, and to be almoſt at no tyme vnhooded.
               You muſt therefore haue an eye,The Curre. and eſpeciall regarde to this inconuenience, at ye firſt, by giuing one or two mornings a ſkowring of Aloes, or of Agaricke, to ſkowre your Hawke withall, bycauſe if you ſhoulde aduenture vppon any ſharpe or hard painefull medicine, applying it to the eye of youre Hawke, it woulde perhaps cauſe a greate repaire of euill humors and accidents to the place diſeaſed.
               When you haue giuen thys ſkowring of Aloes, or Agaricke, to remoue the matter from the eye, you muſt vſe a powder made of waſht Aloes, finely beaten, one ſcruple, and of Suger candye two ſcruples, blowing of this powder into your Hawkes eyes three or foure times in a daye, with the Pipe or quill aforeſayd. Thys is the gentleſt, and moſte ſoueraine medicine that you can applie to the eye in thys caſe.

and whileſt you do miniſter this receyte, it ſhall be good ſometimes to bath the eye with the vrine of a little boy.
               If by theſe medicines aforeſayd, the webbe of the eye wyll not be remoued, we muſt be driuen to vſe a ſtronger receyte, which is this.
               
                  Another remedie.Take a newe layde egge, and roſt him ſo long vntill the white of him become like milke. When you haue ſo done, put it into a fine white linnen cloth, and ſtrayne it ſo much and ſo long, vntill you ſee iſſue through your ſtrayner a cleare greene water, wherof you ſhall now and then infuſe a droppe or two into the hurt eye, vſing it ſo three or foure times in the day at the leaſt, vntill you ſee your Hawke amend of hir miſcheefe, and waxe ſound.
               Laſt of all, if theſe things auayle not to the cure, I do commend and allow aboue all the reſt, that you take the iuyce of Celendyne rootes, making them cleane from the earthe that doth vſe to hang to the moores: then ſcrape away the outmoſt rynde and pill of the roote, and vſe the iuyce to your Hawke. Truly I haue found this to be of ſingular force and vertue in the like accident.
               It ſhall not be amiſſe, in this and ſuche like affections and ill paſſions of the eye of a Hawke, to bath hir eyes often with roſe water, wherin haue bene boyled the ſeads of Fenygreke. But you muſt remember, that this water or colirie, be ſomewhat warme when you vſe it, bycauſe the eye is ſo noble, and ſo ſenſible a member, as it can ill brooke things eyther ouerhote or ouercolde, but muſte haue them moderately hotte or cold. This deuiſe may you vſe to bath your hawkes eye withall, vntill ſuch time ſhe be recouered, feeding hir meane while with good meates, and ſuch as are light of digeſtion.
               Hawkes are of ſo noble and excellent a nature, as the moſt part of medicines that you doe applie to the hurtes and cures of men, you may boldly beſtowe on Hawkes, as things very holeſome for them, as by their working will be moſt euidently ſeene and perceyued: yet muſte there be a diſcretion vſed, in

the adminiſtration of theſe ſayd receytes, hauing alwayes a regard vnto the weake and delicate nature of Hawkes, in reſpect of men: and therefore ye quantities of euery thing muſt be allowed and giuen accordingly.
               It happeneth diuers times, that through the Catarre, and paine of the head and eyes, there lights vppon the eares of a Hawke ſo mortall and deadly an apoſtume, as ſeldome when, though there bee greate care vſed about the cure, ſhe maye be brought to perfect ſtate, or recouered. And this proceedeth, bycauſe the miſchiefe lies ſo neare a neighboure to the brayne, as before it can breake or be clenſed outwardly, it cauſeth the Hawke to periſh. Beſides that, it is very hard to applie medicines in that place: but if the Hawke be of ſo ſtrong a nature, that ſhe brooke the breathing and rupture of this diſeaſe, which you ſhall perceyue by the quitture and filth that dothe iſſue from hir cares, giue hir this remedie, which is a very noble receyte, and approued of me often times, as well in men, as in Hawkes, to my great commendation and glory.
               Take honie of Roſes, and oyle of egges,The Cure. incorporate them togither, and powre twice or thrice a daye into the eares of your Hawke, ſome fewe droppes of it hote: and if you find by the abundance of filth, that there needeth great abſterſion, you maye adde therevnto a quantitie of Sarcacoll beaten into powder.
               The wine of Pomegranats is a moſt excellent remedie in this miſchiefe, confected with thoſe things aforeſayd.
               Butter well coyled and beaten in a morter of lead, one houre at the leaſt, and afterwardes powred into the Hawkes eares reaſonable hote, twice or thrice aday, is a very good remedie.
            
            
               Of ſuch euils as happen to Hawkes in their chappes and mouthes.
               THe chappes, and mouth of a Hawke is ſubiect to ſundrie diſeaſes, and in ye Hawkes mouth, there are wont to growe

certayne white peeces of fleſh, and ſometimes tending ſomewhat too blacke, which do hinder the Hawke from hir feeding, by meane whereof without any other euident cauſe, ſhe becō
                  meth leane, and lowe. Wherfore it ſhall bee very neceſſary to looke into hir mouth ſometimes, both in the Palat, and vnder the tong, bicauſe that many times, there eſpecially, do growe vp certaine peeces of fleſh like in ſhape to a graine of Peper, ſometimes leſſe, ſometimes bigger than a Peper grayn, which it ſhall be neceſſary to cut away, either with a payre of cyſers, if you may commodiouſly do it, or with Roch Alome burnt, or with a droppe of Oyle of Brimſton, applyed vpon a little cotton, with an yron vnto the place, taking away the corrupte fleſh. You muſt mundifie the place with honie of Roſes, and bombaſt or lynt, vntill you ſee the quicke fleſh vnderneath it, then afterwards, vnto the honie of Roſes, you may apply and adde, a little powder of Maſticke, or incenſe to conſolidate the wounde, waſhing it ſometymes among with white wyne.
               Moreouer, and beſides this, there is wont to happen vnto Hawkes in the mouth, a certaine frownce or impedimente, which doth hinder their feading, as the other peeces of fleſh do, of which I haue ſpoken before. This frownce may be very well perceyued and diſcerned with the eye, and will appeare alſo, by the feeding of the Hawke.
               Diuers times this kind of euill is cured with honie of Roſes, and with the powder of nutſhels, bound in a peece of linnen cloth, well bathed and ſtyped togyther, and thruſt vnder the whote ymbers, vntill it may bee brought vnto fine powder: thys may you continue twice a day, as long as ſhall bee needefull.
               But if this will not ſerue the turne, it ſhall be very neceſſary to mortifie and kill the frownce with Aquae fortis, ſuch as goldſmiths do vſe to part their mettalls withal, hauing reſpect not to touch it any where, ſauing only vpon the frownce, and part diſeaſed, for that it will fret the good and ſound fleaſhe.

After you haue mortified the frownce or canker with Aquae fortis, as I haue tolde you, then muſt you mundifie and conſolidate it with honie of Roſes, which wyll cure it out of hand.
               Alſo it is very good, to applie this receyte following in the cure of the frownce, whome the Italians call
Zaruoli.
               
               Take a cleane Skillet, wherevnto put good white wine, a quantitie of Verdigrece, well beaten to powder, of Roche Alome like quantitie, one ownce of honie, and a fewe drie Roſe leaues, boyle all theſe thyngs togither to the conſumption of halfe the wine: then ſtrayne it, and with the ſtrayning hereof, twice or thrice a day, bath the frownce with a little lint or bombaſt, tyed on the toppe of an inſtrumente for the purpoſe. But you muſte well regarde whether the fleſhe be good or no, and with a toole fitte for it to ſearche and cutte away the dead fleſhe, for otherwiſe it will doe little pleaſure, and the Hawke ſhoulde bee aſſured to ſuffer greate paynes, and yet to dye at laſte. Hauing mundifyed the wounde with the receyte aforeſayde, bathe it onelye wyth Honie of Roſes, and it wyll diſpatche the Cure.
               Take Verdegrece a quantitie, bynde it in a linnen clothe,The Cure. ſtype it one day and one nighte in Roſe water, or Plantine water, or common water, not hauing the reſt, and afterwardes waſh the frownce therewith, vntill they be mortified, whyche you ſhall well perceyue by the quicke fleſhe that will growe vnder: then applye Honye of Roſes in the ende of the cure, and it ſhall doe your Hawke great good.
               
                  Egiptiacum is an excellent thing to cure & kill the frownce in a Hawke, which is none other thing, but a very Canker, ſuche as men are plagued withall. Wherefore,Another. take Verdegrece, Roch Alome, of eyther two ownces, Honie of Roſes

one ownce, water of Plantaine, wine of Pomegranats, of eyther two ownces, and a halfe, ſet them on a ſofte burning fire, alwayes ſtirring them with a ſticke, or wodden ſplatter, vntill it turne to the thickneſſe of honie: then take a little of it, and mingle with a quātitie of Plantaine water, and you ſhal find this the moſt excellent remedie, aſwell for the frownce in a Hawke, as alſo for the Canker in the mouth of a man. Thus much is neceſſary to be vſed, when the frounce dothe happen vnto a Hauke by ſome apoſtheme of ye head, engēdred by a corrupt liuer, or ſome other inward part. But many times it ſo falleth out, that the beake of a Hawke is hindred and offended with this kind of euil, and not the mouth ſo much: in ſuch ſort, as the Hawke cannot well feede, by meane this miſchiefe doth ſo fret and eate the horne of hir chappe and beake. For remedie of that, you muſt take a ſharp knife, and pare away, as muche of the beake as is corrupted: but if the maladie or frownce haue eaten very farre vnder the horne of the beake, it is not ſufficient to cut it away with a ſharpe knife, as farre as the canker hath eaten, but you muſt afterwardes anoynt the place with honie of Roſes, twice or thrice: and in ſo doing the Hawke ſhall recouer and do well, for the honie of Roſes will both mundifie and incarne.
               Sometimes a Hawkes beake or clappe doth ouergrowe ſo much, as it is very neceſſary to cope it with an yron, and afterward to ſharpen the beake with a knife, taking away ſo much as is needeful for the better feeding of your Hawke, but in any wiſe you muſte not medle with the nether clappe, bycauſe that doth not commonly growe ſo faſt, nor ſo farre as to hinder your Hawkes feeding. Wherefore that part is to be fauored. Let this ſuffice as touching ye diſeaſes of ye Hawkes mouth, and the frownce, bycauſe ther is no canker or frownce ſo ill, but being taken in time, with theſe receites, it will be recured aſſuredly.
            
            
               
               Of the Pantas.
               ONe ſpeciall diſeaſe among others that be lurking and ſecret within the breſt and couert parts of a Hawke, is the Pantas, a very daungerous euill, and familiar to Hawkes: for lightly fewe eſcape, that are once encombred wyth thys infirmitie.
               This miſcheefe proceedes, when the lungs and thoſe breathing members by exceſſiue heate are ouerdried, and baked, in ſuch ſort, as they cannot by any meanes freely drawe the ayre to them, nor yet vtter it well being once receyued, for the better cooling of the hart, whoſe bellowes the lungs are, by nature ordayned for that ſpeciall purpoſe and office, wherby the hart wareth inflamed, and by a neceſſarye conſequente, the Hawke of force muſt periſh.
               Beſide that, the humiditie and moyſture of the head diſtilling from aboue, vpon thoſe breathing partes, and there encreaſed, and waxen thicke, is wont alſo to be a great furtheraunce to thys miſchiefe, and breede difficultie of breathing. Wherefore it ſhall be very neceſſary, to regard it at the firſte, before the diſeaſe haue taken too deepe roote: for that then (for any thing I know) there is no remedie in the worlde to be had for this Pantas, which is commonly tearmed Aſina.
               
               You maye iudge of the beginning of this greefe, and know it by thys. Your Hawke laboreth muche in the panell, mouing hir trayne often vp and downe, at each motion of hir panell, and cannot many times mewte or ſliſe: and when ſhee doth ſliſe, ſhe droppes faſt by hir, and makes a ſmall rounde burnt mewte: theſe are apparant proofes, that ſhee hathe the Pantas growing on hir.
               Againe, you may perceyue it by the more violent motion of hir gorge than cuſtome was, but the other are the moſt aſſured ſignes that you can deſire and infallible. Moreouer, when your Hawke doth often times open and cloſe hir clappes and

beake, then is the diſeaſe very neare confirmed. And looke how muche the more ſhee dothe it, the more is the Pantas rooted on hir, and then is the cure deſperate, and not to be hoped for.
               
                  The cure of the Pantas.The beſt remedie that euer I coulde fynde for the Pantas, was to ſcowre the Hawke with good oyle oliue, well waſhed in ſundrye waters, ſo long, vntill it became cleare and white.
               
                  The way to waſh Oyle.My accuſtomed maner of waſhing it was, to put it in an 
                     •
                  arthen potte, that had a little hole in the very bottom of it of purpoſe made rounde, whereby it mighte the better bee ſtopte with the toppe of my finger: then do I conuey into this potte that quantitie of Oyle, whiche I meane to waſhe in it, and with cleare water do there coyle it togither with a wodden ſplatter, or a ſpone, that the water waxeth ſomewhat darke with it: after whiche remouing my finger, the water paſſeth away by the hole, the Oyle remayning behinde, and ſwimming aloft, as it is the nature of it to do. And thus do I ſixe, ſeauen, or eyght times, ſo long, vntill I perceyue the Oyle to haue no filthe lefte in it at all. Then of this Oyle thus prepared, I beſtowe vppon my Hawke that hathe the Pantas, filling therewith a chickens gutte waſht very cleane, of an ynche long and ſomewhat more for a Falcon and Goſhawke: but for other leſſe Hawkes, of a leſſe length, faſt knit at bothe endes with a thread, to the ende the Oyle maye not iſſue out, whiche gutte I conuey into the Hawkes throte, after ſhe hath caſt, and is emptie aboue and in the pannell bothe, holding hir on the fiſte till ſhee make a mewte: and one houre after ſhe hath left mewting, then I feede hir with ſome ſlipper fleſhe, as the harte of a Calfe, or a Pullets legge, refuſing to vſe olde Pigeons and Sparowes, bycauſe they are ouer hote meate, vnleſſe happely the Hawke were very lowe and poore, but being hie and full of fleſh, thoſe other meates aforeſayde, are not alone holeſome, and ſufficient for hir, but they will be much better, being waſht in water of Bugloſſe, and wroong drie in a linnen cloth, and then minged with the powder of

Suger candie, vſing this order ſixe or eyght dayes or moe, euery other day till my Hawke recouer: giuing hir euery third or fourth daye, a cotton caſting with Cubebes and Cloues, to ſcowre and diſcharge hir of ſuch moyſt humors as deſtilleth from hir head, whiche ſometimes (as I haue ſayde before) is the chiefe and originall ground of this diſeaſe.
               Beſides this remedie, there is one other very good, and that is butter, and Larde, well ſliſed, and waſhed in ſundrie waters, till they become very cleane, and whyte, whyche you maye keepe in Roſe water, vntill you haue occaſion to vſe it.
               Of theſe beeing thus prepared and conſerued, you maye take as you haue nede, for euery ſkowring ſuche a quantitie, as will ſerue to make a pill or pellet, ſo greate as you maye well conuey into your Hawkes throte, vſing it in maner and time aforeſayd: giuing hir now and then among that ſkowring of Cubebes and Cloues, as well for the reaſon alreadie alleaged, as alſo bycauſe of hir liquide meate and ſlipper feeding vppon thoſe harts, ſo bathed and ſtieped in water. For Cubebes and Cloues will greatly comfort the ſtomacke and gorge of your Hawke.
               I haue found by experience that Oyle of ſweete Almonds is of wonderous efficacie in the cure of this diſeaſe, giuing it in a chickens gutte as aforeſayd.
               If theſe remedies which I haue ſhewed, doe not preuayle, nor performe the perfit cure of your diſeaſed hawke, ne yet doe make hir mewte, which happened at no time to me in all my experience and practiſe. But when there is no remedie to bee had at all, I can well allow the vſe of Agaricke with a cotton caſting, bycauſe Agaricke is of great force to cauſe a Hawke to ſliſe But if for al this, the griefe do dayly proceede and increace, then do I thinke good that you beſtowe a Cauterie vpon youre Hawkes heade, betwixt hir eyes, & eake at hir nares, ſpecially if there be any imperfectiō in thē. Some mē are of opinion, yt for ye cure of the Pantas you ſhulde giue your hauke

two inches of a Lucerts tayle, newly cut off, conueying it into youre Hawkes gorge, and afterwardes ſetting hir in ſome darke place, till the haue caſt, and then to giue hir gotes milke, with the bloud of a Doue. Otherſome writers do will and aduiſe to let the Hawke bloud in the necke.
               But I for my parte, haue neyther tried the one, nor the other, if I ſhall tell you the trouth of the matter, bycauſe I doe not at all like of theſe deuiſes: but doe aſſure you, that with thoſe other remedies and receytes, whiche I haue taught you in this Chapter of the Pantas, (I meane, the ſkowrings, and the cawterie,) I haue done very muche good, and recouered my Hawkes of this diſeaſe, and therefore do recommend you to them, as vndoubted experiments.
               Betony reduced into the forme of an Electuarie with honie, is a very good remedie for this greefe, as well in men, as in Hawkes.
               One other remedie which I find in an Italian Author, is this. Take Mummy, Rhewbarbe, Saffron, & Suger candye, make all theſe into powder, giuing it to your Hawke, for the ſpace of eight days at leaſt in a chickins ſkinne, if ſhee will take it, if not, force it into hir. And while you miniſter thys medicine vnto hir, al that time let hir not be borne on the fiſte: and withall among ſometimes, giue waſht freſh butter with ſuger candye, and ſometimes a cotton caſting with incenſe within it. But I do more commend, to giue hir bole Armoniacke, in a pill with honie.
               Theſe remedies no doubt, are very good and ſoueraigne againſt the Pantas of a Hawke. Make you choyſe of them, but let the Cawterie be the laſt refuge, for that is an extremitie. Remember this rule of Phiſicke, that euer it is beſt to begin wt the weakeſt: for if they will profit and do ſufficient good, in vayne it were to charge nature with the ſtrongeſt receytes, which are rough, and churliſh in working.
            
            
               
               Of the infirmitie and diſeaſe in the gorge of a Hawke, when ſhe dothe caſt hir gorge.
               SVndry are the diſeaſes that Hawkes are peſtred withall, by meane of the indiſpoſition of the gorge, when yt parte is out of tune: among which the moſt ordinarie and perillous is the caſting of the gorge, when a Hawke dothe caſt hir meate vndigeſted, in the ſelfe ſame forme ſhe receyued it▪ or elſe corrupted, and of a lothſome ſauoure, both whiche they doe many times.
               If ſhee caſt it cleane, and not ſtincking, but of good ſmell, ther is no great feare of the matter, nor any great danger: bycauſe it maye proceede by meane ſome ſmall bone is croſſed and turned in the gorge of the Hawke, whiche doth cauſe hir to caſt it againe for hir more eaſe and quiet: Wherefore in this caſe it ſhall be good for the more ſuretie, and to knowe the worſt of the accident that may happen thereby, to beare your Hawke to the water, or to offer hir a baſon of water, to trie whether ſhe wil bowze or no. For by bowzing, beſides the good that ſhe ſhall receyue by it, you ſhall haue euident proofe and vndoubted ſhewe of hir diſeaſe, and that in deede ſhee is ſicke, and dothe ſtande in neede of Phiſicke: but if ſhee bowze not at all, it argueth hir to bee in good time.
               Theſe accidentes are wonte to happen by meane of ouer much moyſture and humiditie, and through exceſſiue rottē humors, engendred in the gorge.
               Wherefore if the Hawke caſt hir meate well ſauoring, and of good coloure, neyther ſtinking to ſmell, nor lothſome to vewe, and do bowze after it, it ſhall be good to heate and comfort the gorge, with the powder of Nutmegges and Cloues, with a quantitie of Muſke, all enwrapped in a peece of fine cotton, or bombaſt, giuing it to the hawke when ſhe is emptie

paneld, as cuſtome is to do, holding hir on the fiſte, vntill ſhee put ouer hir ſayd caſting into hir gorge. Then two houres after ſhe hath caſt it againe, it ſhall be very neceſſary to feede hir with yong Doues, giuing but halfe a gorge, or ſomewhat leſſe at a time: and at nighte when hee ſuppes hir, to lette hir plume a little, and if the Hawke will bowze, to giue hir leaue to doe it, for truly it will be very wholſome for hir. By this meanes, I promiſe you, I haue recouered ſundrie ſieke Hawkes, and chiefly Sparowhawkes.
               I haue ouer and beſides this, vſed with great good ſucceſſe, good Roſe water, altred wt a quantitie of powder of Cloues, and muſke, preparing it after this manner:
               I haue taken Roſe water two ownces, powder of Cloues two ſcruples, of fine Muſke fyue graines: and of this haue I giuen my Hawke fyue ownces, or there about, after that as my Hawke hath bin either poore or hie in ſtate, holding hir on the fiſte, vntill ſhe hath made a mewte.
               This medicine will bring hir to a good apetite, a ſweete breath, and will beſides all theſe ſcowre very well.
               But if that which ſhe doth eaſt, be corrupted and ſtincking: ouer and beſides the aforeſayd remedies, whiche indeede are excellent good, I can allow well that you take the roote of Celidonie, or Celondine, remouing away the vpper rynde and pill off the roote, vntill it looke redde, and droppe agayne, then to infuſe it in a quantitie of luke warme water, ſtirring the roote vp and downe in the water, to cauſe it to receyue the effect and qualitie of the Celydonie the more. Of which roote you muſt (after you haue ſo done) conuey a pellet as bigge as a beane for the huger ſorte of Hawkes, into the beake of your Hawke, thruſting it downe with your forefinger into the very gorge of hir, to the end it may the better deſcend into your Hawke. Beſides this, it is very good to open hir beake, and conuey into hir one ſpoonefull of the water aforeſayd, not all at once, but at twice or thrice, cloſing

faſt hir clappes againe, bycauſe ſhee maye the better keepe it, and not caſt it vp preſently.
               Thys beeyng done, keepe hir a ſpace vppon the fiſte, vntill the roote and licoure bee well ſettled in hir gorge. After whyche, caſt hir on the pearche, in ſuche a place, where is no reſorte, eyther of people, dogges, chickens, cattes, or other ſuche lyke thynges, to the ende you maye the better diſcerne hir ſkowring: and beſydes, that ſhee maye haue the leſſe cauſe to bate. There let hir ſtande, vntill ſhee hathe caſt all the roote whiche ſhee receyued, and that the water hathe made hir mewte and ſliſe ſufficiently, whyche will doe hir very greate good. Then after two houres it ſhall be well, to giue hir a yong Ratte or Mouſe, newly ſtripped out of the ſkinne hote, and for lacke thereof, a yong Pigeon, whome you ſhall kill, by throwing hir forcibly againſt the grounde, with the raines downeward, bycauſe the bloud may gather togither, and ſtande: whereof feede youre Hawke, giuing hir the hart alſo, and the reynes thereof, withoute anye more allowance of any of the Pigeons fleſhe. When ſhee hathe diſpatched and rydde this beaching of the Pigeons hart and bloud, or of the yong Ratte, then giue hir in like manner the like quantitie, onely of the dead doue: onely twice a day to a Sparowhawke, but to a Falcon or Goſhawke, foure or fyue beachings in one day, euer obſeruing the ſelfe ſame order that I haue preſcribed you.
               The next morning you may, if neede be, in a little lint, or flaxe, or ſuch like deuiſe, gyue a ſkowring of incenſe or Olibanum, I meane, the leaues of it brooſed in your hand, as ſmall as is poſſible, gyuing hir but a ſmall gorge, to the ende, that towardes the euening, you may allowe hir a reaſonable ſupper.
               By this vſage and order haue I cured ſundrie Hawkes of mine owne, and other mens.
               You muſt note, yt whē theſe remedies aforeſaid, do not profit,

nor do the feate, and that the Hawke doth caſt hir, more than twice, then is it a deſperate caſe, and ſo much the woorſe, if the Hawke be lowe and poore, for then in that caſe haue I ſeene very few or none recured.
               Neuertheleſſe, I haue ſomtimes ſeene a meruayle wrought in this caſe, by making the greater kind of Hawkes, as Falcons, Gerfalcons and ſuch like, dronke with a ſponfull or two of ſtrong Malmeſie, conueyed by force into hir gorge: but to ye leſſer Hawkes you muſt not giue ſo muche of the Malmeſie, but in leſſe quantitie. Which done, they haue bin placed vpon a bedde or a cuſſhen, for on the pearch they cannot ſtande, being drowſie, but will lie as things in a traunce, for the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, and many neuer recouer themſelues againe, but if happily any do after they are thus dealt withall, recouer and ſliſe, and ſcoure away their medicine, no queſtion that Hawke ſhall throughly recouer: then is it good to giue hir of the bloudy parts of a Pigeon vſed in that manner as I foreſhewed you, but this daungerous medicine is not to be giuen, but in deſperate caſes.
            
            
               Of diuers accidents that happen to Hawkes, by meanes of fowleneſſe of the gorge, and indiſpoſition thereof.
               IT hapneth ſometimes that a Hawke can hardly put ouer hir meate which may be diſcerned by this, when in the morning ſhe hath of hir ſupper aboue. This miſfortune chaunceth partly by reaſon hir meat was ouerdrie, and (as we may ſay) ſo hard baked in the gorge, as ſhe coulde not put it ouer, and partly agayne, for that the Hawke cannot endue ſufficiently, neyther yet dothe fyll in the pannell as ſhee oughte to doe.
               
                  In the firſte caſe, I haue holpen diuers with gyuing the Hawke water at wyll, to bowze hir pleaſure, bathing beſides hir feete & pearche with freſhe colde water: whiche not ſeruing the turne, I haue thruſte my forefinger into hir gorge, and ſo holpen it along, and ſomtimes my little finger, or a waxe candle: and by that meanes haue cauſed hir to fill in the ventricle ſooner than otherwiſe ſhe woulde haue done. The weakeneſſe of which part diuers times is a cauſe that the hawke doth not well endew, nor fill in the Panell.
               Somewhiles againe I haue vſed, & chiefly to Falcons, to giue a ſkowring in Cotton of powder of Mummie, prepared of Cloues and Nutmegs, rolling aloft vpon the cotton a litle lynte of Flaxe, bicauſe they ſhould the ſooner caſte it. And by this meanes haue recouered them preſently.
               When a hawke doth endew but ſlowly, & hath by yt meanes ſmal luſt to hir meate, you muſt thus do, to make hir more eger & ſharpe, wrappe hir meate in the feede of Naſturciū, or watercraſſies, and ſo cauſe hir to take it. But this muſte be vſed onely in winter, by reaſon that kinde of ſeede is very hotte.
               The meate being thus vſed, will bring hir to be very ſharpe ſette, and cauſe hir to be well breathed, and beſides make hir luſtie, for in deede it is a medicine very excellent, and of infinite vertue.
               Beſides, ſometimes the gorge is ſo out of tune, as it is the cauſe that the hawke at hir accuſtomed houre doth not caſte, but retayneth hir caſting within hir. Wherevpon it behooues ſome arte to be vſed to make hir caſte. The nexte remedie for yt (as I haue ſayde already) is to gyue the roote of Celendine, prepared in forme aforeſayde.
               Moreouer Muſtard ſeede, otherwiſe called Senvye ſeede, is an excellent & a preſent remedy for yt miſchiefe, being cōueyed into ye hawkes throte, of ye bignes of a beane, to ye huger ſort of haukes: but to ye leſſer haukes a leſſe quātity ought to be giuē: and beſides yt, one graine of Cloues, wt a litle pure Aloes wel waſht, albeit yt wil ſomwhat vexe & wrōg ye hauke in this eaſe
               
                  But aboue all other, do I commend and preferre a ſkowring conueyed into a little cotton caſting, that is made of the pouder of Aloes Epaticke waſht, of Cloues, Nutmegges and Ginger, of eache of theſe equall portions, rolling the cotton in a little Tow or Flaxe, making it as hard with your hande as you may, & then rolling it in ye pouder of Cloues, and forcing it downe the hawkes throte: and preſently you ſhall ſee your hawke caſte it vp with the olde caſting whiche ſhe had before. This, beſides the benefite of that, will comfort greatly & ſtrēgthen the gorge, and ſkowre the heade of all ſuch euill humors, as are there, ſurcharging the ſame. The vſe of this deuise nowe and then, will be very neceſſarie and beneficiall to your hawkes without doubt.
               If your hawke will not caſt, take Aloes, Pepper, pouder of Cloues, and honie of Roſes, making of all theſe a long pyll, and as bygge as a caſting, gyue it your hawke, and ſhe ſhall preſently caſte vpon the taking of it.
            
            
               Of woormes, that moleſt and trouble hawkes out of meaſure.
               NOwe do I holde it high time, and the place very conueniēt to write of ſuch kinds of woormes, as do trouble and vexe ye poore hawke, as hir mortall enimies, which after a ſort do depende of the gorge, through whoſe weakeneſſe there are engendred groſſe and viſcuous humors in the bowelles of a hawke, where beeing weakely wrought by default of naturall heate, the humor conuertes into ſmall woormes a quarter of an ynche long, and more.
               You may perceyue theſe woormes to plague and trouble your hawke, when you ſee hir caſte hir gorge, when hir breath ſtynckes, when ſhe trembleth and wrytheth hir trayne, when ſhe croakes in the night, offreth with hir beake to hir pannell, when hir mewte is not cleane, white, nor in ſuche abundance as it oughte to bee. And beſides all this, when your Hawke

keepes at one ſtaye, and is lowe of fleſh continually.
               In this caſe it behooues you to deſtroy theſe woormes eyther with a ſkowring of waſht Aloes Epaticke, Muſtard ſede, and Agaricke, of each one egal portions, vſing to giue it as I haue taught you before. Or elſe, by miniſtring the pouder of ye Gall of a Bore pygg
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in the ſmoke: or if theſe fayle, to gyue the pouder of Harts horne being dryed.
               White Dittander, Hiera pigra minore, (for there are ſundry kindes of it) of eache two drāmes, Aloes Epaticke well waſht three drammes, Agaricke, Saffron, of each one dramme, being all incorporate with Hoonie of Roſes, is an excellent remedie agaynſt the woormes. You muſte keepe it well, and giue Falcons, Goſhawkes, & ſuche like, the bygneſſe of a beane, but to Sparowhawkes, and the leſſer ſort of hawkes, as muche as a peaſe, in form of a pill, thruſting it down your hawkes throte, keping hir after it a ſpace on ye fiſt, till ſhe haue ſliſed & mewted hir medcine, feding hir afterward wt good meat after your wōted maner. And this ſhall recouer hir, and kill the worms.
               For the ſame diſeaſe it is very good, to giue a ſkowring of white Dittander, Aloes Epaticke well waſht, Cubebes foure or fiue, a fewe flakes of Saffron enwrapped in a morſell of fleſhe, to cauſe the hawke the better to take it.
               This receyte, no doubt, will bothe make the hawke to ſlyſe and mewte, and withall recouer hir. For it is an approoued remedie againſte the woormes, and ſpecially when the hawke doth wrythe and wreſt hir trayne.
               Againe, take Rheuponticum, Suger Candy, filings of yron, of eache like quantitie, of theſe, with iuyce of Woormewood, frame pilles, and cōueying them into the ſkinne of a chicken, giue your hawke one pill at a time, & it ſhall do hir pleaſure.
            
            
               Of the Filanders.
               NOw I am entred in ſpeche of wormes, I thinke it good to write ſomwhat of ye Filanders, to giue both knowledge &

cure of them. Albeit theſe wormes doe not all depende of the gorge, for their naturall place & being is neare the raynes of a hawke, where they be enwrapped in a certaine thinne nette or ſkinne, ſeueral by themſelues, apart from either gut or gorge.
               Theſe Filanders (as the very name doth import,) are ſmal as threedes, & one quarter of an ynche long, a
                     ••
                   more proper and peculiar to Falcons, than to any other hawke or fowle. And this makes me to thinke, ye they are naturally allowed ye Falcon, bicauſe in deede they do not at al times vexe & trouble the hawkes, but now & then, & ſpecially when ye hawke is poore, & low of fleſh. But if ſhe be hie & luſtie, then by reſon of ye abundance of nouriſhment & foode yt they receiue from ye hawke, they moleſt hir not at all, but rather do hir good: and my reaſon is this. I cannot be induced to thinke that nature (who doth vſe to make nothing but to ſome ende and purpoſe) hath produced & placed thoſe Filanders in that part of the Falcō for naught, or to hurt the hawke. But how and in what ſort they pleaſure or profit the hawke, I coulde neuer yet reache by coniecture.
               When they are troubled and grieued with the Filanders, you ſhall firſte diſcerne it by the pouertie of the hawkes, by ruffling their traynes, and by certayne twytches and ſtartes that they wyll make, ſtrayning the fiſte or pearche with their pownce, and laſtly by their crooking in the nyght time, which kinde of noyſe they vtter, when the Filanders pricke and gripe them within. For when they wante their ſuſtenance, whiche they can by no meanes haue, when the hawkes are lowe and poore, then do they endeuour to rende and breake that ſlender nette wherein they are naturally incloſed, to yſſewe oute to ſeeke their vittayles ſome other where. And manye tymes it happeneth, that, not ſeeing to it in tyme, and at the firſte, they paſſe through their webbe, and crall vp as hyghe as the verie hearte, and other principall partes of the Hawke, whereof it muſte needes conſequently followe, that ſhee periſheth without redemption.
               I haue ſometimes ſeene this peſtilent woorme by piercing

and breaking the bed wherein nature hath layde them, aſcend vp ſo highe, as they came foorth, and appeared at the Hawkes beake and mouth.
               Wherefore it ſhall be neceſſarie to reſpect the cure of theſe Fylanders, not by killing them (as you woulde doe other woormes, (for then happely beeyng deade, and rotting in that place, from whence they can not paſſe awaye with the Hawkes mewte, they woulde there corrupte and breede a filthie Apoſtume in hir) but the waye that you muſte take: is, by making thē droncke with ſome medicine to entertayne them, in ſuch ſort, as they may not offend or grype the hawke.
               The beſte remedie that can bee deuiſed for it, is to take a Garlicke head, pyſling from the cloues thereof the vtmoſte finde: whiche doone, you ſhall with ſome ſmall yron toole, or bookine hette in the fyre, pierce the cloues, and make certayne holes in them. And afterwards ſteeping them in Oyle at leaſte three dayes, gyue your Falcon one of them downe hir throte: for the cloue of Garlicke vſed in this manner as I tell you, will ſo inrage & aſtonne the Filanders, that for thirtie or forty dayes after they wil not at al moleſt your hawke. Wherevpon ſome Falconers, when their Falcons be low and poore, once in a moneth do of ordinarie gyue them a Cloue of Garlicke, for feare of the Filanders, to preuent the woorſte, and truely to good effecte. And for that verie purpoſe and cauſe, are ſeldom or neuer without Garlicke ſtieped in Oyle, where yt lōger they lye, ye better, & more medicinable they are.
               Thus muſt you deale with thoſe Filanders, that lye in the raynes. But there is one other kind of Filanders, lying in the guts, or pannell of a hawke, which are long, ſmall, and white worms, as though they had dropt out of ye raines of ye hawke. If you will deſtroy thoſe Filanders, you muſt take Aloes Epaticke, fylings of yron, Nutmegges, & ſo much Honie, as wil ſerue to frame a pyll, which pyll you ſhall giue your hawke in ye morning, as ſoone as ſhe hath eaſte, holding hir on ye fiſte for ye ſpace of an houre after. Then caſt hir on ye perche, & when

you geſſe hir to haue ſlyſed hir pill, and mewted it cleane, then feede hir with good hotte meate.
               There are beſides theſe, yet one other ſorte of Filanders in the guttes of a hawke alſo, whiche cauſe a hawke to caſte hir gorge as ſoone as ſhe hath fedde, and do make hir ſtrong breathed: for them prouide this remedie.
               Take Aloes Epaticke, & Wormwood made into very ſmall pouder, temper the pouder with Oyle of bitter Almondes: and that done, annoynte therewith the flanckes and ſides of your hawke. And if you like not the Oyle, for greſing your Falcōs feathers & plumes, compounde thoſe ſayde pouders wt Vineger at the fire: but it is certaine that the Oyle is the better farre of both, and more proper to this diſeaſe.
               If you can, giue your hawke Oyle of bitter Almonds, and not diſquiet hir gorge, & after it beſtow ye other cure vpon hir, with the annointing hir as I haue taught you▪ you ſhal finde it the moſt perfect remedie, yt may be againſt thoſe Filanders, that lodge in the guttes and bowels of your hawke.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe of the Lyuer.
               THe lyuer of a hawke is oftentimes inflamed by ouermuch bating & trauaile, as it happeneth not ſeldome to Falcons brought from farre & forrayne parts by ſhippe: & againe, when they bee impacient and bedlam in the mewe, or when they flee ſurcharged wt ouergreat bells. For the ouerbelling of a Falcō, puts hir to a greater payne & trouble, than needes. By theſe & ſuche like occaſions, hawkes become hot lyuered. Againe ſomtimes it happeneth by meane of an Apoſtume, which is engē
                  dred either by ſome pricke of a thorne, or the ſtripe of an other hawkes pownce, by crabbing wt hir. For whē they haue ſuch a ſtripe or pricke, ye ſkinne is broken outwardly, but ye bloud remaining corrupt within, engēdreth ye apoſtume. Many times this diſeaſe of the lyuer proceedes of ſome brooſe agaynſte the grounde, or in a tree, or the encounter with another fowle.
               You ſhall perceiue this diſeaſe of the inflamation of ye liuer,

when your hawke ſtandeth melancolie, caſteth not at hir accuſtomed and woonted houres, by hir fowle caſtings, by hir ſtynking and yll coloured mewtes, (whereof I ſpake before) by hir labouring thicke in the panell, and by feeling of hir: For hir pulſe dothe beate as the pulſe of a man that hath a feuer. Moreouer hir mewt is as black as any incke. The diſeaſe is the moſte peſtilent and daungerous of all others.
               If the heate of hir lyuer proceede of too muche bating, or broyling with hir ſelfe, you maye eaſily cure hir with foure or fyue good lyquide and cooling gorges, as to feede hir with the legge of a Pullette, or the hearte of a Veale, bathed in water of Bugloſſe, Bowrage, Hartes tongue, and ſuche like waters.
               Moreouer it is very ſouerayne, to waſhe hir meate in the iuyce of Heubane, or elſe (that whiche doeth muche more refreſhe the hawke) to take a lyttle larde or Bacon, withoute the rynde, and well waſhte and conſerued in good Roſe water, and laſte of all rolled in powder of Suger Candie. With this receyt more than with any other, am I accuſtomed to recomfort and refreſhe my hawke, when ſhe is ſicke of hir liuer. Notwithſtanding the other medicines are very wholeſome & good. And ſpecially, good freſhe butter, or Oyle waſhte and prepared, as I taught you in the former chapter.
               But when the miſchiefe of the lyuer is engendred by ſome pricke of a thorne, or the crabbing with ſome other hawkes or fowle, as diuers tymes it happeneth to the Falcon, by encounter with a Hearon, when they binde togither in the ayre. In this extremitie, Mummie purified, made to powder, is very good. You muſt rolle your hawkes meate in this Mummie prepared three or foure tymes, & ſo gyue it your hawke: and if ſhee refuſe to take it of hir ſelfe, then conuey it into hir by force, with a Cotton caſting, four or fiue dayes one after an other.
               If ſhe be ill affected in hir lyuer, by a brooſe againſt ye groūd or againſt a tree, or by encounter with ſome other fowle, then

take Rewbarbe of the beſt one ſcruple, dry it vpon a hot yron panne, vntill it may be made into fine pouder, of that gyue in a canuas caſting, the weight of two graines of wheate to your larger ſort of hawkes, but for the leſſe hawke ye one halfe will ſuffiſe. After ſhe hath taken this caſting, if ſhe be hye in fleſhe, then two houres after feede hir with a Pullets legge, waſht in one of thoſe cooling waters, but if ſhe be lowe & poore, wt good hot meate. Thus muſt you cōtinue four or fiue dayes, giuing one day the caſting wt Rewbarbe, & another day wt the Mū
                  my aforeſayd. Truly without doubt your hawke ſhal recouer if you folow this methode, vnleſſe the lyuer be remoued out of his place, which ſomtimes doth happen by ſomegreat brooſe or ſtraine. And you ſhall know it by a cōtinual hardneſſe, which you ſhal feele in the hawkes panell, & by hir yellowe mewtes.
               For this incōuenience there is no remedie in ye world to be had, although you wolde trye all yt medicines yt are to be vſed to hawkes, you ſhal profit nothing. It muſt nedes folow, that wtin fiue daies your hawke peke of ye perche. It is not curable.
               
                  Giordanus, an excellent Falconer, for ye indiſpoſition & heate of the lyuer, willeth you to take halfe an ownce of Soldanel, and one ownce of Iroes, which is floure de Luce. You muſte beate theſe into fine powder, & conuey it into your caſting, & ſo giue it your hawke. Withall at nyght he willes you, when your hawke hath put ouer, and well ſkowred hir filth, feede hir with good meate, waſht in theſe cooling waters following.
               Take water of Endiue, Maydenheare, Cycorie, and Bugloſſe: in theſe waters may you waſh your hawkes meate, as alſo hir caſting, if it pleaſe you, wrapping in ye caſting ye pouder aforeſayde. For what with the helpe of the one and the other, no doubt you ſhall ſee a very good effect.
               Moreouer the ſayde Giordanus ſayth, yt Gerfalcons are of al other ye hotteſt hawkes, & therfore to maintaine & kepe thē ſoūd he doth aduiſe to waſh their caſtings in this water folowing.
               Take Endiue water, Maydenheare, otherwiſe called Capillus Veneris, the water of Scabioſa, of eyther twoo ownces, one

dramme of choiſe Rewbarbe, of the beſt Agarick one ſcruple, put theſe in infuſion, where after they haue bin infuſed ſeuen houres, waſh your Hawks caſting in it. This order vſe euer, when your Gerfalcon is out of tune, and it ſhall greatly pleaſure hir.
            
            
               Of diſeaſes that happen to Hawkes feete, and firſt as touching the ſwelling of a Hawkes foote.
               SOmetymes the arme and foote of a Hawke doeth ſwell, by meanes of yll humors that deſcende and drop downe, through weakneſſe of the foote or arme, through ouergreat trauail & toile, through age, by reaſō of ſome blow or brooſe receiued lōg before.
               This miſchiefe may eaſily bee diſcerned as well by vewe of eye as touch of hande: for beſides that you ſhall plainly perceiue it in ſight, you may feele a verie great heate in the member, ſo as ſometimes the hawke is vnable to ſtande on hir legges, for paine and anguiſh thereof. Wherfore it is neceſſarie to looke to it with all care that may be, and ſo vſe the matter, as the humor breede not the goute, or the pinne, which oftentymes happeneth to thoſe poore byrdes, to their great and continuall plague.
               The way to cure it, is to giue the humor a vent by launſing it, and after that to recomfort the member by often annoynting it with the white of an Egge, Vinegar, and Roſe water, well beaten and coyled togither, or elſe with verie good olde Oyle of Oliues, ſuch as you can come by out of a Bottell wherein Oyle hath beene long time kept: for thoſe droppes that hardly come out of the Bottel, are farre better than any newe freſh Oyle, and are more medicinable in this caſe.
               Moreouer beſides the ceaſing the paine, to delay the ſwelling, you ſhall finde it verie excellent good, to take the powder of
Acacia, and terra Sigillata, of either four drammes, incorporating them with vineger, the white of an Egge, Roſe water, and the iuyce of Nightſhade, as muche as will ſuffice to make this vnguent ſoft and delicate, and with this receyte to annoynt the hawkes foote or arme oftentimes for a ſpace: for this vnguent no

queſtion, will both take away the immoderate ache and paine, as alſo mollifie and delay the ſwelling, and ſo reſtore your hawk to hir former plight againe.
               An other approued medicine is, to annoynt the ſwelling of your hawkes foote with Olium Petroleum, (which is the oyle of a Rocke) and with Oyle of white Lillies, taking of eche of theſe like quantitie, the bloud of a Pigeon, and the tallow of a candle, heating all theſe togither a little at the fire. This vnguent will throughly reſolue the miſchiefe, or at the leaſt, by reſoluing the thinneſt humors, bring it to that paſſe, as you ſhall ſee the groſſeſt partes well digeſted, which you ſhall perceyue by the whiteneſſe and hardneſſe therof. Then muſt you make an iſſue, by launcing finely with a knife the ſkin of the hurt place, and afterwards annoint it for certaine dayes with the vnguent aforeſayde, and it ſhall recouer.
               Beſides this, a very good remedie for the ſwelling in a hawkes foote, after a rupture made, is to vſe this cerotte that followeth. Take Gumme Arabicke, Armoniacke, Sagapeum, a gumme ſo called, of either two drammes, Greeke Pitch, and ſhip Pitche, of eche a reaſonable quantitie, Powder of Maſticke three ounces, of Oyle of Iuniper, or of the Firre tree, new waxe as much as wil ſuffice to make a Cerot, according to Art: diſſolue your gumms in Vineger, which done, ſpread of this vpon a pleggat of linnen cloth, applying it handſomly both within the foote and without, making certaine holes wherthrough to conuey the hawkes ſtretchers or talons: Alwayes remembring if the ſwollen part be broken before the application of your Cerot, to mundifie and clenſe the water and ſlime that is in the wound, and ſo euery two or three dayes to chaunge and renew your Cerot.
               The vertue of it is to deſiccat, comfort and mundifie the filth and quitture that is in the hurt member, whereby the hurt muſt of force be recouered.
            
            
               Of the Gowte in a Hawke.
               MAny times for all the care and remedies aforeſayde, the gowte doth befall a Hawke, which is none other thing than

a hard tumor and ſwelling, full of corruption aboute the ioyntes of a Hawkes foote and ſtretchers, which diſeaſe is verie painefull and offenſiue, by meane whereof the Hawke cannot pray. Truly the Gowte is an incurable euill, and may bee tearmed a (nunquaem ſanus.) Let falconers, and writors ſay what they lyſt, I for my part, can this much aſſure you, that in all my life, I was neuer able by anye deuiſe to cure the Gowte confyrmed, whether it were for want of cunning in me, or by reaſon of the malignitie of the diſeaſe, whiche doeth rebell and ſcorne anye remedie that ſhall bee applyed vnto it. Yet notwithſtanding, bycauſe it ſhall not ſeeme, that I doe it vpon ſlouth, and for deſire to bee ſilent, I will laye downe ſome one remedie or two vſed by dyuerſe Falconers, thoughe oft tymes to ſmall purpoſe or ſucceſſe.
               Some for the Gowte, do vſe to take the Pilles of wilde Apples or Crabbes, wilde and ſowre Sloes, the rinde of an Aſhe, or the Keyes that grow vpon the Aſhe beaten into ſmall powder, mingling it with halfe a pounde of olde Oyle Oliue, all which they put into a Glaſſe Bottell: or other veſſell of Glaſſe, cloſe ſtopte wyth Paſte, or ſuche lyke deuiſe, ſo as no breathe may iſſue foorthe of the Veſſell, whiche done, they couer it in Sande in the Sunne, or in Horſe dung, for the ſpace of fortie dayes, and after that, they ſtreyne it altogyther, ſo as the vertue of the ingredience maye bee incorporated wyth the Oyle. With this forſooth they annoynt the place, hoping to reſolue and cure the Gowte, whiche I coulde neuer doe vpon any Hawke of mine.
               Other ſome doe accuſtome to annoynt the Gowte in a Hawke, with the milke or iuyce of Selendine, and the marrow of a Bacon hogge, and taking a peece of linnen clothe, do bath the member euery thirde day, with the ſtrongeſt Vineger they can get, and do cauſe theyr Hawke to ſtande vpon all this, for remedie of the Gowte.
               Againe, there are, that with the iuyce of Selendine, Vineger, and Honie, doe vaunte they haue made an vnguent, wherewith they haue done greate woonders. But bycauſe

by experience I coulde neuer finde theſe to preuaile in the cure of the goute, I leaue to ſpeake or wryte in commendation of the ſame, putting you out of all hope for recouerie of the ſame.
            
            
               Of the Pin in the Hawkes foote, a diſeaſe much like the corne in the foote of a man. The Italians tearme them Chiodetti.
               
               THere is yet one other euill which happeneth in the foote of a hawke, by meane of matter that powreth downe, in a maner as hard to be cured as the Goute, and as comberſome to the fillie hawke as the Goute, for by reaſon of the Pyn ſhe is neyther well able to foote hir pray, to feede hir ſelfe, nor yet to ſtande ſure vpon hir Pearche.
               The Pynne is a ſwelling diſeaſe, that doth reſemble ſharpe nayles, ryſing vp in the bottome or palme of the Hawkes foote: and by reaſon it doeth ſo muche in ſhape reſemble a nayle, by meane of the ſharpneſſe thereof, thoſe ſwellings are called by the Falconers of Italie Chiodetti, as a man woulde terme them in Engliſh, ſmall nayles, of which verie fewe Hawkes can bee recured.
               Yet for remedie of this diſeaſe, ſome do aduiſe to open the vain of the leg, a thing not only friuolous to talke of, and a verie olde womans fable, or Cantorburie tale, but alſo verie perillous to be put in practiſe. For truly neither wil I my ſelfe at any time practiſe it, ne yet aduiſe others to do it. I can more cōmend, that you mollifie and make ſoft the ſayde Pyn with ſtrong Vineger, the beſt that may be gotten, which done, pare it till the bloud follow after: then to bring it to maturation, and to ripen it, applie handſomly vpon it in a linnen plegget, a quantitie of vnguent made of iuyce of Lemmons, one ounce & a halfe of hennes greeſe, three drammes powder of Maſticke, leaues of Bittonie, and Frankenſenſe, or Olibanum, a reaſonable portion, and ſo much newe waxe as will ſerue the purpoſe.
               Beſides this, I doe vſe to boyle in good white wine, all

theſe things togither, Waxe, Oyle of bitter Almondes, of eche lyke quantitie, a little Sage, Frankinſenſe, Rewe, Roſemarie, to the conſumption of three partes, then pounding well all theſe wyth Turpentine and yellowe Waxe, I make an vnguent of excellent vertue and operation. And if by theſe remedyes aforeſayde, the Pynne become to be ſoft, and forgo his hardneſſe, then doeth it behoue you, to cutte it out from the roote, as lowe as is poſſible, and to drye it vppe with Agrippa, an vnguent ſo called, and with Gratia dei, mingling theſe two togyther by equall portions, as muche of the one as of the other.
               Ouer and beſides all theſe, the playſter that is called Emplaſtrum Sacrum, and Iſis, whom the Apothecaries do ſo terme, are of ſingular vertue, bycauſe they doe mollifie, and deſiccate the wounde or diſeaſe. I cannot remember, that aboue twice, I coulde euer doe any good vpon my Hawkes herewith (nor with any other remedie) and therefore I will leaue to make any further recitall hereof.
               There be ſome ventrous Falconers, that will with a cauterizing yron go about to roote and burne out the Pinne, which I will at no time endeuour to doe, doubting leaſt thereby I ſhall ſhrinke my Hawkes ſinewes, and ſpoyle my Hawke, by meanes they are ſo neare neighbours to the Hart.
            
            
               Of the breaking of a Pounce, or Cley of your Hawke.
               SEyng that I haue begonne to wryte, and decipher you the miſchiefes that doe happen to Hawkes feete, it ſhall not bee beſyde my purpoſe, nor amiſſe, to ſaye ſomewhat of the cure of theyr Pounces and Talons, when eyther by ſtryking the fowle, or by any other accident, they breake cleane off, or riue in ſunder.
               Wherfore when your Hawke happeneth to haue this miſchief, the part of the pounce, or the whole pounce beeing broken away, you muſte applie vnto it the bladder of the gall of a Henne,

vſing the matter ſo as it may get into the broken Talon, bynding it ſo handſomely and artificially to the Hawkes foote, as the gall may not iſſue out, nor fall away from the place. This deuiſe will ſtoppe the bloude, ceaſſe the paine, and within foure or fiue dayes, faſten and harden the horne of the Pounce, ſo as the Hawke ſhall be able to flee: and if ſhe be a falcon, ſhe ſhall ſtrike or ruffe a Ducke as before hir hurt.
               And to the ende your Hawke teare it not awaye with hir beake, it ſhall be neceſſarie eyther to clappe hir on a hoode with a falſe beake made vnto it, or to faſten to hir hoode a peece of leather artificially, ſo long and large as maye ſerue the turne, to arme hir beake, ſo as in time hir Pounce, if it bee but broken, maye waxe hole againe: or if it bee cleane ryued awaye, a newe may growe in the place agayne.
               Let this ſuffice as touchyng the breaking or ryuing of the Pounce of a Hawke.
            
            
               VVhen the thigh or legge of a Hawke is out of ioynt.
               BY ſome outwarde accident, many tymes the thighe or legge of a Hawke is become out of ioynt: wherefore it ſhall be verie neceſſarie in this caſe, as ſoone as is poſſible, to ſet it in his right and naturall place againe, to the ende that no matter nor fluxe of humor deſcende or diſtill, to hinder the ſetting of it in ioynt againe, whiche muſt needes enſue if it be not regarded in time. Which done, ſet the Hawke in ſome ſuch place, where ſhe ſhall haue no occaſion to bate or broyle with hir ſelfe, but bee at the greateſt quiet and reſt ſhee maye, applying medicines that haue vertue to deſiccate and ſtrengthen the hurte member, which you ſhall doe, by bathing a Linnen plegget, or a plegget of Flaxe in the white of an Egge, Oyle of Roſes, and Turpentine, with two drammes of Saenguis Draconis, and of Aloes incorporated togyther, and bynding it aboute the thigh or legge whiche is out of ioynt, and faſtning ouer and aboue the ſayd plegget a ſlender roller of linnen cloth, to conſerue and kepe

it the more firmely and ſtayedly in the place where you woulde haue it to remayne. Vſing the matter thus ten dayes togyther, ſhifting and renewing the medicine euerye two dayes once, to the ende the plegget waxe not ouer drie and ſtiffe to the hurte member.
               I can lyke verie well withall, if before you applie this ſayde medicine, you bathe well the thigh or legge of the Hawke with a reaſonable warme lotion or bath, made of Wine, Roſes dried, Myrrhe, Sage, Comfrey, Camomill, and Roſemarie: for theſe will warme and comfort the nerues and ſinewes, and withall drie vp ſuch fluxe of humor, as ſhall poure downe vpon the lame and brooſed member.
            
            
               When a Hawke hath broken a thigh or a legge.
               IF by any miſhap your Hawke haue broken an arme or a leg, as ſundrie tymes Falcons that are fowle ſlayers doe vſe to doe, by ſome ſtrype, or encounter at the Brooke with a ſtrong fowle, you muſt with all care and ſpeede, ſette right the broken bones in their naturall place againe: whiche done, deplume and plucke away the feathers from the member that is hurt, round about the wounde.
               
                  Then take

                        Bole Armoniake
                        Aloes Epatick of the beſt,
                        
                           Saenguis Draconis,
                        
                      Of eche a reaſonable quantitie, made into fine powder.
                  After that take of

                        Beane floure,
                        Barly floure,
                        Linſede floure,
                      Of eche one dramme.
                  Then take of

                        Oyle of Dill,
                        Oyle of Roſes,
                      Of eche two drammes.
                  Then take

                        The white of an Egge,
                        The mucillage of Fenegreke,
                        The mucillage of Linſeede,
                        The mucillage of Hollihock,
                      So muche of theſe as will ſerue too make a playſter according to arte.
               
               
                  When you haue made this playſter, ſpreade a portion of it thinne, vpon Flaxe or Linte well towſed, applying it vpon the rupture and broken place, wyth as greate cunning and care as you can: you can not vſe it too daintily, when you applie it, bycauſe of the tenderneſſe of the hurt. This done, bynde it with a fine Linnen roller to ſtaye the playſter. Then make fine ſplets of Timber, all of one length, thinne as may be, and in faſhion like the ſcales of a Sworde ſcabbarde, whome you muſt enwrappe in Lynt for brooſing the member. Theſe ſplets beſtowe orderly aboute your Hawkes legge or thighe on euerie ſide, bynding them with the Linnen rollers or fillets artificially, but neyther ſo looſely as the bones may ſlippe out of theyr place, ne yet ſo ſtreightly, but that the hurt member may receyue hys naturall nouriſhment and comfort. For otherwiſe it woulde be mortified, and the vſe of it loſt.
               This ligature and rolling of the member, muſt be continued at the leaſt .xxx. dayes, for that the bone cannot cloſe againe firmly vnder one Monethes ſpace. Yet can I wiſhe, that you vnbinde your rollers, and chaunge your medicine, twice at the leaſt in the firſt fiftene dayes, dealing ſo daintily as the bones may not ſunder thereby. And by meane thereof will your medicine, and the ligature, worke the better effect.
               Laſtly, it ſhall not be amiſſe, after you haue thus done, to vſe for three or foure dayes this lotion or water, to bath your hawkes legge, to ſtrengthen and comfort the place.
               Take Roche Alom one dramme, Roſes dryed, the pyll or rind of Pomgranets, and Frankinſenſe, of ech a ſmall quantitie, white Wine as muche as will ſuffiſe: wherein you muſt boyle theſe things aforeſayd, to the conſumption of halfe the wine, with this lotion, bath your hawkes thighe and legge, plucking away the feathers as aforeſayde. And this ſhall comfort the member, ſo as no fluxe of humors ſhall repayre to the place.
               Beſides all this, you muſt not forget, during the time of this cure, to keepe your diſeaſed Hawke remoued from all noyſe and acceſſe of people: and if this miſfortune befall hir in the Winter time, you muſt ſet hir warme.
               
                  Moreouer, it ſhall be good and neceſſarie in the beginning of your cure, to giue your hawke,

                     1 Aloes waſht, or
                     2 Agarick in Trocyſckes
                   to ſcoure hir, to the ende there grow no inflamations. And withall to feede hir with good meate, the better to mainteyne hir in ſtate during the cure.
               It will be good for you to vſe the helpe of ſome Apothecarie for the confection of the playſter, as alſo for your lotion or bathe: for the more artificially it is made, the better effect it will take. Truely it doth ſtande with good reaſon, that it will recure your Hawke, the receyte is ſo good. All the care muſt be in the daintie handling of the broken member, and in rolling and ſpleting it orderly.
            
            
               Of ſtripes and brooſes in a hawke.
               HAwkes are wont diuerſe times to receiue ſtripes and blowes by other fowles, as the Falcon by encounter with a Heron, and ſometimes by ſome other accident, as by carying hir in a hawks bag vpō occaſion, or by raſhing into buſhes and thornes, or ſuch like hurtfull places.
               Theſe ſtrypes and hurtes either are ſimple hurtes (as they are termed) that is to ſay in the ſkinne and fleſhe of a Hawke only, or elſe compoundes, as when a nerue and ſinewe is prickt, or cut in ſunder.
               The ſymple woundes and hurtes are of ſlender or no daunger at all, and will bee recured lightly agayne, eyther with the iuyce of Orgium, or a bathe and lotion made of Maſticke, Aloes, and Myrrhe, two drammes, Pympernell, Comfrey, and Sage, of eyther a handefull and a halfe, of Agresta cleare and good, ſixe poundes, putting all theſe things aforeſayde,Agresta. into a ſtone Veſſell made verye cleane, or elſe into an earthen potte, there ſuffering it to boyle ſo long with a cloſe couer vppon it, vntill two thirde partes of the Agresta bee waſted and conſumed. Then ſtrayning it verie well, adding vnto it one ounce

of powder of Myrtils. This may you reſerue to vſe as a bleſſed and ſoueraigne medicine.
               There is yet one other notable medicine, deuiſed by maiſter
Fredericke Zorzi, and oftentymes approued by me, with verie good ſucceſſe.
               Take good Aloes, Myrrhe, Olibanum, and Saenguis Draeconis, of either one dramme, of fine Graynes one ſcruple: beate all theſe into powder, and infuſe them in two ounces of Aqua vitae, for the ſpace of twelue houres: then after ſtrayne it verie well, and of this vſe to the hurtes of your Hawkes head, and alſo to hir ſhoulders, if they receyue any brooſe or ſtripe.
               But in any condition I cannot allowe the vſe of Oyle of Roſes, in hurtes of the heade, as it ſeemes, that the ſayde Authour woulde haue it.
               If your Hawkes ſkinne of hir thigh or hinder partes be broken, fretted awaye, or hurt by bearing hir in a cloſe Canuas bagge, or ſuch like, you maye eaſily recouer hir with thys deuiſe. The leaues of dryed Sage beaten to powder, or the powder of Olibanum, or Maſticke, bathing the hurt with white wine, when you meane to applie the powder, and in two or three dayes you ſhall ſee it recouered.
               But if the ſtripe be ioyned and matched with the offence of any nerue or ſinewe, then will it be a harder matter to cure, for that the hurt is of greater importaunce and daunger, for then is it wont to be full of paine, and to cauſe inflamation. Wherefore in this caſe, the beſt remedie that can be deuiſed is, excellent good Oyle powred reaſonable hote into the hurt, taking away the feathers firſt that are about the wounde, and vſing this bathe about the member where the hurt is.
               Take Roche Alome one dramme, dryed Roſes, ryndes of Pomegranettes, and Myrrhe, of eche a quantitie, boyling all theſe in good odoriferous white Wine to the conſumption of halfe.
               No queſtion this will greatly comfort the wounde, and hinder the fluxe of humors, that otherwiſe woulde flowe downe to the place, and breede an Apoſtume.
               
                  Much more might be ſayd of ſtripes and brooſes of hawkes, but I doe leaue you ouer to the learned Phiſitions, and ſkilfull Surgeons, bycauſe I will not ouerwearie you with tedious circumſtaunces: accounting it ſufficient for mee, to haue layde downe the cures for moſt ordinarie hurtes, which doe ryfeſt happen to Hawkes, and of ſuch as haue tymes paſt by fortune come to my handes. If you couet to haue greater ſtore of medicines, for the cure of any member or hurt part of your Hawke, I aduiſe you that haue ſkill in the Italian tongue, to flee ouer to Meſsier Frederigo Giorgi, his practiſe, plainely and excellently ſet downe in his booke of Falconrie, from whence I haue collected ſundrye things. But as touching theſe hurtes and ſtrypes of Hawkes, I haue not borrowed muche of him, but haue in this parte of my collection, more vſed the briefe cure of
Franceſco Sforzino Vicentino, that excellent Italian Gentleman Falconer.
            
            
               Of Hawkes Life.
               HAuing hithervnto ſpoken of ſuch diſeaſes and greefes, as for the moſt part Hawkes are troubled withall within their bodies: nowe remayneth that in fewe ſpeeches I ſhew you a remedie for vermin and Life, a particular paſſion and affection that lighteth on the ſkinne of a Hawke, and ſpecially about hir heade, the plie of hir wings, and hir trayne: for in deede theſe Life and Mytes doe chiefly raigne and lodge in thoſe three partes of the Hawkes more than in any other.
               Falconers doe vſe to ridde theſe vile wormes and Life in the Winter time, by taking of pepper beaten to powder two drams, of warme water one pounde, or as much as will ſuffice, mingling the Pepper and water well togither, and then to pepper (as we terme it) or waſhe all hir feathers with the ſayde lotion or bathe, and ſpecially thoſe partes of the Hawke whereof I ſpake before, where the Mites and Life do moſt haunte: whiche done, they ſet the Hawke on a perche, with hir trayne and backe to the Sunne ward, holding in their handes a ſmall ſticke one handfull

long, on the toppe whereof they faſten a peece of waxe, either red, or greene, and with that, (while the Hawke doth weather hir) they take away the Life and Mytes crawling vpon the feathers, ſo as before the Hawke be throughly dryed and weathered, what with the waxe, and their owne dropping away, there will not be a vermin left about the hawke. For the Pepper and water doth ſo much diſeaſe them, as they are enforced to leaue their accuſtomed lodgings: then the heate of the Sunne, or fire, helpes to make them ſhew themſelues: and the waxe by cleauing to them, vtterly and clearely riddes the hawke of them.
               I haue ſeene ſome Falconers adde vnto the Pepper and water, a quantitie of Staueſagre, as an enimie to the life and mytes, by meane of ſtrength and force that is in it: and I take it to be verie neceſſarie to be added in this medicin to the Pepper, for the better diſpatch of thoſe vile vermines, which do ſo much vex and annoy the hawke, as ſhe can by no meanes keepe hir ſelfe in good ſtate, whileſt ſhe is incombred with them.
               You muſt remember to pepper your hawke in this maner, as I haue ſhewed you, in a verie warme ſunnie day, when there is no winde at all blowing in the Skie. But if by fortune you bee enforced to do it in another time, when the weather is colde, and the Sunne not ſhining, then muſt you ſet your hawke by the fire to weather hir, and drie hir feathers: but neither muſt the fire be ouer hote, nor the gorge of your Hawke towardes the fire, whereof I haue giuen you aduertiſement before, in thoſe precepts which are to be obſerued of a good Falconer. For if you ſet hir with the gorge to the fire, no doubt, ſhe will receyue no ſmall harme and inconuenience thereby, and for the moſte part death enſues of it.
               In the Sommer time you may diſpatch your hawke of the Life & Mites with Auripigmentū
                   beaten into verie fine pouder, beſtowing and ſifting it betwixt the hawkes feathers with your fingers, and ſpecially in thoſe places where they doe moſt vſually haunt, alwayes hauing regarde that none of the powder come into your hawkes eyes for offending hir. And after the beſtowing of this powder, you muſt in no wiſe beſpowt hir with water

(as ſome do vſe to doe) to the great hurt and miſchiefe of thoſe poore byrdes. For the bathing or ſpowting hir with water, is a meane to make the powder to frette awaye, and conſume the Hawkes feathers.
               Some other affyrme, that Mynt leaues boyled in water, to the conſumption of a thirde part, bathing the Hawke therewith ſomewhat warme, will diſpatch the Liſe and Mytes, but for my part, I neuer approued this medicine, and therefore can ſaye little of it.
               Let theſe ſuffiſe as touching the peppering of lowſie hawkes, for of all other plagues that befall the Hawke, I account thys the leaſt, bycauſe they may moſt eaſily be deſtroyed, as dayly experience doth teach vs: and yet the remedies for them good to be knowne, bycauſe you ſhall ſeldome or neuer buy a Hawke from the Cage that is not lowſie, or ſet your Hawke on a Perche where a lowſie Hawke hath ſtoode, and ſhe ſhall be aſſured to be neuer a lowſe the worſe for it.
            
            
               Of misfortunes that happen to Hawkes in the mew. And firſt of all, of their laying egges in the mew.
               IN the mew Hawkes are ſubiect to ſundrie accidents. Among all which (to paſſe ouer the greſineſſe and exceſſiue glitte, that they are ſurcharged withall, hauing ſomewhat toucht that matter in the Chapter of the Goute) the greateſt miſhap that may be is, when Hawkes fall to laying egges, and to be with egge in the mewe. For in verie deede this is a great miſchiefe, and dyuers tymes doth kill the hawke.
               You ſhall firſt perceyue it by the creaking and crying that they vſe in the mewe ſometymes, and otherwhiles on the perche, albeit now and then they do it for egerneſſe and apetite, when they are ſharpe ſet: which as it is eaſily founde, ſo is it as quickly remedied.
               A man ſhall knowe when they fall to lyking and laying, by this, from the necke of the Hawke, downe to the verie middle of

hir traine, there is vpon the feather, a certaine thing like the floure of Branne, of a pale and aſhie colour.
               And bycauſe this accident happeneth by meane of too muche daintineſſe, and luſtfull pride of the Hawke, it ſhall bee good to keepe hir low, and to holde a hard hand ouer hir, pinching hir of hir feeding, giuing hir liquide and moyſt fleſhe, from the middle of Aprill, to the ende of May, which is the only time to be feared of all the yeare for this matter. When the Hawke doth leaue hir croaking and crying in the mewe, it is a manifeſt proofe that ſhe is with Egge, whiche you ſhall knowe, both by hir groſſneſſe and filling in the pannell, as alſo by hir ydle ſtanding withoute liſt to feede. And if happely the Egges bee growne any thing great within hir, you ſhall hardly hinder hir, but that ſhee will lay them. Therefore (as I tell you) it ſhall be good in tyme to looke vnto it, keeping hir lowe in Aprill and May. And in thoſe monethes to miniſter vnto hir, Aloes Epaticke waſht, a quantitie of Saffron lapped in Bombaſt or Cotton, wherevpon conuey a little Flaxe or Towe, and make a caſting or ſcouring of it, thruſting it downe hir throte into hir gorge, the Hawke being both emptie panneld, and hauing no meate aboue to put ouer, keeping hir on the fiſt after it, till ſuch time the ſcouring be in hir gorge. Of this and ſuche like ſcourings may you giue your hawke euery third or fourth day, for foure or fiue times, feeding hir with liquid meates, ſuch as will lightly be indewed. And vſing this order, no doubt your hawke ſhall do well.
               Againe it is verie good agaynſte the ſame miſchiefe, to cauſe your Hawke in foure or fiue byttes of meate, to take a quantitie of Saffron in chyues, vſing hir after the manner and forme aforeſayde.
               Moreouer it is a very good way, to delay and kill the liſt and lyking of a Sparhawke, to feede hir for three, foure, or moe dayes, if you thinke good, with liquid meates waſht in water, wherin the great pilles of Ornus haue beene infuſed for the ſpare of eight or ten dayes, being finely cut to peeces. But it ſhoulde be farre better, if you cauſe thoſe rindes and pilles to bee boyled in water, ſo long vntill they become ſofte and tender, and then to

waſh your Hawkes meate therein.
               If your Hawke bee with Egge (as they terme it) ſo as you may perceiue and feele the egges within hir, beſides thoſe foreſaid remedies, it ſhall be good to annoynt hir tuell with oyle Olife: which being done, conuey in thy forefinger at hir tuell, as finely as thou canſt, to feele the egges, whiche if thou once feele, gripe thy Hawkes pannell ſoftly for hurting hir, forcing downwards the egge towardes thy finger in hir tuell, and if it be poſſible ſo bring it away cleane, and rid thy hawke of it: but if thou canſt not do it, breake it euen there right, and afterwarde beſtowe a clyſter vpon thy hawke of things lenitiue, to make hir mewt and ſliſe well: for by this meane (as my Italian Authour doth informe me) thou ſhall diſcharge thy hawke of this miſchiefe, and bring hir to be in perfite ſtate againe.
            
            
               To cauſe a Hawke to mewe faſt and well.
               SOmetimes it ſo falleth out, that Hawkes doe not mewe in time, ſo as they may be flowen with in the pleaſant tyme of the yeare, nor be drawne when other Falconers do accuſtome to drawe their hawkes, but they come ſo late as the yeare is farre ſpent, and ſmall pleaſure to bee taken in keeping or fleeing with them, for which a man is ſometimes driuen of force to vſe deuiſe to further the matter, and to practiſe to make hir mew ſooner than hir accuſtomed maner is to mew of hir ſelfe. Wherfore to make a hawke mewe timely, the ſureſt and beſt way is to caſt hir off into a good mewe for the purpoſe, (made in maner as I haue taught you before) and there to allow hir of the beſt hote meates that may be had, as Quayles, Pigeons, and Sparrowes, and now and then among, to ſet hir in the mewe ſome veſſell, large and deepe, conueniently filled with water, wherein your hawke may bowſe and bath at hir pleaſure.
               But if this ordinarie kinde of good and kindely mewing will not ſerue the turne, (which ſeldome, or neuer almoſt happeneth to Goſhawkes, for that by this former faſhion & vſage they

do vſe to mewe verie well and orderly) then (as I ſayde) it behoueth to aſſiſt and further nature by Arte and Phiſicke, to cauſe a Hawke to mewe tymely.
               To helpe in this caſe, thoſe kyrnelles or ſmall nuttes, whiche are growing vnder the throte of a Weather, are verie good (as mine Authour affyrmeth) vſing them euery thirde day, for thrice, or thereaboutes, allowing a Sparrowhawke three or foure of them at once, being both emptie gorged and panneld. But you may giue a Falcon ſixe or more at one time, holding the hawke on the fiſt, till ſhe beginne to ſliſe and mewte, and after that a ſpace feede hir with good hote meate, alwayes remembring, that if the hawke do loath the taking of them, (as happely ſhee will) or doe not verie well brooke them after ſhe hath taken them, then that you giue hir reſpite betwixte tymes, for three or foure dayes togither, to the ende ſhee may not finde hir ſelfe cloyed with them.
               If at the ende of eight dayes ſhe beginne to caſt any feather, then may you into the mewe with hir, without more a doe: but if not, then muſt you fall to giuing hir of thoſe glandulous kirnels of the Weather againe, once or twice more: for vſing it in this order the ſeconde time, without queſtion, within ſixe or ſeuen dayes ſhee will caſt the backe feathers, or hir ſarcels or flagges: thē muſt you throw hir into the mew, giuing hir water to bath, for ſhee will verie muche couet the water, and you ſhall ſee hir within two or three dayes ſo bare and in a maner cleane without feathers, as ſhe will not be able for lacke of them, to flee to hir ordinarie ſtande or pearch. Wherefore I can commende, and aduiſe you to haue ſome lowe perche and ſtande for hir in the mewe, wherevnto ſhee may iumpe when ſhe hath caſt hir feathers, ſo as ſhe is vnable to flee. Eſpecially remembring to feede hir all that while ſhe is ſo without feathers, twice in a day, allowing hir ſuch and ſo much meate, as ſhe can endew, and make away with. For all that tyme will ſhe couet great gorges, and ridde great ſtore of meate, vntill ſhee haue recouered hir cote againe. And to reſtrayne hir, or keepe a harde hand vpon hir, hauing mewed hir feathers, and being now at poynt to put forth

newe in their places, wyll breede hir feathers to bee full of tayntes, and ill fauoured, and beſides that hir ſarcelles and principalls will not be ſo long and large as they ought to be, by meanes whereof ſhe will not be able to flee ſo well as ſhee was accuſtomed.
               Some others, to cauſe a hawke to mewe ſpeedely, do wyll you to enwrappe hir meate in the powder of a Frogge, dryed in an Ouen, or Fornace.
               Other ſome, in the powder of a Cuttell bone, taking of the powder of this fiſhe bone, to the weyght of a pennie. But theſe practiſes and deuiſes I did neuer approoue, and therfore do committe them to the diſcretion of the Reader.
            
            
               Of accidentes that happen and lyght vpon a hawkes feathers, and firſte, how to vſe the matter, when a feather cannot be imped.
               DIuers and ſundrie tymes it ſo falles oute, that a hawkes feather beeyng drawen out of the wyng or trayne, by violence and force, the hole cloſes vp, and ſhuttes after it preſently, in ſuche ſorte, as a newe feather can by no meanes growe and ſpring vp in the place, to ſerue the hawkes turne and vſe agayne.
               For remedie heereof, ſome doe wyll a man to make the hole agayne, where it was before, and to open it a freſhe, with a Barlye grayne, dryed ſo as it bee not burnte. Then after that, to keepe it open, that it runne not togyther agayne, you muſte frame a ſmall pellette of Larde, or boyled Hoonie, whiche being conueyed into the hole, will there abyde, vntill ſuche time as the ſhooting oute of the new feather do remoue it, and diſplace it.
               Some other time it happeneth a feather to be broken in the quill, ſo neere the wing, as it is not poſſible to ympe it againe:

then do they vſe, (to make the quill to fall and droppe away withoute payne to the Hawke) this deuiſe. They annoynte the place with the bloude of a yong Ratte, whiche will cauſe the broken quyll to come away. After which, to kepe the hole pen, they vſe the helpe aforeſayde, with the Barly corne.
               Theſe twoo cures, I neuer tryed, bycauſe it was neuer my happe, (I thanke fortune) to ſtand needefull of the practiſe. But truely I like neyther of them ſo well, as I can greately commende them.
               Otherwhile it chaunceth, through the hurte of a Hawkes wing, that one or twoo of hir Flagges, long feathers, or Sarcelles, are brooſed, and thereby bothe put hir to greate paynes, and eake hinder hir fleeing. Wherefore, it ſhall be in this caſe very neceſſarie, as ſoone as it happeneth, to looke and vewe the wing well, whither there be any bloude, muche or little, in the quill that is brooſed, in maner aforeſayde: which if be ſo, it ſhal be nedefull to pierce it with a ſharpe needle, or ſuch like inſtrumente, to gyue the bloude yſſewe, before ſuche time as it bee congealed and waxen harde. And after that, to annoynte the brooſe (and eſpecially, where the blacke bloude is) with olde larde, and reſtie Bacon.
               Moreouer, it ſhall be very good to ceaſe the payne, to poure vppon the hurte place, three or foure droppes of good Oyle of Roſes, ſomewhat hotte, whiche hauing vſed for the ſpace of three or foure dayes, it ſhall not bee amiſſe, to bathe it with
Aqua vitae, to drye and reſolue it. If you vſe this meane in the beginning, when the hurt is firſte taken, no doubt, it wyll breede reſolution.
               But if by negligence or otherwiſe, it be foreſlacked at firſt, ſo as the brooſed Sarcell, or other feather growe oute of order, and croſſe the nexte feather to it in fleeing, and by that meane bee a hinderance to the Hawke, and a payne, it ſhall be good to cutte it off in the quill. And to the ende there may growe another ſecond feather in the place of that, whiche is ſo ſpoyled and cutte off, it ſhalbe well done, to make the quill to

droppe away. To bring that to paſſe, firſte of all wipe wel the bloude congealed and corrupted within the place, and after that, fill it with Aqua vitae, of the beſte that may bee gotten, and deale ſo artificially, as the Aqua vitae may ſtaye, and not droppe out of the place. Which muſte be done, by ſtopping the hole with waxe, or ſuch like deuiſe. This Aqua vitae, by meane of the heat of it, will cauſe the quill to fal away within eight dayes, or little more, by meane whereof there may ſhoote oute a newe feather.
            
            
               The way and manner, howe to ympe a Havvkes feather, hovvſoeuer it be broken or brooſed.
               SOmetymes it ſo falleth oute, that the feathers of a hawkes wing, or trayne, bee broken, wherevppon it is bothe neceſſarie and needefull, to ſette other lyke in theyr ſteades. Whiche feare, wee terme, the ymping of a hawkes feather.
               This may be done in foure ſeueral manners and faſhions, after that the feather is broken.
               For firſte, in the greater and huger ſorte of hawkes,The first way to ympe a Hawke. if a feather bee broken one fingers breadth, or thereaboutes, within the quill, then your nexte remedie is, to ſheare it off with a payre of Syſſers, or ſheares, to the ende it may not cleeue or ryue any further. Then hauing prepared a like feather to the ſame, of ſome other Hawke or fowle, reſembling the broken feather: you muſte cutte the quyll of it, and ſo force it togyther, as it maye enter the broken quyll of the Hawkes feather, annoynting it before you thruſte it in, or ſeeme to place it for good and all, in the gummie fatte of a fygge, the yolcke of an egge, or ſome kinde of Semonde made of purpoſe, thruſting it very directly into the truncke and quill of the broken feather, and as wee maye terme it, graffing the one in the other. And to the ende

it maye haue the better holde, and the faſter ſtaye, it ſhall not bee amyſſe, to ciynte, or nayle them faſte togyther, with the poynte of a Partridge feather, taking the very toppe of it, and ſtrypping awaye the feathers on eyther ſyde the webbe: and after that, making a ſmall hole with a ſlender needle, ſo as it paſſe through bothe the quilles, as well that whiche ſtycketh faſte in the hawkes wing, as the other borowed and adopted feather, drawing through the hole made with the needle, the poynte of the Partridges feather, to fyll vp the hole agayne. Whiche done, cut it off cloſe by the webbe finely on eyther ſide, and ſo will it ſtande very handſomely, faſte, and almoſt not to be diſcerned, but to be the hawkes naturall feather.
               
                  The ſeconde manner of ymping.But if a Sarcell, a Flagge, or a Trayne feather bee broken, or ſlyued amydde the quyll, ſo as another feather ymped in him after the manner aforeſayde, can well take no holde, or ſtande ſure: Then ſhall it bee neceſſarie to take a Iunyper ſticke, or ſuche like drye tymber, and thereof to make a ſmall ſharpe pegge, ſo as it may enter the quyll, whiche done, dyppe the one ende of it in Glewe, Semonde, or the ſlyme of the fiſhe, whome my Author termeth a Colpiſce, the Germaines a
Leymefiſche, (a fiſhe, as Geſnerus reporteth, ſo ſofte and tender, as beeyng ſodde, or fryed, he falleth all to a gellie, or glewe, for whiche cauſe hee is deteſted greately, and banniſhed all mens tables.) He is headded like an Ape, and for that occaſion (called of diuers, Marmotum, as we may interprete it, a Marmoſet, or an Ape.) In the ſlyme (I ſaye) of this fiſhe, dyppe your Iuniper ſticke thruſting it into the broken quill, remē
                  bring to place it ſo aptly, as it may be without the quill, of iuſt ſize to anſwere ye length of ye feather when it was ſound & vnbroken. Then do put ye other end likewiſe in the glew, or Semond, cōueying it by force into ye quil of the fether which you haue gotten, ſo cloſe as the one quill touche the other directly. After all this, faſten & clynte both ye quils to ye Iuniper pegge, wt a Partridge his feather, as before. And if it were ſo, as the

quill were ſlyued or rente, pierce it through with a needle and threede, and with the threed bind it harde to the ſticke, on both ſides the quil, and it will hold very faſte, and ſerue the hawkes turne in hir flight in ſteade of a naturall feather.
               If a ſarcell, or other feathers be broken aboue the quyll,The thirde manner of ymping. towards the poynt of ye fethers twoo or three fingers bredth, you muſt cut it off with a ſharpe penknife, aſlope, and (as they ſay) a ſwaſhe, & then take another like feather to the ſame, cutting it in like maner, as you did the other, ſo as it may fitte with ye ſame feather, both for length and cutte. Which done, with an ymping needle ſayde in Vyneger and ſalte, ſo cloſe them togither, as they may be thought to be one feather.
               The laſte maner of ymping is,The fourth & last manner of ymping when a feather is not quyte broken off, but brooſed, and (as it were) but markte, ſo as it can not bee holpen and righted agayne with warme water. In this caſe it ſhall be better, rather to cutte awaye the feathers, onely to cutte the nether parte of the webbe, iuſte ouer agaynſt the brooſed place, leauing the vpper parte whole and vntouchte: then to take a long ſlender needle, like a Glouers needle, and to threede it, and hauing ſo done, to thruſte the eye of the needle beeing threeded, into the greater parte of the feather towardes the quyll, forcing the poynte of it ſo hard with a thymbell, as it may bee cleane hydde in the feather, and no parte of it to bee ſeene. After that, ioyning bothe ſides of the brooſed feather togyther, where you cutte the webbe, drawe the threede as harde and as ſtreyghte as you can poſſible, ſo as the poynte of the needle, by pulling of the threede that hangeth out, may ſo farre enter the vpper parte of the feather, as it maye bee halfe on the quyll ſide, and the other halfe on the poynt of the brooſed feather, which wil ſtrengthen the feathers maruelouſly. This done, cutte off the threede, which was for none other purpoſe put there, but to draw the point of the needle backe into the vpper parte of the feather.
            
            
               
               Hovv to ympe the trayne of a havvke, beeing all broken, and neuer a feather whole or ſound.
               MAnye tymes it ſo fortunes, as the trayne of a hawke is quite ſpoyled, and no one feather lefte to ſerue the turne. Wherefore it ſhall be neceſſarie in this caſe, to ſet your hawke a newe trayne, which is done after this manner.
               You muſte take a peece of paper as bygge as your hande, in the myddle whereof you muſte ſlytte a hole, through which conuey the hawkes trayne being broken, vp to the very rumpe of hir, drawing backe throughe the ſayde ſlytte of the paper, all the brayles and ſmal fethers of the trayne that grow about the hawkes tewell, both aboue and beneath, ſo as there appere none at all, but the long feathers, vppon whiche you meane to woorke your feate. Then cutte off thoſe long trayne feathers wt a fine penknife, beginning frō the firſt, ſecond, third, fourth, fifte, and ſo on the other ſide of the trayne in like manner, and you muſt cut them off aſlope, ſidewayes, towards the toppe of the truncke or quill, vntill you come to the twoo couert feathers, which twoo you muſt cut directly, & not ſloping, as you did ye reſt. So as when you haue done, the trayne of ye hawke may be in ſhape like the pypes of a payre of Organes. Then take the trayne of a mewed Iay, (if it be poſſible, bicauſe they are the fayreſt feathers beeing mewed) ſetting in euery quyll of the hawkes trayne, one feather of the Iaye, orderly, the firſt feather of the Iaye, in the firſte quill of the Sparowhawke, and ſo conſequently. And if the Iayes feather will not enter the hawkes quill, then muſte you cutte it a little, and brooſing it with your finger, force it into the cutte quill, anoynting the ende of the borowed feather in the fatte of a ſigge, the yolcke of an egge, or ſuche like ſtuffe, and ſo placing it right and directly with the hawkes feather. Hauing ſet one feather in this order aforeſayde, on the one ſide of the hawkes trayne, paſſe ouer to the other firſte feather of the other ſide, and do in lyke

manner, alwayes placing and ymping them ſo, as in length, and eache condition elſe, they may agree fully with the naturall feather of the hawke: and ſo from one to the other, vntill you come to the twoo couert feathers, whiche you muſte ſette laſte of all the reſt, and thoſe in ſo good order, as your eye may iudge them to be excellently ymped by the iuſte lengthe & ſyze of them. After all this, take awaye your paper, and with a knife wette in a little ſpittell, go ouer all the ymped feathers, putting ye knife betwixte euery quyll, cloſe by ye rump of your hawke, and ſo go along the feather, to cut away all ſuch ſmall feathers, as ſhall be out of order, by meane of the ymping and cutting of the feather in the trayne of your hawke. Whiche done feather by feather, ſet your hawke firſte on your fiſte, and ſo after a ſpace on the perche, that ſhe may tricke hir ſelfe, and right and enoyle hir feathers with hir beake.
               Here will I not omitte to remember euery good Falconer, that he haue in his houſe, and in a readineſſe about him at all tymes, his ymping needles, and ſuche like neceſſarie implementes, to ſerue the turne withall, and to lende his companions, if they neede. For it ſhall redounde to his credit greatly, and by meanes thereof he ſhall be accompted a gallant Gentleman, and a good fellowe.
               Now in myne owne opiniō, I haue diſcourſed ſufficientlye of all diſeaſes, & made you priuie to the Italians order of phiſicking his hawke, whiche I can very well commende, as greatly agreable to reaſon. Yet neuertheleſſe in this laſt part, you ſhall for your greater ſtore of remedies, and better knowledge, haue the Frenche Falconers manner of dealing wt their hawkes ſet downe. But before I do that, I will write ſomewhat to inſtruct you howe to prepare your Mummie, a very neceſſary thing to be learned, and withoute the whiche you oughte to bee at no time, if you meane to kepe hawkes, and to haue them in good order and tune.
            
            
               
               The waye and meane to prepare Mummie for Falcons, and other birds of praye, and when and howe it oughte to be gyuen.
               SYthence that in theſe receytes for hawkes diſeaſed & ſicke, I haue diuers times made mention of Mummy, and of other medicines appropriate and peculiar to ſundrie griefes, here I thinke it not amiſſe, to laye downe the meane, how to prepare it for the vſe and benefite of all Falconers, that ſhall haue occaſion to imploye it to any ſicke hawke: For that in cure of a brooſe, I take it to be the moſt ready and exquiſite way to recouer the hurte hawke againe.
            
            
               Mummie is prepared in this manner.
               Firſt, you muſt take Nutmegges, in number four, Cloues, Ginger, & Cynamon, of eyther halfe an ownce, Saffron one dramme, reducing all theſe to fine pouder. Boyle them in an earthen potte well glazed, & couered cloſe with a reaſonable quantity of good Malmeſie, to the cōſumption of a third part: then take Mummie three ownces, or foure, or ſo much as ſhall content you, beating it to pouder, and putting it into a lynnen cloth, ſo bounde, as it may by no meanes ifſew out of ye ſame. Hang it ſo by a ſtring faſtned to a ſticke, as it may not reache the bottom of the pot, but as it may be infuſed in ye very middle of the Malmeſie, which you muſt cauſe to boyle againe at a ſoft fire, ſo long vntil there be a cōſumption of another thirde part. Which done, take it from ye fire, & let ye Mummie, being ſo bounde in ye lynē cloth, reſt for ye ſpace of four or fiue hours, to the ende the vertue of thoſe pouders may pierce and enter the Mummie, which by this meane will become very perfect. And hauing done al this, kepe the Mūmie out of the ſunne & winde in ye ſhade, in the ſelf ſame cloth wherin it was infuſed, vntil it be perfectly drye againe, and the vſe it in pouder at your nede, eyther ſtrewing it vpon your hawkes meate, or gyuing it in & caſting of Cotton, as I haue taught you before.
               
                  There is a kind of pill or paſt, deuiſed by that noble Gentleman,
Hierom Cornarus of famous memorie, for ſicke Falcons which haue loſt their appetite, and day by day become megre and lowe, making a blacke mewte, of full of fleſh vndigeſted, which is prepared in this maner following.
               Take Saffron, Agaricke, Cubebes, Frankinſenſe, Rewe, Cloues, Cinamom, fine Aloes, of eyther two ſcruples, two Nutmegs, choyce Mummy, Rewbarbe of the beſt, of eyther one dramme, and the fifte parte of the marrowe of a Beefe, or Veale, as muche as will ſuffiſe to make a mixture of theſe powders aforeſaid: of al whiche you muſt make a pill or paſte, giuing thereof to the huger ſorte of Hawkes as muche as a Beane in a pill, in manner aforeſayd.
               This is a very good receyte, but not ſo good as this vnderwrittē, which is deuiſed by (Meſſer Manoli) the Falconer to the renowmed Signor Bartelmewe Aluiano, and practiſed vppon his Falcons, being ſicke, and ill affected in their gorges. He was wont to take Triacle, Hiera Pigra, Caſſea Lignea, Cloues, Cinamom, Aloes, Galenga, Agaricke of the beſt, Sirup of Roſes, confection of Hamech, Diacatholicon, Benedicta, of eyther one ſcruple, choyſe Rewbarbe, Mummy waſht and purified, of each two ſcruples, of Nutmegge three drammes, beating to powder thoſe thinges that are to be beaten in powder, and incorporating all with honie of Roſes, making thereof a pill or paſte, which he would keepe to ſerue his turne at neede, whereof he would giue his huger Hawkes the quantitie of halfe a Beane, and to leſſer Hawkes, a leſſer quantitie, in forme of a pill, beeing emptie both in gorge and pannell. And truely, this would worke a maruelous effect vpon his ſicke Hawkes: and if you vſe the ſame, no doubt you ſhall find greate pleaſure in it.
            
         
         
            
            Of the cauteriſing inſtruments and tooles, vvherevvith Falconers do ſeare their Havvkes in deſperate cures, when nothing elſe vvill ſerue the turne but fire, the laſt refuge of all others.
            
               depiction of instruments and tools
            
            HAuing ſundrie times in my collection of Falconrie, ſpoken of cawterie, to be beſtowed vpon Hawkes, according to the diuerſitie of their diſeaſes and hurts, it ſhall be very needefull for me here in the later ende of my third booke, to ſet down the proportion and ſhape of the yrons, which are proper to yt matter, and maner of cure, being a very neceſſary thing for euery good Falconer to haue thoſe yrons about him continually to ſerue his turne.
            
               Wherefore I ſay, that the cawteriſing yrons, are made in foure maners, and beare foure ſeuerall kinds of ſhapes, as by their peculiar pictures and portraitures may be ſeene.
            
               
Wherof ye firſt aſſigned to this charact (A) doth ſerue to cauteriſe
ye hed of a hauke, bicauſe it is round, & ſomewhat playne on the toppe.
            
                The ſecond, ſigned with the letter (B) ſhall ſeerue to cawteriſe
ye nares, without danger or hurt to ye little ſtert yt groweth vp in the midle of the nares, for that it is round, and hollow at the toppe.
            
                The third, which is (C) is a cawteriſing button to burne or
ſeare the head of a Hawke, and with that other deuice on the backe ſide, to cut the ſkin vnder the nares if neede be.
            
                The laſt, ſigned with the character (D) is often times vſed
to cawteriſe and enlarge the nares of a Hawke, & therefore is made ſo ſmall & ſharp at the poynt, ye better to enter ye nares.
            Of theſe tooles and inſtrumentes, it behoues you to haue larger, and leſſer, according to the varietie and proportion of your Hawkes, for that ye Falcon and Goſhawkes head being more huge than the Sparowhawkes, it ſhall not bee good, nor cōuenient to cawteriſe thē all wt one ſelfe yron, of one bignes, but to ſhift your toole, according to the qualitie of the Hawke.
            Ouer and beſides all theſe tooles aforeſaid, a Falconer muſt haue his paire of kniues, one ſtreight poynted, the other bending at the toppe, a ſplatter, his coping yrons, a payre of Sizers, and a Surgeons inſtrument, to ſerue his vſe in all diſeaſes of a Hawke, about hir beake and pownces.
            Thus muche I accompt ſufficient as touching Hawkes, & birds of pray, ſo as now there remayneth nothing more, but the French Falconers opinion of diſeaſes and cures, and laſtly, one ſmall treatiſe and very neceſſary diſcourſe, as touching the diſeaſes that happen to Spanells, with the cure of the ſayd miſchiefes, which ſhall be the very laſt part of all this collection of Falconrie.
            Though I like the Italian Gentleman very well, for hys

ſingular ſkill and iudgement in Falconrie, yet neuertheleſſe, bycauſe I find ſundry things very good and neceſſarie in the French practiſioners, which maye ſtande you in ſtead, (as well for manning & lewring, as alſo curing your diſeaſed haukes) for whoſe only benefite I vndertoke the collection of this my booke. And partly, for that the French Gentleman ſhall not growe iealous of mee, that I ſkorne his ſkill, in regard of the learned and delicate Italian, waying them both indifferently, if I find them both to deſerue like due commendation and praiſe: I haue heere offered to your viewe and iudgementes ſundrie French mens opinions, and inuentions, as touching this Arte of Falconrie, crauing you to iudge the beſt, both of them and me: of them your neighbours for their firſt inuentions: and of me youre countrie man, for my late collection: whoſe paynes beſtowed heerein, ſhall be nothing but a pleaſure, if I may find my ſelfe guerdoned with good liking and deſerued thankes from you. And ſo I committe you ouer to the diſcourſe it ſelfe, withoute anye farther circumſtaunce or proteſtation.
            
               How to keepe and mayntayne all manner of Hawkes in health, good plight and liking.
               TO keepe Falcons and all maner of birds of pray in health, the chiefe Falconers ſaye, yt they muſt neuer haue a great gorge gyuē thē, ſpecially of groſſe meates, as Beefe, Porke, & ſuch other yt are hard to be put ouer and endewed. Moreouer you muſt beware in any wiſe that ye feede them not with the fleſh of any beaſt that hath lately gone to rutte, for yt will kill them, and yee ſhall not perceiue how. I fynde by experience, that the giuing of great gorges, and the feeding of them with ſuch ſorts of fleſhe, (ſpecially colde,) dothe deſtroy and ſurfit moe Hawkes than all other miſchaunces that can happen to them. And therefore I warne all Falconers to beware howe

they ouergorge their Hawkes: and if they be driuen to feede them with groſſe fleſh for want of better, let it be well ſoaked in cleane water, and afterward ſufficiently well wroong. It muſt be done in Sommer with colde water, and in Winter with ſuke warme water, and it muſt not be wroong too muche with the hande: for the maſſineſſe of the fleſhe, and the looceneſſe of the water, will cauſe them to put ouer and to indew the ſooner and more ſpedily. And it will cauſe them to haue the larger panels, whereby they ſhall the better ſcowre themſelues downeward of the glitte, and groſſe humors. And thys is to be vnderſtoode of all groſſe fleſhe wherewith yee ſhall be fayne ſometimes to feede your Hawkes: but not of any other feeding that is light and of good digeſtion. For yee muſt haue diſcretion to reward your Hawke now and then with ſome good liue and warme meate, or elſe ſhee maye bee brought too lowe. Neuertheleſſe the ſeruing of your Hawkes with waſht meate (as is ſayde before) is the way to keepe them in healthe.
            
            
               Of Aloes Cicotrina, wherewith you muſt make ſcowrings for youre Hawkes.
               
                  I Tell you further, that to maintayne youre Hawkes in good plight, & to keepe them from all diſeaſes, you muſt euery fifteene days, giue thē ye mountenāce of a beane of Aloes Cicotrine, which muſt bee put into them, wrapped vp in a little of the fleſh, or of the ſkinne of a Henne, to the intent that the taſte of the Aloes which is very bitter, be not felt of them. And whē your Hawke hath ſwallowed it downe, beare hir vpon youre fiſte, the better to cauſe hir to keepe that whiche is giuen hir, which done, let hir afterward caſt vp the water & ſlime whyche ſhe hath in hir body: and take vp the reſt of the Aloes againe which ſhe hath caſt, and let it not be loſt, for it is good and will ſerue for another time. Then ſet your Hawke in the Sunne

or againſt the fire hooded, and feede hir not till two houres after, at whiche time you ſhall giue hir a reaſonable gorge of ſome liue birde or fowle. And the ſaid medicine muſt be giuen in the morning after that the Hawke hath caſt.
            
            
               Of common pilles that are giuen to Hawkes for laxatiue medicines or downewarde ſcowrings.
               NEuertheleſſe in ſtead of the ſayd Aloes, ye may at youre diſcretion vſe common pilles, ſuche as Potecaries giue men to make them looſebodyed. And many are of opiniō, that they be much better thā that other of Aloes: for the pilles driue downeward and ſcowre more ſtrongly and with greater effect. Yet notwithſtanding, ye may vſe eyther of thoſe two, making thē at your pleaſure. Of the ſaid pilles you ſhall giue your Hawke one or two, after as the quantitie of them is, and when ſhe hath taken them, ſet hir by a fire, or in the Sunne, and feede hir not for the ſpace of two houres after, at whyche time ye ſhall giue hir ſome quicke and liue thing to feede vppon: For the taking of the pilles will ſet all hir body out of temper and tune. And ſo ye ſhall keepe your Hawkes in good plight, ſtate and health.
            
            
               Another vvay to ſcovvre by medicine.
               
                  Staueſaker is called Filā
                     der, bycauſe it loues a man, and wil cliue to him like the burre.TAke Aloes Cicotrine, and graines of Filander, otherwiſe called Staueſaker, and Caſſia Fiſtula, as much of the one as of the other, to the mountenance of a beane, togither, & whē ye haue beaten it into powder put it into a Hennes gut of an inch long, tied faſt at both ends: then conuey it into hir in the morning, ſo as ſhe may put it ouer, and that muſt be after ſhee hath caſt, if ſhe had any caſting at al. Then ſet your Hauke by the fire or in the Sunne, and feede hir with a quicke chicken, or ſome other liue warme meate two houres after, as is ſaid afore: and ſo your Hawkes ſhall be kepte in good plight & ſtate. And it is to be noted that you muſt not giue ſo muche to

a Goſhawke, for they be not of ſo ſtrong and churliſh nature and mettell as other Hawkes are: & much leſſe to a Sparowhawke, bycauſe ſhe is not able to brooke ſo ſtrong a medicine, as the Goſhawke is. And therefore you muſt beare in mynde that your giuing of the ſaid things to your Hawkes muſt bee according to their natures and ſtrengths, by the good diſcretion of ſuche as through their noble diſpoſition doe place their care, pleaſure, and minds, vpon ſuch things.
            
            
               To make a Hawke caſt when ſhe keepeth it too long.
               FOraſmuch as Hawkes do ſometimes keepe their caſting too long and cannot put it vp: or elſe it may now and then fall out that a man knoweth not whether they haue any caſting or no: in ſuch caſes, you muſt giue your Hawke a little Aloes, and then ſhe will caſt it togither with the ſlime and filth that hindred the caſting of it. And for want of Aloes, giue hir the mountenance of a beane of the roote of Celendine in two or three pellets, and it will eaſe hir out of hād. And to further the matter, it ſhall not be amiſſe to giue hir one ſpoonefull of water, wherin the Celendine rootes haue bin ſtieped ſome ſpace: for the bitterneſſe thereof will force hir to caſt.
            
            
               Of the bathing of Havvkes.
               IF you mind to keepe your Hawkes in tune and ſtate to flee well, you muſt make them bath oftentimes, and you muſte ſet water by thē, though they liſt not to bathe. For ſomtimes a Hawke is deſirous to bowze and take of the water by reaſon of ſome chaunce, or for ſome heate of hir body, or of hir liuer: and then is water good and auaylable to ſet hir agayne in good plight and health: whiche thing you ſhall lightly perciue by that, that the Hawke will make countenaunce of more cheare and reioyce more. When your Hawke is bathed (whether it bee Goſhawke or Falcon,) lette hir be throughly well

wetherd at the fire of in the Sunne. And if ſhee happen to bee waſhed, or ſowſt with raine, or otherwiſe, let hir be throughly weatherd as is ſaid afore, leaſt ſhe ſurfet by cold, ſpecially whē ſhe commes from the field and from hir fleeing. For then is ſhe cōmonly marrde for lacke of good order, and looking too, in ſomuch that therevpon inſew the Pantas, and other diſeaſes. And therefore when the Falconer perceyueth the tyme to be daungerous for his Hawke to take ſuch maner of colde, as in winter time after hir flight, or by taking wet in flying: he muſt firſt weather hir well at the fire or in the Sunne, and then giue hir fiue cloues of Maces in hir caſting, and that wil heate hir againe.
            
            
               To keepe Hawkes from inconueniences which they take of themſelues, or which happen to them vnwares.
               FVrthermore, to preſerue Hawkes from miſchiefes whyche they take lightly by cold or otherwiſe: when ye haue bathed and wetherd them, beware of ſetting them in cold and moyſt places, but chooſe ſome warme and drie place, and with ſome clothe roll the pearch or billet that they ſtand on. For diuers times when Hawkes haue beaten and brooſed them ſelues at the encounter, with great toyle in the field or at the riuer, they be ſo tyred, and take cold ſo lightly, and do ſo chafe their feete, that if ye ſhould ſet them downe in that plight, vpon a ſtande of ſtone or wood, their legges and feete would ſwell, by reaſon of the humors that would fall down and diſtill from ye higher parts, and by that meane breede gowtes, as happeneth in mē by like diſorder. For ſuche diſeaſes light not to men nor yet to Hawkes, but for want of good heede and looking too whē they haue diſtempered themſelues by anye immoderate exerciſe. When ſuch diſeaſes light vpon poore Birdes, they be hard to

be cured, vnleſſe a man haue very good ſkill to order them, and to prouide remedie for them.
            
            
               How men ſhould make their Hawkes to tire euery day.
               
                  I Say further, that the good Falconers and ſuche as haue a care to vſe theyr Hawkes well, and to keepe them in health, muſt make them to tire towardes the euenings before they let them iouke. When your Hawke hath put ouer and indued, afterward in giuing hir caſting, you may well at youre diſcretion gyue hir (if you liſt) a little Aloes Cicotrine in hir caſting, or elſe ſome commō pill, and that doth greatly ſcowre the head, and doe hir much good. And that muſt be done eyther once a weeke, or twice in three weekes: and the ſayd medicine is giuē diuers times by ſuch as like not to giue their Hawkes tiring. Neuertheleſſe I ſay that tiring in the morning after the Hawke hath caſt, is very good. And if the tyring be of plumage, keepe hir from eating of feathers (as well as you may) for feare leaſt ſhe take caſting before the euening: for towards night it is no daunger, for then of common courſe ſhee is to haue caſting. Let hir tire againſt the Sunne, ſnyting and ſewing hir beake a little at your diſcretion, after as you find your Hawke lowe and poore, vntill you intend to go to your paſtime. I haue knowen many Falconers that neuer make their Hawkes to tire, ſaying that it is but a cuſtome, and needeleſſe: but I ſay the contrary. For inaſmuche as the Hawke is exerciſed by reaſonable tyring, ſhee becommeth the helthyer and the lighter both of body and of head, by all moderate exerciſes, yea and ſhe is the better in ſtate alſo as you may perceyue. And I beleeue that the opinion of ſuch as ſaye ſo, proceedeth of nothing but of ſlouth and of ſmall loue whych they haue to their Hawkes. Therfore forget not to make your Hawke to tyre againſt the Sunne in the morning: for it riddeth them the better of the watry humors that deſcend out of

their heads, if either before the doing of it or after, you ſet them vpon a pearch againſt the Sunne, that they may tricke and enoyle themſelues at their pleaſure. This done, ye may ſette them in their accuſtomed places. And bicauſe ſome Falconers are ſo ſlouthfull (as is ſayd afore) that they will not make their Hawkes to tire, and otherſome haue not leyſure always to do it: in ſtead of tyring, I will giue them a remedie that followeth to eaſe them of their watery humors which they haue in their heads for want of tiring. Take Agarike beaten into powder, and Ierapigra, with a little Saffron, and make a pill of it as bigge as a beane, and put a third part leſſe of Ierapigra than of Agaricke to binde your pouder togither. Let that pill ſo made be put into hir wrapped in Cotton, towards euening when ſhe hath indued hir gorge and is emptie, making hir to receyue it three or foure dayes togither. And you may vſe this medicine from mooneth to mooneth at youre diſcreſion: And by the opinion of all Falconers, ye may giue this pill for all vnknowen and hidden diſeaſes, for which you know none other remedie.
            
            
               Another receyt to keepe and mayntaine youre Hawkes in good healthe.
               IF you intend to keepe and maintayne your Falcons and all other Hawkes in health, take Germander, Pelamountayne, Baſill, Grimelſede, and Broome flowres, of each of them halfe an ownce: of I ſop, of Saxifrage, of Polepodie, and of Horſemintes, of eache of them a quarter of an ownce: of Nutmegges, a quarter of an ownce: of Cucubes, Borage, Mūmy, Mogewort, Sage, of the four kinds of Miraholans, Indorum, Kebulorum, Beliricorum, and Embelicorum, of eache of them halfe an ownce: of Saffron an ownce, and of Aloes Cicotrine the fifth part of an ownce. All theſe things confect to a powder, and

at euery eygth day or at euery twelfth day giue your Hawkes the quantitie of a beane of it with their meate. And if they will not take it ſo, put it in a Hennes gutte tied at both ends, or elſe after ſome other meanes, ſo as ye cauſe them to receiue it downe. And if they caſt vp the fleſhe againe by force of the powder, let it no more be giuen them with fleſhe, but in the foreſayd maner of the gutte, and lette them ſtand emptie one houre after. And according as you ſee your Hawke diſpoſed, make hir to vſe this medicine, to ſkowre hir of the euill humors that are in hir body, bred of feeding vpon naughty fleſh, which ingendreth ſuche humors and cauſeth many diſeaſes in Hawkes.
            
            
               That the diſeaſes whiche Hawkes haue in their heads, do commonly come of giuing them too great gorges, and of foule feeding: the meane of knowe it.
               THe chiefe Falconers ſaye and agree, that the diſeaſes in Hawkes heads do moſt commonly breede of giuing them too great gorges, eſpecially of groſſe and ill fleſh. For when a Hawke hath too full a gorge, ſhe cannot well put it ouer and indue it, wherevpon it falleth to corrupting and ſtincking in hir gorge by lying too long there, and ſpeciallye, more in a Hawke that is lowe and poore than in one that is high, and full of fleſh, inſomuch that ſhe is forced to caſt it all ſtincking. And if ſhe happen to put it ouer ſo ſtincking, it atteynteth and rotteth hir panell, by meanes whereof the fume and ſtinch aſcend vp to hir head, and there cloſe and ſtuffe vp hir eares, and the paſſages of hir pipes and head, ſo as the humors whiche were wonte, cannot paſſe away as they were accuſtomed, by reaſon whereof the head ſwelleth inordinately.

For the humor ſeeketh iſſue and vent eyther at the eares, or at the nares, or at the throte: for wante whereof the Hawke falles in daunger of death if ſhee haue not ſpeedy remedie. And to diſcerne this diſeaſe of the head, the Hawke will ſniffe often, and ſhet hir eyes towards night, and ſometimes ſhet eft the one and eft the other eye, and make as though ſhe iowked with woorſe cheere than ſhee was wont to doe: and then muſt you beware that ſhee ſwell not betweene the eye and the beake. And if ſhe do, then cauterize hir in that maner that is ſet downe hereafter. Whenſoeuer the humor makes a ſhew to ſew out at the Hawkes eares, at hir nares, or at hir throte, then is ſhee in perill of deathe, if ſhee bee not holpen preſently.
            
            
               The remedie of the ſayde diſeaſe.
               YOu muſte take the larde of Bakon that is not reſtie, nor ouer olde, and of the fatteſt of it make ſlyces, as it were to larde Partridges, and ſuche ſmall birds, and let them ſteepe in freſhe colde water a whole night, chaunging the water three or foure tymes. Then take the marowe of beefe well picked, and ſuger once boyled and clarified, and of thoſe three things being eche of like quātitie, with the quantitie of a lyttle beane of Saffron in powder, well mingled togither, make pilles of the bigneſſe of a beane, and giue them to your hawke, cauſing ſome body to caſte hir, and opening hir beake by force, if ſhee will not take them otherwiſe. This done, ſet hir by the fyre, or in the Sunne, and anone ye ſhall ſee howe ſhe will ſkowre and ſlyſe by caſting vpwarde and downwarde the groſſe humors wherwith hir bodie is ouercharged. And when ſhe hath muted well three or foure tymes, let hir be taken from the fire, or out of the Sunne, and ſet vpon hir pearche in hir accuſtomed place, and let hir not be fedde till twoo howers after, and then allowe hir of a chicken or mutton but halfe a gorge. Let

hir be thus dealt withall three dayes togither, making hir to tyre euery day agaynſt the ſunne both morning and euening. And foure fiue or ſixe days after, giue hir euery day a cloue of Mace in hir caſting, and ſhe ſhall recouer.
               When the three dayes are paſte, wherin you haue ſo ſcowred hir, take a little pepper beaten into very fine powlder, and mingling it with vineger in a ſawcer, open hir beake, and rubbe the roofe of hir chappe therewith, and likewiſe put a droppe or twayne of it into hir nares, and ſet hir by the fire or in the Sunne, and you ſhall ſee how mightily it will open hir head. Howbeit you muſt not giue this medicine to a Hawke that is very poore, for ſhe will not bee able to brooke it. And within an houre or two after, feede hir with a chickens leg: and after let hir haue twice a day at hir houres a reaſonable gorge, and let the ſayde powlder be giuen hir no more but once.
               In ſtead of this powlder, ſome giue thys medicine following, whyche you maye gyue alſo if you thinke good: that is to witte, a little Staueſacre, howbeit that it is very ſtrong, if there be not ſkill vſed to delay the ſtrength of it. Wherefore if you mynde to giue your Hawke of it, giue hir not paſt three or foure graynes of it wrapt in a cloth or in lint, whiche you muſt breake afterwarde and beate into powlder. Then take a little cleane water in a diſhe, and put your powlder in it, and mingling it togither in manner of a Sirop, put three or foure droppes of it into your Hawkes nares, and ſette hir in the Sunne or by the fire as is ſayd afore, if it be colde. That done, then by Martins aduice take pitche if you will, to the mountenance of a beane, whyche you muſt warme betwixt youre handes, and afterwarde cleane it to the roofe of hir beake, rubbing it ouer with a little of the powlder of Staueſacre and Pepper, till ſhee feele the pitche well vppon hir Palate: and by and by in laboring to ſhake off the ſayde pitche and water from hir Palate, ſhee will caſt: and let hir caſt hir fill till ſhee bee throughly ſcowred. And when yee

thinke ſhee is ſcowred ſufficiently, take away the ſayd pitche if it bee not falne off already, and ſet your Hawke to the fire, or in the Sunne as is ſayd in the medicine of the Pepper, and feede hir with ſome good meate one houre after.
               And to recomfort youre Hawke after all theſe medicines, yee maye giue hir foure or fyue Cloues of Mace as is ſayde afore, after as the bigneſſe of them is, whyche you muſt firſte brooze a little, and put into hir caſting. For the Cloues ſo giuen are ſingularly good for Hawkes againſt all Rheumes and humors of the head, ſo that it maketh them to haue a good breath and keepeth it from ſtincking, by ſetting theyr whole bodies in a temperate heate. And the Cloues being ſo gyuen euery eight daye, is ynough to keepe a Hawke from all rhewmatike diſeaſes of the head, and from all other diſeaſes that come of cold.
            
            
               Of a confirmed Rewme that commeth of colde.
               NOw that I haue ſpoken of the diſeaſe of the head whyche commeth oftentimes of gyuing too greate a gorge or of fowle feeding, I will ſpeake of the Rhewme or poſe whyche breedeth of the coldneſſe of the brayne, and vpper parte of the head. The Hawkes that haue this diſeaſe, indure ſuche payne as they cannot holde open their eyes. And of this diſeaſe ſpring many other griefes, as the pinne and the webbe in the eye, whereby they loſe theyr ſyght: and ſometimes they loſe their ſyght withoute hauing the pinne and webbe in theyr eyes. Beſides that, there followeth the hawe in their eyes as in the eyes of a Horſe, and ſometimes alſo the pip in their tungs, and another diſeaſe whiche is called the Efforcyllons in the Frenche tong (I knowe not what Engliſhe tearme to beſtowe vppon it.) And moreouer the ſwelling of the roofe of their pallate whyche is called the Vuila, an ill diſeaſe, whereof

breedeth the Cancre. All theſe diſeaſes are very daungerous and put Hawkes in great hazard, if there be not ſkill to remedie them betimes. And Maſter Amé Caſsyan ſayth that ſuche diſeaſes breede of flewme whiche is in the bodies of Hawkes, as I ſayd afore of the other Rhewme: and that fleume commeth of ſetting them in moyſt and colde places. Alſo ſometyme it commeth of bringing them home colde and wet out of the fieldes, and of ſetting them downe vppon their pearches withoute drying or warming them at the fire or in the Sunne.
               The remedie of thoſe diſeaſes is firſt and formoſt to cawteriſe them in manner following. Faſhion a little yron with a rounde heade like a peaze, (whiche is called a button) and make it in manner redde whote in the fire, but yet not ouerwhote: (for yron is very violent if it be too much het.) Cauteriſe hir therewith on the toppe of hir head, bycauſe the griefe and diſeaſe is there grounded. Cauſe your Hawke to be well caſt, that you maye cawterize hir at youre eaſe, and pleaſure, for you muſt beware of burning hir too deepe, and therefore that ye may be ſure to do it well, mayle your Hawke faſt, and pull off a fewe of hir feathers. Aſſoone as you haue done ſo, take another yron with a poynte as ſharpe as the tooth of a combe, and put it in the fire as afore ſayde, and therewith pierce hir nares in ye middes. Thē two or three days after, take another flat yron of a finger broad, heate likewiſe red whote, and cauteriſe your Hawke againe therewith handſomly as it were betweene the eye lid and the horne of the beake, and do it with the ſharper ſide of the yron: not that the yron ought indeede to haue any edge, but rather by all reaſon to be blunt. And take good heede that the fire touch nother the ball of hir eye nor hir nares, and therefore ſee that ye gard hir eye with a wet cloute to keepe it from the ſmoke. All ſuch maner of fires muſt be giuen towards the euening, before Hawkes are ſupped, when they are emptie, for otherwiſe ye handling of them would make them caſt their gorges. When all is done as it

ſhould be, halfe gorge your Hawke, or ſomewhat leſſe with warme meate. And the ſame daye make prouiſion of ſuche Snayles as are among vines, or among Fenill, and ſuche as haue gray ſhelles, they are the beſt, for men are wont to eate of them. Steepe fyue or ſixe of them in the milke of an Aſſe, or of a Gote, or elſe (for want of that) in womans milke, and let it be done in a good large glaſſe well couered, that they creepe not out.
               The next morning breake the ſhelles, and waſh them in newe milke as it commeth from the Cowe: then giue foure or fiue of thoſe Snayles to your Hawke, after that they bee of bigneſſe. And aſſoone as that is done, ſet hir againſt a fire or the Sunne, and remoue hir not away till ſhe haue muted four or fiue times. And if ſhe can abide the heate well, let hir alone ſtill, for it doth hir much good. After noone fede hir wt a Hennes legge or with ſome ſmall birds, or with a Ratte or a Mouſe, whiche are beſt of all, and then ſet hir in a warme place and giue hir not too great a gorge. When euening commes, that ſhe hath indued & put ouer hir meate, take fiue or ſixe Cloues of Mace, broken aſunder, and wrapped in a peece of fleſh or a pellet of cotton, and make hir to receyue it by fayre meanes, or fowle, by opening hir beake, and conueying it into hir. Continue this medicine foure or fiue dayes, and your Hawke ſhall recouer. Afterward make hir to tire euening and morning and let hir feeding be ſtyped in milke as is ſayde afore of the Snayles, for the milke ſcowreth hir body within, and is very nutritiue, and will quickly bring hir to be hie, and in fleſhe agayne.
            
            
               Another medicine that Mallopin giueth in ſtead of the other aforeſayd.
               TAke the powlder of Saffron and Camomill, of eache the mountenance of a little peaze, & when ye haue mingled thē
                  
togither, put thereto Larde that is neither reſtie, nor ouer ſalted, and ſteepe them a nyght and a day in three or foure changes of water, and then waſhe the Larde throughly in faire licoure. That done, take Suger clarified, and the Maree of a Beefe. Of the things aforeſayde, take as muche of the one, as of the other, ſo as you may make fiue or ſixe balles of the bigneſſe of a Beane. Then myngle the ſayde mixtures, and the powders togither, and euery morning gyue your hawke one of the balls, tyll all be ſpente: and as is ſayde afore, ſette your hawke by the fire, or in the Sunne, & feede hir not by the ſpace of an houre or twayne after: at which time you ſhall gyue hir either a Hennes legge, or ſome ſmall birdes, or a Rat, or ſome Myce. And in the morning, when ſhe hath well indewed, giue hir foure or fiue cloues of Maces lapped in a little fleſh, or in the ſkinne of a Henne, or in pellettes of Cotton. And ſo may you cauterize hir before the ſayde medicin, after the maner that I haue ſhewed before in the former receyte of the Snayles, ſo you draw hir meate in Mylke, or in freſh butter.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe of the eares, whiche commeth of the Rhewme and colde.
               SOmetimes there happeneth another diſeaſe to hawkes, by reaſon of moyſture of the heade, whiche is called the diſeaſe of the eares, bycauſe there yſſue out certaine humors by them. And ye ſhall know the diſeaſe by this, that the hawke will oft times wrythe hir heade backe, and maketh not ſo good cheare, as ſhe ſhoulde do, and is more vnluſtie. Wherefore ſearch and peruſe hir eares, and you ſhall finde the diſeaſe there. The remedie whereof, by Maſter Amé Caſsians deuiſe, is this.
               Take a little long yron, rounde at the ende as a peaze, and Oyle of ſweete Almonds, or for lacke of that, Oyle of Roſes, whiche is muche better, if you can come by it. Then heat your yron in the fire, neyther glowing red, nor very hotte, and put

it into the Oyle, and of that oyle ſo heat with the yron, droppe a little into your hawkes eares, putting the yron a little into them, that they be not ſtopped. For then of ſuche inconuenience happeneth oftentymes the Canker to the brayne, which is incurable, & killeth the hawke. And beware of thruſting the yron to farre in, or of beeing too hotte, for elſe you may kill hir. You muſt continue the miniſtring of this Oyle, foure or fiue daies, alwaies wiping away the humors gently, that yſſewe out of hir eares, & alwaies reſpecting hir caſting, whither it be cleane or no. And if you liſt to ſkowre hir with a common pyll or twaine, they wil eaſe hir heade maruelouſly well, and doe hir exceeding muche good: or if you do it with the ſayde balles of Larde, Suger, and Marow of Beefe, it is good likewiſe, for you may vſe eyther ye one or ye other at your pleaſure.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe of the eylyddes, whiche commeth of the rewme and colde.
               ANother diſeaſe happeneth to Hawkes, in the eyelyddes, whiche cauſeth a ſwelling vnder the the eylydde, betweene the eye & the feare of ye beake (we haue no proper ſpeach for it) if ye remedie it not betymes, it wyll ſwell rounde about: and thereof commeth the Hawe in the eye, whiche will ouergrow the eye, & ſtoppe it. And aſſure your ſelfe it is a ſigne of death, if it growe too long. For I haue ſeene many dye of it in my tyme, for lacke of remedie. Now by Maſter Amé Caſsyans opinion, the remedie is this. Heate the little rounde yron that I ſpake of afore, & cauterize hir with it ſoftly vpon hir heade, as is ſaid for ye Rewme. Likewiſe with ye other cutting yron ſeare hir betweene the eye & the beake. Alſo pierce hir nares with the lyttle yron, and afterwarde gyue hir the medicine of the Snayles, after the manner aforeſayde, foure or fiue dayes togyther. And for wante of that medicine, you maye

vſe the other, of Larde, Suger, and the Marow of Beefe mingled with the powder of Saffron and Camomill.
            
            
               Of the Hawe in the eye, whiche commeth of moyſture, and colde, and howe it happeneth.
               MOreouer ſomtimes there growes a great diſeaſe in their eyes, which is named the Hawe, and commeth after the ſame manner that it commeth in horſes: namely, ſometyme by a blowe, or a ſtripe, ſometyme by a diſeaſe in the heade, & moſte commonly by hurting of the eye with the ſtreyghtneſſe of the hoode, or by ſome other miſfortune, which cannot ſometimes be eſchewed. And you ſhall diſcerne the cōming of this diſeaſe, by ſeeing a little filme growing vp from the bending of hir beake, and couering hir eye by little and little. And this filme is ſomewhat blacke afore, and is called the Hawe, which putteth out the eye, if it once ouergrowe the ball of it. To remedie the ſame, take a little needle yt is very ſharpe poynted, and fine threeded with a ſilke threede, and therewith take vp the Hawe handſomely, and cut it with a little ſlicer, as horſe-leaches do too horſes, but beware that you cut it not too muche, for hurting of the eye, which you muſt waſhe with Roſe water three dayes togither. In theſe cures of diſeaſes that grow in the eyes, there muſt be great care vſed, for feare of a greater miſchiefe, bicauſe of the dayntineſſe of the place.
            
            
               Of a blowe giuen to the eye, or of ſome other miſchaunce.
               SOmetime the eyes of hawkes are hurt by ſome miſhappe, ſome ſtripe, or otherwiſe, as I ſayde afore. Againſt ſuch vnlooked for miſchaunces, Maſter Amé Caſsyan giueth clere Fenell water, & Roſe water, as much of the one as of the other, & therwith waſheth ye eye twyce or thrice aday. Maſter Malopin
                  
in his booke of the Prince,Arondell in Frenche, is Hirundo, a Swallowe, otherwiſe called Chelidon. willeth to take the iuyce of Celondine, otherwiſe called, Herbe Arondell, or Swallowes herbe, & to conuey it into the eye. And if it be not to be had greene, to take it drye, and to beate it into pouder, and to blow it into hir eye with a quill, and this ſhall recure the hawke.
            
            
               Of the Filme in the eye, which ſome call the Veroll, or the Pinne and webbe.
               THere is another diſeaſe in the eye, called a Filme, whiche commeth ſometimes of diſeaſe in the head, & of Rhewmes that diſtill into the eyes, and ſometimes of ſtanding too long, or too cloſe hooded, whiche hapneth through the fault and negligence of ſuche as haue the bearing and ouerſight of them. For the remedie heerof, Maſter Martin ſayeth, that ye muſte take Celondine, and bray it, putting thereto Hoonie and freſh butter, and of eche of thoſe three gyue your hawke a like portion with a hotte gorge, and moreouer put the powder of Pepper and Aloes in hir eye. Or elſe (as ſayeth Maſter Amé Caſsian) you muſte giue hir the foreſayde medicine of Larde, Suger, and Marow of Beefe, three or four dayes togither, to ſkowre hir, ſetting hir by a fire, or in the Sunne, and feeding hir after it with ſome lyue fowle, and keeping hir out of the wind, & from ſtanding colde, or moyſte. After ſhe is ſo ſkowred, if ye ſee that the webbe ſhewe it ſelfe muche, cauterize hir vpon the vpper part of hir head, and likewiſe a little betwene the eye and the beake, after the manner aforeſayde. When all this is done, ſquirte a little Roſe water into hir eye, and if nede be, miniſter thereto the powder or the iuyce of Celondine, otherwiſe called Herbe Arondell, as is ſayde afore. This diſeaſe of the Pinne & webbe, is of ſome men called the Veroll, for the remedying whereof, they burne the ſhell of a Tortoyſe in a newe pot, and beate it into fine powder, whiche they ſerce through a fine cloth. Then take they a Cockle of the ſea, which

is faſhioned like a Hart, and burning it throughly in the fire, make it into fine powder, & serce it likewiſe. And finally they take Suger Candie in powder. Theſe three powders myxte togyther in equall portions, they vſe to put into their hawkes eyes tyll they be whole.
               Maſter Michelin telleth of one other receyte for the ſayde diſeaſe, which is this. Make a little hole in the top of an egge, and powre out the white of it: then coyle cleare Roſe water, and Sanguis draconis, well togyther, and fill vp your egge with them, and ſtirre them throughly with a ſmal ſticke. Afterward wrappe vp your egge in paſte, and ſtoppe vp the hole of it, that nothing get out: which done, ſet it ſo clozed in the fire, till the paſte become blacke and redde at the taking it from the fire. Then take out that which is within it, and beate it into pouder, and ſerce it through a fine cloth: and of that powder you may vſe to put in your hawkes eye till it bee cured, waſhing hir eye now and then with water of Fenell, and of Roſes.
               Maſter Mallopin makes another medicine for the ſame diſeaſe, which is this. Take the dung of a Lyzart, (which is called a Prouinciall) and beate it into powder, with Suger Cā
                  die, ſomewhat more in quantitie than the other, mingling thē both togither. He ſayeth, that this powder is much better than all the others, whereof you may vſe as is ſayde afore, conueying into your hawkes eye water of Roſes, and of Fenell.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe that breedeth in hawkes beakes, commonly called Formica.
               DIuers tymes there growes a diſeaſe vppon the horne of hawkes beakes, which eateth and fretteth the beake from the heade. Maſter Amé ſayeth, it is a woorme that eateth the horne of the beake within, by reaſon whereof the Hawke is in greate daunger, if ſhee bee not holpen in tyme. Yee ſhall perceiue it by this, that the horn of the beake waxeth rugged,

and the beake beginneth to ryue and cliue from hir head. Maſter Amé Caſsian giueth this anſwere and remedie therevnto. Take the gall of an Ore, (or of a Bull, whiche is better than of an Oxe) and alltoo beate it, and breake it in a diſhe, and put thereto the powder of Aloes Cicotrine, and myngle them well togither. Then noynte the horne of your hawkes clappe or beake therewith, and the very place where the Formica growes, twyce adaye. But beware that you touche neyther hir eyes, nor hir nares. And continewe your ſo doing, till ſhe be throughly cured, and lette hir bee bathed with Orpiment & Pepper, to kepe hir from vermine & Mytes.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe that breedeth in the Nares of Hawkes.
               ANother diſeaſe bredeth in Hawkes nares, ſo as they ſwell exceedingly: and ſometyme vppon the horne of the beake there ryſeth a cruſte, at ye remouing whereof the fleſh is found to be raw vnderneath the clappe, inſomuche that diuers times they looſe ye one half of their beake. Maſter Amé Caſsian ſaith, yt the hawke hath ſmal Mites in hir heade, which creepe downe alōgſt hir beake, & entring in at hir nares, do brede ye ſayd diſeaſe: & that ye hawke feeling them, & being moleſted therwith, thruſteth hir talants into hir nares. Or elſe it happeneth ſomtimes, that a caſt of hawkes do buckle & crab togither, & therof breedeth the ſayde diſeaſe. Maſter Amé Caſsian prouideth for it this remedie following.Here is lefte out the manner of cauterizing a hawkes nares▪ bicauſe the Italian hath ſet it downe. Make little matches of paper, of the bygneſſe of the tag of a poynt, & let your hawke be caſt handſomely, & ſet your matches on fire with a candle, & ſeare your hawke vpon the place ſwollen, taking good hede that you do it not too roughly. Which being done, annoynt it the next morning with a little Hennes grease, and ſo will it heale well, & hir beake and nares will not be ſtuft, but remaine open. Neuertheleſſe ye muſt be fayne ſometimes to touche hir with an yron, which is more daungerous than the other.
            
            
               
               The diſeaſe called the Frownce, whiche breedeth within hawkes beakes, and in their tongues.
               THe Frownce proceedeth of moyſt & colde humors, which deſcend from the hawkes head to their palate, and ye roote of ye tōgue. And of yt cold, is ingendred in ye tongue ye Frownce, otherwiſe called (of the French mē ye 
                  Barbillons, or Sourchelons.) by meanes of which they looſe their appetite, & cānot cloſe their clap, whereof they oftentimes dye: & that diſeaſe is named ye Eagles bane. For as I reported to you in ye firſt parte of this collection, the Eagle ſeldome when dyeth of age, but onely by meane hir beake doth ouergrowe, ſo as ſhe cānot feede & gorge hir ſelfe. Yee may perceiue this diſeaſe by loſſe of hir appetite to feede. And to know it the better, open your hawkes beake, & looke on hir tongue, whither it be ſwollen or no: And if there appere not that diſeaſe, open hir beake againe within a while after, & ſee if there be any likelyhoode of it, and ſo may yee eaſily diſcrie the miſchiefe. For remedie wherof the ſayde Maſter
Mallopin ſayeth, that you muſt take Oyle of ſwete Almondes, or Oyle Olyue waſht in foure or fiue waters, and with that Oyle annoynt hir throte and hir tongue three or four times a day with a feather, for fiue or ſixe dayes togither. And if your hawke cannot feede, lette hir meate be cutte and ſhredde into very ſmall pellets. This done, open hir beake gently, and make hir to receyue it downe, by conueying a ſmall ſtycke into hir throte, gyuing hir not paſte halfe a gorge at a tyme, and that muſte bee eyther of Mutton, or of ſome lyue fowle, Henne, Chicken, or ſuche lyke: fiue or ſixe dayes after, open hir beake handſomely agayne, and with a payre of ſharpe Siſſers, cutte off the typpes of the Barbillons, till the bloude followe, but yet beware of cutting away too muche. After this, annoynte and moyſten wel hir throte with ſyrope of Mulberies, called of the Apothecaries Diamoron, and then annoynte hir with Oyle of ſweete Almondes, or with Oyle Olyue, tyll ſhe be recured.
            
            
               
               Of the diſeaſe called by the Frenche men, Eſcorchillons, a kinde of frownce or Canker.
               
                  Eſcorcer in French, is to rippe off the rinde or skin of any thing, of which word this diſeaſe ſeemeth to be deryued.SOmetimes there happeneth a diſeaſe to hawkes, whiche is called the Eſcorchillons, a harde diſeaſe to bee diſcerned. It breedeth commonly of a Rhewme, confirmed in the heade, from whence ſpring many other diſeaſes, (whereof I haue made mention in the Chapter of Rhewmes in the heade, and of the diſeaſe called (the Barbillons,) whiche breedeth in Hawkes tongues,) as the Pyppe doth, the diſeaſe of the palate, and the Canker, which are very daungerous diſeaſes and deadely. If yee wyll knowe the Eſcorchillons, let your hawke be caſte handſomely, and open hir beake, and force downe hir tongue with your fingers ende, ſo as you may ſee hir windepype, and a little beneath hir windepype yee ſhall finde the
Eſcorchillons, lyke three or foure ſharpe prickes growing one agaynſte another, that ſometymes the Hawke cannot caſte, by meane thereof. And that is a perfect waye to knowe this euyll. Furthermore, in the ſame place, and on eyther ſyde of the windepype, yee ſhall finde twoo ſmall ſtertes of deſhe, whiche are naturall to all Hawkes. But at the lower ende of them doe growe vp manie lyttle prickes, whiche are the cauſe that a Hawke can not well caſte in the morning, inſomuche that ſometymes ſhee is fayne to caſte hir caſting by peecemele, and not whole. And that is another aſſurance of the ſayde diſeaſe, whiche maye bee well cured and remedied bothe togyther.
               The remedie which Amé Caſsyan gyueth for this diſeaſe, is ſette foorthe in the former Chapter by Maſter Mallopin, where hee wylleth you to take Oyle of ſweete Almondes, or Oyle Olyue, &c.
            
            
               
               The diſeaſe of the Canker which breedeth in the throtes and tungs of Hawkes.
               YE muſt vnderſtande that the Canker breedeth of fowle feeding your Hawkes, not waſhing of their meate in colde water in Sommer, and in warme in Winter, whiche ingendreth in their guttes groſſe ſlimy matter. And when thoſe humors come to be moued, they fume vp into the head, and (ſo diſtilling agayne) ingender heate of the lyuer, which breaketh out in the throte and the tung, and there ingender the Canker. You ſhall diſcerne this diſeaſe by the feeding of your Hawke, for in taking hir meate ſhe letteth it fall, and afterward hath much adoe to ſwallowe it. Therefore let hir beake be anoynted, and you ſhall find the diſeaſe of the Canker. Maſter Amé Caſsian giueth this medicine for it. Take Oyle of Almonds or Oyle Olife waſhed as is ſayd afore, and anoynt well hir throte with it twice or thrice a day. That done, giue hir the ſayd medicine of Sugre, Lard, and marrowe of Beefe three dayes togither, and feede hir with Mutton or with Pullets or Hennes fleſh dipped in the foreſayd Oyle, but ye muſt not waſhe your Oyle of Almonds. After this, you muſt behold and regard the Canker, and if you find it white, take a ſmall yron made at the one ende lyke a Raſor, and at the other end edged and ſharp. And if hir tung be very much ouergrowen with the Canker, ſlit & open it handſomly alongſt the ſide of hir tung, and with your Raſer ſcrape away the whitenes ſoftly which you ſee there. Then take a little Cotton or lint to drie and drinke vp the bloud of hir tung, and ſee that none be left. And if the other ſide of hir tung happen to be ſo too, ſlit it likewiſe: which done, take the iuyce of Maydenheare, and lay vpon it. And for want of that herbe, take a little bineger, or rather the iuyce of a Lymon which is much better, and waſh hir meate in Oyle till ſhe be throughly recured. Maſter
Michelin giueth another remedie which is this. Anoynt wel hir throte and tung with Sirup of Mulberies (otherwiſe called
Diamoron) two or three dayes togither, after whiche take of the foreſayd good Oyle: Then take the powder of Brimſton and

of ſugre candie, or of other white ſuger mingled well togither of eche a like, and put a little thereof vpon the Canker: for it you ſhould lay much, it would fret the tung too ſore. And this maner of dealyng is better for a confirmed Canker, than any other. Therfore waſh hyr meate with the oyle aforeſayd, and feede hyr with mutton, or the fleſh of Hennes or pullets.
            
            
               Of a kinde of Pippe that is in a Hawke.
               THe Pippe cōmeth chiefly of cold and moyſtneſſe of the head: and ſometimes of feeding your hawke with euill and rotten fleſh, without waſhing it and making it cleane in warme water in the winter, and in colde water in the Sommer. Whereof ingendereth ſlimy & groſſe humors in the bodie, which aſcend vp to the head & ingender the pip on the tip of the tung as ye ſee cō
                  monly fall out in chickens. And ye may perceiue this diſeaſe by your hawkes often ſniting, & by making a noyze twice or thryce in hyr ſnyting. M. Amé Caſsian ſayeth, that to remedie this diſeaſe, you muſt caſte your hawke gently, & looke vpon the tip of hir tung: and if ye finde hir to haue the pippe, ye muſt ſcoure hir with a pill made of Agarik and Ierapigra, giuen two or three dayes togither with hir caſting towards night, and that will rid hyr of the rhewme in hyr head, the rather if ſhe be made to tyre againſt the ſunne in the mornings, as is ſayd afore. M. Malopin in his booke of the Prince, ſayeth, that to cure the Pippe, ye muſt binde a little cotton vpon a ſtickes ende, and dipping it in ſweete roſewater waſhe well hir tung with it: and afterwarde annoynt it three or foure dayes with oyle of Almonds, and oyle olife well waſhed as is before ſayd: and when ye haue done ſo, ye ſhall finde the Pippe all white and ſoft. Then take an awle, and with the poynt of it lift vp the Pippe ſoftly, remouyng it as women do Pippe their Chickens. Howbeit ye muſt not remoue it till it be full rype: for if yee take it to greene, you ſhall hurte your hawke. And looke that you wet hir tung and palat twyce or thryce a day with the foreſayd oyle, till ſhe be throughly cured.
            
            
               
               Of the diſeaſe of their palat which falleth of ſwelling by reaſon of moyſture of the head.
               SOmetimes it happeneth that the palates or roofes of hawkes mouthes are ſwollen, and looke whytiſh: which commeth of moyſture and cold wherwith their heads are ſurcharged. And ye may perceyue this diſeaſe by that they cannot cloſe their beakes, and by that they looke not ſo cherely as they were woont to do, ne can put ouer, or endew their meate but with greate payne. To cure your hawke of this diſeaſe, you muſte open hir beake, where you ſhall finde the roofe of hir mouth whytiſh and ſwollen. And if you find it not ſo, you muſt ſearche hir beake to diſcerne if ſhe haue any other diſeaſe there that lettes hir to ſhet it: for ſometimes their beakes growe more on the one ſide of the clappe than on the other, ſo as they cannot cloſe thē. The remedie that M. Amé Caſsian giues for this euill, is this: The hawkes that are ſo diſeaſed muſt haue the ſayd pilles of Larde, ſuger, and maree of beefe, giuen them euery morning, one or twoo, for foure or fiue dayes ſpace togither, and aboute an houre or two after, feede them with ſome poultrie or mutton drawen through the foreſayd oyle. And after thoſe dayes, open hir beake againe and ſoftly ſcrape of the whyteneſſe: and if ye finde the ſwellyng abated, then do none other thing to hyr but onely continue your anoynting of hyr with the ſayd oyle. But if ye perceiue the ſwellyng to ryze to high, ye may launce or pricke it, but ye muſte beware that yee ſtryke not to deepe, for ye may ſoone kill your hawke. Afterwarde lay the iuyce of maydenheare to it, and continue it till it be throughly cured, and alwayes drawe hir meate in the ſayd oyle, or elſe in milke or butter.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe of the iawes.
               THe diſeaſe of the iawes cōmeth either of drawing the hoode to ſtreyt, or for that it is to cloſe & ſtreyt of it ſelf. And yt cauſeth the Rewme to droppe downe out of the hawkes head vpon hyr

gummes & iawes, (if we may ſo terme them.) You ſhall know it by this, that ſhe can neyther open nor ſhet hir beake.
            
            
               M. Michelins medicine for the ſame.
               ANnoynt well the gorge, iawes, and nares of your hawke with oyle of ſweete Almondes three or foure dayes togither, and for want of that, take oyle Olife waſht in two or three waters, and drawe hir meate through it as is ſayde afore, and giue hir pilles of Lard, ſugre and marie of a beef, or elſe common pilles to ſcoure hyr bothe vpward and downeward.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath broken hir clappe, by ſome miſchaunce.
               AN other inconuenience befalleth Hawkes by the negligence of ſuch as kepe them: for in their feeding there cleaneth or remayneth ſome peece of fleſh in their iawes or in the roofe of their mouth, or on ſome place or other of their beake, whiche marreth their beakes, ſo as it is enforced to fall away in ſliuers and peeces. This hapneth for want of wiping their beakes as they ought to be after their feeding, by meane whereof both hir clappes grow ſo much, as at length it falleth to breaking and riuing, if it be not remedied in time. And thereof breedeth this diſeaſe which we call (Formica Corroſiua) wherby the beake becommeth brittle and is vtterly marred. Maſter Amé Caſsian apointeth it this remedie following. Looke into your Hawkes beake, coping it and keping it very cleane, and if you find any Formica corroſiua there, remoue it. That done, anoynt the horne of hir beake with the bloud of a Snake or an Adder, and the bloud of a Henne, mingled togither, to make it to grow the more ſpeedyly. Alſo let the meate which ſhe eateth be cut in ſmall pellets, for otherwiſe ſhe cannot feede. And yet for all that, ceaſſe not to flee with hir. Within .xv. dayes or three weekes after, when ye ſee hir beake begin to grow agayne, caſt your Hawke handſomely, and cope hir nether clappe that the vpper clappe may ioyne orderly vnto it, as it ſhould do of his owne nature.
            
            
               
               Of the falling ſickneſſe, whiche hapneth to hawkes as well as to men, and other liuing things.
               THe chiefe Falconers ſay, that the falling ſickneſſe happeneth too hawkes, through a fumyng heate that aſcendeth vp from the liuer to theyr heads, and maketh them to fal downe vpon the ſuddayne. M. Mallopin ſayeth, that to remedie this diſeaſe, the hinder part of their head muſt be pervſed & ſought, where a man ſhall finde two little pittes, whiche muſte be cauterized with a wyer of braſſe. And if that help not, then muſt you cauterize hyr dayntely vpon the head with the foreſayd round yron, or elſe you may hap to kill hir. This done, drie redde Lentils in an ouen, and make them into fine powder: then take the filyng of yron, the fineſt of it, as much of the one as of the other, and mingle thē bothe togither with honie, and make it in little balles of the bigneſſe of a peaze. Then giue your hawke two or three of them, puttyng them as farre into hir gorge as you can, and holde hir vpon your fiſt at the fire or in the ſunne til ſhe haue made a mute or twayne, and let hir haue no meate till noone, and then ſerue hir of a Pigeons wing, dealing ſo with hyr ſeuen or eight dayes togither: In the night let hyr be kepte alwayes abrode, and in the day times in the darke, with water continually before hir.
               M. Amé Caſsyan teacheth another medicine: that is to wit, that the ſkinne of theyr heades muſte be launced right ouer agaynſt the foreſayde pittes, where there are little veynes whiche muſte be taken vp with a ſilke threede, and annoynted ouer with the bloud of a Chicken. Whiche beyng done, ye muſt gyue hir the foreſayde pilles ſeuen or eight dayes togither, takyng good heede that ye ſet hir not neere any other hawkes, and that your hawking gloue be very cleane. For that kynde of diſeaze is contagious, and will ſoone paſſe from one hawke to another, by feeding on the gloue whereon another hath bene fedde before. And by night lette hir ſtande in the winde and open ayre, and by day in darke places, with water alwayes afore hyr, as is already taught you.
            
            
               
               Of another falling euill which firſt breedeth in the necke and in the gorge of a Hawke.
               IF you perceyue your hawke to haue a ſwollen necke & gorge, & that ſhe panteth more ſtrongly in the mornings at one time than at another: aſſure your ſelfe that ſhe hath the falling euill.
Martin ſayeth, that you muſt take Sanguis draconis, Nutmegs, that kinde of Mirabolans, whiche are called Kebuline, Cloues, Cynamon and Ginger, of eche two pennie weight, and making it all into fine powder, ſtrew a quantitie of it euery morning vpon hir meate, ſupping hir euery night with a ratte or a mouſe, three or foure dayes togither, and that will make hir whole and ſounde.
            
            
               Of the Fiſtula, a grief that proceedes through payne of the head.
               YE ſhal perceyue when your hawke hath ye Fiſtula, by the rū
                  ning of hir nares & by the ſtreaming downe of ye humors frō hir head. For yt which diſeaſe, Martin alloweth this remedie. Ye muſt caſt your hawke handſomly, and deplume hir head behinde in the backer parte, and anoynt it with butter and ſwynes bloud togither. And you ſhall finde a vayne that cōmeth downe to hir eyes, whiche you muſte cut, and knit it againe with a redde ſilke threede, anoynting it well and throughly with butter & ſwynes bloud for nine dayes togither, and then it will recouer hir.
            
            
               For the ſwymming in the head of a Hawke.
               IF your hawke gape much and beate hyr wings, then be yee ſure that ſhe hath ye ſwymming in ye head. The remedie wherof is this. Take a fine needle that is ſharpe poynted, and when ye haue well het it in the fire, pearce hir nares with it through on bothe ſides, and beware that ye go not awrie, for ſo ye may do hyr great harme. Then anoynt it with Oyle and butter togither, and it will recouer hyr, by meane of the vente that you ſhall giue the humour by the nares.
            
            
               
               For all maner of diſeaſes in the head, and ſpecially for the ache that is in a Hawkes head.
               WHenſoeuer your hawke hath any great diſeaſe or payne in hyr head, take ſixe graynes of pepper, foure of Staueſaker, and fiue cloues, & beate them togither into ſine powder, and feede hir but three dayes togither, with warme meate mingled with it, and ſhe ſhall recouer. And for want of that, ye may vſe the fine powder that is mēcioned heretofore. And if your hawke will not be fedde with it, let it be conueyed into cotton or into a a Hennes ſkin, to take away the ſent of it, & feede hir with none other than warme meate, and ſuch as is light of diſgeſtion. For the diſeaſes of the head, do ſo weaken hyr appetite and ſtomacke, that ſhe cannot put ouer, nor indew hir meate. And to the ende ſhe may the better indew it, giue hir but ſmall meales till ſhe be throughly recouered. And if ſhe will eate the yolke of an egge, droppe vpon it ſome of the ſayde powder, and giue it hir with whote meate, and ſo ye ſhall recouer hir. Here are ſundry receytes and medicines, whiche I neuer haue proued, and therefore I can warrant little of them: but neuertheleſſe I finde them in my French Authors, and therefore am ſo ventrous to place them here in this collection of remedies for hawkes: leauing them ouer to the deſirous Falconer, that hath a wil to practiſe vpon his hawke. For ſtore (they ſay) is no ſore, & among many there muſt needes fall out ſome good and wholeſome receytes. Wherfore iudge diſcretely of all: and make proofe of ſuche as you lyke:
Experience is the mother of skill.
               
            
            
               Of the ſtone, and how and wherof it cōmeth.
               YOu muſt vnderſtād yt there are .ij. ſorts of diſeaſes in hawks, called by the name of the ſtone: & ſcarſly dothe the one come without the other. The one keepth beneath in their tuels, & the other in their bowels & panels: & they may be cured bothe togither. Some cal this diſeaſe ye Cray. And M. Amé Caſsian ſaieth that the ſtone or Cray commeth by the eating of filthie fleſh, & by meane of foule feeding. For it burneth & drieth in theyr bowels,

(as I ſayd heretofore in the diſeaſes of the head) bicauſe the filthe which they haue gathered in their panels inflameth their Liuer, which doth ſo drie vp the ſubſtance of the guttes, that they cānot mute, but muſt needes die of it, if they be not cured. Some ſay that this diſeaſe cometh of giuing them waſht meate whote before it be throughly cold, & that is like ynough: for a hawke likes not of water and bloud both togither at once. The ſtone in the fundement cometh of the filthe whiche the hawke ſhoulde mute, which thickeneth & lies bakte at the tuell: by meanes wherof ſhe becomes ſo poore, that ſhe cānot mute or ſlyſe from hyr, & ſo muſt needes die. Yet notwithſtāding I haue often ſeene, that when a Falcon is high and luſtie, ſhe will ſlyſe it out well ynough by meane of hir ſtrength. And ye may perceyue when ſhe hath the ſtone, by that ſhe muteth with peyne & by drops, which is a ſigne that ſhe needeth to ſkowre that matter, whereof the ſtone dothe grow. And when ſhe muteth at twice, & a third time after that, it is a token that the ſtone is throughly confirmed in hyr guttes & panel. Moreouer, when ye ſee that hir tuell is chaſed, & but little droppes from hyr, and that the feathers of hir trayne are much filed with hir muting, and that ſhe is euermore picking with hyr beake about hir tuell, be ye ſure ſhe hath ye ſtone in hir tuell, which we cal the ſtone Craye. Againe when ſhe muteth and maketh as though ſhe would iouke vpō your fiſt, & in hir eyes is more troubled thā of ordinarie: doubt not but that ſhe hath the ſtone cray. And bycauſe ſhe cannot ridde it, ſhe is in daunger, if ſhe be not lookte too in time. The remedie thereof by the iudgement of M.
Amé Caſsyan, is this: take a ſlyce of Larde (or a pellet of Sope, wet in ſalet oyle) of the bigneſſe of a gooſe quill, and an inche long, and put theron the powder of Aloes cicotrine: which done, caſt your Hawke handſomly, and conuey it into hir tuell as ye woulde giue a man a ſuppoſitorie: and if the Larde be too tender and ſofte to handle, ſticke it vpon a Hennes feather, ſo as the feather appeare not through the Larde (for ſo may yee do hir greate harme with the feather) and ſo conuey it vp into hyr tuell, drawyng away the feather gently, and leauing the Larde behind, and haue ſnayles in a readineſſe to giue hir immediatly

after ye haue applied the ſayde deuiſe. And for lacke of Snayles, giue hir the forementioned pyll of Lard, mingled with marrow and ſuger, and ſet hir in the Sunne, or by a fire, without feeding of hir till one houre after noone. And if ſhe indure well to be by the fire, or in the Sunne, let hir alone, for the heate is very good for hir. After this, giue hir ſomewhat more than halfe a gorge of a yong pullet, or if ye can come by any Myce or Rats, nothing is better. But let hir not ſtand in the ayre or in the wynde, except the weather be fayre and warme. At night when ſhe hath indewed well, giue hir foure or fiue cloues of Mace broken, and lapped vp in a little cotton, or in the ſkynne of a Henne: and do ſo three or foure dayes, ſauing the ſuppoſitorie or pellet aforeſayde, for it will ſerue twice well ynough. And thus ſhall you ſkoure your hawke throughly. Looke well to it, that ſhe caſt not vp the cloues of Mace, for they be ſingular good for hawkes in all reſpectes, ſpecially for all humors that ſurcharge their heades, and generally for all Filanders and wormes. And if you mynd to rid a Falcon cleane of the Cray, and of the ſayde diſeaſe: giue hir meate ſteeped in Goates mylke, or in other mylke, and do ſo foure or fiue dayes together: for the ſayde mylke is verie good againſt the Cray. In the booke of the Prince, there is another receyt, for this diſeaſe of the Cray or ſtone. That is to wit: Take the gall of a Pigge of three weekes old, and conuey it into your hawkes beake, ſo as ſhe maye take it and ſwallowe it downe whole without breaking, and take heede that ſhe caſt vp none of it againe. Afterwardes, giue hir a little piece of the Pigges fleſhe, of the bigneſſe of a Beane, and let hir ſtande emptiepanneld vpon the ſame vntill night, ſetting hir in the Sunne or by the fire. This medicine is verie good for all byrdes of praye that are encombred with the Craye or Stone. Neuertheleſſe, if a Goſſehawke or a Sparrowhawke haue that diſeaſe (ſo it be not too ſore) giue it hir nor more but once. But as for other hawkes that are of ſtronger mettel, ye maye giue it them thrice. And when euening is come, feede your hawke with a pullet, or with mutton, or with ſmall birdes, and the nexte morning ſteepe hyr meate in Goates mylke, or womans mylke, feeding hir ſo three

dayes together with ſmall gorges, and ſhe ſhall be ſounde. And if you will not or can not vſe the ſayde Receypt, ye may take a little oyle Olyf, and ſomewhat leſſe Honnye, and wette your hawkes meate therewith, for it is good to helpe that diſeaſe. Some put the ſayde things into a Hennes gut tyde faſt at both endes, bycauſe a hawke will take it the better: and naturally ſhe likes not oyle with hir meate.
               Maſter Michelin ſets downe another medicine which is this. Take Larde, marow of beefe, Suger clarified and once boyled, and Saffron in pouder, or eache a like quantitie, prouided that the Lard be firſt ſtieped in vineger four and twentie houres, and the water ſhifted three or foure times, and ſet abroad in the open ayre. Of the which things confected together, ye muſt make pylles of the bygneſſe of a Beane, whereof you ſhall giue your hawke one or two, ſetting hir in the Sun or by the fire, and feeding hir with poultrie or with mutton, allowing hir but reaſonable gorges, foure or fiue days together, & giuing hir Maces as afore: for they can not but do the hawke great pleaſure in euery condition and part. Maſter Michelin teacheth another receipte for this diſeaſe, ſpecially for Goſſehawkes and Sparowhawkes, which I haue tryed ofte.
               Cut a Sheepes hart in ſmall pieces, and when ye haue let it lye ſtieping all night in Aſſes mylke, Gotes mylke, or womans mylke, put a little boylde Suger into the milke, and gorge your hawke reaſonably therwith three days together. And aſſure your ſelfe, that this medicine is very excellent for the Cray, & without danger for all manner of hawkes. M. Martine ſayth in auouchment of this matter, that when a hawke cannot well mute with hir eaſe, it betokeneth & plainely ſheweth that ſhe hath the ſtone Cray. For remedy wherof, take the heart of a Hog, and a quantitie of his ſewet minced very ſmall, and make them into pouder togither, & giue it the hawke in hir meate three days ſucceſſiuely.
               Againe, I haue ſeene ſome take the white of an egge, or the whole egge, with a little Saffron in pouder, well coyled and beaten together, which being beſtowed vpon the hawkes meate, hath cured hir.
               
                  
                  Mallopin ſets downe yet one other receit more. Put the iuice of (water Creſſyes) in a Hennes gut of one inche long, tyed at both ends, and force your hawk to receiue it. Which done, ſet hir in the Sunne or by the fire, and feede hir not till noone, at which time giue hir but halfe a gorge of hote meate, bicauſe of the medicine, which hath ſet al hir body out of temper. Let this he done two or three dayes, and if you find the medicine to haue ſcowred and takē much at the firſt of your hawke, giue hir leſſe and leſſe, and ſo ſhall ſhe recouer. The booke of Princes ſetteth downe yet one other remedie for the ſame diſeaſe, that ye might put it in vre whiche ſoeuer liked you beſte. Take a penny weight of Perſley ſeede, as much of Smallage ſeede, a dramme of boylde Suger, a penny weight of Staueſaker, of Wheaten branne one dram, and halfe the ſhell of an egge. Put them altogether into a good large pſnet full of water, and ſeethe it till it be conſumed to the one halfe, and then ſtreine it through a cloth. Then take of
Caſsia Fiſtula one dramme, and of Turbith one penny weight, of
Hermodactils two pennye weight, and of Aloes Cicotrine three penny weight. Beate all theſe into fine pouder, & put them into the water, wherein the other mixture was boyled, and make thereof a Clyſter in the bladder of a Pygge.
               Then take a great quyll of a Gooſe or of ſome other byrde, and thereof make the necke of your Clyſterbagge faſt tyed to the bagge, that nothing maye iſſue out of it, and ſo giue your hawke the Clyſter, as you haue ſeene it giuen to men at theyr neede. This done, ſet your hawke in the Sunne or by the fire, and keepe hir emptie till noone, at which time giue hir a pullets legge, and ſo ſhe ſhall recouer no doubt.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe called the Filanders which happen in the bodyes of Hawkes: and firſt of ſuch as are in their gorge.
               THe chiefe Falconers ſay, that all hawkes haue the Filanders at al times, & are neuer wtout them, like as it is ſaide that no

horſe is without the Bottes. There are foure kyndes of Filanders, and one other kynde of Filanders, of which I will ſpeake hereafter in their due places. And with all theſe ſortes of Filanders, ſome hawkes are more peſtered than other ſome. The cauſe of them is eyther their feeding on groſſe and foule meates, which ingender & increaſe thoſe Filāders in them, or elſe for that inflying either ye field, or the riuer, they breake ſome ſmal veines within their bodies, at the encounter, by ſeazing too violently vpon their praye. By reaſon whereof the bloud burſteth out into their bowels, and there dryeth and clottereth, whereof breede the ſayd Filanders in great aboundance. Afterwarde by reaſon of the ſtinch of the ſayde bloud ſo clottered and bakte, being corrupted and putrified in the bulke bycauſe it is out of the proper veſſels and vaynes where it ought to be, the Filanders runne about ſeeking the cleaneſt places of the bodie, to ſhunne the ſayd noyſyme ſtinche, and creepe vp either into the hawkes heart, or into hir gorge, ſo as ſhe dyeth of it. Againe, ſome men ſaye, that their hawkes dye of the diſeaſes of the heade, or of the Craye, when in deede they dye of the Filanders or (which is worſſe) of the (Aignilles) a kinde of Filanders for whiche we want an engliſhe terme. I wil ſpeake firſt of thoſe Filanders that craule vp to the hawkes gorges, and from thence to the holes in their palates whereat the hawkes do breathe, and by them into their braynes, wherby they be in danger of death. Ye may perceiue this inconuenience in the gorge by this, that when you haue fedde your hawke, the Filanders feeling the ſweetneſſe and taſt of the fleſh, doe ſtyrre and craule about in ſuche wiſe, as you ſhall ſee your hawke oftentimes gape. By reaſon wherof it commeth to paſſe that nowe and then ſhe caſteth hir gorge. Againe, ye may know by this, that your hawke will be ſtrayning at them with hir talons. Therefore caſt hir gently, and looke into hir throate, and you ſhall ſee them crawling there. To kill the ſayde Filanders, maſter Amé Caſsyan ſayth thus: take a great Radyſh roote, and make a hole in it, and fill it with water, and ſet it in embers verie hote, putting freſh embers to it continually by the ſpace of halfe an houre or more, till it be throughly well boyled, and as

your water diminiſheth, fill it alwayes vp againe, howebeit that the Radiſhe yeeldeth water ynough of his owne nature. Then put the Radiſhe into a dyſhe, ſtampe it and preſſe out all the iuyce quite and cleane. This done, put the quantitie of a Peaze of Saffron made into pouder into the ſayde water, and waſhe your hawkes meate therewith when yee feede hir, and giue hir but halfe a gorge. And if ſhe will not feede on it, let hir be kept emptie, till ſhe be verye greedie and eger: doe thus to hir three or foure dayes together, and you ſhall kyll the Filanders, and make your hawke ſounde.
            
            
               Of the Filanders that are in hawkes bowels, and in their reynes.
               YE ſhall diſcerne that the Filanders are in hir bowelles and guttes, by hir heauie cheare and playnt in the nighte, for ſhe will crye, and make a mournfull noyſe. Alſo ye may perceyue it by this, that when ye take hir on your fiſt in the morning, ſhe will ſtretch hir ſelfe more ſtrongly than ſhe is wont to do of ordinarie, and ſomtimes ſhe wil make as though ſhe would iouke vppon your ſi
                     •
                  te, and ſhe will be buſie with hir beake about hir backe right ouer againſte hir raynes. When ye ſee theſe ſignes, aſſure your ſelfe that eyther the Filanders or the (Aigailles) doe trouble hir: and if ſhe haue not helpe of them betimes, they will kill hir, for I haue ſeene many dye of that diſeaſe. Maſter
Amé Caſsian giueth this remedie for that miſchiefe.
               Take Lentilles, of the reddeſt that you can finde and parche them at the fire, and make fine pouder of them, with the pouder of Wormeſeede, leſſe by one halfe than of the pouder of Lentils, and mingle and temper them well together, and make thereof a playſter, dryuen (vppon cloth or leather.) Then deplume your hawke in the place where hir griefe is, and lay the playſter to hir panell, changing it euerie day, for foure or fiue dayes ſpace together, and ſhe ſhall be cured.
               If ye like not that receipt, Maſter Michelin giueth you another, which is this. Take the leaues of a Peach tree, of Rew, and

of Wormeſeede, and of thoſe thre being brayed together, ſtreyne out the iuyce, and afterwarde take then pouder of Wormewood, and put it into the iuyce, and lay it vpon your hawkes reynes playſterwiſe twice a day, euening and morning, for foure or fiue days together, & it will kil the Filanders, and ſaue your hawke.
               Maſter Amé Caſsian telleth yet one remedie more. Take (ſaith he) a cloue of Garlyke pylled, and giue it your hawke in a hens ſkynne, and it will heale hir.
            
            
               Of the Filanders or wormes that are in hawkes legges and thighes, whiche the Frenchmen call Vers.
               THere is another manner of Filander called the (Vers) which commeth ſometimes vpon hawkes that are lately taken, by ſetting them vpon a pearche vnhooded or vnſeled, for they fall to beating of them ſelues with ſo great force, that they breake the veines of their legs. And this hapneth ſpecially rather to Hagard hawkes, than to ſoare hawkes. By meanes whereof the bloude of thoſe veynes ſo broken, poureth and diſtilleth along their legs and pannels, betweene the ſkinne and the fleſhe, and there lying in lumpes, doth conuert to wormes, whereof the hawke dieth. This diſeaſe may come alſo by hir bating ouermuch vpon the fiſte, where through ſhe bruſeth hir ſelfe violently: and ſometimes he that beareth hir furthereth it by his raſhneſſe & impaciencie. And ye may perceiue that ye Filanders & wormes are in your hawkes legges or bowels, by this: They plume themſelues oftentimes, yea, & the pendant feathers of their thighes and of their panels, fal off voluntarily. Maſter Mallopin ſayth, that the remedie for this diſeaſe, is to waſhe your hawkes thighs & bellie twice a day, for foure or fiue dayes together, with the foreſaid medicine of the leaues of the Peachtree, of Rew, & or wormeſeede, and with the wormeſeede it ſelfe.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe called in french the (Aiguils) an euill worſe than the Filanders, for which I know no apt Engliſh terme, and therfore muſt borow the french terme of mine Author.
               
                  THere are found a kynd of Filanders which are called (Aiguilles) bycauſe they be ſharpe like a needle, ſhorter and more perillous than are the great Filanders, for as much as in ſeeking the cleaneſt partes of the body, to ſhunne the ſtinch and filth, they pearce the bowels & creepe vp to the hart, ſo that your hawke periſheth of them, if ſhe be not regarded in time. Ye ſhall perceiue this diſeaſe by hir ſhrinking and ſnyting vpō the lure, as alſo by hir graſping with hir foote more ſtrongly in the mornings than ſhe was wont to do, & againe by the often picking & beaking in hir braile feathers, & neare hir tuell. M. Mallopin giueth this remedie folowing. Take Staueſaker beaten into pouder, the herbe of Barbarie, otherwiſe called in greek Peſtora, & Aloes Citotrine, of each a like quantitie, coyled altogether into pouder, and giue your hawke the quantitie of a Beane thereof, lapped vp in ſome part of a Hennes ſkinne, or in cotton. Which done, ſet hir in the Sunne or by the fire, and at noone allowe hir but halfe a gorge. You maye giue hir of this pouder three or foure dayes, ſo ſhe be not too lowe already: for if ſhe be not ſomewhat highe in fleſhe and in life, ſhe will not be able to beare and brook it. And if this medicine cure hir not, take this that foloweth, which is of maſter
Mallopins deuice alſo. Burne Harts horne well raked in the embers, & when it is waxen cold, beate it into pouder. Then take ye like quantitie of Lupins made into pouder, as ye had of ye harts horne, & aſmuch againe of the pouder of Wormſeed, as of both ye other, & halfe aſmuch Aloes Cicotrine, as of the Harts horne, and half aſmuch Tryacle as of Aloes. Mingle al theſe togither with Honny by litle & litle, & force it to that thickneſſe, yt ye may make balles of it to the bigneſſe of a nut, whereof ye ſhall giue your hawke euery day one, by the ſpace of fiue or ſixe days, allowing hir but half a gorge after it. And if your hawke caſt it again, let it be lapped in a litle cottō or in a hens ſkin, yt ſhe feele not ye bitter taſt of it. M. Amé Caſsian giueth yet another remedy, which is the medicine made heretofore for the Filanders, that is to wit, Rew & Wormwood, of each alike, and aſmuch of the Peachtree leaues, as of thē both, with a litle pouder of Wormſeede infuſed in the iuyce of the ſaid herbs. Then fill a Hennes gut of an inche long, therwith tied faſt at both ends, and giue it to your hawke.
               
                  You maye vſe any of all theſe at your owne diſcretion and pleaſure.
            
            
               When a hawke gapeth inordinatly vpon the fiſte of hir keeper.
               
                  A Hawke will nowe and then ſall to gaping, eyther vpon hir keepers fiſt, or vpon the pearche, and ſpecially when ſhe is ſet in the Sunne being ſomewhat hote. And this gaping maye be vnderſtoode and conſtrued two wayes. The one is w
                     •
                  en ſhe doth it of hir owne nature, but that is not ſo ofte as the other which commeth by miſchance, and that eyther of colde that ſhe hath taken, or of ſome moyſt humor that deſtilleth downe into hir gorge. Some are of opinion that the hawke which vſeth it often, is diſeaſed with the Filanders, which creepe vp and downe in hir gorge before ſhe be fed, or after ſhe hath indewed, as I haue declared in the chapter of Filanders of the gorge.
               The remedie by Mayſter Amé Caſsians aduyce, is to take the pouder of Wormeſeede and of Wormewoode, of eache alyke, and one quarter leſſe of Aloes Cicotrine, and of theſe three pouders mingled together, to gyue your hawke the mountenance of a Beane in hir caſting, lapped vp in a Hennes ſkyn, or in any ſuch like deuice.
            
            
               Of Apoſtumes that breede in Hawkes.
               WHen a hawke hath any Apoſtume in hir bodye, ye ſhall knowe it by the ſtuffing of hir nares, and by hir inordinate panting, whiche accident commeth ſometymes by ruſhing raſhely into buſhes, or by bating too muche vppon the pearche, and moreouer by ouer free encounter with hir praye Nowe when ſhe is ſo bruſed and chafed, and taketh colde vpon it, Apoſtumes breede thereby, bycauſe the miſchiefe is not knowne and looked vnto afore hande, Mallopin in his booke of the Prince gyueth this remedie.

Take the white of an egge well beaten, and the iuyce of Colewortes well brooſed, as much of the one as of the other, and giue it your Hawke in the morning, in the ſmall gut of a henne, and ſet hir by a fire, or in the Sunne, and at noone feed hir with mutton, or with a Pullet. The next day take Roſemarie dryed, and beaten into fine powder, and beſtowe it vpon hir meate reaſonably. For other three dayes giue hir Suger, and three dayes next after that, plie hir againe with hir ſayde powder, letting hir ſtande warme day and night, and feeding hir with good meate: and the likelyhoode is great ſhe ſhall be recouered.
            
            
               Of a Hawke that hath hir Liuer inflamed.
               THe inflamation of the Liuer happeneth ſometymes through the negligence of ſuch as haue the keeping of Hawkes. For they feede them with groſſe and naughtie fleſhe, ſuch as is ſtale and ſtinking, without making of it cleane, by meanes whereof proceedeth the ſayde inflamation of the Liuer. Alſo it happeneth for want of bathing when neede is, and for lacke of water, which they ought to haue, or with ouerfleeing of them, when they bee emptie panneld. Ye ſhall perceyue this diſeaſe by theyr feete: for they will be chafed, and the colour of their chappes will be chaunged, and looke whitiſhe through the heate of their Liuer. And if yee finde hir tongue ſcorched and ſcalded blacke, it is a ſigne of death. To remedie this miſchiefe, make the medicine of Snayles ſteeped in Aſſes milk, or Gotes milke mentioned in the Chapters of the diſeaſes of the heade, and of the ſtone: and giue your Hawkes of it three or foure days in the mornings. And if ye cannot get that medicine, ye may vſe the other that is made of Lard, Marrow of beef, and of boyled Suger, with a little Saffron, foure or fiue dayes togither euery morning, as is ſayde before. For the ſcouring of hir will ridde and abate hir heate. And all that while for ſeuen or eight dayes, feede hir with poultrie, or with mutton, ſteeped in milke: for milke is verie good for the heate of the Liuer. And you muſt beware you feede hir not with

Pigeon, nor with other groſſe fleſhe, for breeding hir to inordinate heate. Maſter Amé Caſsian ſayth yet further, that to allay the ſayd heate in Hawkes, it is very good to ſteepe or wet theyr meate in Endiue, or Nightſhade water: and likewiſe in white whey newly and lately made. And that this maner of feeding muſt be continued foure or fiue dayes, till the Hawke be well ſcoured. And that if the hawke haue a deſire to bowze the ſayde whey, ye muſt let hir take hir fill. Maſter Amé Caſsian ſayeth moreouer, that when your medicine hath ſcoured your hawke after the maner, and hir tongue is not aught in the better tune, ye muſt take oyle Olife waſht in two or three waters, and bath hir tung & throte therwith with a feather, three or foure times in the day, for foure or fiue dayes togither, and gently ſcrape hir tung and throte with a deuiſe of ſiluer, or of other mettal for that purpoſe. And although ſhee neither can feede nor will, yet ſhee muſt not be giuen ouer, but haue meat gently conueyed into hir gorge by ſmall morſels, and thruſt downe lowe ynough with a fine ſticke, that ſhe may take it: for ſhe cannot ſwallowe hir meate by reaſon of the ſwelling of hir tung, and therefore ſhe muſt bee aſſiſted in maner aforeſayde. Maſter Michelin ſayth furthermore, that to comfort and ſtrengthen the Liuer withall, ye muſt ſteepe Rubarb in a diſhfull of colde water all night, and the next morning waſhe hir meate therewith, continuing ſo by the ſpace of foure or fiue dayes togither.
               
                  Martin giueth yet one other medicine, which is this: Take a Pullets gut, thrice the length of your little finger, & cutting it in three peeces (which you muſt tye faſt at eyther end) fill them with Oyle of Almonds, or oyle Olife, and thruſt them into hir throte ſo as ſhe ſwallow them one after another: and within an houre after gorge hir reaſonably with a yong Pullet. And the next morning take the ſeedes of Ruſhes, and the ſcrapings of Iuorie, and the dung of Sparrowes, of eche two pennie weight, and make therof a powder, and ſeaſon your Hawkes meat therwith, and it will pleaſure hir. And theſe two medicines are to be vſed when a hawke is not very fowle within, for if ſhe be, then are the other former medicines better.
            
            
               
               Of the Canker which breedeth of ouer great heate in the Liuer.
               IF a Canker happen in the throte or tongue of a Hawke, by meanes of the heate of the Liuer: Make hir the foreſayde medicine of Snayles, or that of Larde, as it is deuyſed before, gyuing hir hir meate ſowſt in Mylke, or Oyle of ſweete Almondes, or Oyle Olife: and let the Canker bee waſht twice or thrice a day, tyll it wexe whyte and rype. Then wyth your Inſtrument ſcrape it cleane awaye, that nothing of it remayne. And if there happen to bee any deade fleſhe in it, put powder of Alome, or the iuyce of Lymons in it, and plye it ſtill with the ſayde Milke or Oyles, till ſhe bee throughly recured. And to make newe fleſh grow vp againe, put to it a little honie of Roſes.
            
            
               Of the Pantas of the gorge.
               BYcauſe many menned ſpeake of the diſeaſe of the Pantas dyuerſely, and yet knowe not what it is: I will ſhewe three maner of Pantaſes wherewith Hawkes are diſeaſed. The firſt in the gorge, the ſeconde commeth of colde, and the thirde is in the reynes and kidneys. The firſt kinde of Pantas commeth of bating vpon the perche, or vpon the fyſt of him that beareth them, by meanes whereof ſome little veynes of the Liuer breake, and the bloud poureth out vppon the Liuer, which dryeth and cloddeth into ſmall flakes, and thoſe ryſing vp afterwarde when the Hawke bateth agayne, doe ſtoppe the paſſages and windepype, and thereof commeth the Pantas. And ſometyme when the Hawke bateth, thoſe flakes doe ſo aſcende into hir throte, and lie ouerthwart it, that ſhee preſently falleth downe deade: inſomuche that ſome holde opinion it is the Pantas that maketh Hawkes to dye ſodenly. For proofe whereof, open your hawke when ſhee is deade, and yee ſhall finde this maladie in hir throte. Maiſter Amé Caſsian gyueth no medicine to thys Pantas in the gorge, bycauſe it cannot be miniſtred to hir,

neither by hir throte nor otherwiſe. For the diſeaſe holdeth hir in the verie windepipe, whereby the breath paſſeth in and out. Neuertheleſſe his counſell is to cloze vp the Hawke in ſome conuenient Chamber, with Lattis windowes, ſo as ſhee may not get out, and to ſet hir two or three perches, that ſhee may flee from one to another, and haue the Sunne ſhine in vpon hir if it be poſſible, and ſhe muſt haue alwayes water by hir. And when yee feede hir, hir meate muſt be cut in ſmall pellets, and haue neyther feather nor bone in it, leaſt ſhe ſtreyne hirſelfe in tyring, and ſhe muſt haue but halfe a gorge at once, and but once in a day. This is his counſell and aduice for this miſchiefe.
            
            
               Of an other Pantas that commeth of colde.
               AN other Pantas commeth of colde when Hawkes take wet in fleeing the fielde, or the Riuer, and are not weathered afterwarde, nor ſet in a place where they may ſtande warme. Againe this diſeaſe commeth by ſtanding where ſmoke or duſt may annoy them. And ye ſhall knowe the Pantas, by your Hawkes panting, for that ſhee cannot drawe hir breath as ſhee ſhould do. Mallopin ſayth that to remedie this diſeaſe, ye muſte take the filings of yron, and meale of Lentils, of eche like quantitie, which you muſt temper togither with honie till it bee lyke paaſte, that ye may make it in little balles as bigge as a peaze. Whereof you ſhall giue your Hawke two or three euery morning, and after noone feede hir with good meate, but not with beefe: which dyet you ſhall allowe hir three or foure dayes. And if ſhe amende not, ſeaſon hir meate with powder of Orpiment two or three dayes.
               Maſter Michelin giueth this medicine following: Take Maydenheare, which groweth lightly at the heades of pondes and pittes, and therewithall the rootes of Perſley, the rootes of Smallage. Of all theſe take like portions, and boyle them in a good bigge pot that is newe. Then ſtreyne the water through a Colander, and put thereto a quantitie of clarified Suger, with a

little marrow of Beefe, and ſtirre them all togither, and thereof giue your Hawke a portion in the morning, and as much at Euen, with a ſmall tunnel, or otherwiſe with a ſpoone or other fitte deuice foure or fiue dayes togither, and let hir not feede till noone be paſt, then giue hir of Pullettes fleſhe without bloud, dipped in Oyle of ſweete Almondes, or Oyle Olife waſht in two or three waters: and when ye haue ſo ſowſt hir meate, let it alſo bee ſeaſoned with a little Saffron and Suger. And foure or fiue dayes after, if neede be, giue hir on hir meate the powder of Orpiment without Oyle other three or foure dayes. And afterward ye may returne againe to your oyle of Almondes, or oyle Olife, till your Hawke be throughly recured.
            
            
               Of the Pantas that is in the reynes and kidneys.
               IT happeneth ſometymes that when a Hawke hath bene recouered of ſome great greefe by good keeping and intendance, afterwarde ſhe waxeth euill againe, and falleth to panting, wherof breedeth this diſeaſe of the reynes and kidneys, in maner of a Canker, as bigge as a beane, which ſwelleth bigger and bigger, in ſuch wiſe, that ſhee falleth to caſting ſome part of hir meate. This Pantas differeth muche from both the other: for it will leaue hir ſeuen or eight dayes, & then vexe hir again more ſtrongly. And ſomtymes it will take hir but from Moneth to Moneth, ſo as ſhee ſhall beare it oute a whole yeare. It is diſcerned by this, that when ſhee panteth, ſhee ſtirreth hir reynes more than hir Pinions, whereas in the other ſhee ſtyrreth more hir Pinions, than hir reynes. Againe to knowe it truely when it commeth and goeth euerie ſeuen or eight dayes, if your Hawke chaunce to die, rippe hir and you ſhall finde a knubbe of the bigneſſe of a ſmall Beane full vpon the reynes and the ſmall of hir backe, whereof that diſeaſe proceedeth.
               Maiſter Caſsian gyueth this remedie for it. Yee muſt take the rootes of Capers, of Fenell, of Smallage, and of Parſley, and boyle them togither in a newe Potte, to the conſumption

of a thirde parte. Then take an olde Tyle, the older the better, and make powder thereof. When you ſerue your Hawke, feede hir with fleſhe ſtieped in the water of the ſayde rootes, a quarter of an houre or thereaboutes aforehande. In the morning when ye giue hir of that waſht meate, giue hir none of the powder, and at night waſhe not hir meate with the ſayde water, but beſprinckle it with the powder, ſo competently as ſhe maye receyue it, and giue hir not at any time aboue halfe a gorge: let this be done nine or tenne dayes, or more. If yee ſee that your Hawke amende not, continue it ſtill: for then was the diſeaſe verie much confirmed, and the Hawke had borne it out long, and it is hard to bee cured. But if yee take the diſeaſe when it is newe and greene, plye hir diligently with this Medicine, and it will helpe hir.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that is morfounded by ſome miſchaunce.
               
                  Morfound is the Frenche worde which doth ſignifie on Engliſh the taking of colde.SOmetimes it falleth out that Hawkes are morfounded by ſome miſchaunce, and ſometimes alſo by giuing them to great a gorge, ſpecially when they be wette. For then they cannot indewe nor put ouer theyr gorges, and ſo they ſurfeyte, bycauſe their meate conuerteth into ſlyme, and groſſe humours which ouerthrowe their appetite, by meanes whereof they come oftentymes to theyr bane. Yee ſhall knowe the diſeaſe by this, that if yee giue your Hawke a great gorge, ſpecially ouer night, the next morning ſhe will haue no lyſt to hir breakefaſt, but becommeth colde, and ſo falleth into great diſeaſe. Mallopin in his booke of the Prince, giueth this medicine for it. When yee perceyue hir to be ſo morfounded, and to haue loſt hir appetite, giue hir no meate that day, but ſet water before hir, and let hir bowze or bathe at hir pleaſure. When ſhee hath bathed and is weathered agayne, throwe hir a liue Pigeon, and let hir kill it, and take as much of the bloud of it as ſhee lyſteth, but let hir not eate paſt one of the legges at that tyme. Afterwarde ſet hir downe on ſome high thing, with water by hir, and beware of giuing

hir any great gorge. Then for foure or fiue dayes togyther giue hir fiue or ſixe cloues of Maces, lapped vp in a hennes ſkinne, and that will recouer hir.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe that is called the priuie and hidden euill in a Hawke, for vvhich vve haue no ſpeciall terme.
               SOmetymes Hawkes periſhe for want of knowledge of ſome ſecrete diſeaſe that happeneth to them, and therefore I will tell you how you ſhall know it. The Hawke that hath that diſeaſe is alwayes greedie to feede, inſomuch that when ye haue giuen hir a great gorge in the morning, ſhee will haue indewed it out of hande, and if ye giue hir another at Noone, ſhee will put it ouer by and by, and if yee giue hir the thirde at night, ſhee will diſpatch that quickly alſo, and the more ſhee feedeth, the more greedie and nippie ſhee is. This diſeaſe commeth of this, that when your Hawke is verie poore and lowe in ſtate, and you deſirous to ſet hir vp quickly, thinking to bring hir in good plight with great gorges, you feed hir with Pigeons and other fleſhe, which ſhe cannot indew, by reaſon of hir pouertie & weakneſſe, for want of heate in the liuer: the heate whereof is the cauſe of all kindly digeſtiō & indewing. Alſo you may know this diſeaſe by hir often muting which is wateriſh & thin, & beſides ſhe doth ſliſe further thā ſhe is wot to do, by reaſon of ſpedy induing hir meat.
               Maiſter Mallopin in his booke of the Prince, ſayeth that for remedie of this diſeaſe, yee muſte ſtiepe a ſheepes heart cutte in ſmall peeces all one night in Aſſes milke or Goates milke, and the next day giue your hawke a quarter of it in the morning for hir beaching, as much at noone, and the reſt at night, forcing hir to receyue as much of the milke as ye can, and continue it fiue or ſix dayes togither, till yee ſee hir mute kindely. Then feede hir reaſonably with good meate, ſtieped in Oyle of ſweete Almondes, continuing it for three or foure dayes ſpace twice a day. And as ye find your Hawke to mend, ſo increaſe hir meales by little and little, till ſhee bee in as good plight as ſhe was before, alwayes

continuing the ſayde Mylke: for ſome are of opinion that milke is good for all diſeaſes of a Hawke. Maſter Amé Caſsian ſaith, that to remedie this diſeaſe, yee muſt take a Tortoys of the land, and not a water Tortoys, and ſtiepe the fleſhe of it in womans milke, Aſſes milke, or Goates milke, and giue your Hawke a quantitie of it for a beaching three or foure tymes, and a little more at hir feeding tymes ſixe or ſeuen dayes togither. Afterwarde feede hir with ſheepes heartes ſtieped in Womans milke, by little and little at once, till ſhee bee recouered: and let hir not ſtande in a dampiſhe or moyſte place, but in warme places in the Winter, and in coole places in Sommer, and alwayes hooded.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe and weakneſſe in the reynes.
               WHen your Hawke cannot iumpe the length of hir lynes and Criance to your fiſt, or from your fiſt vp to the perch, nor bate with hir wings: Ye may well thinke that ſhe hath the diſeaſe of the reynes. Therefore maiſter Caſsian willeth you to chop a Hares ſkinne haire and all in verie ſmall and fine peeces, and to mingle it with Cattes fleſhe, and to feede your Hawke with it ſeuen or eight dayes togither: and if ſhee indew it, ſhee ſhall recouer of hir diſeaſe.
            
            
               Of Havvkes that haue the ague or feuer.
               TO knowe whither your Hawke haue the Ague: Marke whether hir feete bee more ſwollen than they were woont to bee or no: if they bee, then hath ſhee the Ague. To remedie this miſchiefe, Michelin ſayeth, you muſte mingle Arſenicke and Capons greace togyther well ſprinckled with Vineger, whereof you muſt make a little Ball, whiche you muſte cauſe your Hawke to take by caſting hir, and vſe it in ſuch wiſe as ſhe may keepe it, and it will ridde the Ague.
            
            
               
               Of the Havvke that voydeth vvormes.
               IF a Hawke voyde Wormes, by maiſter Martins aduice yee muſte make this Medicine following. Take of the fine fylings of yron and ſtrewe it vpon your Hawkes meate, which (if you doe well) muſt bee Porke: and feede hir ſo three or foure dayes wyth that kynde of fleſh ſo ſeaſoned, and it will cure hir.
            
            
               Of the Teynte in a Hawkes feather, and hovve many kindes of it there be.
               HItherto ye haue read of the inwarde diſeaſes of Hawkes: Nowe I will tell you of the outwarde accidentes: and firſt will ſpeake of the Teynte, whiche the Frenche Falconers call
Taigne, the Italians, Zignuole and Tarmae, whereof there are three ſortes. The firſt is when theyr principalles or long feathers beginne to droppe off, by meanes whereof many Hawkes are marred and caſt awaye, without knowledge howe to helpe it. Maiſter Amé Caſsian ſayeth, that this commeth ſometymes of the Lyuer, and of the exceſſiue heate of the bodye, by meanes whereof ſmall pymples ryſe vppon theyr wings, or on their traynes, whiche afterwarde cauſe theyr feathers to droppe off, and when they are gone, the holes where they ſtoode doe cloze agayne, wherethrough the Hawke doeth periſhe, if ſhee bee not remedyed. This diſeaſe is contagious, and one of them will take it of an other, and therefore yee muſte not let the Hawke that is affected with it, ſtande neare a Hawke that is ſounde, neyther muſt you touche or feede a ſounde Hawke on the Gloue whereon a ſicke Hawke hath beende fedde. And yee ſhall knowe that ſhee hath that diſeaſe, by hir often picking with hir beake vppon hir principall feathers of hir wings and trayne, and by theyr dropping awaye. Therefore caſt your Hawke, and let hir bee well peruſed, and yee ſhall fynde the ſayde diſeaſe. For remedie whereof, Maiſter Martin, and

Maiſter Caſsian ſay, you muſt caſt your Hawke, and when you haue ſound the ſmall pimple whence the feather dropt firſt, you muſte get a little ſticke of Firre, whiche is by nature gummie and fatte, make a little pegge of it, not ſharpe at the foreende, nor thruſte it in with violence, but ſoftly as you may. And if ye can get none of that Woodde, then take a grayne of Barlye, and cutte of the forepoynt of it, and annoynt it with a little Triacle, or Oyle Olife, and conuey it into the hole, ſo as it may ſticke a little out, and the hole not cloze togyther, and ſtoppe agayne. Then with a ſmall Launce or Penknife you muſte ſlitte the pimple, and let out the redde water which you ſhall finde there. After this take Aloes Cicotrine in powder, and put it into the gall of an Oxe, coyled in a diſhe, and with thoſe two mingled togyther, annoynt the ſlitte rounde aboute: and beware that there come nothing in the hole where the feather grewe, for it mighte doe the Hawke great harme. This done, take of the reddeſt Lentilles that you can come by, and leſſe than halfe ſo muche of the fylings of yron, and mingle them togyther with Honie, and thereof make Pilles as bigge as a Peaze, and giue your Hawke two or three of them euerye Morning. Then ſet hir by a fyre, or in the Sunne, and after Noone giue hir a reaſonable good gorge of a Pullet, or of Mutton, and if yee lyſt yee maye giue hir of thoſe Pilles towardes the Euening alſo. Let hir meate bee ſtieped in milke as is ſayde heeretofore, fiue or ſixe dayes togyther, and looke alwayes to the incyſions that yee made, and ſhee ſhall bee recouered.
               An other remedye Martin gyueth for the ſame diſeaſe. Annoynt the place wyth ſome good Bawlme where the feathers fell awaye, and the Teynte will dye out of hande, and freſhe feathers ſupplie the place agayne. And hee ſayeth moreouer, that you muſte take the powder of Petre of Alexandria whiche is ſolde at the Potecaryes, and mingle it with Vineger, and annoynt the diſeaſed place with it three or foure tymes, and it will be whole.
               The ſeconde kinde of Teynte whiche fretteth the principals

of a Hawke to the verie Quill, commeth (as the cheefe Falconers affirme) of ill keeping, when they haue not their due intendance, beeing neyther bathed nor ſcoured, nor kept in wholeſome places. And therefore we are forbid to keepe a Hawke in a ſluttiſhe corner. Againe, ſometymes both in the mew and out of the mewe it happeneth that by feeding them with filthie and lothſome fleſhe, they become full of filth both within and without, whereof breedeth ſuche a ſort of Wormes, as doe vtterlye frette aſunder and marre their feathers. The three chiefe Falconers ſay, that for this ſeconde Teynt which fretteth the feathers of a Hawke, in ſort that they become like ſtickes, yee muſt take vine ſhredds, and make therof as ſtrong Lie as ye can, and waſh your Hawke once a day with it throughly: and when ſhe is weathered againe, annoint all hir feathers with honie out of the combe. Then make powder of Sanguis Draconis, and Roch Alom verie ſmall, and powder the foreſaid Quils therwith, and your hawke ſhalbe recured. Or elſe take a Mole of that ſort which breedeth in Medowes, and put hir in a new earthen pot well couered and ſtopped, and ſet it on the fire one whole day: which done, take hir out againe as ſhe is, and make hir into powder very ſmall. And when ye haue bathed your Hawkes feathers throughly with the ſayd Lee, by and by beſtrow hir feathers with the powder of the Mole a certaine time togither, and it will pleaſure hir.
               The thirde kind of Teynt is knowne in Hawkes by the ryuing of their principal feathers throughout alongſt the vpper ſide of the webbe of them. And that happeneth commonly for want of cleane feeding, and due attendance. To remedie this, Mallopin ſayth, that ye muſt take a greene Reede, and cleaue it all alongſt, and ſcrape oute the pithe of it, and wring oute of it as muche iuyce as yee can, wherewith you muſte moyſten the ſayde ryuen feathers all alongeſt the ryftes of them, and they will cloſe and ſhette againe as before. And if anye feather happen to be dropt awaye, let a tente made of Fyrre or of a grayne of Barlye as is ſayde heeretofore bee put into the hole of it, and vſe it after the foreſayde manner, and a newe feather will growe againe out of hande. If this deuiſe to cauſe a feather

to growe againe be not to your liking, you ſhall in this collection finde ſuch as may content you.
               
                  Martin giueth another Medicine and aduice for the ſame, which is this: Take twopennie weight of Orpiment, and nine graynes of Pepper, and make it into powder, and caſt it vpon hir meate, which muſt be reaſonable warme. Againe, take three ſlices of Bacon, of that which is neareſt the ſkinne, and let them bee ſo ſmal as your hawke may ſwallow them with eaſe: ſawce them with a little honie, and ſtrew of the powder of the filings of yron vpon the honie, and giue your hawke thereof three dayes togither. After which time take a yong Chicken, and before yee boyle it in wine, brooſe the breaſt of it, and open it with a ſharpe knife or other inſtrument, that the bloud may follow. Then feed hir with the ſayd Pullets fleſh warme, ſteeped in Goates milke, or other milke. Practiſe this two or three dayes, and afterwarde therevpon giue hir good warme meate, and ſhee ſhall recouer.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that indeweth not, ne putteth ouer as ſhe ſhould doe.
               IT falleth out ſometimes that a Hawke cannot well indew nor put ouer hir meate as ſhe ſhould doe, and that is onely bycauſe ſhe is foule within, or hath taken ſome ſurfeyt, or elſe that when ſhe was low and poore, hir keeper being deſirous to ſet hir vp againe to haſhly, gaue hir to great gorges, which ſhe by reaſon of hir weakneſſe was not able to put ouer and indewe, wherethrough ſhee ſurfetted and forwent hir appetite of feeding altogither. For remedie hereof, Mallopin ſayeth ye muſt feede hir with light meates, and little at once, as with yong Rattes and Mice, or with great Rattes, for there is more ſubſtaunce in them than in the other, whereof yee muſte giue hir but halfe gorges, that ſhee maye the ſooner indewe them, and put them ouer. Or elſe feede hir wyth Chicken, or Mutton dipped in Goates milke, or otherwyſe. And for wante of thoſe, take the yolke of an Egge, and giue hir a quarter of a gorge thereof,

and when ye feede hir with the fleſh of any liue byrde or fowle, ſteepe it well in the bloud of the ſame fowle, and it will doe hir much good. So ſhall your Hawke mount of hir fleſh apace: if beſides that, you doe alſo ſcoure hir with pilles made of Larde, Marow of beefe, Suger, and Saffron three mornings togither, and two houres after giue hir a reaſonable gorge.
               Another receyt which maſter Michelin giueth, ſaying. When a Hawke indewes not hir meate, ne putteth it ouer as ſhe ought to doe, but hath ſurfeyted and wanteth naturall heate: Take verie pure white wine, and ſteepe hir meate in it luke warme, giuing it hir by little & little oft tymes in the day, alwayes chaunging hir meate, and ſee that it be light of digeſtion. Doe thus to hir till ſhe be in better tune againe, giuing hir fiue or ſixe cloues of Maces in the Euening wrapped in a little cotton, or in ſome other ſuch like deuice: for that will warme hir head, & all hir other partes verie well, and let the Cotton bee dipped in odoriferous olde wine.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that can neither caſt vp hir meate, nor endew it as ſhe ought.
               ANother miſchiefe is wont ſomtymes to light vpon Hawkes, namely that by taking ouergreat gorges, they can neyther indewe nor caſt it againe, and alſo that many tymes a Hawke ſoareth away with hir pray, and feedeth ſo greedily vpon it by reaſon ſhe was kept ouereager and ſharp, that ſhe can neither get it vp nor downe, and thervpon falleth in danger of death. Wherfore all men ought to vſe diſcretion in feeding their hawkes, that they ouergorge them not.
               Maſter Caſsian ſayeth that for remedie thereof, ye muſt ſet cleane water in a veſſell before your Hawke, and let hir bowze thereof at hir pleaſure. And if ſhe liſt not: then take the quantitie of a Beane of Porke, of the fatteſt of it, and two parts leſſe of powder of Pepper, with a little ſalte brayed verie ſmall, and when ye haue mingled them all togither, make a little ball of it

as bigge as a Beane, and put it in your Hawkes beake, ſo as ſhe may receyue it. Then ſet hir by the fire, or in the Sunne, and you ſhall ſee hir caſt hir gorge. But let not the Hawke be too poore, to whom you intende to allowe this pill, for if ſhe bee too lowe, ſhe will hardly beare it.
            
            
               Another medicine to make hir caſt hir gorge.
               RUb the roofe of hir mouth with a litle Vineger and Pepper, and ſhe will caſt by and by. And if ye liſt, ye may alſo conuey two or three droppes of the ſame into hir nares, and it will make hir caſt hir gorge out of hande. And if ye ſee that the Vineger and Pepper do vexe and diſtemper hir to muche after the caſting of hir gorge, ſpirt a little freſh water with your mouth into hir pallat and nares.
            
            
               Of the Havvke that caſteth hir gorge ouer much, and cannot indew as ſhee ſhoulde doe.
               MAny tymes it commeth to paſſe that when a Hawke hath fedde, ſhe cannot keepe hir meate but falleth to caſting, as ſoone as ſhee hath receyued it. This commeth of feeding hir with groſſe, foule, and vnholeſome meate not waſhed: or elſe for that ſhe is foule in the panell, and ſo cannot indew by reaſon of the great ſtore of filth that is within hir. Therefore ye muſt beware that ye cut not hir meate with a foule knife, or with a knife that hath cut Onions, Leeks, Chibbols, or ſuch other like things. To remedie this inconuenience, giue not your Hawke greate gorges. And to bring hir well in tune againe, ſcoure hir with the forementioned pilles of Larde, Marrow, Suger, and Saffron, by the ſpace of three dayes. And aboue all things, let not the Hawke that hath caſt hir gorge be fedde a good ſpace after it, but let hir ſtande emptie in the Sunne with water before hir to bowſe at hir pleaſure, for that will doe hir muche good. And when yee feede hir, giue hir at the fyrſt time but a quarter of a

gorge, and at the ſeconde ſomewhat more, if ſhee keepe the firſt: and hir meate muſt be ſome liue foule, and good of digeſtion, till ſhe be brought againe to hir naturall plight. But if ſhee keepe not all hir meate, giue hir yong Rattes, or liue Mice: and for want of thoſe, giue hir ſmall byrdes till ſhe bee recouered. If theſe foreſayde things boote not, then by Mallopins aduice, take Coriander ſeede beaten in powder, and temper it with warme water, ſtreyning it through a cloth, waſh your Hawkes meate therewith foure or fiue dayes togither, and if yee haue no Coriander ſeede, take the iuyce of Coriander. And if your Hawke mende not yet for all thys: Followe the counſell of Maiſter
Michelins heere inſuyng. Boyle Baye leaues in whyte Wine till halfe the lyquor be waſted, and then let it coole with the leaues ſtill in it. Which done, force a Pigeon by deuice to bowſe ſo much of the Wine that ſhe may die of it. Then immediately feede your Hawke with the ſame Pigeon, and let hir not eate more than a legge of it.
            
            
               Of the Havvke that hath loſt hir appetite and vvill not feed, to make hir eager vvithout bringing hir lovv.
               A Hawke doth ſometyme loſe hir appetite of feeding by ſome miſfortune, as by taking to greate gorges towardes Euening, whiche ſhe can not well indewe, bycauſe the nyghtes are colder than the dayes. Alſo ſhee may loſe hir appetyte by being foule in the pannell, and diuerſe tymes by coldeneſſe, or by ſome other diſeaſe whiche can not bee perceyued out of hande. For remedye whereof, Maiſter Mallopin ſayeth, yee muſte take Aloes Cicotrine, boylde Suger, and marrowe of Beefe, of eche alyke, ſauing that there muſte bee leaſt of the Aloes, and when yee haue mingled them togyther, and made them in little Balles or Pilles as bigge as Beanes, giue of them to youre Hawke, and holde hir in the Sunne tyll ſhee haue caſte vppe the ſlyme and fylthe that is wythin hir. And if it happen to ſkoure downewarde, lette it not trouble you,

for it will doe hir much good: and feede hir not till noone, at which time giue hir good meate, and ſerue hir ſo three dayes togyther.
               For the ſame diſeaſe, Michelin ſayth you muſt take common Pilles that are giuen to purge men withall, and giue one or two of them to your Hawke in the morning, keeping hir hooded by the fire, or in the Sunne, looking to hir that ſhe caſt them not, (if it may be) to the intent they may cauſe hir to ſcoure downward. And the booke of the Prince ſayth that it is good giuing of thoſe Pilles to Hawkes in the beginning of September. For if they haue the Filanders, or any other inward diſeaſe, it ſcoureth them, and riddeth them of all miſchiefes that may enſewe. Three or foure dayes after you haue giuen your Hawke theſe Pilles, if ſhe haue yet no luſt to feede, caſt the filings of yron vpon hir meate three or foure dayes togither.
               Maſter Amé Caſsianſayth, that for the ſame diſeaſe, when you perceyue it, you muſt giue your Hawke a liue Stockedone, allowing hir leaue to ſeaze and tire vpon it, and to take the bloud of it at hir pleaſure. And for want of a Stockdone, ſmall birdes are good, and ſo be Rattes and Mice, ſo ſhe haue them aliue. And if you will haue hir to indewe them quickely, giue hir but halfe gorges.
            
            
               When Hawkes are low brought, a remedie.
               IT happeneth ſometymes that Hawkes are brought ſo lowe, that a man ſhall haue much a doe to ſet them vp againe. And that commeth through the fault of vnſkilfull keepers, rather than any other thing. For ſome giue them yll meate, colde and vnwaſhed. Alſo Hawkes doe happen to growe poore by ſome diſeaſe that their keepers are not ware of. Againe ſometymes it happeneth that a Hawke ſoares awaye, and is loſt foure or fiue dayes, and ſo becommes poore for want of pray. Maſter Caſsian ſayth, that if ye will ſet hir vp againe, ye muſt feede hir a little at once and with good meate, ſuch as Rattes and Mice are, for they

they be lyght of digeſtion, or elſe with ſmall birdes, which are good likewiſe, and of great nouriſhment. Pultrie alſo is good, but it nouriſheth not ſo muche of his owne nature, as Mutton doth.
               Againe ye may ſet hir vp, (when ſhe is low) in this maner folowing. Take a ſpoonfull or twaine of honie, three or foure of freſh butter, boyle them togither in a new pot of water, thē take Porke wel waſhed, & ſtiepe it in that water, giuing your hawke a good reaſonable gorge of it twice a daye, warming your ſayde water when you intend to fede your hawke. And if ye cā find any Snailes that breede in rūning waters, giue hir of them in the morning, and they will bothe ſkowre away the groſſe ſlimie humors that are in hir panell, and alſo be a great helpe to ſet hir vp againe, (for they nouriſhe very well.) And if ye mind to make your hawke eager, and ſharpe ſet, without bating hir ſelfe, take the hart and liuer of a Pye, and when ye haue made it into powder, make your hawke to eate it, and it will ſette hir ſharpe and eager. Theſe are the opinions of the Frenche Falconers. You are to consider of them all, and to vſe the moſt probable at your election and pleaſure.
            
            
               Of a Hawke that hath no liſte to flee, and is become vnluſtie or ſlouthfull.
               NOwe and then it happeneth, that a hawke hath no lyſt too flee, eyther bicauſe ſhe is in euill keeping, that is to witte, of ſuche as knowe not howe to gyue hir hir ryghtes: as bowzing, bathing, and ſuche other things, whereof ſometymes ſhee hath greate neede: or bycauſe the hawke is too hyghe, and full of greaſe, wherethrough ſhee becommeth coye: or contrarywiſe, bycauſe ſhee is too lowe and poore: or elſe by reaſon of ſome miſhappe or diſeaſe whiche ſhee hath, that is vnknowen.. Therefore Maſter Caſsian ſayeth, if a hawke be vnluſtie to flee, ſhee muſte be vewed and peruſed by ſome one of good ſkill, and haue ſuche remedies miniſtred to hir, as ſhe

hath neede of, as well for bathing, as for bowzing: For in any wiſe water muſte bee ſette before hir. And if ſhee bee high and not well enſeamed, hir meate muſt be throughly waſhed, that it may ſkowre hir the better. Or elſe if ye lyſte, ye may gyue hir the foreſayde medicine of Larde, Marrowe, and Saffron. And if yee perceyue your Hawke to be ſicke, or diſeaſed, ye may vſe the remedies ſette downe heretofore, according to the ſeuerall natures of the diſeaſes, tyll your hawke be in good plyght againe, as ſhe was before.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath broken hir wing by ſome miſchaunce.
               IT happeneth ſomewhile, that a hawke breaketh hir wing by miſchaunce, as by bating againſt the ground, or otherwiſe. Maſter Mallopin ſayeth, that when a Hawke hath hir wing broken after that manner, yee muſte take Sanguis draconis, Bole Armoniacke, Gum Arabicke, white Franckincenſe, whiche is called Olibanum, Maſticke, Aloes Cicotrine, of each of them a like quantitie, and a reaſonable quantitie of fine meale flower. Make a powder of all the ſayde things, tempering it with the white of an egge, and make thereof a playſter, and laye it to the hurte, when yee haue firſte ſette it right agayne. Then croſſe hir wings one ouer another, as thoughe they were not broken, and maile hir well and faſte, ſo as ſhe may not ſtirre them, and lette the meate that you giue hir, be cutte in ſmall pellettes. Remooue not the plaiſter for ſeuen or eight dayes, and when yee laye on another, in any wyſe beware that that wyng bee not remooued: For if it bee neuer ſo little remooued or diſplaced, your laboure is loſte, and your Hawke marred for euer.
               Therefore keepe hir in that order by the ſpace of .xiiij. or xv. dayes, ſetting hir vpon a very ſofte Cuſhion, and lette hir meate bee good, and newe killed, and giue hir meetely good

gorges of it, for ſhee needes not to be kept lowe, to recouer hir health the better.
            
            
               Of a Havvke that hath had ſome blovve or ſtripe vpon hir vving.
               SOmetymes a Hawke hathe a ſtrype on hir wing by ſome miſhappe, ſo as ſhee cannot afterwarde holde it ryght, but it hangeth alwayes downe, and lolleth: Maſter Caſian ſayeth, that yee muſte take Sage, Myntes, and Pelamountaine, and boyle them all togyther in a new earthen pot full of good wyne, and when they bee well ſodden, take the potte, and ſet it vppon hotte imbers, as cloſe ſtopped as maye bee. Then make a rounde hole of the bygneſſe of an Apple, in the clothe that your potte is ſtopped withall, for the ſteame to iſſew out at. Whiche done, take your Hawke vpon your fiſte, and holde out hir hurte wing handſomely a greate whyle ouer the hole, that it may take the fume whiche ſeameth vp out of the potte. Afterwarde, lette hir be well dryed by keeping hir warme by the fire, for if ſhe ſhould catche ſodaine colde vpon it, it would becomme woorſe than it was before. Vſe hir thus twyce adaye, for three or foure dayes togyther, and ſhee ſhall bee recouered.
            
            
               Of the Havvke that hath hir vving out of ioynte.
               WHen a Hawkes wing is out of ioynte, yee muſte take hir handſomely, and put it vp, ſo as ye may ſette it in his ryght place agayne. Whiche done, laye a playſter to it, made of Sanguis draconis, Boli Armeni, Maſticke, and flower tempered togyther with the white of an egge, and maile hir vp, letting it lye by the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes, and it wyll bee whole.
            
            
               
               Of a Havvke that hath hir pynion broken.
               IF a Hawke chaunce to haue hir pinion broken by treading vpon hir, or by ſtriking agaynſt ſome thing, Maſter Mallopin ſayeth, that there is no better remedie, than the foreſayde Receyte, made for hir wing broken: and that if neede be, ſhee muſt be mayled, that it may the better ioyne togither againe, and the playſter renewed euery fiue dayes. Or elſe let the hurt be ſplented by and by, and bounde vp with conuenient deuiſes for the purpoſe, giuing hir hir meate cut in ſmal pellets, & lette hir continue maled, that ſhe trouble not hirſelfe with tyring.
            
            
               Of the Havvke that hath hir legge or thyghe broken.
               TAke Firre or Frankincenſe, pill of the barke of it, and beate it into powder, and mingle it with the white of an egge: & if ye can, put in alſo a little Sanguis draconis, & make a plaſter of it. Then deplume your hawkes thygh, and lay the playſter to the broken place, taking good heede that yee binde it not too ſtraight, for feare of fluxe and repaire of accidents to ye place, for ſo ye may do hir greate harme. And for want of Firre, or Franckincenſe, take the barke of an Oke: for Firre is not to bee had in many places. Afterwarde renewe your playſter euery fiue or ſixe dayes, till your Hawke be throughly whole, alwayes cutting hir meate to hir, as aforeſayde, and keeping hir hooded. And if it bee broken beneath the thyghe, laye the ſame playſter to it, taking good heede, that ye binde it not too harde: for in ſo dooyng yee maye make hir foote to wither away, and mortifie the member, whiche is a very greate negligence. For hawkes are dayntie birdes, and dayntily to be dealte withall.
            
            
               
               Of the Hawke that is wounded with a ſtripe, or ſome other miſfortune.
               IF a Hawke happe to bee wounded by an Eagle, or any other byrde of praye, by crabbing togyther, or by encounter in fleeing: or by a iobbe with the truncke of a Crane, Hearon, or other water fowle: or by taking ſome greater blowe agaynſte a tree or Rocke, whereby ſhee is greately payned, and in daunger to bee marred, if there bee not ſkyll to helpe hir with ſpeede. By Maſter Amé Caſsians aduiſe, take the iuyce of the herbe called Culuerfoote, otherwiſe named Herbe Roberte: and if yee finde your Hawkes ſtrype to bee greate and blacke, and yet that it hath no greate gaſhe, you muſte make inciſion, and ſlytte the ſkinne a little more by your diſcretion, that ye may the more eaſily conuey in the ſayd iuyce. That done, laye a leafe of the ſame herbe vpon the wounde, to couer it, ſpreading the feathers handſomely againe ouer it, and lette it not bee remooued .xxiiij. houres after. And know yee, that the ſayde herbe hath ſuche vertue, that what wounde ſoeuer you laye it on, it ſhall neuer ſwell nor ranckle. For wante of the herbe it ſelfe, take of the powder of it, and put it into the wounde, keeping it alwayes cleane, by waſhing it with a lyttle white wine, as is aforeſayde. And if ye ſee that the iuyce or powder of that herbe doe no good, take the medicyne that Mallopin ſpeaketh of. Take Oyle of Roſes, and Capons greace, of eache a lyke quantitie, with a lyttle leſſe Oyle of Violets, and leſſe of Turpentine by the one halfe, and confecte them all togyther. Then take Maſticke and Franckincenſe in powder, of eache alyke: and if yee can finde the ſayde herbe called Culuerfoote, drye it, and beate it into powder alſo: and when you haue ſerced your powders, putte them into the ſayde Capons greace, and ſtyrre them togyther with a ſtycke, tyll they bee throughly incorporated, and ſo ſhall your Vnguent bee perfecte. And the chiefe Falconers ſaye, you muſte make handſome tentes

of Cotton, beſtowing on them this vnguente, and ſo applie them to ye wounded places of your hawke from time to time, tyll they be recured. And if the Hawkes ſkinne be muche broken or torne, yee muſt ſowe it vp handſomely, leauing a little hole in one ſide for an iſſew, which you muſt keepe open with a tent noynted with the foreſayd vnguente, till it be throughly whole.
               Maſter Michelin ſetteth downe another medicine, ſaying, that if a Hawke happen to haue a ſtrype or a wounde, you muſte plucke awaye the feathers rounde aboute the hurte place, and that if the wounde bee ſo deepe, as it can by no meanes bee ſtytched vp: ye muſte put of the powder hereafter following, into it. Take Sanguis draconis, white Franckincenſe, Aloes Cicotrine, and Maſticke, and of thoſe foure being all in like quantitie, make a fine powder, and laye it vpon the wounde, and afterwarde annoynt it rounde aboute with Oyle of Roſes, or Oyle Olyue warme to comforte it. And if the wounde bee not ſo large, but that it may well be ſtytched: ſowe it togither agayne, leauing a little hole for an iſſewe. Then make a playſter with the whyte of an egge, and hauing firſte annoynted it with the ſayde Oyle, laye of the powder vppon the ſore, and put a tente in it dypped in the ſayde vnguente, to keepe the iſſewe, and laye your playſter vpon it, dreſſing it after that manner ſtyll, till your Hawke be ſounde.
               There is yet another medicine very good and auaylable, whiche is this. Take the powder of fine Canell, whiche is nothing elſe but Cinnamon, and put it in the wounde, ſupping it afterward with good Oyle of Roſes, or Oyle Oliue.
            
            
               Another medicine of maſter Caſsians making.
               TAke halfe an ownce of Maſticke, a quarter of an ownce of
Bole Armoniacke, halfe an ownce of Roſes, an ownce of

Capons greaſe, an ownce of Oyle of Roſes, an ownce of Oyle of Violets, and a quarter of an ownce of virgin waxe. Of all theſe, let the things that may be molten, bee molten togither: and let thoſe things that are to be beaten into powder, be beaten to fine powder. And when ye haue ſtreyned all your liquors into a newe pot, put your powders into them, ſtirring them about wt a ſticke, till they be well incorporated togither, taking good heede that ye put not too much fire vnder your pot, and ſo ſhall your vnguent be perfect. Whiche you may vſe in handſome pleggets for your hawke, tenting hir wt ſmal tents dipped in the ſame vnguent, after the maner mentioned in the former receyte, till ſhe be throughly recured.
               And if your Hawke be hurte or brooſed without any ſkinne broken, take the powder of Mummie, myngled with the bloud of a wood Culuer, or of a Pullet, and conuey it into hir throte, ſo as ſhe may receyue it downe, and twoo or thre houres after, gyue hir a reaſonable gorge of good meate. If the brooſe bee apparant, annoynt it with good oyle of Roſes, and if nede require, for the largeneſſe or ſoreneſſe of hir woundes, let hir bee mailed, as is afore ſayde, for hir more quiete, and more ſpeedy recouerie.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath ſwollen feete.
               IT happeneth diuers times, that hawkes haue a ſwelling in their feete, & that commeth by chaſing of their feete in fleeing their praye, & in ſtriking it, & by taking cold vpon it, for want of rolling the perche with ſome warme clothe: or riſe bicauſe they be full of groſſe humors, and fowle within, whiche humors beeing remooued by their labour and trauell in fleeing, drop downe vpon their feete, and there ſwell, ſpecially in Sacres more thā in any others. For they be of their owne nature very heauie Hawkes, and haue groſſe feete. Againe, it happeneth ſometimes that a Hawke pricketh hir ſelfe vpon a thorne by ruſſhing into bedges & buſhes ouer ventrouſly, wherevpon

followe ſuche ſwellings as are daungerous, and harde to bee cured. Therefore Maſter Caſsian ſayeth, that when a hawke is in that taking, ſhe muſte be ſkowred three mornings togither with the pilles of Larde, Marowe, Suger, and Saffron, and ſette in the Sunne, and fedde twoo dayes after with ſome good meate. Then muſt ye take Bole Armoniacke, & Sanguis draconis, leſſe by one halfe, & make it in powder, & temper them wel togither with the white of an egge, & Roſe water, and annoynt hir feete with it three or four dayes twice aday, ſetting hir vpon ſome cloth to keepe hir feete warme. And if this medicine do hir no good, take this that followeth.
               
                  Mallopin ſayeth, that if a hawkes feete be but ſwolne, & haue not any knubs in the ball of the foote, take a payre of Sizzers or coping yrons, & cope the talons of hir ſwolne foote, till the bloud folow which done, take Capons greaſe, oyle of Roſes, & oyle of Violets, of eche alike, & twice aſmuch of Bole Armoniack. Whē ye haue mingled thē all wel togither, make therof an vnguent, & anoynt your hawkes feete therwith twice aday til they be throghly whole, alwaies ſetting ſome ſoft & warm thing vnder hir fete. And if this do hir no good, then trie the receites aboue mentioned, till your hawke be throughly recured.
            
            
               Of the ſwelling in the legges or thighes.
               SOmetimes a hawke hath hir legges ſwollen, and ſometime hir thighes, & not hir legges: & that cōmeth either by ouerlaboring hir ſelfe in fleeing, or by ouermuch ſeazing hir praye, and by taking colde vpon it. Alſo by like labour and bating, the humors beeing ſtyrred within hir, droppe downe to hir thyghes and legges, and thereof commeth this ſwelling.
               
                  How to make oyle of egges.Wherefore firſte let your hawke be ſkowred with ye pilles made of Larde, Marow, Suger, & Saffron, then roſte nyne or ten egges hard in their ſhells, & when they be cold agane, take the yolkes of them, & breake them with your hande in an yron poſſenet ouer ye fire. Thē take an yron Ladle, and ſtirre them

handſomly without ceaſſing, and when yee ſee them become blacke that ye would thinke they were mard and burnt, boyle them ſtill, which done, gather them togither and preſſe out the Oyle of them, then heate them againe as before to preſſe out as much Oyle of them as is poſſible, and put it vp in a glaſſe. And when ye mind to vſe it for the ſayd diſeaſe, ye muſte take tenne droppes thereof, put thereto three droppes of vinegre, and three of Roſe water, and mingle them well togither. Thys medicine is ſingular good againſt al ſwellings of their thighs, legges, and feete, and moreouer it ſuppleth and mollifyeth their finewes. But firſt ye muſt anoynt the ſwellings with a little Adiantum, and afterward with your Oyle prepared as aforeſayd, till your Hawke be cured.
            
            
               Of the ſvvelling in a Havvkes foote, vvhich vve tearme, the pin, or pin Goute.
               DIuers times there riſe vp knubbes vpō yt feete of Hawkes, as vpon the feete of Capons, which ſome call Galles, and ſome Goutes. They come ſometimes of the ſwelling of the legges and thighes, which I haue ſpoken of before, or of other diſeaſes that breede of the abundaunce of humors within the Hawke, which muſt firſt be ſcowred with the laſt mentioned pilles three or foure dayes togither. And Maſter Amé Caſsian ſayth, that when a Hawke hath the ſayd pinnes and gowtineſſe in hir feete, ye muſt make round matches of paper as big as the agglet of a poynt, and ſeare or cauteriſe the pin rounde about. And if the knubbe ſticke farre out, yee maye ſlit it mane
                     •
                  ly with a whot ſharpe knife, and put a little ſliſe of fatte Lard into the ſlit to keepe it open, and ſet your Hawke vpon a little heape of very fine ſalt. And if there growe any dead fieſh in it, lay the powder of glaſſe, and two parts of Hermodactils vpon it, and when the Sore is ſkowred, anoynte it with Swines greace, and hony togither, always laying ſalt vnder

hir feete to the end of your cure. And to remedy the ſame, Mallopin in his Booke of the Prince ſayth, that when a Hawke is gowty or hath the pin on hir feete, ye muſt take of Rew three ownces, of Barberies three ownces, of Colewort leaues three ownces, of Oyle of Violets a reaſonable quantitie, of Turpentine two ownces, of Sheepes ſewet as much ſhall ſerue, of the fatte of a yong Pullet one ownce and a halfe, of Virgin waxe one ownce, of Maſticke one ownce, of white Frankincence one ownce, of Opopanax one ownce, and of Alome two ownces. Firſt ſtrayne out the iuyce of the ſayde Herbes brayed togither, then put thereto all youre other mixtures made into powder. Which done, melt all your ſewets togither in a new earthen potte, and put your iuyces and powders therevnto, ſtirring them continually with a ſticke ouer a ſoft fire, and ſo cooling them by little and little, whereby your vnguent wyll become perfect, and you may keepe it two yeares good. And whē ye occupie it, ſpread it plaiſterwiſe vpon lether, or linnen cloth, laying it vpon the pin Goute, remouing it each other day till it be whole, for xv. dayes togither. And if the pin open not of it ſelfe, ſlit it and open it with a little ſharp launce of ſteele made whot, then clenze the filthie matter and quitture, and ſo ſhall your Hawke recouer aſſuredly.
               Maſter Caſsian ſetteth downe another good and wel tried receyte for the ſame, which is this: Take a quantitie of Turpentine, halfe as much white Sope, making the Sope into powder. That done, make aſſhes of vineſhreddes, and take therof ſomewhat leſſe than of the powder of ye Sope. Set theſe three mixtures togither vpon the coles in a new pot, and ſtirre them ſoftly with a ſticke till they be incorporate togither. Thē make plaiſters thereof, and beſtowe them on the pinnegoute, ſo as they may not fall off, nor be remoued by the Hawke, ſhifting them euery two dayes till fifteene dayes be paſt, and that the diſeaſe growe to maturation. Afterward you may ſlit the pinne, drawing out all the matter and quitture cleane, but let your launce be ſomewhat hote wherewith you ſlit it, and if

the pin open of it ſelfe it is better. After this, you muſt applie another plaiſter of Diaculum magnum, whiche you ſhall find at the Apoticaries: for it is a great drawer, and if it haue any dead fleſh in it, lay a little Verdegrece to it, for that is a corroſiue, and a fretter.
               
                  Martin ſayeth, that to ſoften the pinne on the Hawkes foote and to make it growe to a head, yee muſte take the rootes of Flower deluce, which beares the blewe leafe, drie it and beate it into powder, and make thereof a Salue with honie of Roſes, and lay it to the pinne till it be throughly whole.
               Maſter Caſsian ſayth further, that if your Hawkes feete bee chafed and fall to ſwelling, take the fyling of yron beaten into powder, to the mountenaunce of a beane or twayne, and the quantitie of a beane of a gad of ſteele fyled into powder, and twice as much of the barke of an Oke as of the fyling of yron, of which barke of the Oke, you muſt take away the vttermoſt part, and of the reſt make fine powder, ſerced through a cloth. When yee haue mingled all theſe powders togither, boyle them in a new potte with a potle of good vineger, to the conſumption of a third part. Then let it ſettle, and put the cleereſt of it alone by it ſelfe, and the groundes of it alſo by it ſelfe in a long narrow bagge, that the Hawke may reſt both hir feete vpon it. And with the water ye may vſe to bath hir feete euery day three or foure times aday. Likewiſe yee muſt wette and refreſh the bagge with the ſame water, that the grounds may lie the cloſer vnder the feete of the Hawke, whych muſt ſtand vppon it night and day till ſhe be recured. And truely thys is good for all manner of griefes and ſwellinges of the feete.
               
                  Martin is of opinion that you muſt take halfe an ownce of Aloes and the white of an egge, with halfe an ownce and two penny weighte of Glewe, mingle them all togither, and put them in preſſe, ſo as all maye bee reſidence, and make thereof a playſter, and laye it to youre Hawkes

feete till there be ſome iſſue and vent, then anoynt them with ſoft Sope. And when there hapneth any rupture, take Saltpeeter and Alome, of each two penny weight, making it into powder, beſtowe it vpon the broken place to fret the dead fleſh away, for this is a good corroſiue for that purpoſe.
            
            
               Of the Havvke that eateth avvay hir ovvne feete.
               THis inconuenience hapneth to Merlions in chiefe, aboue all other Hawkes, and to fewe or none elſe that I cā reade of. Maſter Caſsian ſayth it is a king of Formica which maketh them to eate their feete in that order. For remedie heereof, make youre Hawke a Coller of Paper to conuey about hir necke, ſo as ſhe may not touch hir feete. Afterward take an Oxe gall, mingle it with a reaſonable good quātitie of Aloes, and anoynt youre Hawkes feete therewith twice or thrice aday, foure or fiue dayes, and it ſhall doe hir pleaſure, and preſerue hir from this euill. If that do hir not good, then by Maſter
Caſsians aduice, take Swines dung, and putting it on a Tyle, ſet it to the fire or in an Ouen, bake it till ye may force it into powder. Whiche done, waſh your Hawkes feete with the pureſt and ſtrongeſt vinegre that ye can find, afterwarde beſtow hir feete in the ſame powder, doing ſo twice or thrice aday for xiiij. or xv. days till ſhe be throughly recured.
            
            
               The maner of the taking vp of Havvkes veynes vvhen an humor droppeth dovvne too faſt on their feete.
               WHen yee intende to ſtoppe the veynes that feede ill humors in your Hawkes feete, let hir be hand ſomly caſt, then away with hir pendant feathers. After that, force hir leg a little with your finger, and you ſhall ſee a good pretie bigge

veyne vnder the knee. Hauing found the vayne, take a needle and raiſe vp the ſkin a little, and make an iſſew at your diſcretion: but take good heede that ye touch not the veyne. That done, take the Clee of a Bitttor, or of ſome other bird whatſoeuer, wherewith do lift vppe the veyne, and drawe youre ſilke threede vnder the veyne vppon the Clee, and knit it on the ſide towards the leg to the kneeward: for if ye cut it towardes the thigh aboue the knot, ye ſpoyle your Hawke. Do no more to hir, but let it bleede as much as it will, remembring the nexte morning to anoynt it with Oyle, or Capons greace. And bee ye ſure that the taking vp of veynes is good and nedefull. For afterward the humors powre not downe vppon their legges and feete. I thought good to ſet ye downe this maner of taking vp of vaynes, bycauſe I haue vſed it my ſelfe, and recouered many Hawkes thereby. For when a Hawke hath the veynes of eyther thigh once taken vp, the diſeaſe can no more returne, for want of the wonted ſupply of moyſt humors, and crude matter that flowed vnto the place.
            
            
               The maner of ſcowring, and vſing youre Hawkes when they are to be caſt into the mewe.
               WHen the time is come to caſt Hawkes in the mewe, it is requiſite and needefull to ſcowre them and to make them cleane. For diuers times we ſee, that fowle feeding of Hawkes in lewring and fleeing time, ingendreth the Filanders and other diſeaſes in them, whereof they periſh for want of care and cure in due time. Wherefore Maſter Michelin ſayth that when ye intend to caſt your Hawke into the mewe, ye muſt make three pittes of the bignes of a beane, of the foreſayd mxture of Larde, Marowe, Suger, and Saffron, which you may giue hir three mornings togither, not feeding hir in two houres after, but ſuffring hir to gleame. Then giue hir

ſome good fleſh and reaſonable gorge, ſetting hir all the while at the fire, or in the Sunne. And for other three mornings after that, you muſt giue hir the mountenance of a beane of Aloes Cicotrine when ſhe hath caſt, keeping hir likewiſe by the fire or in the Sunne, and ſhe will caſt the Aloes with groſſe ſlime and filthy ſtuffe. Likewiſe, Aloes being giuen towardes night enwrapped in hir caſting, is very good againſt the Filā
                  ders. This done, and performed, as I haue tolde you, ye may caſt hir into the mew.
               Maſter Amé Caſsian ſayth that for the ſame purpoſe ye muſt conuey the quantitie of halfe a hazel nutte of Ierapigra into a hennes gutte, knitte faſt at both ends, and force it into your Falcons throte, holding hir on the fiſt by the fire or in ye Sun, till ſhe haue ſkowred, and ſo keepe hir emptie and voyde till noone, at what time ſhee muſte be allowed of ſome good hote meate a reaſonable gorge: the next morrow feede hir well and after thoſe two dayes caſt hir into the mew without any moe ceremonies or circumſtance.
               
                  Artelowch aduiſeth you, that the mewing of a Hawke naturally, with yong Rattes, Mice, Dogges fleſh, Pigeons, Rabbets, and other holeſome fowles, is farre better, than to vſe any arte in the matter, or ſuche ſuperſtitious practiſes, as you may perhaps reade ſome, and heare of many. Truely I am of his opinion, and ſo doe perſwade you, that will mewe youre Hawkes in good order: for haſte in that caſe, maketh waſte, as in all other things.
               The beſt thing that you may do, when you meane to caſte hir into the mew, is firſt, to ſkowre hir well, after that manner that I haue ſhewed you in this booke, to cope hir well, and to ſet hir vp in fleſh before you caſt hir into the mew, to diſcharge hir of al diſeaſe as neare as you can, to rid hir of mites & lice, being once in the mew, to ſet hir water ſometimes, to feede hir with liquide and laxatiue meates now and then, and to omit none of thoſe inſtructions, which I haue collected for you out of the Italian Falconers: for they are very good obſeruations,

ſpecially for ſoare Hawkes, and Nyaſſes.
               But in the French man Artelowch, I finde one neceſſarye note for a Haggart, which is this.
               The Haggart (ſaith he) is not to be caſt looſe into the mew, but to be mewed on the fiſte, for otherwiſe ſhe woulde become too coye and ſtrange, and if ſhe fall to bating and beating hir ſelfe for heate, then muſt you hood hir vp, or beſpowte hir with colde water, the nexte way to make hir leaue bating. Thus muſt you continue hir on the fiſte, till ſhe begin to ſhed hir feathers, then ſhall it bee good to ſet hir downe, and tie hir to a ſtone, or pearch, as you do the reſt. And after ſhe hath mewed, and commes to flee, then if you let hir ſtand on a blocke, or billet, caſed and rolled with cloth, you ſhall do very well.
               Goſhawkes, Tiercels, & Sparowhawkes, muſt be mewed as Falcons, ſaue that they wil not be borne on the fiſte, but be at libertie in the mewe, and very clenly ſerued.
               Before you draw your Hawke out of the mewe, fifteene or twenty dayes, you muſt begin to bate hir of hir diet, the ſooner and better to enſeame hir, by reſtraint of hir ful feeding, which ſhe had before, for otherwiſe, there woulde followe ſurfet and repletion, than which there is no more daungerous euill.
               It is no ſlender part of ſkill, ſo to vſe a Hawke in the mew, as ſhe may bee quitte of all miſhappes, that befall hir in the mewe, if ſhe bee not well attended and regarded, during the time ſhe is in the mew.
            
            
               The maner hovv to deale ſo vvith a Havvke in the mevv, as ſhe may auoyde the miſchaunces of the mevv, vvhich ſundry times do happen, as vvell diſeaſes, as other harmes.
               IT hapneth diuers tymes that when Hawkes are in the mewe, ſome doe mewe well and ſome ill, ſo as ſome of

their owne nature, and ſome by miſhap, do fall to be diſeaſed, or otherwiſe breake their feathers, and caſt them not all the yeere long. As touching this matter, Maſter Mallopin in hys booke of the Prince, ſayth: that when youre Hawke meweth not well and kindly: go in May to a ſlaughter houſe where Sheepe are killed, and take the kernelles that are vnder theyr eares right againſt the end of the iawebone, of the bigneſſe of an Almond. Choppe ten or twelue of thoſe kernelles very ſmall and giue them to your Hawke with hir meate, finding the meanes, by ſome way or other, that ſhe may receyue them and put them ouer. And when ſhee once beginnes to caſt hir feathers giue hir no more of them.
            
            
               Another vvay.
               WHen ye meene to further the mewing of your Hawke, take of the Snayles that haue ſhelles, ſtampe them ſhelles and all, ſtrayning them through a cloth, and with the Oyle that comes thereof waſh hir meate two or three tymes. Alſo take of the Snayles that lie in running ſtreames, gyue your Hawke of them in the morning: for that wil both ſcowre hir and nouriſh hir greatly, and ſetteth hir vp, and maketh hir to mewe apace. Maſter Michelin, in his Booke of the King of Cypres, ſayth thus: Cut an adder in two partes and ſeeth him in water, and with that water and wheate togither fede your Pullets, Pigeons, Turtles, and other birds which you intende to allow your Hawkes that are ſlacke to mewe, and ſoone after they ſhall mewe their feathers apace.
               Maſter Caſsian ſayth, that when a Falcon will not mewe, ye muſt take of Backes, otherwiſe called Reremice, and drie them ſo at the fire or in an Ouen, as yee may make them into powder, which you muſt beſtow vpon your Hawkes meate. Alſo take little ſucking whelpes, and feede your Hawke with the fleſh of them, ſteeped in the milke or renet, whiche you ſhall find in the mawes of them: afterward ſhred the mawe it ſelfe

in ſmall peeces, and force hir to take it, and ſhe ſhall mew very well, and timely. Likewiſe all maner of liue birds make a Hawke to mew well, for it is their naturall feeding, and therfore beſt for them.
               
                  Martin ſayth, that to mew your Hawke well, ye muſt ſette water by hir once or twice a weeke, and alſo roſt Frogges in the fire, making them into powder, and beſtowing it vpon hir meate. Likewiſe ſmall fiſhes chopped, and giuen with hir meate do further a Hawkes mewing very much. Thus do the french Authors write, I leaue them to youre experience, that lyſte to follow the french faſhion.
            
            
               The maner of dieting and keeping Hawkes in the mewe.
               WHen ye intend to caſt your Hawke into the mew, yee muſt ſee the mew very cleane, then furniſh your hawke with all hir implements, ſetting hir two or three times in the Sunne, taking good heede that hir furniture of hir legges bee not ſo ſtreight, and vneaſye, as ſhe be driuen to be euer tearing at it. Alſo you muſt caſt hir into the mew high, luſtie, and in good plight, well ſkowred, and fed with good hote fleſh. Again ye muſt now and then giue hir ſmall fiſhes, ſpecially to Goſhawkes, Sparowhawkes, and all other roūdwinged hawkes, bycauſe thoſe fiſhes be (as my Author tearmeth them,) laxatiue, and good to ſkowre, ſetting them water twice or thrice a week. For now and then they will bowze, by meanes whereof they diſcharge their bodies of humors, and alſo their bathing in it maketh them the better penned and the firmer. Yong Rattes, Mice, and Swallowes, are very good feeding for a Hawke, for they bee nouriſhing meates, and will keepe the Hawke in good plight. Therefore let your Hawke be mewed in a place that is cleane, handſome, and well kepte, for ſhe wil reioyce, and delight greatly in it. Thus haue yee the manner of mewing your Hawke, after the opinion of the French.
            
            
               
               The maner of drawing Hawkes out of the mewe.
               WHen ye drawe your Hawkes out of the mewe, yee had neede to take heede that they bee not ſoo greaſy: for ſometimes when they be ſo, and ſet vppon the fiſte vnhooded, they ſo take on, and heate themſelues with bating, that they breake their greace within them, putting themſelues in great daunger of death. Wherefore my counſell is, that all mewed Hawkes ſhould be well attended and fed with waſht meate, foureteene or fifteene dayes before they bee drawen out of the mewe, to breede reſolution of glitte, and groſſe matter, whydx is in their panels, whereof they ſhall ſkowre the moſt parte by doing as is aforeſaid, and ſo ſhall ye quit them of all danger.
               
                  Mallopin ſpeaking heereof in his booke of the Prince, ſayth, that if a Hawke be huge and greaſy, when ſhe is new drawē, a man muſt not beare hir vnhooded. For yee may well vnderſtand, that if ſhe feele the ſunne, the aire, or the wind, ſhe lightly falleth to bating and ſtirring, by meanes whereof ſhe heateth hirſelfe inordinately, and ſo runnes in daunger of deathe and ſpoyle by taking cold vpon it. Wherevpon the Petifalconers and Nouices, which know not what it meaneth, ſaye that the Hawke periſheth by meane of hir mewing and thorough default. And therefore when a Hawke is to be drawen out of the mewe, ſhe muſt be well attended, and lookte too, that hir meate be waſht, and regard had that ſhe be not ouergorged. And if happely ſhe loze hir appetite and liſt to feede, take Aloes Cicotrine, and the iuyce of Barberies, and force hir to receyue it in the gut of a Hen. Which done, hold hir vpō your fiſte vntill ſhe haue ſkowred, keeping hir emptie till noone: At which time giue hir ſome hote meate or bird, and the next day giue hir of a Hen, ſetting hir water to bathe: and aſſure youre ſelfe that this medicine is good againſt all wormes, and Filanders that may breede in the body of a Hawke.
               
                  Mallopin ſayth that whē ye draw a Hawke out of the mew,

ye muſt waſh hir meate, feeding hir therwith by little & little, and allow hir ſuch fleſh as is laxatiue, that ſhee may haue the leſſe ioy to keepe it long, or ſtand vpon it, and to the end ſhe be not proude or ouerhaught of hir drawing out of ye mew. And therewithall ſhee muſt be dayly plyed and borne on the fiſte. Within few dayes after ſhe is thus drawen, ye muſt ſkowre hir and enſayme hir with the foreſayd medicine of Lard, Suger, Maree, and Saffron, with a very little Aloes: for if ye cō
                  fect it with too much Aloes, ye ſhall bring hir ouerlowe. Therfore giue hir of it euery day a pill, for three dayes togither: and therevpon ſet hir in the Sunne or by the fire, keeping hir emptie two or three houres after, then giue hir a reaſonable gorge of a Pullet or of mutton.
               Maſter Caſsian ſayth that ſome Falconers, after they haue enſaymed their hawkes in maner aforeſaid, three or four days before they intend to flee, do giue them a pill of the bigneſſe of a beane, made in maner following. They vſe to take a little Larde, with the powder of Pepper, and aſſhes fifted and ſerced, of each alike much, and make therof a ball, & conuey it into the hawkes beake, ſo as they inforce hir to take it down, if ſhe wil not otherwiſe. Which done, they hold hir hooded by ye fire or in ye Sunne, making hir to keepe the pill as long as they can, & afterward do let hir caſt it at hir pleaſure. By this meane yee ſhall ſet yt ſhe wil caſt groſſe and flegmaticke humors, wherby hir panell and bowels will be diſcharged of much glit, and ſhe become ſound and cheereful, and ready to flee hir pray. And an houre or twayne after this, they feede hir with a liue chicken: for ye muſt note, that the pill which ſhe hath receyued, hath diſtempered hir very much. Neuertheleſſe I muſt giue you warning, that you muſt not ſo deale with a poore and low hawke, as ye would with a hawke that is high and in pride. In doing after this maner, your Hawke ſhall be luſtie, and enioy hir all the yeare after. For hardly ſhal yt hawke do hir parte in fleeing that yeare, whiche is not well ſkowred, & carefully enſaymed.
            
            
               
               VVhen Aloes is to be giuen to Hawkes that are fleeing.
               MAny are of opinion that when Hawkes are fleeing, they muſt haue Aloes Cicotrine giuen them from mooneth to mooneth, conueying the quantitie of a beane thereof into their meate, or into a Hennes ſkinne, to take away the bitterneſſe thereof, that they may keepe it as long as may be, before they caſt it, then ſetting them al the while by a fire or in the Sunne, til they haue caſt the ſlimie and groſſe humors with the Aloes. And if ye minde to keepe your Hawke from the wormes and the Filanders, giue hir the mountenaunce of a peaze of Aloes euery eyght dayes in hir caſting. Againe, ye muſt remember, that whenſoeuer you perceyue youre Hawke waxe anye thing cold, to giue hir fiue or ſixe cloues of maces, and they will ſkowre hir head of all watrie humors: moreouer beeing giuen at euening in a little cotton as yee giue the Aloes, they be very good and auaylable againſt all maner of Filanders.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath hir talons broken.
               
                  A Hawke doth ſometimes breake a talon by ſome miſchance, and often by the rudeneſſe and churliſhneſſe of the Falconer in vnſeazing hir roughly from hir pray, in ſomuch that hir talon taryeth behind in the thing that ſhe ſeazed on, and ſomtimes is quite broken or ſliued from the fleſh, by reaſon whereof ſhe is in daunger of ſpoyle, or at leaſtwiſe of lozing hir talon. When a Hawkes talon is ſo ſliued off, as ther remaineth nothing but the tender part that was within it: make a little pretie lether gloue of the bigneſſe of hir ſtretcher or clea, and fil it with Capons greace and drawe it on, tying it handſomly to hir leg with two pretie ſtrings, renuing it euery other day till the poynt of hir ſtretcher be well hardned againe.
               And if a Hawke happen to haue but a peece of hir talon

broken off, ſo as ſome part of it remayneth ſtill behind, let it be anoynted with the fatte of a Snake, and it will growe againe as the others. And if the Hawke be hurt by violence, ſo as the talon is become looce from the fleſh, and falles to bleeding: then firſt of all caſt the powder of Sanguis draconis vppon it, and it will ſtaunch the bloud out of hand: and if it ſwell or rancle after it, then dreſſe it & anointe it with Capons greace or honie of Roſes till it be throughly recured.
               In theſe hurts of Hawkes talons, Martine giueth this coū
                  ſell following. Make little matches of paper and ſere therwith the ſtretcher that hath loſt his talon, and bind the cindre of the ſame paper with a little honnie to it, and let it ſo reſt nyne dayes togither. And if the talon be quite bereft, put on the foreſayd gloue with Capons greace, till the pownce be growen againe, and lette the Hawke reſt till ſhee bee throughly ſound. And if the Hawkes foote or leg chaunce to rancle, and growe to further inconuenience, confect the vnguent of Capons greace, Oyle of Roſes, Oyle of Violets, Turpentine, powder of Frankinſence, and Maſtik, and anoint the ſwelling therwith, and let hir reſt till ſhe be throughly recured.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that layes an egge in the mewe, or out of the mewe.
               SOmetimes Hawkes are with egge in the mewe, and efte without the mewe, whereby they fall ſicke and are in greate daunger if there be not remedie had for it: whiche thing you ſhall eaſly perceiue by them in May and April, at which times they are wont to be with egge. To remedie this inconuenience, let the Hawkes meate be waſhed in the vrine of a manchild of ſixe or ſeauen yeares old, eight or nine dayes togither, and that will keepe hir from laying. But if the egges be already full faſhioned within hir, then to breake and diſpatche them, yee muſte (as Maſter Martin ſayeth,) giue hir the yolkes

of a couple of egges reere roſted with butter, twice or thrice a weeke: and that muſte bee done during the mooneths of May and Aprill. For beſides that it will breake and waſt away the egges within a Hawke, it is good alſo to ſet them vp when they be lowe in ſtate, howbeit you muſt remember that whenſoeuer yee miniſter this medicine, yee muſte giue them fleſhe withall, for it is of great nouriſhment.
               Againe, Mallopin ſayth that to breake egges in a Hawke, ye muſt take of the liquor that bleedeth or oozeth out of vynes in March, when they be cut, and with that liquor waſh youre Hawkes meate nine or tenne dayes, and the egges will conſume & waſte away by yt meanes, how greate ſoeuer they bee.
            
            
               The maner of taking Hawkes in the Eyree.
               FIrſt you muſt beware that you take them not before they are ſomewhat woxen: for if ye do ſo, and bring them into a cold and moiſt place, they will haue a diſeaſe in the backe, ſo as they ſhall not be able to ſtand on their feete, and moreouer they ſhall be in daunger of vtter ſpoyle. Therefore they muſte not be taken, till they be ſomewhat ſtrong, and can ſtand well on their feete. And you muſt ſet them vppon ſome pearche or bayle of wood, that they maye by that meanes the better keepe their feathers vnbroken, and eſchue the dragging of theire traines vppon the ground, for ſo ſhall they bee the better ſunned.
Michelin ſayth further, that to keepe Eyeſſe Hawkes from that inconuenience, ſpecially when they bee taken ouer little, they muſt be kept in a drie and cleane place, & yee muſt ſtrewe euery where vnder them the herbe, that in (Frenche is called
Yeble) which hath a ſeede like Elder. This herbe is of nature whot, and good againſt the goute, and the diſeaſe of the reines which might befall them: Wherefore if ye will keepe Hawkes well that are new taken from out of the neſt, if ye take them in

the morning, yee muſt let them ſtand emptie till noone: and if ye take them in the euening, yee muſte not feede them till the next morrowe. And when yee feede them, giue them tender fleſh, and after that, lette them not ſtand emptie any more too long for hindering their feathers, and tainting them.
            
            
               Of Hawkes that haue lice, mites or other vermine.
               IF ye will knowe whether your Hawkes haue lice, or mites, ſet hir in the warme Sunne out of the winde, and by and by ye ſhall eaſyly perceyue it: for they will crall out vpon hir feathers and ſwarme there. For remedie hereof take a quantitie of Orpinent beaten into very fine powder, and hauing mingled it with halfe aſmuch powder of Pepper, lette youre Hawke be caſt handſomly, that ſhee breake not hir feathers, then powder firſt the one wing and ſo the other gently, and finally all the whole carkaſſe of hir: after which, ſet hir vppon your fiſte againe, beſpoute hir, and ſquirt a little water on hir with your mouth, and ſet hir by a fire, or in the Sunne, till ſhe be throughly wetherd. Afterward when ye intend to feede hir, waſh hir beake to take away the ſauor of the Orpiment, and beware that your Hawke be not poore, when you intende to vſe Orpiment. Hauing thus done, you ſhall ſee that all the mites and lice will diſcouer them ſelues vpon hir feathers and die, eyther the Orpimēt alone, or the Pepper alone are as good as both of them togither to ſpoyle the mites. But here is the oddes, the Pepper maketh the mites to ſhewe themſelues, and then the Orpiment murdreth them. When yee vſe the Pepper alone, put thereto a thirde part leſſe of Aſſhes, to abate the force of the Pepper, and ſo ſhall your Hawke be ridde of thoſe vermine. And aſſure your ſelf yt no hawke which hath ye mites (be ſhe neuer ſo good) is able to do hir duetie & play hir parte, by reaſon of ye anoyāce which ſhe feeleth in hir feathers by thē.

And if ye would rid hir of the mites without waſhing hir, thē my Author bids you take a very old Mauis or Blacke bird, & hauing takē out al the greace that ye can find in hir, anoynt your Hawkes feete and the pearch whereon ye ſet hir therewith, for all the Vermine will repaire downe to it: and therfore ſhift hir out of hir place twice or thrice in the nighte, that ſhe may be no more troubled therewith.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that holdeth not hir wings vp ſo well as ſhe ſhould do, but lolleth them.
               IF a Hawke that is newly taken, be ſet ſtraightwayes vpon a pearch or vppon the fiſte of one that hath no ſkill to vſe hir, ſhe ouerheates hir ſelfe with bating, and afterward catcheth ſuche colde vpon it, as ſhee cannot recouer or truſſe hir wings cloſe to hir againe, nor be able to flee well. Mallopin ſayth, that to remedie this miſchiefe, you muſt take of ye beſt vineger that is to be gotten, & with your mouth ſpirt it vpon, and betwixte hir feathers, till ſhe be throughly wet, taking good heede that none of it come in hir nares, and afterward ſet hir by the fire or in the Sunne, ſeruing hir ſo two or three dayes togither. And if ſhe recouer, doe nothing elſe to hir, but if ſhee recouer not, let hir bathe, eyther of pleaſure or of force, and ſhee wyll truſſe vp hir wings to hir, by meane of ſtriuing with hir ſelfe. Then let hir be ſet very warme by a fire or in the Sunne: for if ſhe ſhould chill vppon it, ſhee woulde become worſe than before.
            
            
               Of the Crampgout.
               
                  MArtin ſayth, yee ſhall diſcerne the Crampgout by your Hawkes holding of hir one foote vpon the other, and by hir often knibbing and ſobbing of hir foote with hir beake. For remedie whereof ye muſt caſt hir handſomly and let hir bloud on the veyne that is betweene the foote and the legge, and afterward anoynt the veyne with Capons greace or with Oyle of Roſes.
            
            
               
               To keepe a Hawke from all manner of Goutes, the Frenche mans opinion is this.
               BY Martins aduiſe, if yee doubte that your hawke ſhall haue the Goute, you muſt feare hir and cauterize hir, as hereafter followeth. Take a ſmall yron with a rounde button at the ende, as bygge as a Peaze, heate it redde hotte, and feare hir therewith, firſt aboue the eyes, then vpon the toppe of hir head, and thirdly vpon the balles of hir feete. And this violent kind of dealing with hir, is the next and aſſuredſt waye to do good in ſuche deſperate diſeaſes, if any helpe be to bee had. But my Italian Author Sforzino, giueth ouer a hawke that is troubled with the Goute, and thinketh there is ſmall credit to bee gotten by the cure, bicauſe of the impoſſibilitie.
            
            
               For the byting of avenemous beaſte or woorme.
               IF your Hawke be bitten or ſtung of a venemous beaſte, or woorme, make hir to receyue a little Tryacle, and powder of Pepper, and afterward feede hir with hotte meate two dayes: and beware that ſhe touche no water for twentie daies after. Or elſe burne a Frogge, and beate hir into powder, and put thereof vpon Cattes fleſhe, and gyue it your Hawke.
               Theſe are ſtraunge remedies and rare, and of the Frenche deuiſe. Giue your iudgement of them, and by tryall you ſhall knowe what they will do. I finde them in my Authour, and therefore do ſette them downe, and not for any experience I haue had of them.
            
            
               For the wound or byting of any beaſte.
               IF your hawke be hurt by any miſchaunce, and the mouth of the wounde very ſmall, ryppe it larger, and ſkowre it with white wyne, laying theron a playſter of white Frankincenſe, and Maſticke, and annoynte it rounde aboute with butter, Oyle of Roſes or Oyle Olyue.
            
         
         
            
            A treatiſe and briefe diſcourſe, of the Cure of Spanels, vvhen they be any vvaye ouerheatte: deuiſed and written by Maſter Franceſco Sforzino Vicentino, the Italian, Gentleman Falconer.
            
               depiction of men with dogs and bird
            
            HOwe neceſſary a thing a Spanell is to Falconrie, and for thoſe that vſe that paſtime, keping Hawkes for their pleaſure & recreatiō, I deeme no man doubteth, as well to ſpring and retriue a fowle being flowen to the marke, as alſo diuers

other wayes to aſſiſte and ayde Falcons and Goſhawkes. Wherefore, ſeeing that hythertoo in my collection, I haue ſpoken altogyther of Hawkes, bothe for the Ryuer and field, and in my conceyte, haue lefte fewe needefull poyntes for a good Falconer, vntouchte or treated of: nowe I ſhall not do amiſſe, nor wander ouer wyde from my purpoſe, if I ſaye ſomewhat of Spanells, without the which a Falconer, (ſpecially vſing to flee the fielde) cannot be, without mayme of his paſtime, and impayre of his gallant glee. And againe, for that they are ſubiect to many diſeaſes and plagues, (as we commonlye terme them) for dogges, and longer than they are without infection, we may expect from them no pleaſure, aſſiſtance, or recreation: I wyll onelye in this treatiſe deſcribe you their harmes, with cures due to the ſame. Among all whiche, I place the Mangie firſte, as the capitall enimie to the quiete and beautie of a brane Spanell, wherewith they poore dogges, are oftentymes greately plagued, bothe to the infection of their fellowes, and the no ſlender griefe of their maſters.
            The waye to cure and diſcharge a Spanell of the Mangie,The cure for the mangie. is to annoynte him eyther at the fire, or in the Sunne, thryce euery other daye, with an vnguent made of Barrowe flicke one pownde, common Oyle three ownces, Brimſtone well brayed foure ownces, ſalte well beaten and brooſed, aſhes well ſyfted and ſierced, of eyther twoo ownces, boyling all theſe in a Kettle or potte of earth, mingling them well togyther, tyll the barrowe flicke bee incorporate and well compounded with the reſte. With this vnguente thus made and confected, annoynte and beſmeare all the bodie of your Spanell, and euery other parte of him, ſhifting his litter and kennell often, the oftener the better. And laſtely, hauing thus done, waſhe him ouer and ouer with good ſtrong lye, and it will mortifie and kill the Mangie.
            But if perhappes (as commonly it falleth out) the Spanell looſe hir heare, though it proceeded not of the force of this

vnguent and ſtrong medicine, yet it ſhalbe very good to bathe your Spanell, ſhredding his heare in this order, with the water of Lupines, or Hoppes, and to annoynte hym with ſtale barrowes flicke.
            This medicine, ouer and beſides that, it cureth and quitteth the Mangie, it alſo maketh the Spanells ſkinne beautifull & fayre to looke to, and kylles the flies, the dogges diſquieters and enimies, to his eaſe.
            But when this foreſayde remedie is not of force ſufficient to rydde the mangie, but that it ſpreddes and getteth greater power and dominion ouer your Spanell: then doth it behooue you to deuiſe a farre ſtronger medicine, whiche is, to take of ſtrong Uineger twoo quartes,Another remedie more ſtrong. or as muche as will ſuffiſe, cōmon Oyle ſixe ownces, Brimſtone three ownces, ſutte of a chimnie or potte, a quantitie of ſixe ownces, brayed ſalte and ſerced, twoo handfulls: boyle all theſe aforeſayde in the Vineger, vſing the former order of annoynting your Spanell in the Sommer tyme.
            If neither of theſe remedies aforeſayde wil ſerue the turne, then for a laſte refuge, you muſte be dryuen to practiſe with a farre ſtronger, than eyther of both. But in any wiſe, this medicine muſte not bee miniſtred in the colde of Winter, for it will then put the Spanell in greate hazard of death.
            
               A verie ſtrong medicine for the Mangie.Take quicke Syluer, as greate a quantitie as ſhall ſuffiſe, and mortifie it with ſtale barrowes flicke, or Larde, as if I ſhoulde ſette you downe this proportion: Of Quicke Syluer, twoo ownces, Barrowes greaſe ten ownces, myngle them well togyther, vntill they be incorporated: with this vnguent annoynte your Spanell in the Sunne, tying him afterwards for the ſpace of an houre in the Sunne, to the ende the vnguēt may ſyncke in, and pierce the deeper. Then waſhe him twice with blacke Sope, and obſeruing this order of annoynting him euery other day twyce or thrice, aſſuredly you ſhall rydde him of all Mangineſſe, whatſoeuer it be.
            But I muſte tell you this by the way, that this vnguente

of Quicke Siluer, will cauſe hir heare to fail away. Wherefore it ſhall be requiſite, euery third or fourth day, to annoynt him with ſtale Bacon greaſe, for that will preſently make his heare to growe and come againe.
            If a Spanell be not very muche infected with the Mangie,A waye to cure the mangie withoute any vnguent. then is it and eaſie matter to cure it in this ſorte:
            To make a kinde of breade with wheaten branne, and the rootes, leaues, and fruite, or flouers of the herbe which we call
Agrimonie, beating it well in a morter, and making it into a paſte or dowe baking it in an ouen, and ſo made to giue your Spanells of the ſayd breade, as muche as they lyſt to eate, and none other breade at all for a time. With foure or fiue of theſe loaues of breade, made in manner as I tell you, haue I cured my Spanels of the mangie, and ſome other of my friendes.
            Though euery body for the moſt part, do know theſe common herbes, yet neuertheleſſe I will follow mine Author, and ſet it downe with the ſame deſcription as he doth.
            
               Agrimonie, is an herbe that growes in meadowes & fields, neare vnto ſome roote of a tree, and vppon the mouth of ſawe pittes, and other olde vncleane and vnoccupied places. The leaues of it do ſpreade vpon the grounde, they are a ſhaftment in length, iagged on eache ſide, like vnto the leafe of Hempe, diuided into fiue or moepartes and braunches, indented rounde aboute. It brings foorth one or twoo blackiſhe ſtalkes, vppon whiche there are certayne boughes, ſtanding one diſtant from another, on whiche there are yellowe floures, and thoſe floures, beeing through rype, doe yeelde certayne rounde berries as bygge as a Peaze or Fatche, whiche wyll cleaue and hang to a mans garmentes, if hee once touche them. This deſcription doth my Italian Authoure make of the herbe Agrymonie, whereof he woulde haue this bread made to cure the mangie Spanell. I leaue it ouer to thy vſe and diſcretion, till thou neede it.
            
               
               Of diuers accidentes that happen to dogges, and firſt of that ill, which is called Formica.
               EVery man dothe knowe, that there is a kinde of vyle diſeaſe that lyghtes vppon Spanels eares, whiche dothe greatly vexe them, in the Sommer tyme eſpecially with the flyes, and the ſcratting and tearing themſelues with theyr owne feete. We terme it in Engliſhe, a kinde of Mangie, but bothe the Latiniſt, and the Italian terme it Formica. The Frenche man hee calleth it, Fourmyer, whiche in trouthe is in Engliſhe nothing elſe but an Ante, or Pyſmere, applyed heere in this place to a dogges diſeaſe, for ſome likelyhoode and propertie betwixte the Pyſmere and the miſchiefe, whiche is accuſtomed to creepe and go further and further, with his infection, to the greate anoyance of the poore Spanell, euen as the Pyſmere is euer buſie, trauayling too and fro, and neuer vnoccupied.
               
                  The cure.The waye to rydde this vyle diſeaſe and miſchiefe, is to beſtowe vpon the infected place, a medicine made of Gumme
Dragaganthe, foure ownces, infuſed in the ſtrongeſt Vyneger that may bee gotten, by the ſpace of eyght dayes: and afterwardes brooſed on a Marble ſtone, as Paynters do their coloures, adding vnto it, Roche Alome and Galles, beaten to powder, of eyther twoo ownces. Vſing theſe things as I haue ſhewed you, you maye make a powder of marueylous force: for this purpoſe, laying it vppon the member where the Mangie lyes. This no queſtion, wyll kyll the
Formica.
               
               
                  Of the ſwelling in the Spanels throate.Sometimes there befalles this miſchiefe vpon poore Spanels. There droppeth downe an humor from their braynes, by meane of whiche their throates and neckes do ſwell vnreaſonably. For remedie of this, I wyll aduiſe you to take nothing more, than to annoynte all the place withoute with Oyle of Camomil, then waſhing and embroching the dogges

throate rounde about the griefe with Vineger not ouerſtrōg, and with Salte. If you do this, you ſhall recouer your Spanell, and dryue awaye this diſtillation of ill humors, that fall out of the Spanels heade, cauſing the greate ſwelling in the throate.
            
            
               Of a kinde of woormes, breeding in the hurtes and mangie partes of a Spanell.
               SOmetymes when a Spanell hath taken a hurt or wounde, there do ingender in the wounde certaine woormes, that do hinder the cure of the hurt, cauſing it to continue at one ſtaye, or to growe woorſe and woorſe. Wherefore it ſhall be very neceſſarie to endeuour to kill them, which you ſhal do aſſuredly, if you conuey into the wounde nothing but the gumme of Iuie,The cure. called in Latine, (Gumma Hederae) keeping it there for the ſpace of one day or twoo, waſhing the wound with wine, and after that annoynting it with Bacon greaſe, Oyle of earthwoormes, and Rewe.
               Moreouer, a iuyce made of the greene pilles and ryndes of Wallnuttes, or the powder of dryed Lupynes is very good. Likewiſe powder of wylde Cucumbers, is excellent to kyll thoſe woormes: and not that alone, but it will play the parte of a Corroſyue, fretting awaye the deade fleſhe, and encreaſing the good.
               But when the woormes growe within the body of a Spanell,Of woormes within the body. they muſte bee killed in this manner, with an inwarde receyte.
               Cauſe your Spanell, eyther by loue or force, to eate,The cure. when hee is faſting, the yolke of an egge, with twoo ſcruples of good Saffron beaten into powder, & confected with the ſayde egge,VVhē a spanell is bytten by a Foxe, or mad dogges. keeping him after it from meate, till night.
               When a Spanel is hurte, as long as hee can come to licke the wounde with his tongue, he needes no other remedie. His

tongue is his Surgeon. But when he cannot poſſible licke it, then ſuche woundes as bee not venemous, you maye reſolue with the powder of Matreſilua, dryed in an Ouen, or in the Sunne. And if it be the byte of a foxe, it ſhall ſuffiſe to annoynte it with Oyle, wherein earth wormes and Rewe haue bene boyled togither.
               But if it were bytten by a madde dogge, it ſhall bee beſte preſently to thruſte through the ſkinne of his heade and poll with a hotte yron, iuſte betwixt the eares, ſo as the fire may touche bothe ſides of the hole made: And after that, with your hande to plucke vp the ſkynne of the dogges ſhoulders and flanckes backewardes, thruſting it through with the hot yron in like manner.
               The gyuing of this vent to the wounde, will greatly pleaſure the Spanell, and is a ready way to cure him.
               Beſides the application of this canterie and fire, there is one other approued remedie, and that is, to cauſe your Spanell to lappe twice or thrice of the brothe of Germander, and eate the Germander it ſelfe boyled. I neede not to deſcribe the herbe, it is ſo well knowen: but my Author ſettes oowne his proportion and floure. It beares a iagged leafe, and hath a purple or blew floure, and in ſhape it is like a little Oke.
               This herbe Germander, ſodden and confected with ſalte & Oyle, eyther ſimply brooſed togither, or made into a paſte, and giuen vnto a Spanell, will do him very much good in the cure of the byte of a madde dogge.
               
                  
                     To helpe a spanell that hath loste his ſenſe of ſmelling.
                     The cure.
                  Nowe and then Spanels, by meane of too muche reſte and greaſe, and ſome other accident beſides, doe looſe their ſenſe of ſmelling, ſo as they cānot ſpring or retriue a fowle after their accuſtomed maner. In this caſe it ſhalbe very good, to ſkowre a Spanell in this manner.
               Take Agaricke twoo drammes, Sal gemma one ſcruple, beate theſe into powder, and incorporate them with Oximel, making a pill as bigge as a nutte, conuey the pill into butter, and ſo gyue it the Spanell, eyther by loue or force, as he may

ſwallowe it. This will bring him to a quicke ſente and ſenſe agayne, as I haue oftentymes approued.
            
            
               To cut off the tip of a Spanels tayle or ſterne.
               IT is verie neceſſarie to cutte off a little of the Spanels tayle, when it is a whelpe for ſundry occaſions: for in ſo doing, you ſhall deliuer him, and be a meane that no kynde of woorme or other miſchiefe ſhall greatly offende that parte of your Spanell: Whiche, if it be not cutte a little at the verie poynte and toppe, is ſubiect to many euils and inconueniences, and wyll be a cauſe that the dogge will not dare to preaſe ouerhaſtily into the couert after his game. Beſydes the benefite of it, the Dogge becommes more beautifull by cutting the toppe of his ſterne: for then will it buſhe out verie gallantly, as experience will teache you.
               It ſhall be good when Spanell whelpes are one moneth olde or ſomewhat more, to worme them vnder the toung:To worme a Spanell. for there haue they a ſtring verie like vnto a worme, which muſt be pluckt away by ſome deuiſe or other. This is the order of it. If it bee a whelpe of a moneth olde, they take him and open his flew and iawes with a mannes hande: but if it be a bigger Spanell, then do they conuey a rounde ſticke into his mouthe, to keepe it wyde open: which done, they plucke out the Dogges toung, and with a ſharpe knyfe of purpoſe for it, they ſlitte the toung all alongſt where the worme lyes, on bothe ſydes, and ſo verie artificially with the poynt of the knife, they rayſe vp the worme the better to pull it away. But in this caſe there muſte be care vſed, that the worme be not cut aſunder, but had cleane awaye, without leauing any parte of it behynde.
               Some men do vſe (in the taking away of this woorme in a Spanels toung a needle or ſuche lyke inſtrument with a double twiſted threede hanging to it, two ſhaftmentes in length, thruſting the needle quite vnderneath the worme iuſt in the middle of it, drawing the needle ſo farre vntill the double twiſted threede be leuell with the middle of the worme, then drawing it harde with the hand, they pull it out (but by not drawyng the threede

artificially, many tymes the worme breakes in two peeces, and then it is a verie harde matter to come by that parte that is ſlipte and left behinde. Wherfore in myne opinion, the firſt is the better way to diſpatche him cleane. For when this worme is once quite drawne out, the Spanell will become farre the fairer, and waxe 
                     •
                  he fatter. Many tymes the want of worming doth keepe a Spanell poore, and out of fleſh, ſo as he can not proue. And (as auncient writers affirme) the worming doth diſcharge the Spanell of madneſſe and freneſſe (which I can hardly credite or beleeue: the infection and biting of an other madde Dogge beeing ſo venemous, as it is able to worke great effecte in the Dogge, that is bitten.)
               Thus muche I thoughte good to write of Spanels, and their diſeaſes and cures, for that they are ſuperintendantes, and neceſſarie ſeruantes, both for the Hawke and the Falconer, without whome, the ſporte woulde bee but colde, and the toyle farre more than it is to the man. Wherfore it ſhall not be amiſſe for a good Falconer, always to breede and keepe of the beſte kynde of Spanels that he may come by, and ſo to reſpect them, as they heate not at any tyme: Or if they doe by miſfortune or negligence of your lackey boye, then to regarde their cure, which may be done in manner as I haue heere ſette downe: And withall to vſe due correction to the boy. For a good Spanell maketh a good Hawke, and a curſt maiſter, a carefull footeman. Farewell. (∵)
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Epilogue vnto the
Reader.
            
            
               LO Reader here, the ende of this my booke,
               Though not the ende of my good will and loue,
               Beſtowe thy paynes hereon a while to looke,
               As I imployed my head for thy behoue:
               It ſhall ſuffice if thou do not reproue
               This ſlender worke, compilde for thy delight,
               VVhoſe friendly looke my labour ſhall requight.
            
            
               I count my toyle and trauayle but a game,
               I deeme the dayes not long or ſpent amiſſe,
               If ſo I may vnto thy fancie frame
               This booke of mine which all of Hawking is,
               Than which there can be founde no better bliſſe
               In my conceyte to ſuch as loue the glee,
               And force the fieldes where braueſt pleaſures bee.
            
            
               I muſt confeſſe, my Hammers haue but hewde
               That royall Rocke, which others founde of yore,
               I do but tread the pathe which others ſhewde
               Vnto their friendes, to make their skill the more:
               I but tranſlate a garment made before:
               VVhich if I do with gallant ſhape to vewe,
               I deeme as much as if I made a newe.
            
            
               For harde it is to ſtalke in others ſteppes,
               He thinkes himſelfe a thrall that marcheth ſo:
               He iumpes in ioy that at his pleaſure leapes,
               And is not forſt in others feete to go:
               Nothing more leefe than libertie you knowe,
               VVhich no tranſlatour hath I vndertake,
               Vnleſſe that he his Authours ſenſe forſake.
            
            
               VVhich vaunt I dare, I ſeldome here haue done,
               
                  Zforcino knowes, and can controll me then,
               
                  Italian borne, whoſe booke I ouerronne,
               And Giorgies eke compilde with learned pen,
               Aſſuredly theſe two were skilfull men,
               And wiſt full well what Hawkes and hawking ment,
               And all things elſe that further this intent.
            
            
               To Tardiffe eke the Frenchman, I appeale,
               To Malopyn, and Mychelyn, cunning wightes,
               Let Artelowche be witneſſe howe I deale,
               In fielde affayres, or elſe in riuer flights,
               And Caſsyan eke who well of hawking wrytes:
               All theſe I wiſhe as Iudges in the caſe
               VVhere I corrupt or alter any place.
            
            
               Some men perhappes will wonder that I wrote
               Of ſtately Hawkes, and byrdes of rare delight,
               And blazde it out but in ſo baſe a note,
               As ſcarce will pleaſe the gallant Courtiers ſight,
               VVho weyes no golde that is not burniſht bright:
               His curious eare but hardly will dygeſt,
               Sweete Muſickes ſound, that is not of the beſt.
            
            
               For mine excuſe and for my ſimple pen,
               To anſwere thus, I feare I ſhall be faine,
               Sith charge of Hawkes committed is to men,
               That nobles ſerue for yearely hire, and gaine,
               (VVho are not fine but homely mates and plaine)
               My purpoſe was, to ſet them downe the trade,
               To man their Hawkes, and howe they might be made.
            
            
               For Peeres (I knowe, and you muſt needes agree)
               Regarde no more but onely to beholde
               The fleeing Hawkes, their ioy is but to ſee
               The haughtie haggarde worth hir weight in golde,
               To ſlay the ſowle at brooke with courage bolde,
               
                  VVith Hawkes they neuer deale in other ſort,
               Their ſeruants feede, and they enioy the ſport.
            
            
               VVhich if be ſo, the lowe and playneſt ſtile
               Doth beſt agree the Falconers minde to fitte,
               To carpe it fine with thoſe that haue no guile,
               A ieaſt it were and ſigne of ſlender witte,
               The wryters ought the readers vaine to hitte.
               This was the cauſe I wrote my booke ſo plaine,
               I tolde it earſte, I tell it nowe againe.
            
            
               The modeſt minde I knowe, will reſt content,
               VVith this excuſe, and brooke mine anſwere well,
               Of other ſome perhappes I ſhall be ſhent.
               VVhoſe ſullen breaſts vvith ſecrete enuie ſwell,
               VVho pleaſeth all deſerues to beare the bell.
               But if the Courtier fancie this my booke,
               I ſcorne the prowde diſdaynfull Momus looke.
            
            
               Falkners farewell, at pleaſure do peruſe
               Theſe leaues and lines, eche picture and eche page.
               Readers adue, I haue no farther newes,
               I can but wiſh you auncient Neſtors age,
               Vnto whoſe doomes my wrytings here I gage:
               To cure your Hawkes or make your cunning more,
               If ought be here, I clappe my handes therefore.
               My Muſe, and I, haue done the beſt we can,
               To learne you howe your Hawkes to lewre and man.
            
            
               George Turberuile.
            
            
               Liuor, edax rerum, tu
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inuidioſa vetuſtas, Omnia deſtruitis.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            GEntle Reader, if Argus with all his eyes ſhoulde pervſe an impreſſion, yet ſome thing mighte of him bee vnſeene: ſo I muſt of force confeſſe ſundry faultes to haue eſcaped in printyng this booke of Falconrie, by whiche ſome places are made obſcure, and ſundrie termes quite abuſed, contrarye to the Authors meaning and myne: whiche is not my ſmall griefe, neyther yet coulde I muche helpe the ſame, the copie being obſcurely penned and not legible in ſundrie places, for that it was the tranſlaters originall. And therfore when haply they do occurre, or that thou lyght on them, blame not the booke or me, but runne ouer to the
Errata, where thou ſhalte be ſatiſfyed in euery pointe, as hereafter enſueth.
            
               
                  
                     Page.
                     Line.
                     Fault.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     3
                     14
                     
                        Thornkretzera,
                     
                     
                        Thornkretzer, a
                  
                  
                     30
                     6
                     bended
                     bonded
                  
                  
                     43
                     7
                     Juan Vazilniche,
                     Juan Uazaluiche
                  
                  
                     64
                     31
                     
                        Aſtuy
                     
                     
                        Aſtur
                     
                  
                  
                     72
                     4
                     of
                     or
                  
                  
                     113
                     11
                     Hare
                     Hearon
                  
                  
                     113
                     27
                     male
                     make
                  
                  
                     149
                     10
                     times
                     turnes
                  
                  
                     170
                     13
                     female
                     formall
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                     15
                     female
                     formall
                  
                  
                     176
                     11
                     lentrers
                     lentiners
                  
                  
                     191
                     34
                     paſhet
                     plaſhe
                  
                  
                     204
                     9
                     metred
                     mewed
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                     26
                     lentmers
                     lentiners
                  
                  
                     
                        ibidē
                        
                     
                     32
                     lentmers
                     lentiners
                  
                  
                     208
                     4
                     in
                     to
                  
                  
                     222
                     26
                     
                        Pſillin
                     
                     
                        Pſillium
                     
                  
                  
                     227
                     vlt.
                     beaten
                     beake
                  
                  
                     230
                     33
                     Hauke
                     Haukes
                  
                  
                     231
                     19
                     ſnuffe
                     ſniffe
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                     29
                     ſnuffe
                     ſniffe
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                     33
                     
                        Senuiza
                     
                     Staueſacre.
                  
                  
                     241
                     17
                     encreaſed
                     encraſſed
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                     23
                     Aſma
                     Aſma
                  
                  
                     256
                     21
                     Iroes
                     Ireos
                  
               
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   