
      
         
            
            
            THE PRACTISE of the faithfull: Containing many godly Praiers both for Morning: and Euening and other neceſſarie occaſions. Whereunto are added diuers profitable and comfortable meditations neceſſarie to be remembred and practiſed of euery Chriſtian.
            Coloſſ. 4. 2.
            Continue in Praier and watch in the ſame with thankeſgiuing.
            LONDON, Printed by Io. Beale for Samuel Man and are to be ſold in Pauls Church yard at the ſigne of the Ball. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORſhipfull, and vertuous Lady, the Lady Ioan Leuenthorpe.
            
            
               GOod Madame, this Booke of priuate prayer being brought vnto mee by a Friend to peruſe, and being withall requeſted by him to write the Preamble to the booke with three or foure Prayers for certain particular vſes, I yeelded to him, and haue made

choyſe of your Ladiſhip, on whom I might beſtow it, being aſſured of your deuout affection, and kinde acceptance of theſe my labours, and endeauours, I goe not about to teach you that, you know not; but rather put you in mind of what you know already, deſiring nothing more then that your pious diſpoſition might increaſe vnto the period of our time. Prayer (ſaith S. Augustine) is a Speach to God: when you read, God ſpeakes to you: when you pray you ſpeake with God; a ſeruice it is of no ſmall commoditie.

For by it wee obtaine good things, and the remotion of euilles, by it our faith is exerciſed and increaſed, our loue is proued, our zeal is inflamed, Gods graces are augmented, his creatures ſanctified, tentations vanquiſhed, and the tempter baniſhed. To this GOD hath giuē vs his precept, and made vs a promiſe: Chriſt hath alſo giuen vs a patterne, and his owne enſample: his Saints hath made it their practiſe, and we are dayly called vnto it, and now more then heretofore the iudgements of GOD hauing

beene within theſe few yeeres very ſtrangely inflicted vpon vs, by grieuous and long laſting peſtilence, by inundation of waters, extremitie of cold & heat, of drought and moiſture, vnuſuall diſeaſes, and outrageous windes, ſo as it may bee feared he hath ſome farther puniſhments yet remaining, except by our deuout and inſtant prayers, and ſincere repentance he may be pacified. I ſuppoſe it therfore not vnmeet for euery one to ſtir vp himſelfe, and one to excite another to this duty, ſo needfull & commodious.

Accept therefore I pray you of theſe things, as written to this end; ſo ſhall I count my labors (if any) wel rewarded, and my ſelfe contented. The God of Grace vouchſafe you his grace, whiles you liue on earth, and make you ſhine in immortall glorie with him in the heauen.
            
               Your Ladiſhips in all dutie THOMAS TVKE
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            AN INTRODVCTION TO PRAIER.
            
               
                  HE that would pray wel, muſt know 
                     •
                  hat he deſires, and with What mind. To pray ſ
                     •
                  ruently for things vnlawfull, is a thing vnlawfull: and to pray col
                        •
                     ly for things lawfull will proue but a cold ſuite, & the colder the Suiter, the greater the ſinner. One man praies going and knéeles not, another praies

                  
                     •
                  néeling and goes not: Yet both are heard, if their ſoules doe bend, if their mindes attend, and if they burne their incenſe vpon the right Altar.
               One praies and ſpeakes not, another ſpeakes and praies not. This mans voice though loud is not heard, becauſe his praying is all in voice, aud nothing in vertue, in outward ſound, & not with inward ſenſe: the former is heard, yet ſpeakes not: for though his mouth be ſhut, yet his heart is open: his heart talkes, though his tong be tied vp, that's loud, though this below.
               One praies but kéepes no good order, yet gets his

ſuit: another kéepes time and meaſure, & yet gaines nothing. This had the arte, but the other had the hart. The be
                     •
                  t minde is the beſt methode: and he praies orderly, that praies honeſtly.
               One iuſtified himſelfe in his praier, and yet went away condemned: another condemned himſelfe, and went away abſolued. I wil condemne my ſelfe, that I may be iuſtified: I will not iuſtifie my ſelfe, lea
                     ••
                   I be condemned. And though I did build an hundred frée
                  
                     •
                  chooles, a thouſand hoſpitals, ten thouſand colledges, and al this for the loue of my Lord and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus, and in loue of

chriſtianity & chriſtians for Chriſt his ſake, yet would I write in the foundation of all thoſe Buildings, God be mercifull vnto me a ſinner. And though I will condemne my ſelfe, leaſt I ſhould bée condemned of my Iudge, yet will I not thinke I deſerue to be iuſtified, becauſe I will not iuſtifie my ſelfe, but I will ſtill pray for fauour, leaſt the opinion of merit ſhould hinder me from mercy, and leaſt whiles I look to be iuſtified for condemning mine owne iuſtice, I méete with the ſharpeneſſe of Gods iuſtice, forgetting the iuſtice of Chriſt, & idolizing with a iuſtice of mine owne conceiued for

condemning my ſelfe of iniuſtice.
               One praies for God, an other for goods, he obtains, for God is his goods: this is ſtill poore and hauing: becauſe goods are his God.
               One praies for God, and another for goods, and it may be neither are heard: becauſe the former wants his heart, and the latter his head. He that would finde God, let him ſéeke God for God, and other things vnder God.
               God is found of one that ſought him not, and an other ſéekes and craues him, but cannot finde him at the firſt. Why? God will haue the former ſerue and praiſe him, and the other to ſéeke

him ſtill. Sometimes hée ſhewes vs the libertie of his grace, and ſometimes he tries the ſtrength of our faith, and the truth of our loue.
               One man praies long, an other is but briefe, and both obtaine alike: for God meaſures his gifts by his loue and not by the length of our praiers, by his owne benignitie, and not by our breuitie.
               One praies at length & loſes for lacke of deuotion: another is but ſhort, and yet receiueth: becauſe his affection is 
                     •
                  arge & feruent.
               One being long in his praiers is counted briefe, while another being briefe is counted tedious: the former

is long, but vehement: the latter is ſhort and ſhallow, as cold, as briefe, tedious and too-long, becauſe his praier is too-ſhort for deuotion, without ſenſe & ſoule.
               One is very violent and importunate, and another is not ſo earneſt in appearance, and yet this ſecond only is heard. Either for that the former knowes not Chriſt, or becauſe his violence is rather from his ſtrong ſides, then true ſenſe, or a labor of lip rather, than of loue; or elſe perhaps cauſed by ſome horrid apprehenſion of hell, and not of loue to God, or godlineſſe for God.
               Two men pray for the

kingdome of God, one importunatly, the other remiſly: the violent caries it away: the cold ſuiter goes away empty. For God loues the laborious, and contemnes the lazie: if men pray, as if they praied not: he alſo will heare, as if hée heard not: pray féelingly if thou wouldeſt be heard fauourably: & if thou woulleſt taſte of Gods beneuofence, be thou ſure to preſſe him with all violence.
               One praies chiefly for grace, and God giues him both grace and peace: another praies only for peace, and God giues him neither grace, nor peace: not peace, becauſe hée wants grace to vſe it: not grace,

becauſe peace is all the grace, hée cares for: not peace becauſe hée will puniſh him for not begging or eſtéeming grace: and not grace, becauſe he ſéekes not for it.
               One praies for Gods bleſſing vpon his meat, drinke, phyſicke and labor, and God heares him not: another proſpers in theſe things without praier. What is the reaſon? Is it in vaine to pray? No, pray for a bleſſing, and leaue the euent to God. It is ſometimes a bleſſing to want ſuch a bleſſing. By this dealing God ſhewes hée is tied to no man by deſert, hée ſhewes he will do with his owne what he liſt himſelfe,

hée will exerciſe thy faith & fortitude, perhaps he meanes to haſten thée to better fauors: and for the other, that reſpects not praier, and yet proſpers, God doth it to allure him to him, or elſe (it may bée) to fatten him vp for the ſlaughter: in which caſe that proſperitie is very aduerſitie, and that ſéeming bleſſing a true curſe.
               One praieth conceiuing, an other reading: the one frames words to his mind, which is more eaſie: the other frames his minde to words, which is not ſo eaſie: yet both the one and the other praieth & obtaineth, if they pray with good vnderſtanding, and godly

affections.
               A man may pray without booke and miſſe, he may pray by a booke, and get: for he, that praies by heart without heart, does nothing, but talke: whereas he that praies by book with his heart, doth both reade and pray with deuotion.
               He reades a praier but praieth not, who reades without vnderſtanding, or affection 
                     •
                   and 
                     ••
                   likewiſe speakes▪ but praies not, that vtters wordes, and yet weies not, nor heartely wiſhes not the things, he ſpeakes of.
               Two deſire grace: one of them obtaines, the other gets it not. Is God partiall? or reſpects he perſons?

No, but one deſires grace, and vſeth the meanes and ordinances of grace, as the word and Sacraments. and obtaineth: another would haue grace, but cares not for theſe meanes, and is reiected.
               Some condemne the ſaying of one prayer often at one time: and ſo it may, if the hart repeat not as wel, as the tongue. But if there be an ingemination of affection, as well as of the ſupplication, it is not to be reproued. We can double our ſinnes, why can wee not, why ſhould wee not double our ſuites for the pardon of them?
               One prayes weeping,

another cannot ſhedds a teare: yet both may bee heard: for the ſobbes and sighes of the ſoule are as ſenſible to Gods eare, as teares are to the eye: and the ſoule can ſhed teares, though the eyes be dry. As alſo the eye can water, when the ſoule is not wet. The beſt teares are the throbs of a broken and bléeding heart.
               Some imagine that they can make Powerfull prayers, thinking with their words and arguments to preuaile with God Almightie: wheras in truth, if any man bee heard, it is not for the ſwéetneſſe of words, the variety of matter, the multiplicity of reaſons,

but through the interceſſion of Chriſt, who doth make God propitious to vs, and to accept our poore and humble prayers.
               If my prayers be heard, I will aſcribe it to Gods dignation, and not to nay dignitie, to Gods benig
                     ••
                  
                  ty, and not to my prayers excellencie, to his eare, and not to my tongue.
               Praying and wiſhing is not all one. He that wiſhes doth not alwaies expreſſe or define a perſon, from or of whom hee wiſheth ſome good vnto himſelfe: but he, that prayeth, prayeth to ſome body.
               But whether men wiſh, or pray for any grace, it is no ſigne of ſauing grace, except

the meanes of grace be loued: neither ſhall that grace be granted, whiles theſe meanes are neglected. Thoſe meanes can do nothing without God: and God, to wit, ordinarily will doe nothing without them.
               Some are wide—mouth ed, but cloſe-fiſted: they wil promiſe much but performe little, part with nothing: but God is open handed and open hearted: his promiſes are performances, and his wordes workes. He is Verity, and cannot lye: hee is Vertue, and cannot faile: his power is able to make good his promiſe. Amongſt men promiſes are often as weightleſſe as the winde:

ſome would performe, and cannot: ſome could, but wil not: but God both can, and will: his will is not larger then his power: but what God doth will, that God doth work: and whatſoeuer he is able to will, he is able to worke. It is pittie then but that hee ſhould want, that may haue for aſking.
               Hautineſſe is abhominable in a Suiter, but humilitie pleaſeth: yet all that talke of humilitie are not truely humble. Some are humble-proud, proud of humbleneſſe: but indéed he, that is proud of humilitie, doth want humilitie, and ſwels with inſolencie. I would haue all men pray

humbly: yet let no man thinke he deſerues to bee heard for his humilitie: the opinion of ſuch a merits wil ſtop the paſſage of mercie.
               Others forſooth will néeds be ſo humble, as that they will not goe only and alwaies to God directly, but with the craued aide of Saints departed. Truely I deſire to bee humble: but I would not bee humbler then my God requireth: ſuch humilitie is eyther pride of hart, or ignorance of head. I confeſſe I am not worthy of my ſelfe to preſent my ſelfe and my ſuites vnto ſo high a Maieſtie: but his precept and promiſe doth embolden

me: and what I want in my ſelfe, it is ſupplyed in my Sauiour: his merites doth co
                     •
                  er all my denierites.
               Some imagin they néed not pray for that, which they know they haue: yet our Sauiour bids vs pray dayly for our Bread. Thou haſt bread now: thou maiſt be depriued of it by and by: or what if God deny it his word of bleſſing? If he do, thy bread may be thy bane, it may rot, it may hurt, and not help. I will pray for bread, as though I wanted bread. Though I were very rich, yet would I pray as poore. Though I knew I had God, yet wold I ſtil ſeeke him, as if I had not

found him. Though I were holy, and knew my ſelfe to be in the ſtate of grace, yet would I pray that God would accept and ſanctifie me, as though I were vn holy, and felt my ſelfe moſt miſerable.
               There are ſome, that, becauſe they haue beene grieuous and long ſinners, doe thinke it is too late ſo
                     •
                   them, and that they are not worthy n
                     •
                  w to pray f
                     ••
                   mercy. Surely they think not wrong, if they reſpect their owne deſert: yet would I haue them pray for 
                     •
                  arden, becauſe Gods mercie is greater then their miſery, and 
                     •
                  e will remit, if they will repent. I will n
                     •
                  t 
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  eter
                     •
                  d from

crauing mercy, though my merits are worthy nothing, but endleſſe miſery: I will pray for grace, thogh I haue beene too too graceleſſe, becauſe God is gracious and bids me pray, becauſe Chriſt is pit
                     •
                  full and bids me Come, and becauſe the Scripture ſaith, Hee that confeſſeth his ſinne sand forſakethPro. 28. 
                           •
                         4. them, ſhall find mercie.
               
               Some pray for remiſſion, but care not for repentance: they deſire a bleſſing, but yet abſteuie not from that, which p
                     ••
                  ureth curſing. Theſe pray in vaine, becauſe their practiſe is vaine. For God heareth Saints, not Sinners, and granted his pardon

to the penitent onely, and not to ſuch, as perſeuere impenitent. He therfore, that would obtaine pardon, let him abſtaine from ſſnne, which might deteine his pardon. He that would not that ſinne ſhould damne him, muſt not indure ſinne to dominere with in him. Though this be true that no man is pardoned, becauſe he is penitent, yet this is true that No man is pardoned but he, that is penitent. If thou wilt not mortifie ſin, ſinne ſhall mortifie thée: if thou wilt not dye to it, thou ſhalt dye for it. If thou wilt not that it ſhould dye in thee, thou ſhalt dye in it.
               
                  Some ſeeme to couet nothing more then a ioyfull reſurrection after death: yet ſhall they not attaine to a ioyfull reſurrection of their bodies after death, becauſe they labour not the reſurrection of the ſoul before death. There are two reſurrections: the firſt of the ſſoule from the ſléepe of ſinne in this life: the ſecond of the body from the ſleepe of death, in the life toReu. 20 come. Woe be vnto him, that riſeth not t
                     •
                  iſe: for if he riſe but once, he ſhal riſe but from death to death▪ from ſleepe to ſorrow; his body ſhall riſe from the earth, and fall into hell. But hee, that riſeth from the death of ſinne in this

world, ſhall bee raiſed vp to the life of happineſſe in the world to come. I will therefore pray for a ioyfull reſurrection of my body to glorie, and will not forget (whiles I liue) the reſurrection of my ſoule to grace, as knowing that if I will not ſtudy to be gracious, I ſhall not attain to be glorious.
               I haue heard ſome deſire to dye, and ſome deſire to liue: neither durſt I condemne the deſires of either. I will deſire to l
                     •
                  ue, till I haue learn'd to dye: I will deſire to die when I haue learn'd to liue. For a bad death cannot follow a good life: and hee hath learn'd to dye, that hath

learned well to liue. If I can gain Chriſt in my life, Chriſt will not looſe mee at my death. If the loue of Chriſt liue in mee, whiles I liue, I cannot but liue in the loue of Chriſt, when I dye.
               There are many, that often pray they were in heaued, which yet I dare not ſay they ſhall go to heauen. For he, y• praies for heauē and goes in the way to hel, ſhall not aſcend whether he wiſheth, but deſcend whether he walketh: hee ſhall gee, whether his féet doth lead him, & not whether his fooilſh fancie ſlatters him.
               There are ſome pray for death, yet cannot dye: others dye; and would not.

And God by croſſing both doth puniſh both: For to the one nothing ſeemes ſwéeter then death, and to the other nothing ſeemes ſwéeter then life: to the one it ſéemeth death to liue, to the other the very thought of death is a verie death, accounting it the only heauen to liue alwaies vpon the earth.
               Some pray they may dye, and may dye to their coſt, if they pray without care, and liue without conſcience. If the heauineſſe of croſſes, and not the hope of a crowne, if the loſſe of libertie, and not the lothing of luſt, if the ſuſtaining of ſorrowes, and not the weariſomeneſſe of ſin,

if the feeling of paines, and not the fellowſhip of Chriſt doth make a man deſire to dye, his deſire is naught, and his death not good. For thoſe onely deſire well, and dye well, that are mooued more with ſinne then ſickeneſſe, with heauenly comforts, then earthly croſſes, with Chriſt, then with all calamities. Before thou pray to dye, firſt pray for the death of ſinne, which is the ſting of death: and when thou doſt deſire to die, let it be rather to be diſ
                     •
                  nede
                     •
                  ed of thy ſinnes, then of thy ſorrowes, and to liue with Chriſt rather, then to be deliuered of thy croſſes.
               I ſée much hardneſſe of hart amongſt men, and but

a little mercy. I ſuppoſe ſuch perſons impl
                     •
                  re not, pray not much for Gods mercy. For it cannot bée that any man ſhould bée without mercie to his neighbour, who doth truly pray for Gods mercy to himſelfe.
               There are in the world, which pray God to pardon them, yet will they not forgiue their neighbours. Theſe are not men, but monſters, which would receiue mercie of God, but wil ſhew no mercie to men for God, which would haue God forgiue them, but will not forgiue others. Such cannot ſay the Lords Praier, but they pray to the Lord againſt themſelues,

& make their trueſt friend their greateſt for. For wrath without pardon belongs to them, that wil not pardon. I will forgiue, and I will pray to be forgiuen. I would not that any man ſhould néede my pardon: but if he doe deſire it, God grant I may not denie it.
               The rich and the poore pray together, and both do obtain; the rich being poore in ſpirit, and the poore being rich in faith. Thus would I bée poore, that I way be rich: thus would I be rich, leaſt I ſhould bée poore.
               The rich & the poore both pray, and neither are heard; the rich, becauſe he is poore in humilitie; the poore, becauſe

he is rich in pride; the rich becauſe he hath no pity; the poore, becauſe he hath no patience; the rich, becauſe hée contemnes the poore, the poore becauſe he enuies the rich. I will labor therefore to be rich in humilitie and poore in hautineſſe: I wold be pitifull and patient, courteous and contented.
               There are many, that cry Lord help, whom the Lord wil not help. Hée that would haue help of God, let him not deny his helpe to Man: hée that would haue God help him, let him not forget to help himſelfe. For God helpes the helpefull, ſuch as are ready to helpe themſelues, and others to. Tis pitty but that thou

ſhouldeſt lie and die in the ditch, that ſaieſt Lord help, but will vſe no meanes (if thou maieſt) to helpe thy ſelfe. I will therefore pray for helpe, and yet vſe the meanes of helpe, and pray that God would help me in thoſe meanes of helpe, and bleſſe them to mée.
               There are many, which deſire Chriſt might bée their Sauiour, which yet ſhall not be ſaued: becauſe they would bée ſaued, but will not ſerue their Sauiour: they like his ſaluation, but they loue not his ſeruice: he may ſuffer, or do what he will for them, but they will neither ſuffer nor doe ought for him. His merits they pray for, but his

lawes they care not for. Now hée will not bée their Sauiour, becauſe they will not be his ſeruants: for hée will ſaue none but ſuch, as will ſerue him.
               I will therefore ſuffer him to be my Lord, as I doe deſire him to be my Sauiour. Two graces I deſire of him, grace to ſerue him, & grace to be ſaued by him.
               Some neither faſt nor pray, ſome faſt and pray, ſome faſt & pray not, ſome pray and faſt not: but I would both faſt and pray.
               Some thinke that th
                     •
                   place doth ſanctifie praier: others thinke that praier doth ſanctifie the place: I think that Chriſt doth ſanctifie both, and that any

place may ſerue to pray in, if the heart be prepaired: yet of the twaine, I doe thinke that the place is ſanctified by praier rather, thē the praier by the place. I loue the Temple, yet in caſe my ſtudy, mine houſe, the field, the high-waies ſhall bée my Temple, and my chiefeſt care ſhall be to cary a Temple alwaies with me, in me.
               Some pray ſaying, ſome ſinging▪
                   whether a man ſing or ſay, it ſkils not, if he truly pray, and croſſe not order.
               Some aſke their parents bleſſing, but ſeriouſly think not of Gods bleſſing: others aſk God bleſſing, but care not for their parents.

But I will aſke my father bleſſing, that I may haue Gods: and I will aſke God bleſſing, that I may haue my fathers. I will aſke my father bleſſing, that he may commend me to God: I wil aſke God bleſſing, that he may commend me to my father. I will aſke them both, becauſe I would not be condemned of vndutifulneſſe to either; but eſpecially God, becauſe he is mine eſpeciall father, and is able to bleſſe both mée and my father, me to my father, and my father to mée, and vs both to himſelfe.
               Some are common and importunate beggers to Princes: but if they were as inſtant with god, I ſuppoſe

they would not bée ſo great as good: and I thinke Princes would haue more gold in their coffers, & they alſo more grace in their hearts, though perhaps leſſe goods in their houſes.
               Some are deuoted to praier, and ſome to preaching: I loue them both well: I wil preach for praying, & pray for preaching. He that can not finde in his heart to come to the church to heare nothing but praier, by my conſent he ſhould not be ſuffered to come into the Church to heare nothing but preaching. Gods houſe is the houſe of preaching, and of praying to. There may wée ſpeake to

God, and heare him ſpeake to vs. And as occaſion ſerueth, I will goe thither either for both, or for either. And I hold him vnworthy to receiue a bleſſing with the people of God, that refuſes to goe with them thither, though it bée not to heare a Sermon, but only to pray for his bleſſing.
               Some pray and worke not, and ſome worke and pray not: the one would ſéeme to be all for heauen, & the other is ſet wholly on the earth. But I will both worke and pray: for God hath made Munday as wel, as Sunday, and hath giuen me an earthly body as wel, as an heauenly ſoule. But

yet this is not all; I will ſometimes pray, when I will not work: but I would neuer worke, but I will alſo pray, pray before my worke, and in my worke, and when I haue done my worke.
               I haue heard ſome extoll preaching, and others magnific praying. I doe magnifie them both, but am loath to compare them: I ſée not how the one can wel ſtand without the other. This will ſay; hée that is not fit to pray, is not fit to preach: and he that hath not a good care to héere, can not haue a good heart to pray: & he that hath no deuotion to pray, hée cannot haue a deuout affection to heare: for

ſurely hée, that with a good will can ſpeake vnto God, will alſo with a good will heare God ſpeak vnto him: and hée, that hath an attentiue and obedient care for the voice of God, cannot want an honeſt and humble heart to poure out his praiers vnto God. In like manner alſo he, that is fit to bée Gods mouth to his people, is not vnfit to bée the peoples mouth vnto God: and hée that is vnfit for this, cannot but bée vnfit, for that.
               Some pray being halfe a ſléepe, but Chriſt ſaith, Watch and pray. I thinke a man may do well to pray, when others ſléep, and that a man in caſe may ſléepe,

when others pray. But certainely, he that praies ſléepily, ſhall be heard ſléepily. If thy heart be dead, Gods eare is deafe: his eare is much after our heart. I wil therefore watch, when I pray, and pray when I watch.
               One, when hée praies, cries a loud, another ſpeakes very low. But both are loud enough, if their hearts be loud: but if their hearts open not, both are too low.
               Some pray for this, and ſome for that, but I will pray for God. For hée that hath God, wants nothing: but hée, that wants God, hath nothing.
               A man may giue ſo

much, as that he may leaue himſelf nothing: but God, though hée giue neuer ſo much, is nothing the poorer. A man may perhaps turne away beggars, leſt hee ſhould begge himſelfe: but God delightes in the number of beggars, if their behauiour be good, and can giue content to all without detriment vnto himſelfe. I will therefore goe with my pitcher to this well, that can neuer bée drawne dry: I will borrow my light at this ſunne, that cannot but continue: I wil begge of this King, whoſe Exchequer is neuer but full, & whoſe gates are alwaies open for any of his Subiects, that 
                     •
                  ue vnto him.
               
                  There are ſome, that hearing the fourth commandement read vpon the Sabbath day, ▪do pray that God would haue mercy vpon them, and incline their hearts to kéepe that law, which yet doe commonly tranſgreſſe that commandement, and profane the Sabbath day by glouzing and gaming, or by buying & ſelling (themſelues, or their Seruants) euen in thoſe few houres, that are appointed for the ſolemne and publike ſeruice of Almightie God. Of whom it may be ſaid, they loue their owne gaine more, then Gods glorie, their own pleaſures more, then his precepts, and that they are more

fearefull of their own loſſe, then truſtfull to his prouidence. But I will pray and practiſe to kéepe the Sabbath, becauſe God doth bid me kéep it, and as knowing that he, that ſets light by the Lords Sabbath on earth, ſhall not celebrate a Sabbath with the Lord in heauen, and that they, that make ſo ſmall account of the aſſembiies of his Saints in this life, are vnworthy to liue in the aſſemblies of 
                     •
                  is Saints in the life to come. I would not haue men forget the Market-day for their bodies: and I would haue them likewiſe remember the Market-day for their Soules.
               
               
                  Being ſicke we pray for the health of our bodies: ſeeing then wee be ſinfull, why ſhould we not pray for the health of our ſoules. Becauſe God hath giuen me a Soule and a Body, my prayer and and labour ſhall be that I may haue an healthy Soule in an healthy Bodie.
               Some mens prayers are abominable, ſome mens are accepted. The reaſon is this; ſome men are out of fauour, therefore their ſuites are ſcorned: ſome men are in grace, therfore their prayers are heard. I had therefore rather bee in grace with God, then haue all the grace in the world without the grace of God.
               
                  Some pray for an almes, which yet will giue no almes, they would receiue good, but they will doe no good, they would not be denyed in their own deſires, but they will not ſticke to croſſe the deſires and good déeds of others: but doubtleſſe hée, that will giue no almes to man, is vnworthy to receiue an almes of God: he that can without pitty ſée the wants of chriſtians, deſerues that his owne wants ſhould be vnpittied of Chriſt. 
                     •
                  ee that croſſeth the good deſires and good déedes of others, deſerues a croſſe to his owne, and a curſe to himſelfe. I will therefore doe good, that I may find good:

I will heare the cry of others, that I may be heard my ſelfe: I will not denie my good will to man, leaſt God ſhould deny his good will to me. I will not croſſe men in their lawfull deſires, leaſt that God ſhould deny me mine.
               Euery man wil pray for his friendes: but few for their enemies: yet he, that will not heartily pray for his enemies, (as our Lord did, and Saint S
                        •
                     euen) hee ſhall not be partaker of the prayer of our Sauiour, nor the praiſe of his Saintes. For Chriſt prayed onely for thoſe, that ſhould haue his Spirit: and thoſe onely haue the ſpirit of Chriſt, which doe reſemble Chriſt.

And indéed it is iuſt that he, that will not pray for his enemies, ſhould be debarr'd of Chriſt, who out of his loue did pray for his foes, & doth make thē his friends.
               The Pſalmiſt ſaith, I
                        •
                      I incline vnto wickednes with my heart, the Lord will notPſal▪ 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                      heare me. For in déed Gods eare inclineth to vs, as our hart inclineth to him: and if we decline from him, and with our hearts incline to wickednes, we mooue him to decline from vs, and to incline to wrath. If we regard not him in our harts, why ſhould hée lend vs his eares? If we wil liſten vn▪ to that, which hee would haue vs loath, why ſhould not he loath that, to which

we would haue him liſten? I will therefore expell my ſinnes, leaſt God ſhould repell my ſuites. I wil waſh
                        
                           •
                        al 26. 
                           •
                        . mine hands in innocencie, O Lord, and ſo will I goe to thine altar.
               
               Not to pray, or to contemne
                     
                        •
                     al. 14. 
                        ••
                      21. 
                        •
                      15 prayer is a certain ſigne of a wicked man. I will therefore prouoke my ſelfe to pray, that I may be aſſured that the Spirit of God is in me, and that the miſcrie of the wicked belongs not to me, aſſuring my ſelfe that they, that wil not pray to God, make themſelues a prey vnto the Diuell.
               It is a rule of wiſedome, To ſerue the ſeaſon, and wiſely to bee followed of

them, that delight in prayer. For there is a time, in which God is neere, and ready to bee found. Let vs therefore ſéeke him, whiles he may bee found, and call vpō him whiles he is near; or otherwiſe we may call, and not be heard, wee may ſéeke him, and yet not find him. There is alſo a time▪ in which a man may be better diſpoſed to pray, then at an other: let vs therefore beware we looſe it not, leſt if we will not pray, when we may, we ſhall not be able, when we would.
               I haue heard ſome complaine of their dulnes, and bewaile their in diſpoſition to pray: Let them but lengthen their complaint

and lamentation, & ſtrike their rockie hearts with a ſerious remembring of their owne miſeries, and Gods mercies to them, and by the grace of God prayers ſhall guſh out of their harts, as waters did out ofPſal. 105 the Rock. Neither deſpair, though thou feelſt thy ſelfe as dead: for it is a true tokēn of the life of the ſpirit, to ſéel and lament the deadneſſe of ſpirit.
               Some imagine, if God heare them not as ſoone as they deſire, that he will not heare them at all, and that they are of no reckoning with him: in which they are iniurious to thēſelues, and to God; to themſelues, becauſe this fanſie doth

quench their feruencie, and hinder their perſeuerance: and to God, who doth not alwaies hate, when hée makes as though he heares not. For by ſéeming to neglect vs, and by denying our ſuites at the firſt, he
                     •
                   wold rouze vp our ſpirits, he would try our patience, and exerciſe our ſaith, hee would ſhewe vs that not our merits, but his owne mercy moues him to heare vs, and finally he would inſtruct vs to make more account of his benefits, when they come. For commonly things lightly obtained, are lightly eſtéemed.
               Many men pray for things, that are hurtfull to them. I will therefore beg

temporal bleſſings, as they may be bleſſings to mee: and whatſoeuer I pray for, I will ſubmit my ſelfe to his wiſedome, and deſire him to heare me, not to my prayer, but to my profit: not as I thinke, but in what hee knowes to bee fitting for me.
               There are certaine men deuoted to their wicked luſts, that ſtick not ſometimes to ſay that they care not, ſo they may haue halfe an houre before their death to repent them of their ſinnes, and to pray to God for mercie. Theſe men by their preſuming of mercy are in great danger to féele the ſeueritie of iuſtice. They ſpeake as if they had

repentance in a ſtring, as if they could pray when they liſted, and as if they could haue God to heare them, when they would themſelues. But I will repent and pray for mercy in my youth, leaſt I ſhould be reiected in mine age: I wil cry now, that I may bée heard now: I will not refuſe to ſéeke him now, leaſt I ſhould not find him anon: I will ſue vnto him for his grace, whiles I am like to liue, that I may not be refuſed, when I am like to die. I will die, whiles I liue, that I may liue when I am dead: and I wil pray whiles I may, leaſt I cannot when I would. I will liue, whiles I liue, that I

may not die when I die: I will ſue for grace now, whiles it is offered, leaſt for contemning grace now, I ſhould bée denied grace hereafter.
               Becauſe God hath ſet downe all things in an vnchangeable and eternall decrée, and hath determined from eternitie what gifts hee will giue vnto the ſonnes of men, therefore ſome imagine that it is to little or no purpoſe for a man to pray. This is a profane, and fooliſh fanſie▪; profane, becauſe it drawes a ſide the heart from dutie. For the rule of our obedience is not the ſecret decrées of God, but his

reuealed pleaſure. NowPſal. 150. 1. Theſ. 5. his will, which he hath diſcloſed to vs, is, that wée ought to pray vnto him, and that continually. I ſay again, it is a fooliſh fanſie: for as God hath ordained the end, ſo hée hath appointed meanes vnto it: as hée hath ordained to giue men theſe and theſe gifts, ſo hée hath ordained & commanded that men ſhould aſke them. And if hée giue temporall things to any man, that is not deuout, pious, and vnderſtanding, know that ſuch things, which ſhould haue béene for his good, doe make for his deſtruction by reaſon of his corruptions. But this is a certain truth, God giues

nothing to any, which is a true bleſſing vnto him, but he giues him grace truly to deſire it. I will therefore aſke, leaſt I ſhould not receiue, I will ſéeke, leaſt I ſhold not find, I wil knock, leſt the gates of grace ſhould not bée opened to me. I wil ſincerely, inſtantly, and inceſſantly pray for glorie, that I may haue hope that God will vouchſafe me glorie.
               Theſe things (good Reader) I haue written for thy profit, which I commend to thée, and thée to God, farewell in Chriſt.
               Trin-vni Deo gloria, 

                     Thine in Chriſt T. T.
               
            
            
               
               CERTAINE NECESSARIE Rules to be remembred of euerie Chriſtian concerning Praier, viz.
               
                  IF thou wouldeſt make ſuch a praier as God may bée pleaſed to heare, thou muſt repent thée of thy ſinnes, and ſo daily renue thy repentance as thou renueſt thy ſins, as Iſay 1. 15. Dan. 9. 5. 6.
               
               2. Before thou makeſt thy praier to almighty god,

thou muſt bee or at leaſt deſire to bée reconciled to thoſe, whom thou haſt offended, as néede requireth Math. 5. 23. Mark. 11. 25.
               
               3. Thou muſt prepare thy ſelfe both in heart and minde as one that is to ſpeake familiarly vnto god Eccleſ. 5. 1.
               
               4. Euery petition thou makeſt, muſt procéede from a liuely ſence and féeling of thine owne wants, & of thy ſpirituall pouertie; for otherwiſe no praier can bée powerfull and harty and conſequently acceptable vnto God.
               5. Thou muſt endeuor that thy praier do procéede from an earneſt deſire of that grace thou wanteſt,

and this deſire indéede before God is praier it ſelfe, Exod. 14. 15. Rom. 8. 26.
               
               6. Thy praier muſt procéede from ſauing and true iuſtifying Faith, becauſe it is impoſſible that either thy perſon or thy praier or any other dutie thou performeſt, ſhould bée pleaſing vnto God without Faith Heb. 11. 6.
               
               7. It muſt be grounded vpon Gods word, and not framed after the carnall opinion and fancie of thine owne braine as 1. Epiſt. Iohn 5. 14.
               
               8. Thou muſt preſent thy praier to God alone, & to none other, for none elſe can héere all men, in all places,

and at all times, but he only.
               9. It muſt be preſented to God in the name, merit and meditation of Chriſt alone, for we our ſelues are not worthy of any thing but ſhame and confuſion, Coloſſ. 3. 17. Iohn 16 23.
               
               10. Thy affections ſhould be inſtant and perſeuere in praier and that not only in the time of praier, but alſo afterward and till the thing aſked bée granted Luke 18. 1. Eſay 62. 7.
               
               11. Euery praier ſhould ordinarily haue in it, if it bée ſet and ſolemne, ſome thankſ-giuing vnto God for his benefits both for ſoule and body Phil. 4. 6.
               
               
                  12. When praier is ended thou muſt haue a particular Faith whereby thou maieſt depend vpon God for the granting of thy particular requeſts ſo far forth as god ſhall ſée them fitting for thée Marke 11. 24.
               
               13. Laſtly, thou muſt labour to doe and practiſe that which thou praieſt for, and not only to pray for bleſſings: but to vſe all lawfull meanes whereby thoſe bleſſings which thou aſkeſt may be obtained.
            
            
               12. Briefe notes ſhewing the neceſſitie of Praier.
               BEauſe without praier wée cannot giue vnto

God his due glory which belongs vnto him.
               2. Wée can neither bée aſſured that we are Gods Children, nor that we haue right vnto any creature, before we make conſcience to practiſe this dutie daily Rom. 8. 15. 16.
               
               3. All things are ſanctified vnto vs by the word and by praier, therefore without praier euery thing workes to our condemnation 1. Tim. 4. 5.
               
               4. Without praier wée cannot looke to obtain any thing from God as a bleſſing, nor to turne away any euil from vs Math. 7. 7.
               
               5. Wée are no better then earth-wormes and worldlings, and not fit to

ſpeake of any thing well without praier Rom. 8. 5.
               
               6. The Lord our God commandes vs all to ſtep into the breach with godly Moſes, and by harty praier to ſtay his hands from being auenged of the iniquities raigning amongſt vs, Ezek. 22. 30.
               
               7. God requires a dayly and conſtant courſe of praier at our hands, which hath béene the practiſe of the Saints of God in all ages Iob. 1. 1. Pſal. 1.
               
               8. God doth daily beſtow bleſſings vpon vs, therefore wée muſt daily ſerue him, Lament. 3. 23. Pſal. 103. 2.
               
               
                  9. Becauſe Satan is neuer wearie of tempting vs therefore wee ſhould haue our loines girt and bee alwaies vpon our watch to reſiſt him 1. Pet. 5. 8.
               
               10. We haue not a daies warrant no not an houres certaintie of life, therefore wée are at no time to bée vnprepared, becauſe wee know not the houre when our maſter commeth Math. 24. 42.
               
               11. Wee are Pilgrimes and Trauellers in this World, and therefore wée muſt trauell each day home ward to our owne countrie Heb. 11. 10.
               
               12. By our
                     •
                  calling wée are watchmen, Souldiers,

&c. and therefore we muſt daily be exerciſed in this ſpiritual warefare as 2. Tim. 2. 6.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
            
               Set a watch O Lord before my mouth and keepe the doore of my lips
               Pſal. 141. 3.
               Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my hart, he acceptable in thy ſight, ô lord my ſtrength, & my redeemer
               Pſa. 
                     •
                  9. 4.
            
            
               A GODLY AND neceſſarie Praier to be ſaid at all times.
               
                  O Eternall God, and in Ieſus Chriſt our moſt mercifull and loning father, wee thy vnworthy

and vnprofitable ſeruants, doe héere in thy ſight fréely confeſſe, and acknowledge before thy Deuine Maieſtie, that wée are moſt miſerable and wretched ſinners and grieuous tranſgreſſors of all thy holy Lawes and Commandements: that as wee were borne and bred in ſinne and ſtained in the wombe, ſo haue wee continually ſince that time multiplied many actuall tranſgreſſions againſt thy Maieſtie, both in thought, word, and déed, ſo that our ſins are grown more in number, than the haires of our head, and heauier in waight, than the ſands by the Sea ſhore: therefore, it is thy méere

mercie long ere this they haue not preſſed vs downe to the verie pit of Hel, thou only O Lord knoweſt our ſinnes who knoweſt our hearts, nothing can bee hid from thy al-ſéeing eye thou knoweſt both what we haue béene & what wee are, yea our conſcience doe accuſe vs of many and greiuous euils, and thou being farre greater than our conſcience, art able to lay much more vnto our charge: we appeale therefore from thy iuſtice to thy mercy, which is aboue all thy workes how much more aboue our ſinnes, Intreating thée to looke vpon vs in the face and countenance of thy well pleaſed ſonne Chriſt

Ieſus, for his ſake O Lord we pray thée bee good and gratious to all our ſinnes & iniquities paſt, of what nature or kind ſoeuer they be, whether of ignorance or of knowledge, of commiſſion of euill or of omiſſion of our duties, waſh them all away in the blood of thy déere ſonne, burie them in his graue, and lay ſuch a waight of his righteouſneſſe vpon them, ſo as they may neuer bee able to riſe vp againſt vs, either in this World to accuſe vs, or in the World to come to condemne vs. And becauſe O Lord our nature is ſo prone to commit ſume, and that with grée dineſſe, ſo that if thou ſhouldeſt euen

at this inſtant, giue vs a frée pardon of all our ſins, yet we confeſſe, ſuch is the corruption of our weake fleſh, that without the reſtraining grace of thy holy ſpirit, we ſhould fall into the ſame ſinnes againe or 
                     •
                  nto worſe, therefore, wee humbly pray thée moſt gracious God not only to pardon that which is paſt, but alſo purge our preſent corruptions, and by the grace of thy good ſpirit preuent thoſe that are to come: grāt good Lord that wee may thinke it more than ſufficient that we haue ſpent the time paſt of our liues, according to the luſts of the fleſh, and after our own deſires and fancies, and may

now euen reſolue to dedicate the reſt of our liues that yet remaineth to thy glorie, our owne comfort, and the good of our brethren, throgh Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
               In theſe our weake praiers O Lord, wee are not mindefull of our ſelues alone, but of thy whole Church diſpearſed ouer the face of the earth farre and wide, bleſſe O Lord the principall member thereof, our dread Soueraigne, king Iames: Enrich his roiall heart with all grares neceſſary for ſo high a place, ſtabliſh his throne we beséech thée, and let his ſoule bee bound in the bundle of life with thée O God, bleſſe

Quéene his wife, make her a helpe vnto him in the beſt things: bleſſe their Roiall Progenie, and grant that they may not want one of that line, to ſit vpon this throne, ſo long as the Sun and Moone endures, Bleſſe all his Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Counſell, be thou preſent with them, and preſident ouer all their counſels, as may bee moſt for thy glorie, the honour of the King, the peace of the State, and the comfort of thy people. Bleſſe all the Iudges and magiſtrates of the land, Bleſſe the Miniſters of thy Word and Sacraments. Thou that art the Lord of the harueſt, thruſt forth many faithfull

and painefull Labourers that they may féed thy people with knowledge and vnderſtanding, bleſſe O Lord all the afflicted members of thy Church, diſeaſed either in body or minde or both, eſpecially thoſe that ſuffer for the teſtimonie of a good conſcience. O Lord to whom all their caſes and neceſſities are manifeſt, we beſéech to make al their bed in their ſickneſſe, lay no more vpon them, than thou ſhalt make them able to beare, giue them the true ſight & feeling of their ſins, ſo farre as may lead them to true repentance, with harty ſorrow for the ſame. And good father deale with them in mercy & not in iuſtice

either to releaſe them out of that preſent miſerie wherein they are, either by life that they may glorifie thée in this World, or by faithfull departure that they may be gloriffed of thée in the world to come. Theſe mercies moſt gracious God, and whatſoeuer elſe thou knoweſt in thy wiſedome to bee better for vs than we our ſelues can aſk, we beg them at thy hands not for our owne merits, for they are nothing, but for the merits of thy decre ſon Chriſt Ieſus our Lord and ſauiour in whoſe name & in whoſe words we conclude ſaying, Our father which art in Heauen, &c.
               
            
            
               
               Morning Prayer for priuate Families.
               MOſt gracious God and mercifull Father, thou that art glorious in power and holines, we thy poore and miſerable▪ Creatures, being but duſt and Aſhes, do here humbly proſtrate our ſelues and our ſinfull ſoules, before the throne of thy Maieſtie, Confeſſing and acknowledging from the bottom
                     •
                   of our hearts, that wee are moſt vile ſinners, conceiued and borne in ſome, and that we are by nature nothing elſe but a 
                     ••
                  nye of all wickedneſſe, wheſe nature and propertie is to

grow and encreaſe in ſin, as we grow in yeares, and to war ſtrong in wickedneſſe, euen as the powers of our mindes and bodies receiue ſtrength: and although our curſed eſtate doth here in greatly appear, yet our ſinne is made out of meaſure, ſinfull, through the excéeding grace, which thou haſt offered vnto vs. by thy Goſpell of thy dear S
                     ••
                  me, whereby we are ſo farre from pro
                     •
                  iting, that of our ſelues without the grace of thy holy Spirit in our hearts, we ſhould war worſe and worſe: wherefore wee beſéech thée O Lord, as our ſ
                     •
                  nes haue magnified themſelues in an infinite length, bredth,

depth, and height: ſo let thy mercies which paſſe all vnderſtanding outſtrippe them, and howſoeuer by reaſon of our ſinnes, wée haue iuſtly deſerued to bée depriued, of all thy bleſſings in this life, and hereafter to haue our portion with the diuell and his Angels: yet O Lord God, wee pray thée remember that we are thy people, and ſhéep of thy paſture, whom thou hoſt redéem'd with thy moſt precious bloud, deſpiſe not therefore O Lord the worke of thy hands: but for thy glories ſake, and for thy bleſſed names ſake ſpare vs, ſparevs good Lord, according to thy vſuall dealing with thoſe

which in prayer haue had recourſe vnto thée, and according to the old and vnchangeable Nature of a kinde, long ſuffering, and mercifull God. Thy mercie O Lord hath manifeſtly appeared vnto vs this night paſt, in that thou haſt giuen vs quiet reſt & ſléep, for the refreſhment of our weake bodies, whereas for our ſinnes paſt committed the day before thou mightſt iuſtly euen in our dead ſléep haue taken our ſoules from vs, and ſo ſuddenly haue brought vs to our account, but it hath pleaſed thée to ſpare vs, and to giue vs a larger time of repentance: O Lord, as thou giueſt vs ſpace, ſo wee

beſéech thée giue vs alſo grace, to repent vs of our former euill wayes, and to turne vnto thée, and for as much as thou haſt commanded in thy holy word, that no man ſhould be idle, but euery one occupied in godly and vertuous exerciſes, according to their Callings: wee moſt humbly beſeech thée, that thine eyes may attend vpon vs, dayly defend vs, cheriſh, comfort, gouerne, & counſell vs, in all our ſtudies and labours, in ſuch wiſe, that we may ſpend and beſtow this day, and all the dayes of our liues, according to the bleſſed will, ſetting thée alwaies before our eyes, and liuing in thy

feare, euer working that which may be fonnd acceptable in thy ſight, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, in whoſe name we end as hée hath taught vs ſaying. Our Father which art in heauen, &c.
               
            
            
               Euening Prayer for priuate Families.
               OAlmightie Lord God and in Ieſus Chriſt our moſt mercifull and louing Father, we thy poore and vnworthy ſeruants, do here from the ground of our hearts, render vnto thy diuine Maieſtie, in that poore meaſure wée are able all praiſe and thankes for all thy bleſſings & mercies,

beſtowed vpon vs from time to time, euer ſince we were born, vntill this preſent houre, eſpecially O Lord we thank thée, for thoſe ineſtimable bleſſings which concerne a better life, and our eternall happineſſe, as our Election before the foundations of the world, our Creation into the world, our Redemption by the bloud of thy deare Sonne Chriſt Ieſus, when wee were worſe then nothing, our Sanctification by the holy Spirit, our Uocation from the world, our bleſſed hope of Glorification in the world to come. O Lord we confeſſe we haue not deſerſerued the leaſt of all theſe

thy bleſſings either temporall or ſpirituall, but haue rather giuen thée iuſt cauſe to depriue vs of euery one of them, by reaſon of our manifold ſinnes, both Originall and Actuall, which we haue multiplied againſt thée from time to time, O Lord we confeſſe that our Conception, our birth, yea and our whole liues haue béene in ſinne, liuing in the breach of all thy Commandements: our fathers and mothers were ſinfull, deriuing it euen from our firſt parents, Adam and Eue, and ſo to vs, that as Adam purchaſed for vs his Children, none other inheritance, but the vnhappy entrance into ſinne, and

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
corruption, and we béeing in his loynes, and engrafted into this deteſtable ſtocke of ſinne: we are ſorie O Lord, that wee haue offended thée ſo willingly, and diſobediently ſtrayed from thy holy Lawes: yea, we do vnfainedly condemn our ſelues in thy preſence, for euery one of our ſins, purpoſing in our hearts by the grace of thy Holy Spirit, to forſake our former euill wayes, and to make more conſcience of ſinne, then euer we haue done heretofore. Now for as much as it hath pleaſed thée, to make the night for man to reſt in, as thou haſt ordained him the day to trauell in: grant deare father

that wee may ſo take our bodily reſt, that our ſoules may continually watch for the time that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſhal appeare for our deliuerance out of this mortall life, in the meane ſeaſon wée beſéech thée grant that in our ſléepe we be not ouercome by any fantaſies, dreames, or other tentations, but that we may fully ſet our minds vpon thée, loue thée, feare thée, and reſt in thée: and that our ſléepe be not 
                     ••
                  ceſſiue or ouermuch, after the vnſatiable deſire of the fleſh, but onely ſufficient to content our weake natures, that wee may be the better enabled the day following, to liue in all

godly conuerſation, in the diſcharge of our callings, to the glorie of thy holie name, and profit of our brethren, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Bleſſe with vs wee beſéech thée, thy Children and Church in all places, poure downe thy bleſſings in eſpeciall manner vpon the Kings moſt excellent Maieſty, the Quéene and her Royall Progeny, bleſſe all the Nobilitie, and Magiſtrates of the land. Bleſſe the Miniſters and teachers of thy holy Word, Lord giue a bleſſing to their labours, that by their miniſterie ſuch may daily be woon vnto thee, as belong vnto thine Election of grace.

Bleſſe and ſuccour all the afflicted members of thy Church, whereſoeuer or howſoeuer diſtreſſed; bée with them in all their ſickneſſe, lay no more vpon them then thou ſhalt make them able to beare, giue them the true ſight and féeling of their ſinnes, ſo far as may leade them to true repentance, a hartie ſorrow for the ſame, howſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe thée to deale with them, let it bee in mercy, and not in iuſtice, knowing they are but fleſh, and in thy good time ſend them a happy deliuerance out of their miſerie, either by life or by death, as it ſhall ſéeme beſt t
                     •
                   thy maieſtie. Laſtly, as

duty bindes vs, we commend vnto thy fatherly protection all our friends and kindred according to the fleſh, whether they bee néere or deare vnto vs in affinitie, or conſanguinity, and all whomſoeuer thou wouldeſt we ſhould commend vnto thy maieſty, for them as for our ſelues wée beſéech thee, continue thy mercies and goodneſſe towards vs, euen for thy deare ſonnes ſake Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and onely Sauiour, to whom with thee and the bleſſed Spirit our Comforter, be aſcribed as is moſt due, all honour, and glorie, now and for euer.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               Another prayer for Morning.
               O Moſt mercifull God and heauenly father, we thy ſeruants doe hers humbly proſtrat our ſelues before thy diuine maieſty acknowledging here in thy ſight, our heinous offences committed againſt thée both in thought, word and worke, ſo that our ſinnes are growne more in number then the haires of our heades, and if thou ſhouldeſt enter into Iudgement with vs, we could not be able to anſwere thée one of a thouſand, they are ſo heinous, that the very leaſt of them, being but conceiued

in thought, is ſufficient in iudgement to throw vs down to the lake that burneth with fire & brimſtone, beſides O Lord, wee are guilty before thy Maieſtie of a huge maſſe of corruption, which we haue drawn from the loines of our firſt parents, which of it owne nature is inough to condemne vs, if thou ſhouldeſt deale with vs according to Iuſtice, though we had neuer committed actuall ſin all the daies of our leues: Further O Lord wee are full of blindnes, and ſenceleſſe ſecuritie, running on headlong to deſtruction, and committing ſinne after ſinne, although not notorious to the world, yet

horrible before thy pure eyes which ſeeſt all things: but O Lord wee dayly grone vnder the burden of our ſinnes, inwardly lamenting our own folie. In Heauen, Earth, or Hell, we ſee none able to ſuſtain thy wrath for them, but euen thy deare. Son Chriſt Ieſus the Son of thy loue, who in mercy infinite, and in compaſſion endles, hath ſuffered and ouercome that endleſſe puniſhment, which was due vnto vs for them. In him therfore moſt mercifull Father, and through him do we come vnto thee, beingful aſſured according to thy promiſe, that thou wilt accept and take that full recompence, which he

our Sauiour hath made for vs, on his Croſſe. In him therefore we ſee thine anger towards vs appeaſed, and thy wrath ſatiſfied, and our debt payed. O Lord enlarge our hearts with thankefulneſſe to thy Maieſtie for the ſame, and make ſinne to dye in vs more and more, that wee may hate, deteſt, and vtterly abhorre all ſinne, in all men, but eſpecially in our ſelues, and ſtrongly (through thy ſpirit) ſet our ſelues in open war againſt all ſinne and wickedneſſe, that we may not pleaſe our ſelues in the leaſt ſinne, but ſtreightly examine ſinne, by the ſtrict Rules of thy holyword, we may alwaies

walke not onely before the eyes of man, but circumſpectly in this reſpect that we haue the eies of thy maieſtie to take a view of our doings: we humbly thank thy maieſty for all thy mercies, beſtowed vpon vs either for ſoule or bodie, amongſt the reſt, wee acknowledge this not to bee the leaſt, that we haue quietly paſſed this night, and that thou haſt giuen vs quiet reſt and ſléepe for the refreſhment of our weake bodies, which without the ſame could not endure: grant we beſeech thée, that we may beſtowe this day and the reſidue of our life, wholly in thy ſeruice, wal king faithfully and conſcionably

in our callings wherin thou haſt placed vs, O Lord bleſſe all our gouernours, whom thou haſt ſet ouer vs in thy roome, in eſpeciall manner ſhowre downe thy bleſſings vpon the Kings Maieſtie, bleſſe him both in body and ſoule with all graces neceſſarie for ſo high a calling, and make him long a Nurſing Father in this Iſraell. Bleſſe our graciousquéen, make her a help vnto him in all good things: Bleſſe their Royall iſſue, graunt that they may dayly growe in fauour both with God and man, and make them loyall to his maieſty all the dayes of his life: bleſſe all the Nobilitie, the Magiſtrates,

and Miniſters of thy holy word, and graunt that euery one of vs from the higheſt to the loweſt may walk faithfully in our places before thee all the daies of our liues, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghoſt, bee all praiſe and glorie both now and euer.
               Amen.
            
            
               Another Euening Praier for priuate Families.
               O Eternall and euerliuing Lord God, and in Ieſus Chriſt our louing Father, thou which haſt giuen vs our bodies and ſoules, our health, our

ſtrength, our maintenance, whence haue wee all theſe things but from thée, thy fatherly protection ouer vs this day in our calling, to whom can we aſcribe it but vnto thée, that wee haue liued hitherto, that wee haue not béene ſwallowed vp with ſome ſuddaine Iudgement, that Sathan had not his will vpon vs, that we know the way and the meanes to a better life, that we are deliuered from the power of darkeneſſe, and tranſlated into the kingdome of thy deare Sonne, that we haue dayly acceſſe into thy glorious preſence to offer vp our petitions vnto thée, and to make knowne our

wants, whence are all theſe bleſſings O Lord, but from the fréedome of thy grace, we confeſſe O Lord, if thou hadſt giuen vs our deſerts, we ſhould haue periſhed long agoe: therefore it is from thy mercy alone that we are not conſumed.
               Now, if receiuing ſo many bleſſings from thee, wee ſhould not ſtirre vp our ſelues to returne ſome thankefulnes to thy Maieſtie for them, how wretched and miſerable creatures ſhould we be. O Lord wee pray thée make vs aſhamed of our vnthankefulneſſe, wound our hearts with the conſideration of our owne dulneſſe, whom ſo many fauours haue not wrought

vnto more obedience, and vouchſafe wee humbly beſéech thée not withſtanding our ſmall deſeruings, to looke graciouſly vpon vs, and accept this our Euening ſacrifice of praiſe, which wee doe here render vnto thy Maieſtie, O Lord let not the ſkantneſſe of our ſeruice, make thee turne away thine eyes from vs, but euen as thou art wont to ſpare thy ſeruants, as a man ſpareth his own ſonne that ſerueth him, and in them to accept the will for the full performance; ſo be pleaſed to looke vpon vs, in Ieſus Chriſt, grant that we may ſenſibly feele the power of his death, killing ſin & corruption in vs, and

the power of his reſurrection raiſing vs vp to newnes of life. Make vs reſolue to renounce, euen our ſweeteſt & beſt beloued ſins, and not to take libertie to our ſelues, to continue in any knowne vngodlines, that we may think it more then ſufficient that we haue hitherto giuen the raines to our ownluſts, therfore now to labour to ſtop & kill all ſin in the beginning, before it come to the act, & reſolue to beſtow the reſt of our liues according to thy bleſſed word. And becauſe the night is at hand, which thou haſt appointed for vs to reſt in, he beſéech thée to take vs into thy fatherly protection this night and euer:

command the guard of thy holy Angels to pitch their tents about vs, & preſerue vs both ſléeping & waking, that we may be the better fitted and prepared the day following to goe on in our vocations & callings to thy glory, our own comforts, & the benefit of our brethren through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord & Sauiour. In whoſe name we beg theſe mercies at thy hands & whatſoeuer elſe thou knoweſt to bee néedfull either for ſoule or body, better then we our ſelues can aſke in that forme of prayer, which hée himſelfe in his holy word hath taught vs ſaying, Our father which art in heauen, &c.
               
            
            
               
               Another Morning praier.
               MOſt mercifull God and louing Father, we thy poore and vnprofitable ſeruants doe here humbly caſt downe our ſelues and our ſinfull ſoules, before the foot-ſtoole of thy maiestie, acknowledging and confeſſing that we are not worthy to approach into thy preſence, much loſſe to haue any thing to do with thée in any part of thy moſt pure worſhip, and ſeruice, ſéeing wee haue liued and continued in the breath of thy holy commandements not only through negligence and infirmitie,

but many times witingly and willingly, contrarie to our owne knowledge, and the holy motions of thy good ſpirit, to the wounding of our own ſoules and conſciences & to the great diſhonour of thy maieſtis. O Lord we beſ
                     •
                  ech thée regard vs not as wee are in our ſelues, but looke vpon vs in the countenance of thy ſonne our Al-ſufficient ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus, for his ſake wee pray thée bee gratious and good to al our ſinnes both in generall and particular, original or actuall, of ignorance, or of knowledge, of omiſſion or commiſſion, whereby wée haue offended thée, from the firſt houre of our conception,

till this preſent time. Lord accept the death and paſſion of thy ſonne, as a ſufficient ranſome for all our ſins, burie them déeply in his graue, and cancell the book of thy wrath wherin they are written with his bloud, that they may neuer be laid to our charge either in this life preſent or in the next. Let thy bleſſed ſpirit ſeale the pardon of them all to the comfort of our cōſciences. Furniſh vs we beſéech thée with all néedefull graces, eſpecially as Chriſtians to walke worthy of Chriſt Ieſus in holy conuerſation: & vouchſafe to bleſſe al good means vnto vs which thou haſt ſanctified for our continuall

groath in grace, and thy fears, eſpecially thy holy word & the miniſtry therof, print déeply in our heartes all holeſome inſtructions, which are deliuered and taught vs out of the ſame by thy miniſters, good lord make vs thankefull euermore for al thy benefits beſtowed vpon vs, chiefely for thy ſonne Chriſt Ieſus the fountaine of all good to vs and ours, as alſo for all thoſe bleſſings that concerne this life preſent, as health, libertie, apparell & ſuch like, for thy fatherly protection ouer vs, & bringing vs to the light of this preſent day: kéepe & defend vs we pray thée from all euill that may hurt vs, and

from falling into any groſſe ſin, that may diſpleaſe thée, ſet thy feare alwaies before our eies, that we may ſpēd this day, and all the daies of our liues, to thy glory & the peace of our owne conſciences: for this day wée beſéech thee giue a bleſſing to our endeuours in our calling, that wee may bee therein conſcionably occupied, knowing that thou ſéeeſt euen the very ſecrets of our hearts, and that nothing can be done, be it neuer ſo ſecret without thy knowledge, theſe mercies and bleſſings we pray thée to grant vnto vs for Ieſus Chriſts ſake our Lord,
               Amen.
            
            
               
               Another Euening Praier.
               ETernall God and in Ieſus Chriſt our moſt merciful father, thou which art the father of mercies, & the God of al conſolations, we thy vnworthy ſeruants doe héere according to our bounden duties humble our ſelues before thy maieſtie, and rendring in that poore meaſure we are able all praiſe and thankes for all thy mercies & bleſſings beſtowed vpon vs from time to time, euer ſince we were borne vntill this preſent, for our election, creation, redemption, vocation, iuſtification, ſanctification,

preſeruation, and the hope of our glorification herafter: as alſo for al thoſe bleſſings that concern this life preſent, furniſhing vs continually with all good things neceſſarie that wée ſtand in néede of. More eſpecially, O Lord we thank thée, y• thou haſt preſerued & defended vs this day, from al perils and dangers both of body and ſoule, wherinto many haue fallen, and wée might alſo, had we not béen guided by thy merciful prouidence. O Lord we confeſſe to the ſhame of our owne ſelues, that wee are not worthy of the leaſt of all theſe thy mercies, but as we were conceiued and borne in ſinne, ſo haue wée

liued in iniquity and in the tranſgreſſion of thy lawes, not regarding to be gouerned by the holy word, and therefore haue iuſtly deſerued, that thou ſhouldeſt poure vpon vs all ſhame & miſery in this life and eternall condemnation in the World to come: but O Lord we know that thou art a God full of mercy, ſtow to anger great compaſſion, and wilt not the death of a ſinner, but rather that we ſhould liue. In confidence of this thy mercie, we confeſſe before thy maieſtie our manifold ſinnes, in treating thée to pardon them all for the merits of Chriſt Ieſus; & ſéeing thou haſt giuen vs ſo large a

time of repentance, grant that we may now at length returne vnto thée in ſinceritie of heart & contrition of ſpirit. And for this night preſent we beſéech thée ſanctific our reſt vnto vs this night, that we may enioy the ſame as thy bleſſing, that thereby our wearied bodies being refreſhed with moderate and quiet ſléepe, wée may be the better enabled to walke before thée in our callings the day following, to thy glorie and our owne comforts, throgh Ieſus Chriſt. Remember with vs, thy Church and children in all places, gather together thine elect, forgiue the crying ſinnes of this land, make an end of

theſe daies of ſinne, and haſten the comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Preſerue thine annointed and our dread ſoueraign King, the Quéen and their roiall Progenie, defend and kéep them from plots and trecheries both abroad and at home. Let thy ſpirit of wiſdome, of Councell, and of vpright iudgement reſt vpon all the Lords of his maieſties honourable Priuie Councell, the Nobilitie and magiſtracie for the beſt good of this whole Land, Bleſſe y• painfull preachers of thy holy word, giue good ſucceſſe we pray thée to their ſtudies and labours, for the winning of ſo many ſoules as thou haſt ordained

to eternal life; comfort all thy afflicted that ſuffer vnder thy hand, and howſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe thée to deale with them, yet ſupport them with patience & thankfullneſſe to vndergoe whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe thée to lay vpon them, and when thou ſhalt ſée it fit, ſend them deliuerance that either by life or by death Chriſt may be to them aduantage. Laſtly we beſéech thée good Lord to bleſſe all our kinſfolkes in the fleſh and all others whom thou would eſt we ſhould pray for, heare vs for them and them for vs, & Chriſt Ieſus for vs all. In whoſe name we ſhut vp theſe our imperfect praiers in that perfect

forme which he himſelfe hath left vs, ſaying Our father &c.
               
            
            
               Morning Praier for a priuate perſon.
               MOſt Glorious God and mercifull father, I thy moſt vnworthy creature, doe héere confeſſe before thy Diuine Maieſtie, to thy glory, though it be to the ſhame and confuſion of mine owne face, that I am not worthy to appeare before thée, much more vnworthy to offer vp my praiers vnto thée, with confidence that thou ſhouldeſt heare them and grant my requeſts by reaſon of my manifold ſinnes and tranſgreſſions

that I haue heaped vp againſt thy maieſty, ere ſince I was borne vntill this preſent day. And now O Lord being come before thée, I muſt néedes confeſſe the vileneſſe of my eſtate. I was conceiued, bred & born in ſinne, and in ſinne haue I continued all my daies, I haue drunke Iniquitie like water, yea, I haue drawne it after me, and tied it vnto me as with great ropes, yea, I haue euē made a mock of ſinne, and it hath béene a paſtime vnto me to doe wickedly: Notwithſtanding O Lord thou haſt called vpon me, but ſtill I haue refuſed, thou haſt againe and againe ſtretched out thy hand, but I haue

not regarded, thou haſt ſought to reclaime me, but I haue hated to be reformed; thou haſt often called vpon mee by thy bleſſed word, yet notwithſtanding I haue deſpiſed thy patience and abuſed thy goodneſſe; ſo that I haue giuen thée iuſt cauſe to heap vpon me all thy ſeareful plagues and puniſhments which in the extremity of thy law do belong vnto the wicked. It is thy vnſpeakeable mercy that thou didſt not make my bed my graue, neuer to haue riſen againe. but O Lord I know there is abundance of mercies with thée, that thou mayeſt be feared: and excéeding experience haue I

had of thy goodneſſe, long ſuffering, and patience towards me, therfore. I grow in hope ſtill, that thou purpoſeſt me good & not euill, to ſaue me & not to deſtroy me: beſéeching thée to accept the death of Chriſt as a full satiſfaction for all my ſm
                     ••
                  es, to waſh them away in his blood, and to binds them in one bundle, & caſt them behinde thy backe neuer to be remembred, I humbly thank thy maieſty for thy manifold mercies extended towards me, this night paſt & al y• daies of my life for my quiet reſt & ſléep, my foode and raiment, my health, peace, and libertie, and the hope of a better life in the merits of thy deare

ſonne Chriſt Ieſus, for all theſe thy mercies, O Lord I haue nothing to render vnto thée, but thine owne. If I could giue thée my bodie and ſoule, they might be ſaued by it, but thou wert neuer the richer for it, yea, euen ſince I roſe I haue taſted many of thy bleſſings, and thou haſt begun to ſerue me, before I haue begun to ſerue thée, I can ſhew no reaſon why thou ſhouldeſt beſtow all theſe bleſſings vpon me more than others, but that thou art mercifull, and if thou ſhouldeſt draw all back againe from me, as iuſtly thou maieſt, I haue nothing to ſay, but that thou art iuſt, and ſéeing O

Lord I am now to enter into the affaires of this day, I beſéech thée bleſſe me in the duties of my calling this day and euer for idleneſſe and godlyneſſe, can not ſtand together, and it is thy pleaſure that in the ſweat of my face I ſhould eat my bread, O Lord preſerue me from all fraudulent and de
                     •
                  eitfull courſes, draw my affections more and more from the loue of the World, & fix my heart vpon thoſe things which are aboue, & if things ſuccéed according to my mind by thy bleſſing vpon my labours, make me thankefull vnto thée, if any croſſe come, make me patient and carefull to profit by euerie

chaſtiſement that it ſhall pleaſe thée to lay vpon me, knowing that howſoeuer they are greiuous for the preſent, yet in the end they will bring the quiet fruit of righteouſneſſe to al them that are thereby exerciſed; which God grant for his Chriſts ſake, to whom with the holy ſpirit bee all praiſe now and euer
               Amen.
            
            
               Euening Praier for a priuate Perſon.
               O Eternall God Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt and in him my moſt mercifull father I humbly confeſſe before thy glorious preſence, that I

am altogether a lump of ſinne, & a maſſe of corruption, and therfore haue for feited thy fauour and incurred thy high diſpleaſure, both in thought, word and deede. My ſins O Lord are more in number than the haires of my head: yea, farre more than I can poſſibly féele or know, and if I ſhould goe about to reckon vp my particular offences, I know not where to begin or where to make an end. It is thou O Lord who knoweſt my ſins, to whom the ſecrets of my heart are manifeſt, and nothing can be hid from thy ſight: beſides my conſcienſe doth accuſe me of many greiuous euils, and I daily feele by

ful experience how fraile I am, how prone to euel and backward to all goodneſſe, my minde, my heart and affections, and all the faculties both of ſoule and body, are ful of vanitie, profaneneſſe, dulneſſe, deadneſſe, & drow
                     •
                  ineſſe in matters of thy worſhip and ſeruice. But O déere father I haue learned from thy mouth, that thou art a God full of mercie, ſlow to wrath, and of great compaſſion and kindneſſe towards all ſuch as are heauy laden & groan vnder the burthen of their ſinnes. O Lord extend thy great mercy towards mée poore ſinner, and giue me a general pardon for al mine offences whatſoeuer, ſeale

it to my conſcience in the blood of thy déere ſon Chriſt Ieſus, aſſuring me more and more of thy loue an fauour towards me, and that thou art a reconciled father vnto me in the ſame chriſt. O Lord I beſéech thée principally giue me victorie ouer thoſe ſins, thou knoweſt my nature moſt prone to commit. Mortific in me whatſoeuer is carnall, and ſanctiffe me by thy good ſpirit, and knit my heart vnthée for euer. Lord grant that I may take delight in the reading and hearing of thy holy word: that I may loue and reuerence all the faithfull Miniſters of the goſpell, giue O Lord a melting heart, that I may

tremble at thy worde, let not my ſinnes holde backe thy mercies from me, nor mine vnworthines ſtop the paſſage of thy grace. I moſt humbly thank thee for all thy bleſſings beſtowed vpon me neceſſarie for this life, as food, raiment, health, peace, liberty, &c. which many of thy déere children doe want being notwithſtanding bought with the pretious blood of Chriſt Ieſus as well as I. Bi
                     •
                  t aboue all, deere Father, I praiſe thy name for the bleſſings of a better life, eſpecially for thy holy worde and ſacraments and all the good I enioy therby for the continuance of thy goſpell, the worde of truth, the

means of our ſaluation, for the death of thy ſon and all that happineſſe I receiue thereby: O Lord open my blinde eies euery day more and more, to ſée and conſider of thy great and meruelous loue towards me in all theſe things, that by the dew conſideration therof my heart may be drawne néerer vnto thee to loue thée much becauſe thou haſt giuen much: and as thou doſt abound towards me in goodneſſe, ſo grant that I may abound towards thée in obedience and thankfulneſſe, and in theſe my weak and imperfect praiers O Lord I am not mindeful of my ſelfe alone, but of the whole eſtate of thy Church

whereſoeuer, bleſſe all chriſtian Kings and Princes, calling vpon thy name, eſpecially our dread Soueraigne the Kings Maieſtie, the Quéene, and their roial Progonie, Bleſſe all the nobilitie, the magiſtrates and miniſters of the Land, that all their Councels and labours may begin at thy feare, and may be referred thy glory. Succour and comfort all thoſe that are comfortleſſe, ſanctifie all their afflictions and troubles vnto them, that they may tend to thy glory, and their owne good. Finally, O Lord according to my bounden dutie I commend vnto thy Maieſtie all my friends and acquaintance,

beſéeching thée for them, as for my ſelfe to bleſſe vs all, in our particular places, and grant that we may do thoſe things which may bée to thy glorie and our comforts, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. In whoſe name I end as he hath taught me ſaying, Our father which art in heauen, hallowed bee thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy-will be done in earth as it is in heauen, &c.
               
            
            
               
               A Prayer for a priuate perſon neceſſarie at all times.
               ALmightie God and in Ieſus Chriſt my moſt mercifull and louing Father, I doe here in thy preſence acknowledge that I am of my ſelfe a moſt wretched and▪ miſerable ſinner, both in reſpect of the corruptions of my heart, as alſo the tranſgreſſion of my life: more particularly I doe acknowledge the infidelitie of my heart wherby I haue not yet learned to depend vpon thy prouidence for the things of this life, nor vpon thy mercie for the ſaluation of my

ſoule: I confeſſe O Lord, the Atheiſme and profaneneſſe both of my mind and heart, whereby all my thoughts and affections are eſtranged from thée, and ſo glewed to the things of this life, that I can take more ioy and delight in doing mine owne will, and in ſeruing mine owne luſts, then euer I would 
                     ••
                   in ſeruing and obeying thée. I acknowledge likewiſe the pride of mine own heart, whereby I doe eralt my ſelfe in the vanity of my own conceit aboue thy maieſtie, and aboue my Brethren, whom thou haſt made farre more excellent then my ſelfe, as alſo the ſecurity of the fleſh, whereby

I put away the day of wrath farre from mee, promiſing to me ſelfe fréedome from all thy curſes and plagues, notwithſtanding I walke in ſinne and in the ſtubbornnes of mine owne heart, my hypocriſie wherby I am content my ſelfe onely with an outward name and profeſſion of religion and holineſſe before men, not regarding the truth and power of godlineſſe: beſides O Lord my life abounds in all Actuall tranſgreſſions againſt euery one of thy commandements, I haue liued in the abuſe of thy mercies, and haue not béene drawne néerer vnto thee. In neglect of thy Iudgements and fatherly

chaſtiſements both vpon others and vpon my ſelfe, and haue not profited therby to true repentance, and reformation of life: yea O Lord I haue liued in the pro
                     •
                  anation of thy holy ordinances, thy Word, Sacraments, and this exerciſe of Prayer, neither preparing my ſelfe hereunto 
                     •
                  right, nor being conuerſent therin, with that care. diligence and conſcience as I ought, and therfore thou maiſt iuſtly depriue me of that fruit of edification I might haue reaped by the reuerent and religious vſing of theſe diuine Ordinances. Many other ſins O Lord I haue committed, the leaſt whereof if

thou ſhouldeſt lay vnto my charge, I were neuer able to appeare in thy ſight, or to anſwere thée one of a thouſand. I beſeech thee deale fauourably with me, as thou art w
                     •
                  nt to doe with thy children, that call vpon thy name, and ſéeke thee in the truth of their hearts. In the midſt of Iudgement, I pray thée remember mercie; open my blinde eyes that I may come to a particular knowledge of my ſinnes: touch my hard and ſtony heart, that I may ſigh and grone vnder the burthen of them, beeing heartily diſpleaſed with my ſelfe, becauſe I haue diſhonored thy name, ſtirre vp my heart alſo that

I may hunger and thirſt after Chriſt and his righteauſnes, and after euery drop of his moſt precious bloud, in him alone to bee well pleaſed with me, and for his ſake to pardon and forgiue me all my ſinnes, waſh them all away in his bloud, and my heart from the filthineſſe and impuritie of them all, ſay vnto my ſoule, I am thy ſaluation, and let me féele thy good ſpirit perſwading my conſcience, by the inward teſtimonie of the ſame, that my ſinnes are pardoned, that I ſtand diſcharged of them all before thy Iudgement ſeate, and ſéeing it is the lot of thy children to be tryed ſundry waies, O

Lord prepare mee to the dayes of tryall: Arme mee with ſpirituall patience to endure thy hand, that I may méekely, and contentedly ſubmit my will, to thy good will and pleaſure, howſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe thée to deale with me, onely teach mee to profit vnder thy rod of correction, and grant that I may learne thereby to deny my ſelfe, to forſake this world, the pleaſures, profits, and preferments of the ſame: to make vile and baſe account of them, in reſpect of the heauenly things, deſtring to be diſſolued and to be with Chriſt, that ſinne and the corruption thereof, might bee aboliſhed, and I may

                  
                     •
                  aue neere coniunction 
                     •
                  ith thy Maieſtie in thine 
                     •
                  wne Kingdome: notwithſtanding, ſo long as 
                     •
                  ho
                     •
                   pleaſeſt to hold mee in this earthly Tabernacle, increaſe dayly more and more the graces of thy Holy Spirit in mee, as namely Faith, Repentance, Feare, Loue, Humilitie and a good Conſcience, and all other graces whereby thine Image may be renued in me, that the longer I liue in this world, the neerer I may drawe to thy Kingdome, indeauouring to ſerue and pleaſe thée, in righteouſnes and new obedience, all the dayes of my life. Be mercifull I beſéech thée to all

thine afflicted, whether with ſickneſſe vpon their beds, or diſtreſſed in conſcience for ſinnes, relieue them I beſéech thée accorcording to their ſeueral neceſſities: ſtrengthen them in their weakenes, ſanctifie all thy corrections vnto them, and grant them a ſpeedie iſſue in thine owne good time, as ſhall ſeeme beſt to thy godly wiſedome. Be mercifull to all my friends in the fleſh, and acquaintance in the Spirit: and all other for whom I am bound by any duty to pray for: granting vnto vs all a ſupply of all graces néedefull for our preſent ſtate and callings, and eternall ſaluation of our

                  
                     •
                  oules: theſe mercies I beg 
                     •
                  t thy hands for Ieſus Chriſts ſake, in that prayer which he hath taught vs ſaying, Our Father, which art in heauen, &c.
               
            
            
               Morning Prayer for the Sabbath day, before hearing of the Word.
               O Moſt gracious God, and mercifull Father: wee thy vnworthy ſeruants, do here proſtrate our ſelues, our bodies and ſelues, to offer vp to thy maieſtie this morning ſacrifice of praiſe and thankſgiuing, for all thy mercies and bleſſings beſtowed vpon vs: we bleſſe thy name

for the quiet reſt, and comfortable ſléepe this night paſſed, from all perils and dangers of the ſame: wee confeſſe O Lord, if thou ſhouldeſt deale with vs according to our deſerts, thou mighteſt haue made our beds, our graues, and our ſléepe our death: euen for the ſins of this night paſt: O Lord we haue done more againſt thée this wéeke paſt then wee haue done for thée all the dayes of our life: yet notwithſtanding O Lord, manifold are thy mercies towards vs ſtill, and thy goodnes is infinite, in euery particular which befalleth vs we haue exceeding experience of thyloue. It is thy great mercy that

wee which haue ſo many wayes prouoked thée, ſhould be ſuffered to liue to behold the light & comfort of the day: but herein thy mercie is much more manifeſt that hauing béene heretofore profaners of thy Sabbaths, barren and hypocriticall profeſſors of thy holy word: yea, fruitleſſe and vnprofitable hearers of the ſame, that-we ſhould yet enioy the bleſſed opportunitie of another Sabbath. O Lord wee confeſſe thou mightſt iuſtly haue fatted vp our hearts, and giuen vs ouer to a Reprobate ſ
                     •
                  nce, and commanded the doores of thy Sanctuarie to be ſhutte vp againſt vs, and not to ſuffer

vs to tread within thy Courts. O Lord, grant that we may rate & eſtéeme thy mercy towards vs in this kinde, according to the true valew thereof, and that wee may not careleſſely forget this or any other of thy fauours, and as thou haſt of thy mercie brought vs to the beginning of this holy Sabbath: ſo we humbly pray thée enable vs to ſanctifie the ſame, as thou requireſt, and our dutie bindes vs: Lord make vs to remember, that this is not any Commandement, or Ordinance of man, but that it is thine owne ordinance, and one of thoſe lawes which thou wroteſt with thine owne hand,

namely, that this day ſhould after a more ſpeciall manner, be conſecrated to thy ſeruice: Lord giue vs grace, that in this thy Sabbath wee may beware of doing our owne works; or of ſéeking our own wils▪ or of ſpeaking vaine and idle words, that wee may ſeriouſly binde our ſelues to the performing of ſuch duties, as doe belong to this day. O Lord we know that herein wee ſhall méete with many corruptions, in this holy ſeruice, our own corrupt nature and affections will thinke it a taſke that can not bee endured: beſides in the world wee ſhall haue many examples of the wicked to draw and

entiſe vs frō our diligence and conſtancie in our godly courſe: but wée beſeech thée from the bottome of our hearts, to ſtrengthen vs, that theſe things preuaile not againſt vs, and grant that wee may more eſtéeme the performance of our duties to thy maieſty, then either the contenting of our owne corrupt natures, or wicked perſons; and ſéeing O Lord, we are now to heare thy holy word: we beſéech thée poure downe thy bleſſings vpon our endeauours this day, in time of prayer, grant vs reuerence to thy Maieſtie, faith in the promiſes of thy Sonne Chriſt Ieſus, a liuely féeling of our owne

wants, and a continuall remembrance of all thy former fauours, and mercies towards vs: and when we heare thée ſpeaking vnto vs by the mouth of thy Miniſters, bee pleaſed to giue vnto vs vnlocked and vnderſtanding hearts, rectifie our Iudgements, ſanctifie our affections, and ſtrengthen our memories, that thoſe holy inſtructions, which wee ſhall heare reuerently, and attentiuely, may of vs be practiſed faithfully and effectually in the whole courſe of our liues, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord: giue vnto the preacher O Lord a doore of vtterance, touch his tongue with a Cole from

thine Altar, that he may deliuer the word of life boldly, that whatſoeuer corruption lies hid in our hearts, the power of thy holy word may ſearch and diſcouer it to the very bottome: and grant that wee may not heare it as the word of a miſerable mortal man, like vnto our ſelues, but as it is indéed the word of thee, the euerliuing God, who art able to ſaue and to deſtroy. And becauſe Sathan a deadly enemie to mans ſaluation, readie to picke the ſéede of thy word which is ſowne in our hearts: therefore wee pray thee O Lord, confound Sathan and all his workes, and be thou more mercifull

in bleſſing thine owne ordinance vnto vs, then Sathan either is or can be poſſibly malicious to hinder the ſame: for this end and purpoſe wee beſéech thée O Lord, to take out of our mindes all vaine and wandring thoughts, all couetous deſires of the world, and whatſoeuer elſe thou knoweſt to be an enemie to the ſauing hearing of thy holy word, that thy word may be vnto vs, not as our ſinnes deſerue it ſhould, but as it is in it ſelfe thy power to our ſaluation, that it may bee as ſeede ſowne in good ground, which bring forth in vs plentifull fruit, to thy glorie and our own comforts,

through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and onely Sauiour, to whom with thée and the Holy Spirit, bee all praiſe and power, maieſtie, and dominion: now and for euer.
               Amen.
            
            
               Euening Prayer on the Sabbath day.
               EUerlaſting God, and in Ieſus Chriſt our moſt mercifull and gracious Father: we thy poore ſeruants are here met together in the feare of thy maieſtie, and in the confidence of thy mercy to offer vp our eueuing ſacrifice of praiſe and thankſgiuing, for all thy mercies and bleſſings beſtowed vpon vs, in moſt

abundant manner: eſpecially O Lord, for that thou haſt not ſuffered vs to walke in darkneſſe, ignorance and blindneſſe, but haſt giuen vs thy moſt holy and bleſſed word, to be a lanthorne to our feete, and alight vnto our pathes, to eternall life. Wee render to thy maieſtie from the ground of our harts, humble thanks for that portion of thy bleſſed word, which this day through thy mercy we haue béene made par takers off: wee confeſſe O Lord, that wee haue heard the ſame with manifold infirmities, and much weakneſſe: neuertheleſſe wee pray thée let thy power appeare in our weakenes, and

vouchſafe to water with the dewe of grace, euery of theſe particular inſtructions, which this day or at any other time, we haue béen taught out of thy holy word, that they may be as ſeede ſowne in good ground and may bring forth much fruit to thy glorie, and our owne comforts in this world, and the eternall ſaluation of our ſoules in the world to come. O Lord we confeſſe thou mighteſt iuſtly haue giuen vs ouer to a reprobate ſence, for our negligence and careleſſenes in matters of thy worſhip and ſeruice: yca, euen O Lord, our laſt behauiour in hearing of thy holy word, hath béene ſo farre ſhort of

that which wee ought to haue don
                     •
                  , that we haue deſerued that thou ſhouldeſt make thy word a ſauour of death vnto vs, and not a ſauour of life: wee confeſſe O Lord, our knowledge is very ſmall in compariſon of the time, we haue enioyed the bleſſing of thy holy word, ſo plentifully preached among vs, and our practiſe is farre ſhort of our knowledge, which makes our caſe the more miſerable: but O Lord God ſeeing thou art ſo good vnto vs, in bringing vs to a view of our owne defects and wants, bee thou alſo mercifull in giuing vnto vs a heart to lament and to bee truely humbled before

thy maieſtie for them: wee beſéech thée in Ieſus Chriſt to bee a reconciled Father vnto vs, freely to pardon and remit all our ſinnes, and grant that the word which hath beene ſowne among vs this day, may take déepe roote in our hearts, that neither the ſcorching heate of perſecution or affliction cauſe it to wither, nor the thornie cares of the world choake it, but that wee may dayly grow vp to theſe holy duties, till at length we come to a perfect age in Chriſt Ieſus: and foraſmuch as we are taught in thy holie word to make prayers and ſupplications for all men: we are not onely mindefull

of our ſelues héere preſent, but of thy children and Church in al places. Bleſſe O Lord all thoſe that thou haſt ſet in authority ouer vs, eſpecially thy ſeruant & our ſoueraigne the kings Maieſtie, ſanctifie his go
                  
                     •
                  ernment, vnto vs. Bleſſe the Quée
                     •
                  e and there hopefull Progenie, the Nobilitie and Magiſtrates of the Land, grant that we may be godly & quietly gouerned vnder them. Bleſſe O Lord the faithfull Paſtors and miniſters, of thy holy word, to whom thou haſt committed the diſpenſation therof & the charge of thy people, yt both in their life & doctrin, they may be found faithful, ſetting only before

there eles, thy honour and glorie, and that by them, all poore ſhéepe, which wander & go aſtray may be brought home into thy fold: & o lord as féeling members of one body wherof Chriſt is head, we pray thée for all ſuch as are afflicted with any croſſe or tribulation, whether in body or minde or both, that it would pleaſe thée to giue them patience and conſtancie to endure thy holy hand ſo long as it ſhal pleaſe thée to exerciſe it vpon them, giue them ſtrength of faith againſt all aſſalts of Satan whatſoeuer, giue them the pardon & remiſſion of their ſins, ſealed vnto their conſtiences by the blood of thy déere ſonne Chriſt Ieſus:

Be pleaſed O lord to deale with them in mercy and not in iuſtice, knowing they are but duſt & aſhes, & in thy good time releaſe them out of that miſery they are either by life that they may glorifie thée here, or by faithfull departure they may bee glorified of thée hereafter. Theſe mercies and whatſoeuer elſe thou knoweſt neceſſary for vs we craue at 
                     •
                  hy hands in that forme of Praier which Chriſt hath taught vs in his Goſpell. Our father &c.
               
            
            
               
               A Praier before the receiuing of the Lords Supper.
               MOſt mercifull father, I thy vnworthy ſeruant, do héere render to thy Maieſtie humble thankes, for that it hath pleaſed thée, notwithſtanding al my former ſins & vnworthineſſe, to inuite me to this bleſſed banquet which thou haſt ordained for the ſtrengthning of my wea
                     •
                  e faith, and for the preſeruation of the memorie of Chriſts death. O Lord I beſéech thée giue me grace to put on the wedding garment, and séeing thou haſt commanded that I ſhould examine my ſelfe,

grant that I may not preſume to thruſt my ſelf into thy holy preſence, without a due examination of mine owne eſtate, both how I haue liued, and alſo how I am prepared for ſo weightie a ſeruice: I deſire to do it O Lord, help my deſire: I promiſe to liue more holy than I haue done, giue me power I pray thée to performe my promiſe. O Lord I confeſſe I am by nature a childe of wrath as well as others, giue me a true and liuely faith, wherwith, as with a ſpirituall hand, I may be ſpiritually ioined vnto thée, that in this outward pledge, wherby it hath pleaſed thée to ſtoope to my ſences, by viſible

ſignes of bread and wine, ſetting forth thereby inuiſible graces, ſo grant good Lord I may wholly reſt in thy death and paſſion, which is the matter of both thy Sacraments, cleanſe mee O Lord that thou maieſt enter into me, and maieſt vouchſafe to take vp thy habitation within me, I know O Lord that I am moſt vnworthy of this excellent mercy: but it is thou that for thine own names ſake, haſt ſhewed vnto me this great ſaluation, not ſparing thine only begotten ſon, whom when the fulneſſe of time was come, thou diddeſt ſend into the World, made of a woman,

that in him thou mighteſt receiue a full ſatiſfaction for my ſinnes, committed both in body and ſoule, remoue far from me O Lord all ſwelling, diſdainefull and vncharitable affections, for this is a feaſt of loue, therefore to it a malicious and reuengeful heart cannot be a welcome gueſt, and when I preſent my ſelf before thée at thy table O Lord I beſéech thée reſtrain wy wandring and idle thoughts, and let them bée ſeriouſly fixed on that which is the Sacrament namely the death of my ſauiour, quicken me vp to deuote and conſecrate my ſelf for euer, vnto his ſeruice, who hath vouchſafed himſelfe

to be a ſacrifice for me, and grant that when I ſée bread and wine on the table with my bodily eie, I may with the eie of my ſoule behold Chriſt on the Croſſe, and when I looke vpon the wine powred out of the veſſell, I may conſider how Chriſts blood was powred out for my ſinnes, and as I receiue this bread and wine into my ſtomack for bodily ſuſtenance, ſo cauſe me I beſéech thée to féede on the body and blood of our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt that it may be nouriſhment for my ſoule,
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A Praier after the Receiuing of the Lords Supper.
               O moſt louing and mercifull father, I cannot giue thée thankes worthy enough according to the deſire of my minde, for the ineſtimable treaſure of this heauenly foode, which thou haſt now made me partataker of in this heauenly myſterie, to wit the true bread of heauen that euerlaſting meat that abideth for eue
                     ••
                   thy bleſſed ſonne pur Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus in whom, I haue obtained, by the gift of this holy Communion, an earneſt of an immortall inheritance,

to come, O Lord let not this pretious blood of his be ſhed in vaine for me, but nouriſh my ſoule by his fleſh, and more and more clenſe it by his blood: quicken me O Lord I beſéech thée in this life, that in the body of his Church I may be partaker of all ſpirituall bleſſings through him, and as thou haſt ſeperated me O Lord from the wicked, in this holy banquet, ſo kéep me I pray thée from their corruptions, that I be not as a dog that returneth to his vomit, and as a filthy ſwine that is waſhed to her wallowing in the mire: but good Lord grant that I may ſeuſibly féele the death

of Chriſt to be ſwéete vnto my ſoule, as I doe now theſe creatures of bread and wine, to afforde a pleaſant taſte and refreſhing to my body, O heauenly Father let me not depart hence forgetful of thy kindneſſe, but grant that I may euen now at this preſent time, euen reſolue with mine owne ſoule to walke in a better courſe of holy obedience to thy Mageſty, than heretofore, hauing reſpect vnto all thy Commandements: and as I haue béene this day put in minde of the benefit of Chriſts death; ſo let mée euery day thinke often of his death, that thereby I may liue vnto righteouſneſſe,

and learne to die vnto ſinne, and grant that euer heereafter: I may ſo walke before thée that all men may ſée that I am become a new creature; thus endeuouriug to walke in this life according to thy will expreſſed in thy holy worde, I may heereafter enioy the ioies of thy kingdome in thy preſence there to abide for euer & euer
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A P
                     •
                  aier before a man begins the workes of his calling.
               O Almightie and euerliuing God, ſéeing all iuſt and lawfull vocations and callings grounded vpon thy worde, are warranted for vs to liue in, and alſo haſt commanded that no man ſhould be idle; giue me grace I humbly pray thée, that I may walke faithfully before thée as in thy holy preſence, ſo that no deceit, cunning or guile take any hold of me, but that I may labour truly and diligently, as doing thine owne work. Good Lord I beſéech thée ſo proſper and bleſſe

my godly endeuours, that in Ieſus Chriſt they may be a ſeale of thy fauour towards me, to maintaine me and mine, and that I may be alſo helpfull and beneficial vnto others, knowing it to be a better thing to giue than to receiue: and when it ſhall pleaſe thée O Lord by thy bleſſing vpon my labours, that my baſket and my ſtore is increaſed, grant that I may not aſcribe to mine owne induſtry & pains, but to giue thée the praiſe of it, to whom it wholly belongeth. And good father grant that I may not ſet my heart vpon theſe outward things, but rather as riches encreaſe, ſo I may be more and more affraid

of my ſelfe, leaſt the cares of this World, and the deceitfulneſſe of riches, choake in me the ſéedes of grace, & ſo ſteale my minde away from better things, & let me not I beſéech thée ſo eagerly follow the duties of my calling, that I ſhould abridge and ſkant my ſelfe of conuenient ſeaſons for heauenly and ſpirituall exerciſes, but alwaies make me behold thy all ſéeing preſence, in whoſe ſight all things are naked, that ſo I may approue my ſelfe vnto thée by a ſtreight & vpright cariage, and in ſo doing I ſhall imitate thy ſon Chriſt Ieſus, who in the daies of his fleſh humbled himſelfe, to liue as a man vpon this

earth, by following a painfull trade, and when the time was come that he was to publiſh himſelfe to the World, he was neuer idle but went about doing good, yea, with that alacritie and chéerefulneſſe, that it was his meat to do the will of his father that ſent him. O Lord grant that I may follow his ſteps endeuouring to pleaſe thée in the whole courſe of my life through the ſame Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and only Sauiour
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A Praier containing humble confeſſion of Sinne, and deſire of pardon.
               O Eternall God and mercifull father, infifinite in iuſtice and truth, taking vengance vpon all diſobedient children, and yet abundant in goodneſſe and mercy towards al ſuch as vnfainedly feare thy name and return vnto thée in ſincerity of heart and contrition of ſpirit, proſtrating their ſoules before thée. I moſt vile and wretched ſinner doe humbly beſéech thée of thy infinite mercy to haue compaſſion vpon my ſinnes, which are

ſo grieuous and ſo vile and loathſome, as thy pure eies can not abide to looke vpon them, I confeſſe O Lord, that all my life hath béen in ſinne, our fathers and mothers were ſinnefull euen from the ſ
                     •
                  ock of our great grandfather Adam, whoſe blindneſſe ſhould haue béen our light, and whoſe ſight was turned to our blindneſſe and darkeneſſe, by the deceitfull entiſements of that enemy of our ſaluation, that ſubtill ſerpent Satan, by whoſe baites our forefather being clothed with innocency and integretie and vnſpeakable hapineſſe, was moued by the deſire of the knowledge of that which thou wouldeſt

he ſhould haue béene ignorant of, by breaking of which thy commandement, he with the woman which thou gaueſt to bee a help & comfort vnto him, were according to thy determinate will, caſt out of Paradice, a place of ioy to a place of miſerie, and labour. I beſeech thee moſt gratious God, ſmite my hard and ſtonie heart, and make it euen to melt with in me, at the ſight of my manifold tranſgreſſions: ſettle in it I pray thée that godly ſorrow which cauſeth repentance, vnto ſaluation not to be repented of, humble my ſoule vnder thy mighty hand and ſuffer it not to fréeze in the dregs

of mine owne corruptions. and make my head full of water, & mine eies a fountaine of teares, which may run down like a riuer day & night: and grant O Lord, that I may ſorrow not ſo much becauſe of hell and damnation which is due vnto me for my ſinnes, but that my chiefeſt ſorrow may be this, that I haue offended ſo good and gratious a God as thou art, in abuſing thy mercies, and requiting thy excéeding loue with ſo greiuous ſins, O Lord I am bold to come vnto thée at this time, not in my owne name, for who am I that I ſhould dare to preſſe into thy preſence, but in the name and mediation

of thy déere and welbeloued ſon Chriſt Ieſus. Let his death & paſſion be a full ſatiſfaction for all my ſinnes, waſh me throughly in his blood from mine iniquities and clenſe me from my ſinnes, let not thy hand of iuſtice deſtroy me, but giue me the comfort of thy help and ſtabliſh me with thy truth. Moſt gratious father, thou which art the father of mercies and the God of conſolations, of thée I aſke mercy and forgiueneſſe of all my ſinnes, thou wouldeſt that none ſhould periſh, but that all ſhould be ſaued and come to the knowledge of thy truth: thou haſt commanded me moſt gratious God in thy

holy word to call and knock vnto thée, whereupon thou haſt gratiouſty promiſed ſo to finde, as to enter into me and to entertaine me. I beſéech thée make good my promiſe vnto me at this time, and regard my teares my ſighes and my groanes, which doe knock at the gate of thy mercies, I endeuour moſt gracious God and ſtriue to do thy will, Lord make good thy promiſe I beſéech thée in thy word and accept my deſire, and howſoeuer vilde wretch that I am, euer ſince I Couenanted with thée to doe thée ſeruice, I haue either vngratiouſly forgotten, or vngratefully remembred all

thy benefits, and haue not ſo eſtéemed thée for them, as I would haue done a mortall friend for a few common Curteſies, yet neuer the leſſe haue mercy vpon me. I can not excuſe my faults, and If I ſhould, yet my conſcienſe would condemne mée: for I had thy expreſſe word to ſtay me and mine owne conſcience to bridle me, yea I would haue allowed thoſe things which I did, if any other had done them but my ſelfe, now when my memorie is the handwriting of my debt, and my thoughts are willing w
                     ••
                  
                  neſſes againſt me, and mine owne knowledge condemneth me; what remaineth

but that I muſt néeds fall into thy hands, O Lord I beſéech thée according to thy wonted mercy and old louing kindneſſe, haue pity vpon me miſerable ſinner, and grant me a frée remiſſion of all my ſinnes and a perfect reconciliation with thée in Chriſt Ieſus: this O Lord I earneſtly craue at thy hands euen for the ſame Ieſus Chriſt ſake our Lord and ſauiour
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A godly Prayer in time of ſickneſſe or at the point of Death.
               ALmightie God, and in Ieſus Chriſt my moſt mercifull Father, I thy poore & wretched ſeruant, which doe here lye vnder thy hand, féeling thy puniſhment of the corruption and tranſgreſſion that is in me, and in all fleſh, euen this ſame ſickneſſe which at this time thou haſt ſent vnto mee, I doe here humble my ſelfe vnder thy hands, and acknowledge againſt my ſelfe my heinous ſins and corruptions, ſo that I confeſſe that I haue not only deſerued ſicknes of body:

yea, the ſeparation of my ſoule from my body, but alſo the ſeparation both of bodie and ſoule from thée and thy kingdome for euer: but good Father I humbly beſeech thee looke vpon me in the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt Ieſus, in whome thou haſt loued mee before the foundations of the world were laid: & though ſinne haue brought ſicknes, and ſicknes bee an vndoubted meſſenger of death, at the time thou haſt appointed: yet grant good Lord, that I may be vndoubtedly perſwaded in this, that death is ſwallowed vp in victorie, and that this death can no more hold me vnder, then it hath done

Ieſus Chriſt, into whom I am tranſlated: therefore I beſeech thée giue me a ſwéet féeling of my incorporation into Chriſt Ieſus, in whoſe death though I dye, yet I ſhall liue, by y• vertue of his reſurrection eternally: O Lord, in this my ſickneſſe, giue me I beſéech thée a déep touch and a ſenſible vnderſtanding of my ſinnes paſt, that I haue not vſed this temporall life which thou didſt lend mee more to thy glorie, that I did not ſo watch for death, as that I was no better prepared for it, that I was no more diligent in my calling to ſeeke the aduancement of thy glory. Now O Lord I pray thee take from me all guile

of Spirit, all diſpoſition to flatter or to ſooth vp my ſelfe, or to leſſen either the number or the qualitie of my ſinnes, cauſe mee euen to breake vp my hart, and to ſearch and trie my waies, that ſo out of the abundance of my feeling, I may poure out a moſt plentifull and ſincere confeſſion before thee, knowing it to be in vaine to endeuour to hide that from thee, which thou (before whom all things are naked) doeſt know better then my ſelfe: yea such is thy mercie, that when I do lay my ſinnes open, thou doeſt couer them: good Father I beſeech thee, giue mee that minde, which a seeke man

ſhould haue, and increaſe my patience with my pain, & call to my mind all which I haue heard, or read, or felt, or meditated, to ſtrengthen mee in this my viſitation, that though I neuer taught any good while I liued: yet I may now inſtruct others how to die, and to beare patiently whatſoeuer thy holie hand ſhall lay vpon them. Apply vnto me al thy mercies and merites of Chriſt Ieſus, as if he had died for me in particular, bee not farre from mee, I beſeech thee when the enemie comes to tempt me, but when hee is moſt buſie, then let thy good ſpirit be buſieſt alſo to defend me, and let my laſt houre

be my beſt houre, and my laſt thoughtes and words the beſt that euer I did thinke or ſpeake. Lord I know that I can not eſcape death, then why ſhould I feare it: and if I muſt dye, why not now, if it ſo pleaſe thee? for my chiefeſt happines is behind, and I can not haue it, vnles I go vnto it. I confeſſe O Lord my paines are great, but ſéeing I trauell to heauen, make mee patient I beſeech thee to beare my paines, and when it ſhall pleaſe thee to call me out of this vaile of miſerie, command thy holy Angels, I humbly pray thee to carrie my ſoule into the boſome of bleſſed A. braham,
                  
there to reſt with thee in eternall glorie for euer and euer.
               Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer of thanks-giuing vnto God, for Deliuerance out of any Sickneſſe.
               ALl honour and praiſe be giuen vnto thee, moſt gracious God, and merciſull Father, for all thy mercies and fauours, beſtowed vpon mee, euen from my cradle to this preſent houre: for my Election, Creation, Redemption, Iuſtification, Sanctification, Preſeruation, and that bleſſed hope of Glorification in the world to come. O Lord,

thou haſt loaded mee with thine abundant fauors, as if I had euer done thy will, although I neuer knew thée as I ought, loued thee as I ſhould, obayed thee as thou commandedſt, nor beene thankefull to thee as thou haſt deſerued: excéeding experience haue I had of thy goodnes many times, but neuer more then in my late ſickneſſe, wherewith thou didſt viſit mee. Lord grant that I be not in the number of thoſe, who are forward to aſke in time of trouble and affliction, but ſlacke and careleſſe, to acknowledge their thankfulnes, when mercy is beſtowed: like thoſe Lepers, that when they were cleanſed,

returned not to giue God thanks for his mercy. O Lord, thou haſt chaſtened me and corrected me: but herein appeares thy mercy, that thou haſt not giuen mee ouer to death. I confeſſe, thou mightſt iuſtly haue cut mee off & depriued mee of the reſt of my yeares: but it was thy good pleaſure to deliuer my ſoul from the pit of corruption. Imprint in my mind I beſéech thée, the vowes & promiſes, which I made in my ſickneſſe of better obedience and ſeruice to thy maieſtie, then heretofore, and grant that I may make conſcience to performe them: and let me know that howſoeuer thou haſt now giuen

me ſome little reſpite and prolonged my daies: yet I muſt not de
                     •
                  eiue my ſelfe, in putting farre from my remembrance the day of my death, but that I may make a holy vſe of this thy fatherly correcting me, and to expreſſe my thankefulnes in my life and conuerſation, in walking godly before thee, and in preparing my ſelfe for my end, that I may finiſh my courſe with ioy, and bee ready to meete my Sauiour in the clouds, and to reſt with him and his holy Angels for euer, and in his euerlaſting kingdom of glorie.
               Ame
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
               A Prayer for a Sick man.
               MOſt gracious God, and in Chriſt Ieſus our mercifull Father: wée poore wretches gathered here before thee, doe truely and moſt freely confeſſe, that wee are moſt vile and miſerable, vtterly vnworthy to ſpeake vnto thee, or to receiue the leaſt fauour from thee, by reaſon of our many and grieuous ſinnes, our blindnes of minde, ignorances, negligences, peruerſenes of heart, and vnſeruiceableneſſe in our liues: but with all we doe remember thy great loue, and mercifull promiſes made vnto them, that with

                  
                     •
                  enitent and humble ſpirits do ſue vnto thée: wherfore wee are enboldned to approch vnto thy throne of grace, in the name of thy Son Chriſt Ieſus, beſeeching thée for his ſake to forgiue vs all our ſinnes originall and actuall: waſh vs (we pray thée) in his bloud, and cloth vs with his righteouſnes: giue vs grace to turne vnto thée with our hearts from all our ſinnes, and inable vs by thy grace to ſerue thee in righteouſnes & holines all the dayes of our liues. Take care (we beſéech thée) of this thy Seruant, whom thou haſt afflicted before our eyes: O Lord receiue him to thy grace, and aſſure him of thy

glory: grant vnto him faith in thy promiſes, patience vnder thine hand, and hope of thy mercy: reſtore him (if it be thy bleſſed will) to his perfect health againe: and bleſſe all good meanes vnto it: if not, prepare him for death and for thy kingdome: comfort him with an aſſured hope of a ioyfull reſurrection, and whenſoeuer his ſoule ſhall depart from his body, grant that it may be preſented without all ſinne to thée, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and Sauiour.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A Prayer for a Woman with child.
               BLeſſed God, and gracious Father, I thy poore Handmaide doe héere humbly preſent my ſelfe before thy throne of Grace: beſeeching thee to forgiue me all my manifold ſins committed againſt thee: burie them in the death of my Sauiour, thy Son Chriſt Ieſus: O Lord I beſeech thee for his ſake to accept of me and this poore worme incloſed in my wombe: vouchſafe to giue vs thy Sonne, and to ſanctifie vs with thy Holy Spirit: grant me ſtrength and patience, I humbly intreat

thee, to indure and ouercome thoſe paines, which for my ſinnes are worthily impoſed on me. Aſſwage them, O Lord, I pray thee, and vouchſafe mee a ſafe deliuerance with ſafetie to this child within me, if it may pleaſe thy Maieſtie; ſo will I dedicate my ſelfe, and that which thou ſhalt giue me, to the glorie of thine holy Name: O Lord, heare: O Lord, help: be thou my God, and my guide, my ſaluation, and my ſuccour; not for my merites, but for the honour of thy mercie, and the all ſufficient merites of Ieſus Chriſt, to whome with thee, and thy Holy Spirit, three perſons, but

one euer-liuing and euerlouing God, bee all honour and glorie, for euer and for euer.
               Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer for a Midwife by her ſelfe alone.
               O Lord my God, I beſeech thee forgiue me my manifold ſins and wickednes, accept of me, I beſeech thée, in thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſt: honour mee with all the graces of thy ſpirit▪ grant me wiſedoms, modeſty, temperance, and a religious heart. Bleſſe mee in this calling, to which thou haſt appointed mee: proſper me, I pray thee, in the thoughts of my heart, the words of my mouth, &

the workes of mine hands. Be mercifull (I moſt humbly beſeech thée) to all thoſe women and children with whom I am to deale. Bee mercifull to this thy Seruant, that is now in trauel: O good Lord, comfort her, ſtrengthen her, and grant her a ſeaſonable and ſafe deliuerance: bleſſe her burthen, O Lord, and giue i
                     •
                   ſtrength & life to be borne: ſo will I render praiſe and thankſgiuing vnto thee. Heare O Lord, and grant mee my hearts deſire, for Chriſt Ieſus his ſake, mine onely Lord and Sauiour.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A Thanksgiuing priuate for the ſafe deliuerance of a woman, to bee ſaid by the Midwife, or ſome woman preſent at her Deliuerie.
               VVEE giue thee thankes (moſt mercifull God▪) for all thy mercies and fauours to vs, for Electing, Creating, Redeeming, Sanctifying, and Preſeruing vs: for our health, peace, and libertie, for the worde and Goſpell, and for preſeruing both it and vs from that barbarous Powder-Treaſon of wicked Papiſts: and finally for the

ſafe deliuerance of this thine Handmaide, and the birth of this Infant: wee beſeech thee giue vs thankefull heartes vnto thee, and grant that by true thankefulneſſe wee may conſecrate our ſoules, our ſelues, and ſeruices vnto thee all the dayes of our life, endeauouring to leade a godly, quiet and vertuous life before thée in this world, that wee may liue for euer with thée in the world to come, through Ieſus Chriſt our onely Lord and Sauiour. Amen. The Lord bee mercifull vnto vs, ſend health and ſtrength vnto this thine Handmaide, Lord bleſſe this Childe, vouchſafe it

life, that it may by Baptiſme bee admitted into thine houſe, and haue intereſt in thy Couenant, the Lord keepe vs all, and honour vs with his grace in this life, and with immortall glorie in the life to come.
               Amen,
            
            
               A Prayer in time of Peſtilence, or any other Contagious Sickneſſe.
               MOſt gracious and euerliuing god, whoſe Iudgements are vnſearchable, and workes paſt finding out, much leſſe to bee comprehended within our weake & ſhallow braines, we can not wonder that we

are afflicted with ſo many ſorts of diſeaſes, and extraordinarie viſitations, for wee confeſſe that our ſinnes haue prouoked thee not only to take vengeance vpon our bodies and thoſe things that belong vnto vs for this life, but alſo euen that thou ſhouldeſt ſeperats both our bodies and ſoules from thee for euer to the e
                     •
                  
                  ternall deſtruction of both: and howſoeuer this iudgement of the plague be grieuous vpon vs, yet it is the ſmalleſt part of our deſert, and if thou ſhouldeſt make it cleaue faſt to our loines, and euen ſweep vs off from the face of the earth, as dung is ſwept away till all be gone, wee haue nothing

to except againſt thee, but that thou art iuſt, for wee haue multiplyed our ſinnes before thée, and haue preſſed thee with the burden of them as a Cart is preſſed with ſheaues: ſo that neither wee nor our Fathers haue kept thy Commandements: and beſides O Lord we muſt confeſſe thou haſt iuſtly plagued vs, becauſe wee haue abuſed and ſet at naught, thy manifold mercies, which thou haſt ſhewed vnto vs for our conuerſion, as the continuall admonitions giuen vnto vs by thy miniſters, riſing early and late, yet wee haue hardened our heartes as in the day of ſlaughter, and haue deſpiſed thy Prophets,

and put farre from vs the euill day, thereby adding drunkennes to thirſt: yet notwithſtanding wee will returne vnto thée that haſt ſmitten vs, for thou art the father of mercies and the God of forgiueneſſes: O remember vs not according to our ſins, but according to thy mercies, O Lord thinke vpon vs for thy goodneſſe ſake, cleare vs wee beſeech thee, and make vs frée from the contagion and Leproſie of ſinne, and then we ſhall bée fréed from the noyſome infection of the Peſtilence, ſo that it ſhall not hurt vs, teach vs O Lord to feare ſinne as we feare the ſickneſſe it ſelfe, for it is the

cauſe of this waſting ſickneſſe which is the fruit of ſinne, but this good Father belongeth onely vnto thee; for thou canſt doe both the one and the other: therefore comfort vs wee pray thee according to the dayes that thou haſt afflicted vs: turns vs vnto thée O Lord, and we ſhall be turned, conuert thou vs and we ſhall be conuerted: If wee humble our ſelues and meete thee with true faith, vnfained repentance, with hartie ſorrow and teares, thy wrath ſhal ceaſe, and then thou wilt call in againe thy meſſengers, commanding thine Angell to put vp the ſword of vengeance into the 
                     •
                  heath, and

ſhew mercie vpon vs, and if it bee thy good pleaſure to ſtretch out thy hand ſtil, and chaſtiſe vs yet more for our Iniquities, giue vs wee pray thée grace and ſtrength patiently to endure thy fatherly hand, to the vtmoſt tryall, and teach vs that whenſoeuer wee are iudged by thée, we ſhall not be iudged with the world, and much better is it for vs to bee temporally corrected in this life, then eternally to ber tormented in the life to come: therefore O Lord, we chooſe rather to fall into thy hands, then in to the hands of men, becauſe thy grace is great, and mercie is with thee that thou maiſt bee feared,

laying faſt hold of faith in Chriſt Ieſus, who is theeuerlaſting propitiation and perfect ſacrifice for all our ſins, & in whom alone thou art well pleaſed, to whom with thée & thy good ſpirit, bee all honour & glory now and for euermore.
               Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer for the Kings Maieſtie & the whole State.
               OEternall God & gracious Father, who in thy eternall counſell, and ineſtimable wiſedome, haſt ordained Kings & Princes to be as Fathers & Nurſes to thy church, and as thou haſt giuen them high ſoueraignty, and ſpeciall authority, ſo thou haſt communicated

vnto them thine own names and titles, both to put them in continuall remembrance that they are for thée, & for thy glory, and alſo vs thy ſubiects of that ſame continuall loue & obedience which we owe vnto thy Maieſtie, that vnder them we may be godly and peaceably gouerned: & ſeeing y• by thée Kings raigne, and thy ſoueraigne authority reacheth ouer all, wee beſéech thée good Lord, ſhew thy mercy vpon al chriſtian Kings & Princes, calling on thy name: eſpecially wee pray thée multiply thy graces vpon thy ſeruant & our dread ſoueraigne, Iames by thy prouidence, King of great Britaine, France &

Ireland, defender of the faith. As thou haſt doubled his croune & lifted his head aboue others: ſo wee pray thée double & redouble thy graces and bleſſings vpon him both ſpirituall & temporall: make vs euermore truely thankfull we beſéech thée for all thy preſeruations of him from thine & his enemies: eſpecially graunt that wee may neuer forget that ineſtimable deliuerance of his Maieſtie & the whole ſtate, from that more then barbarous and helliſh plot of the gunpowder treaſon, kéepe him as the Apple of thine eye, & preſerue his Royall perſon from al conſpiracies and treaſons both forraine & domeſticall, and

continue his gouernment ouer vs: and grant there may not want one of that ſtock to ſit vpon this throne till thy ſon come to Iudgement. Bleſſe in like maner we beſéech thée the Quéenes Maieſty, make her a helpe vnto him in al good things: powre downe thy bleſſings vpon there Royal progeny, and graunt that they may daily grow in grace & fauor both with God and man, & make them loyall to his maieſty all the daies of his life, alwaies afford thy gracious preſence to the honorable lords of his Maieſties Counſell: be thou preſident ouer them at their table, & order their purpoſes, and direct all their conſultations,

as may make moſt for thy glory, the honour of the King, and the good of this land and commonwealth: giue thy bleſſing vpon all the Magiſtrates of the land and courts of Iuſtice: grant that they may drawe forth the ſword of iuſtice, for the deſtruction of vice and wickednes, and for the maintenance of Gods true religion & vertue. Bleſſe O Lord the houſe of Aaron & Tribe of Leui, the miniſters of thy word and Sacraments: and ſéeing theſe are thy Stewards which thou haſt ſet ouer vs, to diſperſe thy miſteries: good Lord giue vs grace, not to eſtéeme of them as mere mortall men like our ſelues, but as they

are indéed the embaſſadors of thée, the euerliuing God, who art able to ſaue and to deſtroy; and that they are not ſuch as raigne ouer our faith, but as helpers of our ioy, which preach not themſelues, but Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and count themſelues our ſeruāts for Ieſus ſake: furniſh them liberally of thy rich treaſure with all graces, fit for ſo excellent a work, & giue vs grace with our beſt endeauours to further y• maintenance therof: to this end bleſſe al ſchooles of learning, eſpecially both the Uniuerſities of this land, that daily there may procéed ſuch as may be profitable Inſtruments both for church & common welth,

and in theſe our prayers we are not vnmindful of the afflictions of Ioſeph, wee beſeech thée ſend thy Spirit of comfort, to all the afflicted whatſoeuer whether in body or in mind or both: eſpecially thoſe that ſuffer for the teſtimony of a good conſcience: wee beſéech thée to ſtand by them in al their diſtreſſes, and bee thou more neere to defend them, then Sathan either is or poſſible can be to ſeduce & draw thē from thée: giue them patience to endure whatſoeuer it ſhal pleaſe thée to lay on them, harty and true repentance for all their ſins, & an happy iſſue from their miſeries, as ſhall ſéeme beſt to thy godly wiſedome, either

by life that they may glorifie thée in this world, or by faithfull departure they may be glorified of thee in the world to come, and that for Ieſus Chriſts ſake our Lord and only Sauior; In whoſe name wee conclude theſe our weake prayers as he hath taught vs. Our Father which art in heauen, &c.
               
            
            
               A Praier containing the ſumme of the Lords Praier.
               
                  OVr Father which art in Heauen. Moſt gratious Lord God, we thy children & ſeruants in thy only ſon Ieſus Chriſt our ſauiour, aſſured héere of by thy good ſpirit, do hartily deſire thée as we are made, redéemed,

& ſanctified to praiſe thée, giue vs thy children grace to acknowledge thée the only true God and to worſhip thée in thought, word and déede: that ſo thy name by vs may be hallowed, teach vs which way we may moſt honour thee while we remaine héere, & to ſet our hearts wholly thereunto, kéep vs from taking any part of thy glory to our ſelues, and let vs account it our greateſt honor to honor thée, and be euer afraid of diſhonoring thée any way, & becauſe we haue no power nor know the meanes of our ſelues to ſerue thée; let thy kingdome come, giue vs thy word to be faithfully and painfully

preached among vs, with thy holy ſpirit to worke inwardly in our hearts, faith, feare, hope, and loue, with al heauenly graces that we may become thy ſubiects & heires of thy kingdome; ſend vs zelous gouernors & faithfull Preachers, that Satan, Antichriſt, hereſies, vice & ſciſmes, may bee vtterly deſtroied, & our déere and pretious ſoules ſaued in the day of the Lord Ieſus, which day wee pray thée to haſten; in the meane ſeaſon thy will bee done in earth as it is in heauē: make vs to forſake our ſelues & all worldly vanities, doing nothing but what thou cō
                  mandeſt, and all that thou doeſt will vs to do it hartely,

ioyfully, readily, faithfully, and with a conſtant heart, as thy Saints & Angels in Heauen performes it, and becauſe our bodies craue neceſſary ſuſtenance without which we cannot ſerue thée giue vs this day ourdaily b cad. We beféeth thée to bleſſe our daily labors to get ſufficient maintenance and al neceſſaries, that we may be able to do thy will, Let neither care nor couetouſnes oppreſſe vs, but wholly commit our ſelues to thy faithfull prouiding for vs, and good father forgiue vs our treſpaſſes. Let not our ſinnes either hinder or depriue vs of thy mercies, we confeſſe that wee haue grieuouſly

ſinned againſt thée, both originally & actually ſo as it is thy méere mercy the waight of them haue not preſſed vs downe to the pit of hell, but thou art mercifull in Chriſt Ieſus and for his ſake we beseech thée pardon 
                     ••
                   as thou haſt promiſed and perſwade our conſciences that we are forgiuen by giuing vs grace to forgiue them that treſpaſſ▪ againſt vs, giue vs power to continue in all godly courſes & lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill, that neither in inward or outward temptation we may euer bee vanquiſhed, but may euer ouercome, which wee deſire (O father of heauen). as thou haſt all

rule and power and maieſt haue glorie and praiſe of hereafter, for euer & euer, and as we are bound in dutie for our election, creation, redemption, iuſtification, ſanctification, for all earthly benefits, and ſpirituall comforts and the certaine hope of eternal glory, to which glorie O father bring vs & that for Chriſt Ieſus ſake our Lord and only ſauiour
               Amen.
            
            
               A praier vpon the Articles of the Creede.
               O Heauenly father from whom all good gifts come, I pray thée in thy mercy through Chriſt Ieſus my ſauiour to grant me

thy gratious gift of a ſound iuſtifying faith which I neither haue nor can haue by nature, that I may beleeue in thee O God only, the father Almightie, maker of heauen and earth, and alſo in Ieſus Chriſt thy only ſonne and our Lord, which was conceiued by the holy Ghoſt, bo
                        •
                     ne of the Virgine Marie, ſuffered vnder Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and buried, that deſcended into hell, and roſe againe the third day, and aſcended into heauen, and there ſi
                        •
                     te
                        •
                     h at the right hand of thee (O God) father Almightie, from whence hee ſhall come to iudge vs all both quick and dead: & that I may b
                        •
                      le
                        ••
                     e in the holy Ghoſt, and that

there is a Catholick church a Communion of Saints, the forgiuenes of ſins, and the reſurrection of the body, and life euerlaſting, that ſo I may be truely perſwaded of thy fatherly prouidence ouer me, & what Chriſt hath done, that is for my deliuerance, & the holy ghoſt to be my comfort & aſſiſtance, being a member of the church, and making me effectually partaker of all the priuileges thereof to my endleſſe ioy & happines, which O father giue vnto me I beſéech thée for Chriſts ſake.
               Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer vpon the ten Commandements.
               O Eternal Lord God I thy humble ſeruant,

that do owe all dutifu
                     •
                  l obedience to thée and am made partaker of manifold benefits both for body & ſoule, which then by the bloud of Chriſt thy only ſon haſt deliuered from that euerlaſting bondage which by corruption of nature I was held in, & from euerlaſting death which I was ſubiect vnto by daily breaking of thy cōmandements: I beſéech thée giue me grace now and euer hereafter to haue none other Gods but thée: neither to make to my ſelfe any grauen Image, nor the likenes of any thing in heauen aboue or in the earth beneath, nor in y• waters vnder the earth, to bow down to them to worſhip them.

Nor that I take the name of thée my Lord God in vaine. Remembring to kéep holy the Sabath day, and to labour ſix daies doing all that I haue to do; but in the ſeuenth day, which is the Sabath of thée O Lord my God: giue me grace to do no maner of work. And that I may honour my father and mother. Neuer to commit any murther, neither Adulterie. Nor to ſteale. Nor to beare falſe witneſſe againſt my neighbor. Nor to couet my neighbours houſe, nor his wife, nor his ſeruant, nor his maide, nor his Oxe, nor his Aſſe, not any thing that is his, that ſo I may do alwaies my duty to thee, O God, al the daies of my life,

beléeuing, fearing, worſhipping, giuing thankes, & louing thée with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my ſoul, with al my ſtrēgth, and louing my neighbour, friend or foe euen as my ſelfe, to doe to all men euen as I would they ſhould doe to me▪ to loue honour & ſuccour my father & mother, to honour and obey the King, Quéene, Prince, & their miniſters, to ſubmit my ſelfe to all my gouernors, ſpirituall & temporall, to order my ſelfe to all my betters, lowly & reuerently, to hurt no body by word nor déede, to be true and 
                     •
                  uſt in all my dealings, to beare no malice in my heart, to behaue my ſelfe in the whole courſe

of my life, as thou maiſt be glorified, my duty diſcharged, my conſcience comforted, my brethren woone or confirmed, and thye mouths of all the wicked ſtopped, which O father vouchſafe to grant me, for thy great goodnes ſake, & thy beloued ſonnes 
                     •
                  ake Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, to whom with thée and the holy ſpirit, bee all praiſe and honour giuen by me & all thy Saints this time & for euermore.
               Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer containing the doctrine of the ſacraments.
               O Moſt merciful father, thou haſt giuen met not onely thy holy word to teach me faith & obedience, but alſo two Sacraments,

outward ſignes and ſeales of inward graces, Chriſt & all his benefites. Giue mee wiledome O Lord, to acknowledge the benefite and thankfully vſe the ſame, beſéeching thée that as by baptiſme I am receiued into the church, & by water outwardly am waſhed: ſo let it ſcale, the aſſurance of the purging of my ſoule from ſin, by Chriſts bloud, and appeare outwardly by thy holy ſpirit, killing in mee corruption, and ſtirring me vp to holines of life, reioyſing in my new-birth, and growing more & more therin dayly; that ſo I may prepare my ſelf in knowledge, in true repentance, hartie loue, and a ſound faith, to

come & bee partaker of the Lords ſupper, which is the other ſacrament to nouriſh me vp in the ſame, where by the ſignes of bread broken, and wine poured out, taken and giuen, Chriſt my ſauiour with his benefits is offered, that gaue his body & ſhed his blood for me. Now, O Lord, as by my hand I take the bread & wine, and with eating and digeſtion receiue alſo the ſtrength to nouriſh my body: ſo I pray thee giue me faith, to apply Chriſt with his merites, that I may féele the vertue therof to nouriſh my ſoule, that I may not come vnprepared, leaſt I eate & drinke 
                     〈◊〉
                   owne damnation, in 
                     •
                  andling ſuch holy myſteries:

neither let mee contei
                     ••
                  e or neglect to be partaker when by the Church thou doeſt call me, but obediently & thankefully communicat with my breathren▪ to ſtrengthen my faith, encreaſe mutuall loue, ſhewing obedience & Gods mercy in Chriſts death, till hee come to iudge vs all at that great day, & that for Chriſts ſake, our Lord and onely Sauiour.
               Amen.
            
            
               Prayer before meate.
               MOſt gracious God, and mercifull father, from whom all good gifts procéed, we poore wretches beſéech thée to ſanctifie to our vſes theſe thy good creatures which we ſhal receiue

now of thy mercy: giue vs grace wee pray thee to vſe them ſoberly & purely according to thy will, & grant y• by theſe bleſſings which thou ſo largely beſtoweſt vpon vs, wee may ſee thy loue towards vs, ſeeking likewiſe for that ſpirituall bread of thy word, which is the foode of our ſoules, that by the ſame we may be nouriſhed to eternal life, throgh Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               Thanksgiuing after meat.
               VVE confeſſe O Lord, it is of thy only goodnes & mercy that wee liue, moue, and haue our beeing in this life, and all things whereby our life is preſerued

comes from thy maieſtie: good Lord wee beſéech thée make vs thankefull for theſe & al other thy mercies both ſpirituall & temporall: and as thou haſt now fed our bodies with corporall foode: ſo good Lord we pray thée nouriſh our ſouls with that heauenly Manna the food of eternall life, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord
               Amen.
            
            
               Another before meate.
               ALinightie God, which haſt created meates & drinkes for mans ſuſtenance, ſanctifie them to the vſe of thy children, without difference, that they may vſe them for their health, & haſt giuen ſtrength to nouriſh

our bodies to thy pleaſure: make vs ſober and thankfull partakers of thē, & graunt that the end of our eating & drinking may tend to enable vs to ſerue thée in our ſeuerall places through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               Another after meate.
               VVE humbly pray thée moſt gracious God and mercifull to ſanctifie theſe thy good creatures, which now of thy mercy we haue receiued at thy hands, that they may turne to the nouriſhment of our bodies where unto thou haſt appointed them: and teach vs to remember that it is thou which to vs and to all thy

creatures giueſt food in due ſeaſon, and therfore that we abuſe not thy mercies, but in ſome good meaſure endeuour to walke worthie of them in the courſe of our liues: through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               Another before meate.
               VVE magnifie thygreat name moſt gracious God, for all thy mercies beſtowed vpon vs from our cradles, to this preſent, eſpecially that thou haſt giuen vs Chriſt Ieſus, & with him al the bleſſings belonging to this life, and to that which is a far better: wee thank thée for all temporall bleſſings, theſe which wee are now about to receiue

grant that our weak bodies being by them refreſhed, we may much more ſéek for the foode of our ſoules, which abideth vnto eternall life, that ſo we labouring to do thy will commanded in thy word here in this life wee may hereafter enioy y• ioies of thy kingdome in thy preſence, there to abide for euer and euer.
               Amen.
            
            
               Another after meate.
               IT is thou O Lord, who haſt elected, created, redéemed, iuſtified, ſanctified preſerued, and now at this preſent fed vs; thy name be bleſſed & praiſed both now and for euer. God ſaue his church vniuerſal the Kings Maieſtie, the Quéen & their

royall progeny, forgiue vs all our ſins, comfort the afflicted, remoue thy iudgements farre from vs, ſend thy Goſpell a frée paſſage, and grant vs & al the Iſrael of God, grace, mercy, faith, truth, & peace in thy Sonne Chriſt Ieſus our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               Another before meate.
               ETernall God, which haſt commanded vs in thy holy word, that whether we eate or drinke, or whatſoeuer we do, al ſhould be done to the praiſe of thy name, and whereas any of thy creatures which we receiue, can not be auaileable to the nouriſhment of our bodies, except they bee ſanctified

by thy word & prayer: wee beſéech thée bleſſe theſe thy good gifts, which now wee are about to receiue of thy bounteous liberalitie, that wee being by them ſtrengthened, may be better enabled to procéed in the diſcharge of our ſeueral Callings, to thy glorie, and our owne comfort, through Ieſus Chriſt.
               Amen.
            
            
               Another after meate.
               HUmble and hartie thanks be rendred vnto thée moſt gracious God, for all thy mercies, for the cōfortable refreſhing which thou haſt now vouchſafed vnto vs: we beſéech thée forgiue vs our ſinnes, which makes vs vnworthy of the

leaſt of thy mercies: pardon wee beſéech thée our great vn thankfulnes, and let thy mercy to our bodies ſtir vp thankfulnes in our ſoules; God preſerue his Church, the Kings Maieſty, the Quéen, their progeny, theſe Realms, increaſe our faith, proſoer thy word & Goſpell among vs, confound Satan and all the euemies of thy truth, and grant vs mercie and peace in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               Grace before meate.
               MOſt gracious father, wee beſéech thée forgiue vs all our ſinnes, bleſſe theſe creatures vnto our vſe, that they may be to our

health, ſtrength & comfort, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               Grace after meate.
               VVE giue thée thankes, moſt merciful father, for féeding vs at this time, and for al thy fauors of this life, and of the life to come: we beſéech thée continue thy louing kindneſſe ſtill vnto vs. Lord ſaue thy Church, our King and his Realines, and giue thy Goſpel an happy paſſage amongſt vs, to thy glory, and our comfort, through Ieſus Chriſt out Lord, and Sauiour.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               Godly Directions for the right Receiuing of the Lords Supper.
               1 THere is required preparation as the commandement of the Apoſtle plainely ſhewes, which pertaines to al communicants without exception: Let euery man examine himſelf. 1 Cor. 11. 28.
               
               2 Knowledge of y• grounds of religion, eſpecially of the vſe of both Sacraments. 1. Cor. 11.. 26.
               
               3 Faith, for al ſacraments are ſeales of righteouſneſſe of Faith. Rom 4. 11.
               
               4 Repentance, which ſtands in a heartie ſorrow for ſinnes committed in hatred and deteſtation of the

ſame, & a reſolued purpoſe of amendment and obedience for the time to come.
               5 Charitie towards men; for this Sacramentis a Communion, wherby all the receiuers iointly vnited together in loue, do participate of one and the ſame Chriſt.
               6 When wee ſee two ſignes to be receiued, bread and wine, wee muſt call to minde that Chriſt is our perfect Sauior both bread & water of life. Heb. 7. 25.
               
               7 When we beheld the bread and wine ſet apart by the Miniſter, and conſecrated by repeating the promiſe and prayers made for that end, wee muſt call to minde that Chriſt was ordained

by God, to bee our Mediatour and Sauiour. Ioh. 6. 27. Acts 2. 23, 36.
               
               8 When we ſée the bread broken, and the wine powred out, we are to meditate of Chriſt ſeriouſly, who was crucified for vs, & broken by his ſufferings wherby life and righteouſneſſe was performed vnto vs: Zach. 12. 10.
               
               9 The giuing of Elements into the receiuers hands, ſignifies vnto vs that God doth truely and really giue Chriſt with his merites to euery beléeuing receiuer, which ſhould put vs in mind of the vnſpeakable loue of God towards vs.
            
            
               
               Rules to know true faith, by the fruits thereof.
               T
                     •
                  iue and ſauing faith is a ſupernaturall gift of God, and a ſpeciall perſwaſion wrought by the holy Ghoſt, in the hearts of thoſe, that are effectually called concerning there reconciliation and ſaluation by Chriſt, this ſaith in whomſoeuer it is, it hath theſe effects.
               1 To beléeue that the Scriptures contained in the old & new Tèſtament; are the very word of God, and ſo much as is néedfull to be beléeued vnto ſaluation, is contained therein: Iohn 5. 39.
               
               2 There will bee an vnfained

deſire to be taught and inſtructed in the word of God, and to haue the vnderſtanding thereof, and moſt to affect thoſe meanes which are moſt effectual to that end and purpoſe.
               3 There will be a continuall ſorrow and griefe for thy ignorance and defectiue vnderſtanding of the word of God, and no marnell; for what can be more greiuous to the children of God, then not to know, or vnderſtand, or not to remember the euidence of his owne euerlaſting eſtate, & the will of his Maſter.
               4 He will examine himſelfe whether his reading or hearing the word, read or preached, his meditating

conference and ſtudie in it do noriſh his loue and delight, and beléefe in it Pſ. 119. 92. 97.
               
               5 Where true faith is, there will be a credite & authority giuen to the word of God aboue al traditions whatſoeuer, and a reiection of whatſoeuer he knoweth to bee oppoſite to the ſame word of God Pſ. 119. 92. 113.
               
               6 There will be a lightneſſe & cheerefulneſſe in the conſcience when any thing is done agréeable to the word of God, and a trouble and heauineſſe in the ſame when any thing is done contrary to the ſame word Pſal. 119. 92.
               
               7 There will be a hoping

in the promiſes of God, an awfull feare of his threatnings a deſiring of the bleſſings and an endeuour to avoid the curſes contained in the word and an equall beléeuing the one as well as the other.
               8 There will be a continuall thankes giuing vnto God for his ineſtimable bleſſings in reuealing his word vnto him, and vouch ſafing liberty and meanes to come to knowledge and vnderſtanding of the ſame, whereby wée may ſee what a greeuous iudgement is on them from whom this word is hi
                     •
                  .
               9 Laſtly, the leaſt meaſure of true f
                     ••
                  t
                     •
                  , that a man can haue is 
                     •
                  hen of

an humble ſpirit, by reaſon of the ſmaleneſſe of his faith, he doth not yet féele the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes and yet is perſwaded that they are pardonable and therefore deſireth y• they ſhould be pardo
                     •
                  
                  ned, & with his whole hart praieth to God to pardon them. Eſay 42. 3. Luke 17. 5.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſtian directions neceſſarie to be practiſed in the courſe of our liues.
               FIrſt & aboue all things ſée that thou feare God and kéepe his commandements for this is the whole dutie of man Eccleſ. 12. 13.
               
               2 Exerciſe your minde in meditating often on the works of God, as his creating & gouerning the world, his proſpering and puniſhing the wicked, his bleſſing & correcting his children as ſéemeth beſt to his godly wiſedome Ier. 12. 2. Math. 25. 31. 32.
               
               3 Submit and humble your ſelfe for your ſinnes,

that the lord may raiſe you vp, for he that iudgeth himſelfe aright ſhall neuer be iudged of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 31.
               
               4 Loue all things for Gods ſake, and God cheifly for his owne, and remember you make him your friend, whoſoeuer be your enemy this you ſhall doe, if as an obedient childe, you liue alway in the eie of your heauenly father.
               5 Neuer make mention of God or any word or work of his, but with feare and reuerence, nor of any man but with loue, vſing his name as you wold haue him to vſe yours Deut. 28. 58. Math. 7. 12.
               
               6 Let no more holineſſe

appeare outwardly then you haue inwardly in your heart which God ſeeth, and in which he deſireth truth, neither pleaſe your ſelfe with your vnprofitablenes or vnwillingnes to perform that which is good. Ro. 12. 11.
               
               7 Speake often to the praiſe of God, neuer or little of your ſelf, becauſe many words can not want iniquitie, therefore ſpeake as few as you can, rather none, then vnprofitably. Pro. 17. 27. Iam. 1. 19.
               
               8 
                     •
                  re-patient vnder the correcting hand of God, becauſe, 1. He doth it. 2. 
                     •
                  ee doth it for your good: 3. 
                     •
                  ee will moderate it, and ſupply ſtrength, and in his

due time will deliuer you out of it. Pſal. 39. 9.
               
               9 Stick faſt to God as well in aduerſitie as in proſperitie, the one being as neceſſarie as the other. If you haue neceſſaries, bee humbled for them, and vſe them well, leſt hee that gaue them take them away. Iam. 1. 2.
               
               10 Take héed of performing holy duties for faſhion ſake, or without féeling and profit, for this is hypocriſie and profanenes. Heb. 3. 12. Esay 1. 11.
               
               11 Whatſoeuer you take in hand, firſt take counſell by Gods word whether it be lawfull or not, be it for profit or pleaſure. 2. Sa. 2. 1. 1. Sam. 30. 8.
               
               
                  12 When you awake frō ſléep, awake with God, and before all things giue him your firſt fruits and calues of your lips. 1. Confeſſion of ſin: 2. Requeſt of things neceſſary for bodie and ſoule. 3. Thankfulnes for mercies receiued, eſpecially your laſt preſeruation and reſt.
               13 Eſchew as much as in you lies all occaſions of ſin, & wiſely endeauor your ſelfe in ſubduing the leaſt, that at length the greater may take no place.
               14 Set your ſelfe carefully as in gods preſence, that ſetting him at your right hand you may not fall. 1. Cor. 10. 32.
               
               15 Uſe prayer as a doore

to open morning, & a locke to ſhut euening, firſt preparing your heart to ſeek the Lord, and thinke in the morning that day may bee your laſt day, & when you goe to bed, you know not whether you shall riſe, vnleſſe it be to iudgement.
               16 Waite vpon the Lord▪ and hee will direct your way, become his ſeruant in obaying his will, for this is your trueſt libertie. Pſal. 37. 34.
               
               17 Thinke euermore your preſent eſtate and condition, to bee the beſt eſtate for you whatſoeuer it bee, becauſe it is of the good prouidence of God.
               18 Account of euery day as of the day of death, and

therefore liue now euen as though you were now dying, and doe thoſe good duties euery day, which you would doe if it were your laſt day.
               19 When night comes before you lie down in bed, call to 
                     •••
                  d how you haue ſpent the day paſſed, & think that day loſt, wherein you haue not done ſome good.
               20 Alwaies remember that the greateſt work you haue to finiſh in this world is to die well, and to make a happy departure out of this world, for they which dye well, dye not to die, but to liue eternally.
               29 Eſtéeme not of your ſelfe better then you are, for the more vile you are in

your owne eyes the more glorious you are in y• eyes of God, for he reiecteth the proud, & giueth grace to the humble. 1. Pct. 5. 5.
               
               22 Redéeme the time paſt of your life with Repentance, and looke to the time preſent with diligence, and to the time to come with prouidence. Epheſ. 5. 16.
               
               23 Exerciſe your ſelfe in reading ſomething of gods word daily, & doe not only ſerue God your ſelf, but ſée that al that are vnder your charge do the ſame. Dev. 6. 6
               
               24 When you craue any bleſſings at the hands of God aſke them in the name of Chriſt, for no man commeth vnto the Father but by him. Ioh. 14. 6.
               
               
                  25 In all your affaires before you attempt any thing, firſt aſke counſell of God, whether it be lawfull to be done, and then you may doe it with a good conſcience. 1. Sam. 30. 8.
               
               26 Let your carriage in the world bee ſuch as may ſhew your diſlik of y• world: for if any man loue y• world, the loue of the father is not in him, becauſe the loue of the world is enmitie with God. 1. Ioh. 2. 25
               
               27 Arme your ſelfe continually againſt temptations, knowing them to bee your portion in this life, & learne from Chriſt and his Apoſtles to beare them patiently. 1. Theſ. 4. 4. 5.
               
               28 Be more afraid of ſecret

ſins thē of open ſhame, and be alwaies perſwaded you are in the preſence of God, and let all your actions be framed accordingly. Ier. 23. 24. Acts 17. 28.
               
               29 In all your afflictions and miſeries bee ſtill perſwaded that your puniſhment is farre leſſe then your 
                     •••
                  ne.
               30 If Gods mercies abounds to wards you, merwell not, if he mixe them with ſome croſſes, for God ſends bleſſings with croſſes, leſt you ſhould deſpaire, and croſſes with bleſſings, leſt you ſhould preſume.
               31 Such ontward bleſſings which you can not haue, deſire God, you may

not be vexed for them, for if you gréedily couet ſuch things, it is longer before you ſhall enjoy them, and more ſubiect to abuſe them when you haue them.
               32 When you would do any good or receiue any good, offer vp your endeuours in a ſacrifice to God in Chriſt, beſéeching God to giue his holy Spirit to ſanctifie his owne ſacrifice.
               33 When God viſites you with affliction kiſſe the todd
                     •
                  , and offer vp all to him, from whom you haue receiued your ſelfe, for the more you ſtruggle vnder his hand, the worſe it will be for you.
               34 In all your actions remember that God takes

notice not onely what you do, but whatſoeuer is done directly, or indirectly, all is done and gouerned by him.
               35 In health prepare for death, for no man can aſſure himſelfe to liue one houre.
               36 Omit no opportunitie to heare the word, & bſe all the meanes of your ſaluation, though you feele your ſelfe moſt vnwilling there vnto, for you knowe not when God will giue a bleſſing.
               37 The more godly thou art, and the more graces and bleſſings are vpon thée, the more néed thou haſt to pray, becauſe Satan is then buſieſt againſt thée, and becauſe thou art eaſily puffed vp with a conceited holines.
               
                  38 In prayer, deſire God to giue thée grace to remember the bedroll of thy ſinnes to humble thée, and the Catalogue of his mercies, truly to make thee thankefull.
               39 Conſent not to the leaſt ſin, for that is the way to fall in to many ſins, and if you make no conſcience of one ſinne, you will not make conſcience of many and great ſinnes.
               40 When thou prayeſt for any grace, & God granteth not thy deſire, but often giues thée the contrarie: yet conſider, God euer heares his children for their good, though not according to there deſires.
               41 Regiſter vp thy ſins

eſpecially thoſe that haue moſt diſhonoured God, and wounded thine owne conſcience, ſet them often in thy ſight, chiefely them when thou haſt occaſion to renew thy repentance that thy heart may be thereby humbled.
               42 Labour to ſée & feele thy ſpirituall pouerty, the want of grace in thy ſelfe, eſpecially thoſe inward corruptions of vnbeliefe, pride, ſelfe-loue, &c.
               43 Endeuour to ſhewe thy ſelf a member of Chriſt and a ſeruant of God, not only in the generall calling of a Chriſtian, but alſo in thy particular calling, in which thou art placed.
               44 Eramine the Scriptures

diligently to ſée what is ſin, and what is not ſin, in euery action, and ſo carrie in thy heart a conſtant purpoſe not to ſinne, in any thing: for faith and the purpoſe of ſinning can not ſtand together.
               45 Striue to obey God in al his commandements, and let thine endeuour bee ſutable to thy purpoſe, to doe nothing at any time againſt thy conſcience rightly enformed by the word of God.
               46 When thou falleſt into any ſinne, a great or little, againſt thy purpoſe and reſolution, reſtnot in it, but ſpéedily recouer thy ſelfe by repentance, humble thy ſelfe, confeſſe thine offence,

and by prayer intreat the Lord to pardon the ſame.
               47 Make conſcience of idle, vaine, vnhoneſt and vngodly thoughts, for theſe are the ſéedes and beginnings of actuall ſinne, in word and déede, the want of this care is oftentimes fearefully puniſhed.
               48 Whatſoeuer good thing thou goeſt about, doe it not in a conceite of thine own worthines, but in humilitie, aſcribing the power and praiſe thereof to God, leſt hee curſe thy beſt doings.
               49 Uſe outward things as meate, drinke, apparell, in that manner and meaſure that they may further godlines, and may be as it

were ſignes, in which thou maiſt exprſſe, the hidden grace of thy heart.
               50 Labour not to goe beyond any, vnleſſe it be in good things, make conſcience of thy word, and let it bee as a bond: deale iuſtly with all men, and in all companies, either do good or take good.
            
            
               Signes of Saluation in whomſoeuer they appeare.
               LOue to the children of God. 1. Iohn 3. 14.
               
               Delight in y• word of God. Pſal. 119. 111.
               
               Often and feruent prayer. Pſal. 45. 18.
               
               To bee zealous of Gods glorie. Rom. 12. 11.
               
               
                  Deniall of any 
                     •
                  uffi
                     ••••
                  
                  cy in our ſelues. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
               
               Patient bearing the croſſe with profit and comfort. Ma
                        •
                     . 16. 24.
               
               Faithfulnes in our 
                     •••
                   li
                     •
                  gs which God hath placed vs in. 1. Cor. 7. 20.
               
               Honeſt, iuſt, and con
                     •••
                  
                  onable dealing in 
                     •••
                   our actions amongſt m
                     •
                  n. 1. Cor. 10. 33.
               
               Aſſured faith in the promiſes of God. Acts 16. 31. Sinceritie of heart. Pro. 11. 20.
               
               The Spirit of Adoption. Rom. 8. 25.
               
               Sound regeneration and 
                     •
                  anctification. Rom. 8. 14.
               
               Inward peace. Rom. 5. 
                        •
                     .
               
               Groundedneſſe in the truth. Col. 1. 23.
               
               
                  Continuance to the end. Mar. 24. 13.
               
               If theſe graces be in vs and abound, they wil make vs neither idle, nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that is, they will make vs ſound and ſincere profeſſors of the Goſpell. 2. Per. 
                        •
                     . 8.
               
            
            
               7. Obſeruations needfull to the reuerent reading, and hearing of the Word of GOD.
               1 PReparation for the manner of reading it. Eccleſ. 4. 17.
               
               2 Wiſedome to vnderſtand it. Iam. 1. 5. 1. Kin. 3. 9. 2. Chro. 1. 10.
               
               3 Diligence to continue in it. 2. Ti. 3. 14. Act. 14. 22.
               
               
                  4 Meditation and conference for the better kéeping of the matter. Deu. 6. 6. Ioſhua 1. 8. Pſa. 1. 2.
               
               5 Faith to beléeue tt. Heb. 4. 2. Iud. 20.
               
               6 Obedience to practiſe it. 1. Sa. 15. 22. 23. Ier. 7. 23. Math. 7. 21.
               
               7 Prayer for a ble
                     ••
                  ing vpon it. Mat. 21. 22. Marke 11. 24. Iam. 1. 5.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE CONTENTS of this Booke.
            
            
               AN Introduction to Prayer. page 1
               2 Certaine Rules concerning Prayer. pa. 49
               3 Briefe notes ſhewing the neceſsitie of prayer. page 53
               4 A godly and neceſſarie Prayer to be ſaid at all times. pa. 59
               5 A Morning prayer for priuate Families. pa. 68
               6 Euening Prayer for

priuate families. pa. 73
               7 Another morning pray pag. 81
               8 Another Euening prayer for priuate families. pa. 87
               9 Another morning prayer. page 93
               10 Another Euening Prayer. pag. 98
               11 Morning prayer for a priuate perſon. pa. 104
               12 Euening Prayer for a priuate perſon. pa. 110
               13 A Prayer for a priuate perſon, neceſſary at all times. pa. 118
               14 Morning Prayer for the Sabbath day before the hearing of

the Word. pa. 127
               15 Euening Prayer for the Sabbaoth day. pa. 136
               16 A Prayer before the Receiuing of the Lords Supper. pa. 144
               17 A Prayer after the Receiuing of the Lords Supper. pa. 149
               18 A Prayer before a man begins the workes of his calling. pa. 135
               19 A Prayer containing humble confeſsion of ſinne, and deſire of pardon. page 159
               20 A godly Prayer in time of ſicknes or at the point of death. pa. 167
               
                  21 A Prayer of Thanksgiuing vnto God for Deliuerance out of any ſicknes. pa. 173
               22 A Prayer for a ſicke man. pag. 176
               23 A Prayer for a woman with Childe. pa. 180
               24 A Prayer for a Midwife by her ſelfe alone. page. 182
               25 A Thanksgiuing priuate for the ſafe deliuerance of a woman to be ſaid by the Midwife or ſome woman preſent at her Deliuerie. page 184
               26 A Prayer in time of

Peſtilence, or any other contagious ſicknes. page 186
               27 A Prayer for the Kings Maieſtie & the whole ſtate. page 192
               28 A Prayer containing the ſumme of the Lords Prayer. pa. 199
               29 A Prayer vpon the Articles of the Creed. page 204
               30 A Prayer vpon the ten commandements. page 206
               31 A Prayer containing the doctrine of the Sacraments. page 210
               32 Prayer before meate. page 213
               
                  33 Thanksgiuing, after meate. page 214
               34 Another before meat. page 215
               35 Another after meate. page 216
               36 Another before meat. page 217
               37 Another after meate. page 218
               38 Another before meat. page 219
               39 Another after meate. page 220
               40 Another before meat. page 221
               41 Another after meate. pag. 222
               42 Godly Directions for the right Receiuing

of the Lords Supper. page 22
                     •
                  
               
               43 Rules to know true Faith by the fruites thereof. pag. 226
               44 Chriſtian exerciſes neceſſary to be practiſed in the courſe of our liues. page 231
               45 Signes of ſaluation in whomſoeuer they appeare. page 247
               46 7. Obſeruations needfull to the Reuerent reading and hearing of the word of God. page 249
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Faults eſcaped.
            
               IN the Epiſtle Dedicatorie: reade period of your timee. And pag. 31. l. 17. read I wil faſt to pray, and pray to faſt.
            
         
      
   