
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  ¶ The order of the greate Turckes courte, of hys menne of warre, and of all hys conqueſtes, with the ſumme of Mahumetes doctryne.
                  ¶ Tranſlated oute of Frenche.
                  1524.
                  Ricardus Grafton excudebat.
                  Gum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To the reader.
            
               IF that good prophete Ieremye ſo bewailed ye beatyng downe of the walles of Ieruſalem and woofull captiuitee of the people therof, yt he was cōſtreigned to cō
               feſſe that he wanted water to powre out of his yies for the iuſte lamentacion of that woofull caſe, what ſtreames of teares maye ſeme ſufficiente vnto vs, to teſtifie the inwarde griefe that we oughte to haue, when we conſyder howe farre and howe wyde Antichriſt hath dilated his kyngdome by other his inſtrumentes, and namelye by Mahumet that peſtiferous falſe prophet? For not onely caſtelles, tounes and citees haue been blaſted with the deadly breath of this poyſoned ſerpente, but alſo whole and ſoundrye prouinces, realmes and nacions, haue ſo dronken in his cākerde venome, that it hath been harde for the verye choſen to eſcape his terrible ſtynges. And where as other adders dooe onlye corrupte the bodies, this hell viper with his forked fierye tongue hathe perced euen the verye ſoules of menne.
            
               
Reade Mahumettes actes who ſo luſte, and he ſhall fynde ſuche pryde and arrogācie ſuche ambicion, ſuch bloudyneſſe and crueltie, ſuche hypocriſye and ſuperſticion, briefely ſuche a mynde to deface, abholyſhe and deſtroye the kyngdome of the ſonne of the lyuyng God (I meane Ieſus our ſauyoure) as in the chiefeſt membre of Antichriſt, he calleth hym ſelfe the mooſt excellent Prophete and counceler of God: he denyeth that Chriſt dyed (in whoſe onlye deathe ſtandeth oure whole hope of remiſſion of ſynnes) he taught his diſciples to faſte all daye, and at night to geue theimſelues tooe immoderate eatynge and drynckynge: he was not aſhamed to ſaye, that God ſpake to hym from heauen and gaue hym lycence to abuſe as many wemenne as coulde phantaſie hym: he counted his wicked lawes ſo good that no Chriſtian manne myghte open hys mouthe agaynſt theim without ſhedynge of bloude: he was a treytoure and made inſurreccion agaynſt his prynce. There are manye other falſe, deueliſhe and abhomynable doctrynes whyche this monſter taught and meynteyned: but it is more neceſſarie for vs to lamente the miſerable caſe of Chriſtes people and to flye to goddes mercye for ayde

then to reherce his deceytes, gyles, deluſions treaſons and conſpiracies agaynſt the true and euerlaſtynge Meſſias and his choſen beleuers. For we ought to knowe that for our ſynfull lyuynge and open contempte of Goddes holy woorde, this cruell woolfe hath been ſuffered ſo piteouſlye to haue ſtained his mouthe with Chriſtian blood. Neuertheleſſe, yf we which profeſſe the name of Chriſte (the promyſed ſeede of Dauid) earneſtly conſyderynge theſe myſeryes, woulde retourne to our mercyfull father wyth vnfayned purpoſe to chaunge our lyues and to embrace with all reuerēce his bliſſed worde, he woulde ſhake of from our brethrens neckes theſe intollerable yokes. Let vs remembre that he hath not onely promyſed delyueraunce to theim that caſte awaye theyr vnfaythfulneſſe and earneſtlye crye vpon hym for helpe, but alſo hath perfourmed it in dede heretofore that we ſhulde in no wiſe doubte of his prompt and readie goodneſſe.
            When the Iſraelites were cruellye and miſerably oppreſſed of the Egyptians, and cryed faythfully to God for ſuccoure, he ſtirred vp Moſes and Aaron to bee theyr captaynes, and to leade theim oute of that fyrye furnace. Lykewiſe, when the Emperour Iuliane

tormented the good Chriſtians, at the contynual prayer of his repentaunt ſeruaū
               tes: God without any delaye plucked from theim that terrible tormentoure: For at what tyme Iuliane tooke hys iorneye into Perſia threatenynge the Chriſtians, that at hys retourne he woulde ſacryfice theyr bloude to his falſe goddes: by the prouiſyon of the true God, he was ledde aſyde by a manne of Perſia, into a wylderneſſe where he receaued hys deathes wounde, and was conſtreigned to confeſſe wyth hys blaſphemous mouthe, that it was the manyfeſte plage of God. For he tooke clottes of bloude and threwe theim vp to the ſkyewarde, ſaiynge: thou haſt ouercommed O Galilean, thou haſte ouercommed, callynge Chriſte a Galilean, becauſe he was broughte vp in Galile.
            There is alſo another later example, which ſemeth more notable than that I can ouerpaſſe it. Whē the Saracens with theyr captayne zulimus, greuouſlye aſſaulted Cō
               ſtantinople in the tyme of the Emperoure Leo, a greate peſtilence alſo piteouſlye waiſtynge the toune in extreme deſperacion of mannes helpe, they wholye fled to the mercyfull

goodneſſe of God, leauynge theyr ſuperſticious religions, and buyrying all their abuſed ymages of the toune, and apointyng all the reſt in theyr kyngdome to the fyre. Then oure mercyfull God ſeynge theyr repentaunt heartes, deferred no lenger from theym hys preſente helpe. For all theſe thynges foorthwyth came together vpon the Saracenes, colde, hunger, peſtilence, ſedicions amonge theimſelues, the death of theyr captayne, theyr ſhyppes partelye brente vp with fyre from heauen, partely bonged and drouned with an horrible tempeſt.
            Theſe examples oughte to moue vs, bothe to abhorre and deteſte oure wyckedneſſe and ſuperſticion, and alſo to conceaue a ſure truſte, that God wyll ſhyne vpon vs wyth hys fauourable countenaunce and delyuer vs from our mooſt cruell enemyes, yf we begynne a newe lyfe and turne vnfeynedlye vnto hym. And yf there bee anye manne that earneſtlye doothe not conſyder the miſeryes and calamiteis of Chriſtian people, let theim reade this lytle treatyſe, wherin they ſhall perceaue, howe myghtye Mahumettes ſuperſticious impietee hathe preueyled: how ample regions the Criſtians

haue loſte, in what bondage they lyue, and whereunto that baſe and vyle nacyon the Turckes haue increaſed, through oure ſynnes. Vpon the conſyderacion wherof they and all other maye be ſturred to call vpon our heauenlye father, that he wyll ſende hys lyuynge ſpirite amonge vs, to woorke true faythe and repentaunce in al mennes heartes to rayſe vp true preachers of ye kyngdome of Chriſt, to confounde Antichriſt with all his heretiquall and damnable ſectes, and to delyuer his people from miſerable bondage.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            
               
                  The eſtate of the courte of ye great Turcke. The ordre of hys armye, & of his yerely reuenues.
                  Item a breife reherſal of al conqueſtes and vyctories that the Turckes haue had, from the firſt of that ſtocke, to this Solyman ye great Turcke that now reigneth.
                  Tranſlated out of French into Englyſhe.
                  1542.
                  Ricardus Grafton excudebat.
                  ☞ Cum priuiilegio, ad imprimendum ſolum.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The eſtate of the courte
            
               YOu haue often requysred, & yet requyre that I wolde wryte to you ye eſtate of the court of the greate Turke, whych thynge you knowe as well or better than I: For I am certayne, that you haue ſene and red all that both the auncient authours and alſo menne of our tyme haue wryten therof, whyche haue ſo largely entreated of this matter, that it maye ſeme arrogauncie and preſumpcion for me, once to open my mouth after theym. Neuertheles, the frendſhyp whyche hath beene What thyng moueth the authoure hereof to wryte thys treatyſe. betwene vs from oure chyldhode well deſerueth, that I ſhulde accomplyſhe youre pleaſure, and ſatyſfye youre requeſt, not onelye in this thīg, but alſo ī al other, which

ſhal lye in my power to dooe.
            Wherefore, ye ſhal fyrſte vnderſtand, Where the Turkekepeth hys reſydence that the greate Turcke kepeth hys ordynarie reſydence in Conſtantynople, whyche the Turkes cal Stamboll. And he hathe hys houſe called Saray, ſytuated vppon the See coaſt of Aſya, ouer a The name & ſytuacyon of ye Turkes palayce. gaynſte the caſtelles called Scutary Where in tymes paſte ſtoode the cytye of Calcedō. And there is but a lytle paſſage by the ſee, from the one to the other, whyche ſtrayghte of auncyente tyme was called Boſphorus 
               Boſphorus, a ſtreyghte of Thrace. of Thrace, nowe named the ſtrayghte of Conſtantynople.
            In the foreſayde Saray, (whych The deſcripcy on of Saraye ye palayce royall. is the palayce royal, of great cyrcuite and compaſſe) ther are many chambers rychely appareled, and pryncypally that whych is apoynted By whom the Turke is ſerued in his chā
                  ber. for the greate Turckes owne perſōne. In which he is ſerued wt
               
vi. yonge ſpryngaldes. Of whych two of theym kepe the watche all Howe .ii. yōge mē watch the Turke nyght lye. the nyght, one at the beddes head another at the feete, eache of them holdynge .ii. torches burnynge in theyr handes.
            Theſe ſprīgaldes euery mornyng make hī redy, & put in the pockets The monye yt is put daylye in the Turkes pockettes. of his roobe, called Caſtan, in ye one .xx. ducates of golde, in yt other a M. aſpres, whyche be lytle poynted peaces of ſyluer moore ſquare Fyfty Aſpres make a ducate And a ducate is worth .v. s. ſterlynge ſo yt euery. x Aſpres maketh .xii. d. ſterlynge. than rounde: of whyche .l. make a ducate. And they haue nothynge grauen in theim but onely letters neyther yet theyr ducates whyche they call Altum & Altumler. For they vſe no armes nor crounes, though oure peynters attrybute to theym tharmes of Cōſtātinople. Which are a croſſe of golde in a red felde of gueulles, wt .iiii. yrons ſuch as we ſtryke fyre wythall out of a tinder

boxe, but they are not yrones, but foure greke, B. that ſygnyfye Baſileus Baſileon, Baſileuon Baſileeis, that The ſygnyfycacyon of the ſuperſerypeyon of the Turkes coyne. is to ſaye: kynge of kynges, raygnynge ouer kynges. The forſayd monye is to be employed on ſmall tryfelynge pleaſures of the ſayde greate Turcke. And yf it chaunce Howe euerye daye ye Turke hath ſo much monye newly put into hys pocket or purſſe, and to whō the monye remaineth yf he ſpende it not. that he ſpēdeth them not that day they remayne to them, whiche dyd put them in ye pockettes. For they that aparrel hym, put in other the nexte day. Theſe .vi. ſpryngaldes wayte vpon hym, whether ſoeuer he goeth, but he chaungeth theym as ofte as hym lyſteth: and going forth wyth hym, euerye one hathe hys offyce. One is Odabaſſi, that is The offyce of yt .vi. ſpryngaldes. chefe maſter of the chamber. The ſeconde Cheocadar, bearer of the robe. The .iii. Silichter, bearer of hys bowe and arowes. The .iiii. Sarapter, bearer of the potte or veſſell to

dryncke water in, for ye ſayd great Turcke drinketh no wine. The. v Chinctar, which caryeth hys ſhooes becauſe the cuſtome of ye Turckes The Turcke alwayes drincketh water is to put of theyr ſhoes whan they go into theyr houſes. Which houſes for the ſame purpoſe haue the The cuſtome of the Turkes is to putte of theyre ſhooes when they go into theyr houſes. flowerths couered wyth thrōmed carpettes, as it were matted: and ſome bemade wt payinted ryſſhes or bentes, accordynge to the haby lytye of euery houſholder. The offyce of the .vi. called Chemligi, and The trimmīg of theyr flourthes. he beareth ſtoles or chayers for ye ſayde greate Turke to ſytte in.
            In the ſayde Saray, ye Turke holdeth his court, which they cal Capy yt is to ſay: ye port or gate in whych be the offycers herafter folowinge
            And for the better vnderſtādīg howe they be entretained, & payed The Tureke vſeth two maner of paymē
                  tes. you ſhal knowe, yt in the ſtate of ye great Turke ther ar .ii. maners of

paymēts or wages. One is called Olopha which are ſure & redy paimē
               tes, after our maner of paiyng by ye hādes of treaſurers The other is The fyrſt payment. called Timar which is as it were an The ſeconde payment. aſſignaciō of landes, heritages, & poſſeſſiōs or reuenues, diſmes, & ꝓ fettes in forme of pēſiō. And they which enioy theſe kynd of pēſions are called Timariotes ye other Olophagi And ther are many offycers which haue both paimētes, as I wil ſhew herafter by name, & I wil begin at Thre captaynes of the porters that hath eche of theym x. s. ſterlynge a daye. the entraunce of the courte
            Fyrſt in ye gate of ye ſayde Saray, there are .iii. Capigibaſſi, yt is to ſaye captaynes of ye porters. Of whych one hath an. C. aſpres, a daye. And there are vnder thē .ii. C & .l. Capigis 
               Two hundred and fyftye vnderporters yt haue euerye one of theym viii. pēce or .ix. pence a daye. ſt or porters, which haue vii. or .viii. aſpres a day. Of the captaynes, one is alwaye at the gate, with lx. porters, & they chaūge frō day to day
            
               
Moreouer, there is a captaine of the gate called Capagas, whyche An other captayne of the gate yt hath. vi s. ſterlynge a daye. is a geided man, and he hath euerye daye thre ſcore aſpres.
            
            One called Saraydarbaſſi a gelded man alſo, which is the captaine of the Palayce in the abſence of the great Turcke, hath .l. aſpres a daye The capteine of the palayce hath .v. s. the daye ſterlyng. Theſe .ii. haue .xii. gelded men vnder theim. Of whome, ye one part hathe ten, and the other fyftene aſpres a daye.
            In thys place of Saray, there are brought vp about .v. hundred young ſpryngaldes, from .viii. yeres of age to twentye, whyche the Howe the Turcke in hys palayce bryngeth vp. fyue, L▪ yong mēne in learnynge great Turcke cauſeth to be enſtructed as wel in learnyng as in feates of armes. Chiefely, he procureth theim to be taught to wryte & reade, and to knowe theyr lawe, to ryde, to ſhoote, and to learne other exercyſes of warre, and of ſcyencis, The teachers of yt yong mē
               
               
according as they ben founde apt & mete. They which are apoī
               ted The teachers of the yonge menne. to teache theym, ben olde doctours in theyr law called Taliſmans. And the foreſayd ſpringaldes ben newe apparelled twyſe a yere, at theyr two ſolempne feaſtes or Eaſters, How theſe yonge menne haue .ii. lyuereys a yere. whiche they cal Bayram, halfe of ſylke, and halfe of wollen cloth. And they go not oute of the Saray, vntyll the great Turke ſeeth that What time ye yonge men go forth of the Saray. they be in age to do ſeruice, and to haue offyces. Then he maketh thē hys Spagoglans or Selichtars, or ſetteth them in ſome other ſtate or degree, accordyng as he fyndeth thē ſuffyciēt, or as he fauoureth them. They are deuyded in the ſayde Saray by ten and ten, and ouer euery The deuiſion and captayns of the yonge menne. ten a gelded man is capitayne.
            They lye all in one hall ſeperated one frome an other, and be wrapped The lodgyng of the yonge menne. euery one in a Sclauine, whyche

is a thrōmed carpet, and dare not come one to a nother. In the myddes The lodgyng of the gelded menne. of the ſayde halle lye the gelded men, in whych halle there are great lampes burning all ye night
            In the ſayde Saray is a fayre & large garden, kepte and trymmed The garden perteyning to Saray. by .xl. or .l. gardeners called Baſtangis, & they haue a capitayne Boſtangibaſi, which hath .l. Aſpres a daye. The capteine of the gardeners.
            
            The Boſtangiz or gardeners haue ſome .iii. ſome foure or fyue Aſpres according to theyr qualityes. And they haue a lyuerey ones a yere of The gardyners lyucrey. blewe clothe or watchettes. They are Ianniſſerotz whiche is a diminutife of Ianniſſaire: For when they go oute of the garden, they are made Ianniſſairers ben ſuche pages as appeteth hereafter in this boke. 
               Ianniſſaires. In ye ſayde garden they ben deuided by ten and ten, and ouer euery ten there is an hedde called The deuiſyō of the gardyners & theyr capteynes. 
               Adabaſſi. Moreouer, there is a lyeuetenaunt of Boſtangibaſſi, that

they cal Protogero, which is a greke name, and in theyr language Checa
                     •
                  a, 
               The Liuetenaunt hath .ii. s. ſterlynge a daye. and he hath .xx. aſpres a daye.
            Nere to the ſaide garden vpon the ſee, are two foyſtes or barges, in whiche the gardeners carye the The barges that attende vpon ye great Turke. greate Turcke for his paſtyme at his pleaſure into Aſia, vnto the caſtelles, Scutari, or whether it ſhall pleaſe hym.
            Further, there are in the ſayde Saray an. C. Ianniſſerotes, appoynted There is an hundred Ianniſſerotes appoynted to catye woode. to beare fyre wode, whiche they carye in charettes, and theyr wages is .iii. or .iiii. aſpres a daye.
            There are alſo .x. Ianniſſerotes or There ar ten Ianniſſerotes that cary water. baſe Ianniſſaires called Sacca, whiche bring water vpō horſes in goates ſkinnes, lyke as they cary wine in the moūtaynes of Auuergne or Limo ſin, or as ye bouge men dooe in Lō
               don, The maner of theyr caryeng of water. & they haue ſemblable wages.
            In the kytchyn of ye 
               Saray, there

is one called aſbaſſi head of the coo
               
                  •
               es, whyche hath .xl. aſpres a daye, The Mayſter cooke. 
               
                  •
               nd vnder hym there are .l. cookes whych haue euery one .vi. or .viii. 
                  
                     •
                  ſpres a daye.
            There is alſo a clercke of ye ke 
               
                  •
               hyne The Clerke of ye kytchyn. named Mutpachemin, whyche hathe .xl. aſpres a daye, and vnder hym a clercke, that hathe .xx. aſpres a daye. The vnder clerke.
            
            The Sewer called Caſnegir
                  
                     •
                  aſſi, whiche hath the charge of the The Sewer. meates, and ſerueth dyſhes before the great Turke hath .lxxx. aſpres a The offyce of the Sewar. day, and vnder hym are an. C. called Caſneger, which ſerue in ſemblable offyce, and haue ſome fortye, & The Sewer hathe vnder hym an hundred. ſome .lx. aſpres a daye.
            Moreouer, there belongeth to the ſayd Saray a ſtable with .ii. hundred The ſtable with the nomber of horſe menne. horſes, & an hundreth men to kepe them, whiche haue ſome ſyxe ſome .vii. aſpres a daye.
            
               
There are other ſmall offycers Note that euery officer is not recyted nor yet all the chyefe & princyyall that is in ye Turcke his courte. perteining to the Turckes courte but it ſhalbe ſuffycient to haue named parte of the princypall. And nowe I wyl ſpeake of them which be without the ſayde houſe, & firſt of his garde.
            In the garde of the great Turcke there are .xii. M, Ianiſſaires, whyche The Turckes garde. they call Ianniſſarlar (& Ianniſſar one Ianniſſayre) all ſlaues of the greate Turcke, & chriſten mens chyldren Theſe Ianniſſaerlars are chryſten mennes chyldrenne. as I wyll ſhewe hereafter. I haue lerned of ſome of them yt we & they write this word Iamogla falſe, and yt it cōmeth of Cham, which they pronoūce Tcham, & ſignifieth a lord or The interpretacyon of Cham and yeſer. Prynce, & yeſter ſignifyeth a ſlaue, not ſuche ſlaues as they bye & ſell for they are called Coul, and Coullar but ſuch as are apoynted to waite vpon ye kyng. The ſayde Ianniſſaire gooe a fote, vnder a capitayne called

               Ianniſſaraga or ſimply aga, which The Ianniſſaires wayte vpon the Turcke a foote. The captei ne of theſe men. ſignifieth a ſtaffe, Which captain hath a. M. aſpres a daie. & .vi. M ducates yerely of Timar yt is of penſiō by reuenues. And he is of ſo great autorite, yt oft he marieth ye doughters or ſiſters of the great Turke. The autoryte of this capteyne. The greate capteyne hath vnder him an other. The clerke of the Ianniſſaries. Wages of ye Ianniſſaries. Vnder him there is a Checaya or Protogero, which hath .ii. C. aſpres a daie and a clerke called Iāniſſariazigi ye is to ſaie clerke of the Ianniſſayres.
            
            The ſaide Ianniſſaires haue ſome eyghte Aſpres a daye more or leſſe, and they bene deuyded by ten and ten. Ouer euerye ten there is an heade called Odabaſſi, that is to ſaie chamberlayne, or heade of the lodginges. The deuiſion and capteines of the Ianniſſaries.
            
            And ouer euery. C. a Centeiner or capitayne of an hundred, whyche they call Boluchaſſi that ſygnifyeth head of a bande of men. The capitayne The capteine ouer ten. ouer ten hathe .xl. aſpres, and

the captayne ouer an. C. hath .lx. a day. Theſe captaines doo always ryde. And the ſayde Ianniſſaires are The lyueries of the Ianniſſaryes. apparelled twyſe a yere with a lyuerye of courſe blewe cloth. They whiche be maryed, contynue wyth theyre wyues: they are lodged in Note yt theſe men are not alwayes reſydent in the Turcke hys courte. certayne houſes appoynted vnto them, in the countrees and quarters of Conſtantynople, and lyue viii .x. xii. or more of them together They whiche are of lower eſtate & The liuynge of ye Iannyſſayres. haue leſſe wages, ſerue the other yt haue larger ſtypendes for the recō
               penſe of that, that they be not abl
                  •
                to beare the expenſes and charges by equall porcyons with ye other.
            When the ſayde Ianniſſaires ar
                  •
                become olde, and be no lenger fy
                  •
                to ſerue in ye garde of the Turcke How the Ian niſſarys are vſed whē they be aged. they are ſent as men nigh deathes doore, in to certayne places and caſtels: and they ben called aſſarer.
            
            
               
And the capitaines ouer tens and ouer hundredes beinge aged: are How the capteynes are vſed. made kepars and capitaines of ye ſayde places, hauing of the penſyon Timar, as much as theyr wages came to, that they had before.
            Amonge ye ſaide Ianniſſaires a. C. & Howe an hundred .l. of the ſayde Ianniſſaryes gooe a fote aboute ye perſonne of ye ſayde Turke l. ben choſē named Solachlar, whych the Grekes cal Solachi, & they lykewyſe gooe a fote about ye perſonne of the great Turcke, and ſome of thē haue .xv. ſome .xx. aſpres a daye. The Solachtars. And theyr .ii. captaines named Solachbaſſi haue eche .xxx. aſpres a daye and they obey to the Aga capitaine The. ii captaynes of the Solachtars. of the Ianniſſaires. Solach ſygnifyeth lyftehanded, and it is ſayde yt they beare theyr weapons in theyr lyfthandes.
            In the garde of the ſaide great Turcke are thre, M. menne called The ſignifycacyon of Solache. 
               Spachoglan whych haue a capitayne called Aga of great eſtimacyō and

autorytie, and vnder hym a lieuetenaūt called Checaia with a clerke. In the Turckes garde is iii. M. Spachoglās, ouer whome is a greate capiteine called Aga, that ride on the ryght hande of the great Turcke The capitaine hath fyue hundred aſpres, the lieuetenauntan hundred the clerke. xxx, and the ſayde Spachoglans thyrtye or fortye a daye, and they ſerue wyth foure or fyue horſes, ridinge on the ryght hande of the greate Turcke.
            Other thre thouſande Selichtars with theyr capitayne Aga lieue tenaunte, and clerke, haue as manye horſes, and aſmuch wages as A nother compaignie which ryde on yt left hande of the Turcke. the Solaches, and they ryde on the lyfte hande of the Turcke.
            All the whyche Spachoglans, and Selichtars, had theyr fyndynge and brynging vp in the palayce of the Greate Turcke, as I haue ſayde before.
            Furthermore, there are .lxxx. Mutaſeracha, whyche beare ſpeares before the greate Turcke. Amonge

whome: he that hathe moſte wages hath foureſcore aſpres a daye, The ſpeare menne that wayte on the Turcke. the other leſſe, and they alſo were broughte vp in the Saraye, as is aboue ſayde.
            This is the moſte certeine and The nōbre of the Turcke his garde is .xxxviii. M. footemen and horſemen. ſureſt ſtrengthe that the Turcke hathe, whyche are twelue thouſande footemen, and aboute fyue and twentye thouſande horſemenne.
            There is alſo a capteine of hunters, and fauconers, named Sechmenbaſſi, whyche is as it were the The capteine of hunters & fauconers. chyefe hunter, and he hath an hundred aſpres a daye, and vnder hym there is a greate nomber of Ianniſſaires.
            
            There is further a Sagarzibaſſi, 
               The Maiſter▪ of the houndes. that is a mayſter of the houndes, whyche hathe fyftye aſpres a daye, and vnder hym there bene manye Ianniſſaires.
            
            
               
Alſo .ii. chiefe faulconers called zaniligibaſſi, whych haue eche an. C. Two hedde faulkeners. 
               aſpres a daye. And they haue .xxv. lieuetenauntes with two hundred faulconers called zaniligilars, of the whiche a hundred haue ten aſpres a daye, the other haue penſyon of Timar, and they ben exempted frome ſubſydyes.
            Further, ye Turcke hath about The Turcke hath forty lackeys. xl. lacqueyes, and runners a fote, called Peyche, and they ben euer aboute hym to dooe hys meſſages: bothe in peace & warre, beſyde the poſtes, whiche they haue appoynted in certayne places as we haue whome they calle Vlach.
            
            He hath alſo an interpreter called Dragoman, to ſpeake to ſtraungers, The Turkes interpreter. which hath ſo much autorytie and credyte, as he hath wytte, and knoweth howe to behaue him ſelfe beſte for hys owne aduauntage.

And he hath .v. hundred ducates a yere, and aſmuche more of The exſpences of the interpreter. the penſiō 
               Timar beſydes his auayles, and gyftes of embaſſadoures and ſtraungers.
            The aforenamed offycers are all of hys courte, but in warre he hath other, whyche in lyke maner are ordinarye, (as the chyefe chryſten prynces haue). Namely Aſapagar capitaynes of Aſapis, which are The offycers of the Turcke that are extraordynarie. extraordynarie fotemen.
            Two capytaynes of Caripoglan which are extraordinaire horſemē and the ſayde Capitaynes haue .lxxx. aſpres a daye, theyre lyeuetenauntes thyrty, theyr clerkes twē
               tye, The offycers ordinarie and extraordinarye. and the ſayde Caripoglans haue ſome twelue, ſome ſyxtene aſpres a daye.
            One called Olophagabaſſi, capytayne of the Olophages hath .ii. hundred and twentye aſpres a daye, his

tenauntes, clerke, and Olaphages, lyke eſtate as the afore ſayde, and they ben ordynarie horſemen.
            He hath a capitayne of artillary The interpretacyō of Topgibaſſi. called Topgibaſſi. For Top ſignifyeth in theyr language a gōne, and Tophec an hachuſhe. And the ſayde Topgibaſſi hathe thre ſcore Aſpres a daye, wyth the lieuetenaunte, and clerke whyche haue eche fyue and twenty aſpres a daye, and there ben two thouſand Gonners called Toagilars, 
               The Turcke hath ii. M. gonners. whyche haue ſome ſeuen, ſome eyght aſpres a daye, and gooe a foote.
            The Arabagibaſſi, that is a capitayne of the charettes (for Araba 
               The capteine of the charettes. ſygnifyeth a charette,) hathe fortye Aſpres a daye. The Checaia, or lieuetenaunt, and the clerke haue twentye Aſpres a daye, and the thre thouſande charrette menne haue euerye one, foure or ſyxe Aſpres
               
a daye.
            There are two maſters of the horſe called Bracarbaſſi, a great and Two maſters of the horſe. a leſſe, the greate hathe fyue hundred aſpres a daye, and ye leſſe hath two hundred: with lieutenauntes and clerkes.
            And theſe haue rule ouer the horſe kepers, mule kepers, ſadellers, ſpurryars, and ouer theym which conducte the camelles, and horſes, and they haue vnder theyr charge foure thouſand choſen horſes that alwayes are in readines.
            There is a Chambaſſi (capitaine of Chiaus,) which are as it were hui ſhers) & the ſaide Chambaſſi, is as it were maſter of ye houſhold. Which The authoryte of the maſter of the Turckes houſholde. hath ſo great autorite, yt yf he goo to any of ye great Turckes ſubiectes, of what eſtate, qualytie, or condicyon ſo euer he be (hygh or lowe, great or ſmall) and wherſoeuer he

be, thoughe it were to one Bacha, or to one Beglerbey, and he ſaye that he is ſent to haue his heade to carye it to the greate Turcke, he is obeied though it were in ye playne felde without ſhewynge anye further commiſſyon or commaundemente.
            There is a Mechterbaſſi, whyche hath charge of tentes, pauylyons, hangynges, & of the greate Turckes The keper of the Turkes palayce and the officers to hym belongynge. lodgynge. Whyche he ſetteth vp, trymmeth, and prepareth whē he is abroade. And he hath .xl. aſpres a daye, and hys lieuetenaunt fyue and twenty. And .lx. Mechters, which ben vnder hym, haue euerye one fyue aſpres a daye.
            There is an other Mechterbaſſi, capitayne of the trompettes, cornettes The captaine of the trompettes. and waytes, tabrettes, and other inſtrumētes of warre, which hath .xxx. aſpres a daye.
            
               
And hys leuetenaunte and clarke haue .xii. a day. And vndre hym be aboute .xii. hundred Meghters, partly on horſe, & partly a foote, which haue lyke wages as the aforſayd
            There is an Imralem Aga, whiche beareth the greate Turckes banner, where there hangeth an horſe The bearer of the Turckes baner. tayle, for the remembraunce af Alexander ye great, as I haue harde of theym, whyche dyd beare it vppon his helmet, and in hys creſſet. And ſo haue alſo the auncient captaynes doone as Vergile ſayth of Geneas Chriſta
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inſignis equina, that is to ſaye: notable wyth a creſte of horſe heare. And the ſayde Imralem, 
               The ſtypende of the ſtādard bearer hath .ii. hundred aſpres a daye, and is captayne of all the Mechters.
            
            There is an Arpaemyn, whyche hath charge of haye, chaffe, barly, otes, poulſe and other prouyſions The forenger for horſes, both in peace and warre

And he hathe .lx. aſpres a daye, hys lyuetenaunte .xxx. and hys clarke xx. vnder the ſame there bē .xx. mē whych haue .viii. or .x. aſpres a daye One called Saremyn deputed to prepare & make clene the wayes both A ſkauenger, wyth hys company vnder hī
                in peace & in warre, hath .l. Aſpres a day. And vnder hī there are .iiii. C menne which haue .iiii. or .v. Aſpres a daye.
            
               ☞ The treſurers and theyr offycyes.
               
                  NOwe it ſhalbe conuenyent to ſpeke of the Treaſurers & theyr offyces. And after yt we will ſpeake of hys counſellers, and of the gouernaunce and conueyghaunce of hys affayres.
               Fyrſte you muſt vnderſtande, that the Turcke calleth hys treaſure The names of the Turckes treaſure 
                  Caſnas, and hys impoſytions, ſubſydies, toulles, tributes, and other reuenues Caraz.
               
               
                  
The fyrſte offycer of his courte ouer the ſayde treaſures is Caſnadarbaſſi 
                  The treaſoret of the palayce of Saray. treaſurer of the mony lying in the palayce of Sarai, being as treaſurer ordained of the ſpare mony. And he is a gelded man, & here mayneth in the ſayd Saray hauyng for hys wages .lx. aſpres by daye.
               Ther are .ii. Defierder, that is ge The treaſoret of yt profytes of the coūtrye a longeſte the ryuer. general receauers. One of theym hauynge the charge of the monye that commeth of the countryes aboute the ryuer Dunce, or Danube, as Seruie, Bulgarie, Boſne, VValachie, and other, wyth the countryes of Aſya, Syria, and Aegypte. And he hath of the pēſyon Tymar, x. M. ducates a yere, beſydes hys aduauntages & profytes whych are verye great
               The ſeconde receaueth the treaſures The treaſorer of Grece of all Grece, whych whā the Turke goeth to warre, abideth in Conſtantinople as hys leuetenaū
                  
Thys manne hathe .v. thouſande ducates of the penſyon Tymar, and other greate profites. The authoryte of the treaſorers and ſtypende of their clarkes,
               
               Theyre offycees are of greate authoryte. And they haue vnder theym .l. clarkes to wryte, and to kepe acompte of the ſayde treaſures, which haue eche of theym. xxx or .xl. Aſpres a daye. Two ouer ſeers of the clarkes.
               
               Two Roſumanegis, that is chiefe heades ofye ſayde clarkes haue .xl. Aſpres a day. And there are manye other receauers and collectors for the receyte of the ſayde treaſures.
               There are .ii. Veſnadars whych be Two wayers of mony. appoynted to waye ducattes and Aſpres, & haue eche .xx. Aſpres a day.
               Syxe Seraſſiers as it were bāquyers are ordayned to iudge and deſerne Syxe tryers of mony golde, ſyluer, and other moneye, whyche haue ſemblable wages and ſtate, as the aforeſayde.
               Two forayn Caſnadarbaſſi where

of one is of Grecia, another of Aſia, whyche are the bryngers in of the mony, & eche of them hath .l. Aſpres, 
                  The colecters and bryngers in of ye mony. a daye. And vnder euerye of them ther are .x. Caſnadars, that haue eche of theym .x. Aſpres a daye.
               Two Desteremyn, one of Grekeland, another of Aſya: haue the offyce Collecters of the pencyon of gatherynge the penſyon Timar, and geue accompte of the Tymariotes, eche hath .l. Aſpres a daye, and .x. clarkes haue .xv. a daye
               They haue ſhewed vnto me that the ordynarye reuenues of the Turcke doth amount to the ſome of .xv. Millions of ducates, which The yearly reuenues of the Turcke doth a mounte to xxxvii. C. thouſād, and .l. M pound ſter. maketh .xxxvii. hnndred .l. thouſād pounde, ſterlynge.
               Nowe herafter, we wyl ſpeake of hys counſayle and gouernaūce of the countryes, whyche are ſubiecte vnto hym, & of the ordre that he kepeth.
               
                  
The great Turcke hath none other counſaylers but ye .iiii. Bacha whyche they call Viſirbacha, that is to ſaye: a counſayloure Bacha, and Bach in theyr language, ſygnyfyeth captayne or head, by the which they maye be interpreted captaynes or rulers. Manye times there are of theym but three, as it chaū
                  ced latelye. That was Aias Bacha, borne in Cimera, aboute the yſle of Corphou, in the olde tyme called Corcyra, Caſſin, Bacha▪
                   of Croace: and Ibraim 
                  The chiefe rulers vnder the Turcke 
                  Bacha, of Parga Albanois, which the Turcke put to death, all theſe .iii. beeinge the ſonnes of Chryſtyen menne.
               And thys aforeſayde Ibraym, becauſe he was brought vp in ye Saray wyth the great Turcke, came to ſooe greate creadence and authoryte, that he commaunded and ordered al thynges abſolutely, the

great Turcke medlynge nothing therewyth. And hys father was a chriſtian in Conſtantinople, an vnprofytabe felow, a tauerne haunter, a druncarde, and one that wolde lye by the ſtreates lyke a beſt. Frome which naughtye lyfe Ibraim coulde neuer reuoke hym: nyether cauſe hym to put on any honeſt apparel notwythſtandynge that he laboured therein dylygently.
               Of late the great Turcke hath made another Bacha, whych is called Ayredenbey whom we cal Barbarouſſe And I haue heard but a lytle whyle ſēce, yt the Turke hath made hym another counſeller named Mehemeth Bacha, of theſe .iii. or .iiii. Baches 
                  The pencyon of the rulers ſome haue .xxiiii. thouſand ducates a yere out of ye penſion Timar (as Ibraim Bacha had) & other xvi. or xviii. M, beſyd other dayly profytes & aduauntages which amoūt

to twyſe as much as theyr former penſiō, & there are of thē that hath vi. thouſande ordinarie men foūd of theyr wages. And all they kepe houſholdes with theyr wiues and ſeruaūtes like as ye great Turcke doth.
               Wherefore in tyme paſte there Other counceloures yt hath bene in Turckye were other counſellers, as Perybacha, whyche gouerned the greate Turcke in hys youthe, Farethbacha, whyche was the lyuetenaunte of The gouernoure of the Turcke in his youthe. Surye or Syrie: and Achimath Bacha, gouernoure of Cayre and of Aegypte, whych wyllyng to make hymſelfe a ſouldayne was ſlayne by the Turckes that were wyth hym.
               Theſe Bachaz go into the chamber of the ſayde greate Turcke, & The chiefe counſelers of ye great Turcke conſulte and dyſpoſe all thynges concernynge the eſtate and gouernaunce of hys affayres
               
                  
Nexte vnto theſe is the Moſey whych is as it were theyr byſhop, declarer & expouner of theyr lawe & medleth wyth none other thyng
               Two Cadiz Leſkier Taliſmās are two doctours in theyr law, to ſe iuſtyce executed, and they are as it were preſydentes, one of Grece, and the other of Aſya. Theſe men ordynarelye folowe the Turckes courte: and for honoure go before the Viſerbaches, thoughe they haue not ſo greate authorytye.
               They bothe inſtitute and putte downe (yf it ſeme good,) and yf Two preſydē
                     tes. the caſe ſo requyre the Cadiz, which are the iudges of the prouynces. And eche of the ſayde Cadiz leſkier, hath .vii. thouſand ducates a yere of the penſyon Timar, & ii. or .iii. hundred ſeruauntes, & .x. clarkes payed by the ſayde Turcke.
               Moreouer, there is a Maſſangibaſſi
                  
as it were chaūceloure, which ſygnyfyeth the letters wyth the The chaunceloure. greate Turkes ſeale, whoſe office alſo, is of great authoryte and rereputacyon, hys place is nexte the Beglerbey, and he hathe .viii. thouſande ducates of the penſyon Tymar a yeare, and more other proffettes, and he is accompanyed wt a great number of horſes and ſeruauntes.
               The Baretemyn, whych deſtrybuteh letters and commaundementes The clarke of the hamper hathe .xl. Aſpres a daye, and he hath vnder hym .x. clarkes, & two Protogeros.
               
               But for aſmuch, as I haue ſpoken before of the Ianniſſaires affyrmyng them to be the chefe ſtrēgth of the Turcke, ere I go anye further I wyll ſhewe you what people they be, and from whence they come.
               
                  
In Conſtantynople there is a captayne of Ianoglans or Azamoglans in which are the chyldren of trybute. And ſomeſaye that Iamoglans ſygnyfye innocente, ſymple, and ignoraunte folkes or learners. But other ſay that it ſhulde be pronounced Chamoglan that is the kynges pages. And they maye be in nomber .v. or .vi. thouſand. Theyr captayne hath. lx Aſpres, a daye.
               And it is to be noted, that euery fourthe yeare the greate Turcke ſendeth into the countryes of Grece, and of Anatolie: (that is the Eaſte Aſya the leſſe) tooe take vp Chryſtyanne mennes male chyldren, whyche are ſubiecte to thys kynde of debte and daunger, how be it, all are notte in ſuche bondage.
               But often tymes, yt he may receaue of thē more largely, he chargeth

the ſayde Chryſtyans wyth ſuche greate and importable ſubſydyes that they whyche be not ſubiecte to thys trybute of chyldren, becauſe The Turcke hathe ſomtyme .x. thouſād chryſtyan mē
                     nes chyldren. they be not able to paie the ſayd ſubſydyes: are cōſtreyned to geue theyre chyldren. Sooe that ſome tyme he hathe .x. thouſande chyldren and more.
               Of whiche he choſeth the good lyeſt to be in his Saray, The rem naunte he cauſeth to be dyſtrybuted to labourers and ſhepherdes about Burcia and Taramania, wher The Turcke putteth chryſten mens childrē to plough they are taught to tyll the ground and to keepe cattell, or to do ſome other huſbandry or ſeruyce to accuſtome and harden theym to paynes, and to learne the Turckyſhe language.
               And after foure yeare, whan he hathe ſente to take vp other, theſe are commaunded to come to Conſtantynople,

and to be delyuered to the captayne of the Chamoglan, where they are broughte vp and haue two lyueryes a yeare, and been enſtructed in ſondrye occupacions.
               So afterwarde they are deuyded to the Ianniſſayres to ſerue them and in proceſſe of tyme they become Ianniſſayres theym ſelues, and frome Ianniſſaires to Salachlars, Silechters, and other offycyes.
               And as longe as they abyde in the ſayd countryes of Burſia and Carmania, they ſpende nothynge of the greate Turckes, becauſe they to whome they dooe ſeruyce dooeth fynd them meate, dryncke and raymente.
               I ſayde before, that in the Saraye, or where the Turcke kepeth hys reſydence, there be a boute .v. The wiues of the great Turcke. hundred yonge ſpryngaldes.
               
                  
But there is alſo another Saray where hys wyues and hys chyldren be.
               Hys wyues are called Sultanes that is queenes. And they are The wyues chyldren of ye greate Turke deuyded one frome another wyth theyr children. In theyr garde and ſeruyce there are a greate meanye of gelded menne, and aboute threhundred yonge maydens, gouerned by the elders, whyche teache theym too eſowe, and worke wyth the nedle.
               The ſayde maydens haue ſome twelue, ſome fyftene Aſpres a daye. And they are apparelled twyſe ayeare, at theyre two ſolempne feaſtes all wyth ſylcke.
               And yf it chaunce that anye of theym pleaſe the greate Turcke, he vſeth that woman as hys wyfe and geueth her at euerye tyme .x. thouſande Aſpres: and ſeperateth

her frome the other, augmentyng her wages and eſtate.
               Whan the maydes be come to the age of fyue and twentye, and that it pleaſe not the greate Turto retayne theym anye longer for hys ſeruyce, he maryeth theym to the Spachoglans, and other of hys ſeruauntes and pages of honour accordyng to theyr qualytyes and condycyons.
               And in theyre places newe are ſent into the Saray, In whych ther are captaynes, Capygiz, & all other offycers lyke as is in the place where he kepeth hys reſydence
               Aboute the towne of Pera, whyche is by Conſtantynople, hauynge onelye an hauen betwene theym. For Pera is as muche to ſaye, as beyond. There is another Saray, where there are foure hū
                  dred Another place where are foū
                     de .iiii. C. chyldren. yonge chyldren wyth all offycers

as the aforſayde haue.
               At Andrinopoli, or Adrinopoli there are two places, the olde and the newe.
               In the olde, there are brought vp thre hundred yonge chyldren. In the newe whych is vppon the Another place where the children are broughte vp. ryuer Mariſſa called ſome tyme He brus, are thre hundred Ianniſſerotz, and all offycers lyke as in the other.
               Oute of theſe two Sarayes, and oute of that whych is at Pera ſome are euer choſen to be put into the great Saray, as they lacke, or ſēd awaye the elder.
               On the coaſte of the ſayde Pera The place where the Turke hathe hys ſhyppes made. vpon the ſee bancke, there is aplace called Terſenal, wher they make galeys, and ſhyppes.
               In whyche ordynarelye two hundred Mayſters worcke and Shypwryghtes haue euery one .x. Aſpres a day.
               
                  
And there bene fyftye ouerſeers, which haue when they worke xii. aſpres a daye, and when they ſoiorne, they haue but ſyxe. Alſo the chyefe clerke, whyche hathe ten other clerkes vnder hym, hath .xxv. aſpres a daye, and the other ten.
               And to the ſeruyce of the ſayde Terſenal, there belongeth a great nombre of handye worckemen, whiche haue .iiii. aſpres a daye.
               They haue aſmuche woode to make ſhyppes as they deſyre, and The Turckes haue no cunnynge in making ſhippes. that very good, but they haue not the connyng to make theim to the purpoſe, ſpecyally gallyes. For they make them nothyng ſo good nor ſo lyghte, as the chryſten men dooe, but boiſterouſe, heuy and euil The chriſtian men helpe the Turckes to make theyr ſhpppes. to gouerne. Notwithſtanding that they haue ſome chriſtian maſters, and geue them aſmuch wages, as they wyll requyre.
               
                  
Ouer the ſayde Terſenal, and al the offyces thereof, there is a generall capiteyne called the Beglerbey 
                  The admyral of the ſee. whiche hath alſo charge of the armie on the ſee at theyr going forth. And the cuſtome was, that euer ye capiteyne of Callipole what ſo euer he were, ſhulde be the generall capitayne or admiral.
               But a lytell tyme ſythens the Turcke cōmitteth the charge ther of to Barbarouſe. Whyche hath The Barbarouſe is the Turckes admyrall. for this offyce, out of the penſyon Timar. xiiii. M. ducates a yere, aſſygned out of the Iſles of Mechelni Rhodes, and Nigrepont, whereoute he gayneth and exacteth thre tymes aſmuche.
               Before that the Barbarouſe toke vpon hym this charge, the Turckes knewe lytle or nothynge touchyng the ſcyence and knowledge of the ſee, excepte a fewe out runners.

And yet to thys daye, when they wyll addreſſe an armye of the ſee, they goo into the mountaynes of Crece, & Natolie, to take vp herdmen whyche they put in gallies to rowe or to ſerue in other veſſelles, to whiche purpoſe they ben ſo vnapte, that they can ſcarcely ſtande on their fete, ſo farre of it is yt they can rowe or dooe ſeruyce. Whiche cauſeth that the Turckes neuer dyd enie notable acte vpon the ſee Neuertheleſſe, the ſaide Barbarouſſe hath ſomwhat amended them.
               I haue ſpoken ſufficyently of Conſtantinople, and of the courte of the greate Turcke, & yf I haue not ſhewed euery thing accordingly, it is no meruayle. For it requyreth a better witte then mine is, to ſearche out ſo greate a matter.
               Hereafter I wyl declare how ye greate Turcke doth gouerne his

and the order appoynted vnto his ſouldyars, aſmuche as I my ſelfe coulde enquyre, and knowe.
               In euery prouince, there is a gouerner yt they call Beglerbey, that is Beglerbey what it is. to ſaye a lorde of lordes.
               The fyrſte is, the Beglerbey of Grece, vnder whome ben all the countrees, whych ye great Turcke hath in Europa. And he is aboue all other, and hath .xvi. thouſande ducates a yere of the penſyon Timar, but he exacteth thryſe aſmuche.
               Vnder hym there is a Defterderler, that is to ſaye, a treaſurer. Which hath .iii. thouſand ducates for his yerlye wages, to whome there ben ſubiect an hundred clerkes which The ſtipende or pencyon of the Beglerbey of Grece. kepe the comptes and regiſters of the penſyon Tymar, and of the Tymariotes. Vnder the charge of the ſaide Beglerbey, there are .xxx. Sangia clars, capitaynes of the ſouldyars,

whiche are deuyded by bannyers, called in theyr tongue Sangiac.
               
               Which Sangiacs haue .viii. ten, and ſome .xii. thouſand ducates of the The penſyon of the Sangyacs. penſyon Timar a yere, and they are lodged in the princypal townes of the prouince, to kepe thē in peace, and obedyence.
               Vnder them are .iiii. hundred Sobaſſis or more, whyche are as it were lyeuetenauntes, abidyng in Sobaſſis, what they are. ſmal townes for the ſame purpoſe and they haue euerye one a thouſande ducates a yere, with manye Flambolers, which alſo ſygnifye heades and capitaynes, of .ii. iii .iiii. or fyue hundred horſes, which are ſent by the Beglerbeys or Sangiacs, in to ſondry places as the caſe requyreth, to make ſpedy expedicyon of theyr affayres.
               Vnder the ſayde Sangiacs, there are .xxx. thouſande Spachis, whyche

ſerue with .iii. or .iiii. horſes a pece and they haue .ii. hundred ducates a yere, and they ben all Azamoglan, that is to ſay, the pages of ye great Turcke.
               Moreouer, in the ſayde countre of Grece, there ben .xx. thouſād Tymariots or horſemen, which haue but .xl. ducates a yere, and ben ſubiecte to the ſayde Sangiacz.
               
               Beſides theſe, there are .lx. thouſande Akengis, as it were aduenturers, which are horſemen without enye wages or payment, but therfore they onely be free and exempted from all ſubſidies. And yt townes ben boūd to ſuſteine their charges, vpon theyre waye, when they goo in the ſeruyce of theyr prynce.
               In the countrees of Aſia, there ben .vi. Bsglerbeyes. The firſte is ye 
                  Beglerbey of Natolie, whiche hathe The fyrſte. charge of the countrees of Pontus,

Bithynia, Lidia, Phragia, Mernia, Caria, beynge all comprehended vnder this name of Natolie. And he hath xiiii. thouſande ducates a yere out of the penſyon Timar. Vnder hym ben .xii. Sāgiacz, of which ſome haue iiii. ſome .vi. thouſande ducates a yere with Sobaſſis, and Flambolers, & xii. thouſande Spachis.
               
               The ſeconde is the Beglerbey of The ſeconde. 
                  Caramanie, which comprehēdeth Cilicia, Licia, Lycaonia, and Pamphilia. Whyche capiteyne hath .vi. thouſande ducates oute of the penſyon Tymar. And vnder hym ben ſeuen Sangiacz, and ſeuen thouſande Spachis, hauynge ſuche wages as the former.
               The third is the Beglerbey of Amaſia, and Toccat, whyche comprehendeth The thyrde. 
                  Cappadocia, Galatia, Paphlagonia, He hathe eyghte thouſande ducates a yere, of the penſyon

                  Tymar. iiii .c. Sangiacs, and .iiii. M. Spachis, with the wages aforeſayde And the Cytie Trebiſonde is vnder hym.
               The .iiii. is the Beglerbey of Anā
                     dule or Aladule, whyche are mountaynes The .iiii. of Armenie, called in olde tyme mount Taurus, and nowe Cocas, on the ſyde of the mountaynes called Caucaſſus. The Beglerbey hath of the penſion Tymar, x. thouſande ducates a yere, and vnder hym ſeuen Sangiacs, and .vii. M. Spachis, hauyng wages lyke ye aforenamed.
               Further, there are ordeyned in the ſayde countrees .xxx. thouſand horſemen ſeruynge withoute wages, free from ſubſydyes, as are ye 
                  Akangis of Grece.
               The .v. Beglerbey, is of Meſopotamia, wherof the pryncypall cytie is The. fyfte. 
                  Ediſſa, called in the holy ſcrypture: Rages, and of the frenchmen Rohaiz.
               
               
                  
Vnder this gouernaūce parte of the great Armenye is comprehended. For the reſte is poſſeſſed of the Sophie, and by ye 
                  Cordins and Beduins, whiche are warrelyke people, dwellynge in mountaynes called Tarquinians, and in olde tyme Medes, ioyninge vpon Bandras, a towne of Aſſiria, which ſome ſuppoſe to be Babilon, and other Niniue, the heade cytie of Aſſiria.
               Thys Beglerbey hathe (as the fame is) .xxx. thouſande ducates of the penſyon Timar, twelue Sangiacs, and .xxv. thouſande Spachis, whiche haue more wages and prouiſyon then the other, bicauſe they lie vpon the coſtes and borders of the ſayde Sophie.
               
               The .vi. is the Beglerbey of Damaſco, Syria, and Iurye, whiche The ſyxte. hathe .xxiiii. thouſande ducates a yere out of the penſyon Timar. xii.

                  Sangiacs, and twentye thouſande Spachis, payde as the forenamed.
               The Beglerbey of Carie, or of Aegypte: 
                  The capteine of Carie. hathe thyrtye thouſande ducates of the penſyon Tymar, ſyxetene The wages of the Sangiacz. 
                  Sangiacz, and twenty thouſand Spachis, the ſayde Sangiacz haue euerye one eyghte thouſande ducates The wages of the Spachis. a yere, and the Spachis two hundred.
               This gouernaunce extendeth vnto the redde ſea, and vnto Mecha, where Mahumettes bodye lyeth. The place where Mahumet his bodie lyeth. It conteyneth parte of Arabie the deſerte, and parte of Arabye the ryche. Howebeit, they are not holye ſubiected to the Turcke. Arabie is not wholye ſubiecte to the Turcke.
               
               For there are manie lordes, of whiche: ſome take parte wyth the Sophy, and ſome with ye Turcke, and there are ſome againe, whiche acknowledge neyther of theym bothe.
               
                  
The other ſyde ioyning to the countree of Aſſiria, called nowe Azemye is vnder the Sophy, and is extended a longe by Meſopotamia vnto Liuerous, 
                  The ſeconde ſtrength of ye Turcke ſtandeth in Spachys. ſome tyme called Hileri. The ſeconde ſtrengthe of the greate Turcke is founded in theſe Spachis, whiche force ſhoulde be greate, yf ye ſayde Spachis were all good. And as touchynge footemen beſyde the Ianniſſaires, the Turcke hath none, anye thyng worthe. For they knowe not howe to kepe anye order and it is agaynſte their nature to learne.
            
            
               
               Nowe, there reſteth to ſpeake of the nature of the Turckes in general, of theyr maners and condicyone, of theyr beliefe, and liuynge. Whyche thynge I wyll dooe as Wherof the Autour wyll intreate. briefely as I canne, and after I wyll ſpeake ſom what of the compleccyon of theyre Kynge, whiche nowe reygneth.
               
                  THe Turckes worſhyp one onely god, whych made heuen and erth, The belefe or fayth of the Turckes. and ſente theim theyr lawe by the Prophete Mahumet wrytten in a booke, called Alcoram, that is to ſaye, the true lawe. The ſayde Mahumet was in the yere of our lorde ſyxe hundred and. xx, in the tyme of Heraclius the The tyme yt Mahumet was in. Emperour, which ſucceded Phocas Daugobert reygninge in Fraunce, & the Lomberdes in Italye. And as we are called Chriſtyanes, ſo they ben called Muſulmans, that is to ſaye ſaued. And they cal vs in their langage

                  Caours, ſpecyally ye Grecians whiche they regarde not: becauſe they were ſo eaſely ſubdued, fayntly defendynge them ſelues by reaſon of theyr ſecrete hatreddes, diuiſyons, and diſcordes. But they haue the Italyans in good eſtimacyon, & count them valyaunt men of warre, calling them french men The Turckes haue the Italyans in good eſtimacyon. For a greate tyme they knewe no dyfference of thoſe nacyons and tonges.
               The foundacyon of their lawe ſtandeth vpon theſe wordes Lahila ha, Hilaalla, Mahumet, Reſulalla, Tangri, Bir, Beremberac, that is to ſaye, God The foundacyon of the Turckes lawe. is God, was, and ſhalbe God, and Mahumet is ye meſſenger or counſeller of God, there is one God onely and one true prophete. Whyche woordes yf a chriſtyane pronoūce vnawares, or otherwyſe in theyre countre, yf it be hearde, he ſhall be

conſtrayned to receaue theyr lawe or to die without fayle. In yt ſtead How by ſpeakynge of certayne wordes a chriſten man ſha
                        •
                     be compelled to receyue their fayth or elles to dye. Howe the Turckes are circumcized. of Baptiſme they ben circumciſed as the Iewes are, howebeit, they paſſe not greatly of it.
               For theyre chyldren are often ſyxe or ſeuen yeres of age or more, before they bene circumcyſed, and manie dye without circumciſyon, at the whyche they make a greate feaſte and an aſſemble. Theyr preſtes ben called Meſen, & theyr churches The cauſe of theyr goynge to church and what they dooe there. 
                  Meſchet, in to the whyche they neuer entre, onles it be to praie vnto God, and to make theyr inclinacyons or bouinges, whiche thyng they do fyue tymes a daye.
               The fyrſte in the mornyng, ye ſe The times of theyr goinge to churche. conde at none, the thyrde aboute thre of the clocke, the fourth about ſyxe, the fyfte, when they gooe to bedde. And they are not bounde to gooe to churche to make theyr inclinacyons,

but if them lyſt. Only they ſpred vpon ye grounde where they are, an hādkercher or a white lynen cloth, and bowe them ſelues fyue tymes, theyr faces vpwarde, hauinge theyr handes vpon theyr breſtes. The ſayde houres ben ſhewed to thē by theyr Taliſmans, which gooe vp vpon the toures of theyr How they are called to churche. churches, and crye out a loude the wordes before written, ſtoppynge theyr eares with theyr fyngers.
               The women gooe not in to the churches wyth the menne, bicauſe The wemen gooe not to churche with the men. they ben not circumciſed. Wherfore they ben counted vncleane. For whyche cauſe they ſaye alſo, that they ſhall not entre into Paradyſe, The foolyſhe opinyon of ye Turckes. but ſhall tarye at the gate with the Chriſtyanes, which haue well kepte theyr lawe.
               It is a great deſpyte amonge them when they call one Sunet▪
                   that

is vncircumciſed. They haue our lorde Ieſus chryſte in great reuerence, The opinion and reuerence that the Turckes haue Ieſus chriſte in. and they holde that he was borne of the virgyn Mary, whom they call Murgen Ana, Mary the mother, and Ieſus chryſte yeſſe Berember, that is Ieſus the prophete conceyued Howe they name Chriſte and our lady. by the ſpiryte, & breathing of God. If any man hath blaſphemed Chriſt, be he Turcke, Iew or Chriſtyane, he ſhalbe puniſhed in lyke maner as yf he had blaſphemed The Turkes wil not ſuffer Chriſte to be blaſphemed. 
                  Mahumat. The punyſhement is fortye ſtrypes with a ſtaffe, and a mercement of money.
               They beleue not that he dyed The punyſhment due for blaſphemye. thorough the handes of ye Iewes, but yt it was another whyche they tooke in his ſteade. For they ſaye yt he was to good a man, & to greate The Turkes beleue, yt chriſt was not crucifyed of the Iewes. a prophete, to ſuffer ſuche outrage of the myſcheueous Iewes, which they count to be ye vyleſt nacion of

the world. They ſo deſpiſe them, & hate them yt in no caſe they wil not How ye Turckes abhorre ye nacyon of the Iewes eate in their cōpany, nether mary a Ieweſſe: howbeit, they mary often tymes chryſtien womē, which they ſuffer to lyue accordynge to theyr owne law, and they haue pleaſure to eate wyth the chryſtyans. And moreouer, if a Iewe wyll deny his lawe, & become a Turcke, he ſhall neuer be receaued, oneles that he were fyrſte baptyſed, and made a chryſtyā. Among theyr ſcryptures they haue oure Goſpelles whyche they call Ingel: but they take away the paſſyon, ſayinge: that the Iewes Howe ye Turkes haue yt bokes of the Euangelyſtes. The Turckes haue noone ymages. added it to mocke the chryſtyans. They haue neyther pyctures ymages nor anye carued or grauen thynge, whyche they defende out of the lawe of Moſes.
               And they ſaye the Pater noſter as we, tranſlated into the Arabique
                  
tongue almooſt worde for worde. They call the deuell Seythan, and The Turckes ſaye the Pater noſter as we dooe. drede and abhorre him as we doe. Before theyr prayers, and inclinacyons, they waſhe theyr fete, handes, The Turckes abhorre the deuell. and faces and all theyr bodye whan they be in ſecrete places, as ofte as they may. Alſo they waſhe The ceremoniall or ſuperſtycyous cuſtom of the Turckes theym ſelues after euery purgacy on of nature, in which poynt both the menne and the women kepe ſo great honeſtye, yt they haue greate ſhame to be ſeene or found in that acte. And they reproue the chriſtyans The clenlines of ye Turckes for theyr neglygence therein callynge them Chunup Caour, that is fylthye chryſtyans.
               They haue two lentes euery yere The Turckes hath two lentes. The maner of theyr faſtinge and they faſt euery time a moneth Al the daye, they eate nothyng, al the nighte they make good cheare At theyr Eaſters they ſende ſalutacyōs one to another, and geue gyftes

wyſhynge one another a good The Turckes geue giftes at theyr Eaſters as we dooe at New-yers tyme. yeare, as we do the daye of the cyrcumcyſyō of Chryſt, or neweyeres day as we call it. And the ſayd eaſter feaſte is not euer at one tyme, but once in the ſomer, & another tyme in winter, or in the ſpring time & in harueſt, which thing chaūſeth becauſe they count not the yere after The Eſter of the Turckes hath no tyme. the courſe of ye ſonne, but after ye mone, which they cal Hay, & haue her in great reuerēce. They ſalute and grete her aſſone as they ſe her The Turcke a worſhype the moone. fyrſt, ſpecyally in warre wt greate cryes & gonne ſhottes & ſounde of trompettes. And the wemē, & children beare the fygure of the mone hangyng about theyr neckes, callyng Wemen cary aboute theyre neckes the fygure of the moone. it Nalcha, becauſe it reſēbleth an horſhooe. Beſides their preſtes Meſen & Caliſmans they haue Deruiz Sophiz, Dēcher Serifz, & other maners of What ſectes are amonge ye Turckes religion, differinge in appparel &

ceremonyes, as our Monkes and Freers dydde
               And ye Turckes are naturally ſuperſtycyous beleuers of dremes, The Turckes are ſuperſtycyous. prophecyes, & Diuinaciōs, whych I haue ſeen them vſe wyth waxe meltted, and caſte into water, and beanes wyth marckes vpon, and they haue manye other ſuperſtycyous maners
               And they holde predeſtynaciō for a ſure thynge, & that the houre The Turckes opynyō in predeſtynacyon, of their deaths is wrytten in theyr foreheades, whych they recken to be impoſſyble to auoyd. Wherfor they entre beaſtlye into perelles, at the leaſt the baſer people, for ye great men haue not that opinyon And they haue Sayntes, whyche The Turckes call vpon ſayintes. they cal vpon partyculerly in certayne neceſſaries, and ſyckeneſſes
               Of our ſaynctes they acknowledge none but Sayncte George

which they call Dereletz Bozatle, that The Turckes knowledge noone of cure ſayntes but 
                        •
                     ſ George. is a knyghte vpō a whyte or gray horſe.
               And I thinke they eſteme him for none other cauſe, but that he is painted as a man of warre, whom they haue in greate honoure and reuerence. If there be anye goodnes amonge theym, it is in thys poynte onelye, that they are pytye The Turckes are pytyful to the poore full to the poore, and great founders of hoſpytalles.
            
            
               The maner of feadyng and lyuynge of the Turckes.
               
                  AS touchynge theyr lyuynge, The groſſe 
                        •
                      rudenes of the Turkes & eatynge they are rude and vncleanlye. They ſytte on the grounde, theyr legges The ſyttinge of the Turckes. layed a croſſe aboue a lytle round table verye lowe, couered wyth le therlyke ſpanyſh ſkynnes.
               In ritch mennes houſes, they

are gylted wroughte & wyth lytle The maner of theyr tables. floures, as we trimme our bookes in the out ſyde. And i other menes houſes they are all playne, whych table hath hangyng about it, a linnen cloth long & narrow which ſerueth in the ſteade of napkyns to wype theyr handes. Theyr deynty meates are paſties & hacked fleſh with many onyons & ſpyces, and euery day they eate ryce and hony for potage. They are forbyddē by theyre lawe to dryncke wyne, but The potage of ye Turckes they make theyr drikee of prunes hony and rayſons, whych they vſe The Turckes maye dryncke no wyne by theyre lawe, but yet oftē tymes they dooe and are drunken that are of ryches and ſubſtaunce yee, and they drike wine tooe, whā they may get it, and become very dronckē namely the ſouldyers, nether counte they it any reproch to thē, but rather do it of ſet purpoſe Agaynſte the Turckes ſhal fyghte, they dryncke drūcken chiefelye whan they ſhall fyghte, or make an aſſaute: than yf they

fid no wyne they eate an herbe called Of an herbe that the Turckes eate. 
                  Afyon, of the apothecaries Opiū
                   whych maketh thē leſe al thought remēbraunce & feare. They haue one cuſtome or vſe wt them, yt they wyl neuer put any paper (yf it haue any thyng wrytē therin) to any The Turckes wyll put wrytynges to no fylthy vſe. filthye vſe or purpoſe no not ſooe much as to wrappe gold in it, fore feare, leaſt ye name of God be wryten therin wherfor: alſo they feare to treade vpon wrytten paper. The Turckes ſonday is our fryday.
               
               
                  Our fryday is theyr ſonday, whych they cal Iumar howebeit, they ceaſſe The Turckes work on theie Sabboth day not to worke, at yt leſt, in ye after none. And ourſōday is theyr market day. As pertaynīg to theyr houſes The Turckes maye kepe as many wemē as they wyll, but they may haue but one wyfe. & families, it is permited vnto thē to haue as many wemē as they are able to kepe, neuertheles they haue but one whom they take for theyr wyfe, whyche bryngethe her huſband no doury, but cōtrary wyſe ye
                  
huſbande geueth mony to the father, and the mother to apparell theyr daughter, and they make a greate feaſt and aſſemble at theyr maryages. Howebeit they haue lybertye afterwarde to be deuorſed The Turckes maye be deuorſed from theyr wiues yf they cannot agree wyth theym. the man to leaue the woman, and the woman to forſake the man yf they cannot agre together, and to mary other.
               The women neuer gooe abrod The wemen when they go abroade haue theyr faces couered, theyr faces vncouered. And after that they be maryed, they kepe no more company wyth theyr fathers brethren, or kynneſmen, but they maye vyſet theyr mothers, ſyſters & kynſwomen. They dye or ſtayne The wemen dye theyr heares, handes & feete. theyr heare and ye outſyde of theyr handes & feete wyth an herbe called Cna, reſemblyng the leaues of a Myrre tree, and they temper it wyth the iuyce of orenges, or Limmons, Howe the women dye themſelues. where of theyr heare, hādes

and feete become very redde, cheifly theyr nayles, whyche thynge I haue ſeen them dooe often tymes. Howe the wemen dye themſelfes And that coloure dureth but .xv. dayes, or .iii. weekes, but yt it muſt be renewed agayne, and they coūt this a great bewty. Theyr roobes and all theyr garmentes are open before vnto the foot, excepte theyr ſmockes: whych may be ſeen whā they gooe, and are commenlye of The apareyl of the wemen ſome couloured Taffeta, and welted aboute wyth parſemente, and wroughte wyth golden thredes aboute the coler. The poore wemen doe were them of checkerd or playne lynnen cloth, hauynge a border about the necke of ſome rybban. And they are gyrded about wyth a brode gyrdle, as it were an horſe gyrth, whych goeth twyſe aboute their bodyes. Theyr ſayde roobes dyffer nothynge from the mennes

garmentes, ſauynge that they be a lytle more pynched, and haue as The aparel of yt menne. it were litle playtes vpon the breſt and they haue lykewyſe longe ſleues, ſtrayte and hangynge.
               The menne counte nothyng ſo ſtraunge in oure garmentes as ye codpeces of hoſen whyche ſemeth The Turckes abhorre the faſyon of oure codpeeces. to theim very diſhoneſt. Likewiſe ye Grecians were them not. And if they fynde any chryſtian man in any place wher they may ouercome him, they cut of hys codpece, ſpecyallye the menne of warre.
               Furthermor, they are very gelousperſōs, preſumptuous, & great boſters and generally al ſo proud The pryde of the Turckes. that they thyncke no nacion in the worlde to be lyke theym: yee, that they are able to ſubdue the whole worlde to theym ſelues.
               They loue men of warre chieflye nobylyte. For yf a chryſtyan receaue

theyr lawe and make theym beleue ye he came of a noble ſtocke they dooe hym honoure, and call hym Cheliby, that is a gentle man. They haue pleaſure to be wel and rytchelye apparelyd, and among other thynges to haue theyr ſweordes Wherein the Turckes delyte. and weapons garniſhed with golde and ſyluer. They are of nature heauy, groſſe, ſlouggiſh, recheles, and vyle people, and commenly glottons. For they wyll ſyt three dayes & more at the table wt
                  out The nature of the Turckes. ryſynge excepte it be to make water. And yf ſlepe come vpon thē they couch thē ſelues in yt ſame places. Howebeit, they make no very good chere, except they haue wyne though it be forbyddē thē, wherof they haue ynough.
               For the Iewes and the chryſtyans ſell it thē. As much as I haue ſeen and knowen they be lyke the

Almaynes in bewty of perſonage The Turckes reſemble the Almaynes in ſome thynges pronouncynge of theyr language and for ye pryde that they haue in theyr warres, ſauinge yt they haue no lernynge, ne bookes, but onely of theyre lawe. Neuertheles, the greate Turcke hath ſome bookes of Aryſtotles phyloſophye tranſlated into the Aribique tongue whych he redeth ſome tymes, and ſo dyd The Turckes for the mooſte parte are vnlearned. hys predeceſſours. They beare in warre greate roules of paper written, and in the wrytynge there are figuers of ſweordes, holbards, bowes, arrowes, daggers, and they haue a phanſye that thoſe thinges The ſuperſtycyous mynde of the Turckes. ſhall kepe them frome beinge wounded.
               All maner of ryotte is permytted vnto theym, where vnto they are greatelye inclyned. And they goo not to warre but by force, and beatynges, chyeflye yf they perceaue

daunger to be in it. And they are the moſt coueteouſe men of all The falſe hartes and cowardnes of the Turckes other nacyons. Theyr houſes are ſmal & lowe, wel trīmed with houſholde ſtuffe, hauinge the floreths couered wyth carpettes as I haue ſayd before. Wherefore, they goe not in wyth theyr ſhoes, but leaue The deſcrypcyon of theyre houſes. theym at the dores, for they are eaſye to put of & on, lyke as our ſlippers are, & they cal thē 
                  Paſmach but thoſe ſhoes yt they go in whē they iourneye are lyke vnto ours, and theym they call Papouch.
               
               They lye vpon greate quyltes The maner of the Turckes lodgynge. made of fyne woll, couered wyth veluet, & other cloth of ſylke accordyng to theyr habilite, for they vſe The Turckes vſe not to lye on fethers no fethers. Theyr ſheetes are of courſe lynnen clothe, wroughte ouer wyth ſylcke of nedle worcke, ſo yt ye cānot ſe the lynnen. Which The ſhetes of the Turckes, whereof they are made is a goodly thynge to looke vpon

for they are all of crymoſyne coulour, at the leaſt, I haue ſeen none other. And there were many foūde in the cytye Modon, whan our gallyes tooke it. They eate in veſſels of tinned copper large and depe
               They haue no greate regarde of buyldynge or purchaſynge landes, ſpecyally they that are in ſeruyce wyth the greate Turcke, becauſe whā they dye, the ſayd great Turcke taketh the thyrde parte of all theyr goodes, and often tymes altogether, as whē they are made greate officers, namelye Baches, or Beglerbees, and to theyr chyldren he geueth wages of the pencyon Tymar.
               
               The Turckes haue other cuſtomes, and maners of lyuynge, whych nowe ſhall not be nedefull to reherſe, for as muche as daylye ye ſhal here more, wherefore, after

that I haue ſpoken a fewe wordes of the ſayde greate Turcke I wyl make an ende of my lettre.
            
            
               
                  THE greate Turcke The name of ye great Turcke. whyche nowe raygneth is called Sultam Soleyman, that is tooe ſaye: kynge Soleiman. For Sultam or Soldan in Moreſque ſygnyfyethe a Kynge or Prynce. So the Turkes call him whan they ſpeake of hym famyly Howe ye Turke is called of hys ſubiectes arly, but when they ſpeake of him reuerentlye, they cal him Vnghyar, whyche is to ſaye, the kynges maieſtye.
               Some tyme they call hym Sultam Soleyman Cham, whyche they pronounce Tchaam whyche ſygnyfyeth Lorde.
               But it is the Tartaryſche lāguage

and not the Turckyſche. I haue hearde hym named amonge the Turckes Badicaa. The ſayde kyng The age of ye Turcke. 
                  Soliman at thys preſente is aboute the age of .l. yeares, and he hath along body, litle bones, he is leane, and euel proporcioned, his vyſage is browne and wrythen, hys heade is ſhauen, ſauynge a tufte in the toppe, as all the Turckes haue, yt their Tolopā
                   may ſyt the better, that The deſcrypcyō of ye great Turke. is an ornament of lynnen whyche they were on theyr heades, he hath an hygh forhed and a large, great yies and blacke, he is hauke noſed he hath a long neck, ſmal and ſtoopynge, hys bearde is clypped and not ſhauen, he is dumpyſhe, and ſpeakethe and laugheth ſeldome but he is verye cholerycke and is an euel fauored man and euel proporcyoned, and taketh no pleaſure in any exercyſe. Further he is

reputed amonge theim verteous, and a good keper of his lawe, moderate, louinge peace & reſte, more then anye of hys predeceſſoures haue done, whyche the Turckes impute to hym for cowardneſſe, & faute of courage.
               He is eſtemed of theim gentle and courteouſe, neuertheleſſe he pardoneth not offenders lightely. His paſtime is to reade bookes of philoſophye, and of his owne law In whiche he is ſo inſtructed that his Moftie or byſhoppe canne teach hym nothyng at all. He is not coū
                  ted verye lyberal, but rather more ſparynge then his predeceſſours.
               He ſuffereth hym ſelfe to be ruled of them whome he loueth, and in whome he truſteth, thoughe he be ſomtymes obſtinate, and opinatyue: thryſe a weke he hath redde before him the hiſtoryes of his predeceſſours.

In which he ſuffereth no lye to be wryten, nor flateries, but only the bare actes. And he is ſatiſfyed wyth no treatyſes or enterpryſes, but wyth thoſe whyche were done amonge theyre neyghboures and other nacions aboute them, faythfully and truely declared, concernynge the conduycte of theyr affayres, he hath a ſonne called The greate Turcke hath a ſonne of the age of .xxviii. yeres. 
                  Muſtapha, about .xxviii. or .xxx. yeres olde, and he is gouerner of Iconie, and of all the ſea coſtes of Magneſia, ouer agaynſte yt Iſles of Chio and Methelin, towardes the Rhodes, where he kepeth his contynuall reſydence.
               To cōclude, bicauſe many haue meruayle that the greate Turcke wynneth dayly, & leſeth nothynge I wyll ſhewe you what order he ſetteth in the countrees whiche he conquerethe, and in what ſtate he

leaueth theym.
            
            
               The order of the countreys.
               
                  WHen ye great Turcke hath wonne a countree, fyrſte he beateth downe all ye fortreſſes, whiche ſeme not vnto him of importaunce and profyte, and the walles of all the townes there about.
               And yf there ben anie ryche or ſtronge houſes in the ſayde countrees, the inhabytauntes whereof haue allyaunce wyth ſome greate lordes beynge ſtraungiers, he taketh thoſe men awaie, and ſendeth them to dwell in ſome other place of his other countrees, beynge already ſtabliſhed in obedience. But he ſuffereth euerie man to lyue accordyng to his owne lawe & belefe

conſtrayning no man to denie his faythe, whiche thynge he doeth, bycauſe he wyll not deſtroye theym, nether brynge them to deſperacyon, beſydes yt, by theyr lawe ſuche conſtrayntes ben defended. After this he ſendeth his Sangiacs and Spachis, 
                  Howe the Turcke ladeth his people with taxes and impoſityons. and chargeth the people with ſo greate taxes and impoſycions, that it is impoſſyble for theym at anye tyme to rebell.
               Alſo he leaueth theim no harneſſe nor weapons of warre, nor ſuffereth theim to gooe oute of the countree, nether to ſerue anye but him ſelfe, yee he conſtreineth them to abyde in their houſes, that they maye be euer founde redye, when he hath nede of theim. And he vſeth theim in hys armyes for dychers, handecrafteſmen, fyndinge them only meate and dryncke.
               Iuſtyce is there rigorouſly adminiſtred

as in his other coūtrees by ye 
                  Cadiz and Sobaſſiz. But weigh The miniſtr
                        •
                     
                     cyon of Iuſlyce. tye and great matters are handeled by hym ſelfe and the Baches, for the great Turcke ſpeketh ſeldom to his other ſubiectes.
               He heareth gladly meſſengers and embaſſadoures ſtraungers, chyefely yf they brynge hym preſentes. But he practyſeth nothing with them, but only heareth them declare the cauſe of theyr cōming. To whiche he anſwereth nothyng or yf he anſwere, he ſayth onely, I haue hearde the, reſorte to the Baches, and they ſhall deſpatche the, after this they ſe hym no more.
               His cuſtome is not to ſend embaſſadoures fyrſte. But yf anye hathe begonne to ſende vnto hym he is content to entreteyne theim, and to ſende his owne agayne.
               By theſe thynges afore reherſed,

you maye perceaue that the Turcke hathe no good footemen.
               That in his campe there are a A ſomme or briefe reherſal of that which is before ſpoken. greate nombre of Chriſtyanes. That hys armyes on the ſea bene euyll furnyſſhed bothe of menne and good ſhyppes, that he is not accompanied but with pages and ſlaues, that hys princypall countreyes are inhabyted of Chriſtyanes, of whome he maketh his warryers, and yt in the countrees there are no fortreſſed places.
               Wherfore, it is to be thoughte that hys ſtrengthe is permytted of God, whyche for oure ſynnes ſufferethe thys eſtate ſo farre ſwaruynge frome all good pollycie: ſo to preuayle and not that it is maynteyned by their wiſdom, ſtrength, or vertue.
            
            
               
               The cōqueſtes or victories of ye Turckes.
               
                  I Thought verely yt I had The preface of the wryter into the conqueſtes. ben dyſcharged, & that I had ſatiſfied you, at yt leaſt ſo farre as my knowlege & powre wolde ſtretch, concernyng the matters of ye great Turcke. Neuertheles, nowe you demaūd of me their petigrees particulerly, howe I ſay they haue proceded to ye conqueſte of ſo many countrees, whych they nowe poſſeſſe. But you conſyder not the affayres, yt I haue in thys palace, whyche as you knowe ben of ſuche qualite and importaunce that it is right harde for me to emploie my ſhorte memorye to anie other thinge then my preſent buſynes doth require. Wherfore, yf I ſhal not ſaie ſo much as you deſire holde me excuſed, for there is no remedye but I muſt accōplyſh your wyl, be it neuer ſo rudely done.
               
                  
                  IN the yere of our lord The yere of our Lorde. M iii. C. a thouſande and thre hūdred, when ye emperour Henry the ſeuēth purpoſed to ſowe in Italye parcialytyes and dyuiſyons betwene the Guelfes, and the Gibelins, and Phylippe the fayre reigned in Fraunce, there were found in Natolie or Aſia the leſſe certayne capitaynes of the turckyſhe nacyon. For there they dwelte after the iourney of Godfrede of Bologne Duke of Boullen, and were there The fyrſte gatherynge of ye Turckes agaynſte the chriſtyanes. before, but then they came foorth, and gathered them ſelues againſt the Chryſtyan armyes before the towne of Nice, called in olde tyme Antigonia, vnder a Capytayne named Soliman.
               
               After this, there paſſed an hundred yeres and more, and no mencyon was made of theim, vnto the

tyme aforeſayde, when there were ſondrie captaines in Natolie, and a monge other Othman, Caraman, and Aſſan, ſurnamed Begy, or Bey, which ſignifyeth lorde or maſter. Howebeit, they take awaie the letter. y. & ſaye Othmanbeg. &c.
               
                  Othmanheg whiche was a greate Othmanbeg entred allyaunce with. ii Grecyans & a Turcke. aduenturer, entred alliaunce with two Grecians, that hadde denyed theyr faythe, and wyth a naturall Turcke. Of the ſayde Grecians, the one was named Michali, the other The names of the Grecyans. 
                  Marcke. And of the ſayde Michali came the Michalogliz, of whiche ſtocke: there remayne ſome vnto this preſent daye, and lykewyſe of Marcke came the Marcozogliz. 
                  The name of the Turcke.
               
               The Turcke was called Auramy, of whiche lynage none remayneth that anye man can tell of. Theyr ſucceſſours are counted of the bloude royall, and the empyre

of the Turckes pertayneth vnto them, yf the ſayde lynage ſhoulde fayle. By the ayde of theſe .iii. the The fyrſt victoryyes of Othmanbeg. ſaide Othmanbeg came in credit and puiſſance, and conquered certaine townes bordering vpon the great ſea coſtes called Pontus Euxinus, and amonge other the towne Siuas, called Sebaſte, & Auguſta. Caraman wente towarde Cilice, to whiche countree he gaue his name. And Aſſam went into Perſia & Aſſiria. Theſe .ii. & their ſucceſſours haue euer ben purſued by ye ſaide Othman, and his ſucceſſours, Of this Othman deſcendeth all the greate Turckes. ſo that they haue diſcōfited Caraman, & taken his countree. But Aſſambeg which is the Sophi holdeth his owne yet, & liueth in perpetual warre & hatred wt the Othmans. The The Sophi kepeth his kyngdome to hym ſelfe, & is not ſubiecte to ye Turcke. ſaide Othman reigned .xxviii. yeres, vntil ye reigne of Philip of Valoies & he was ſo ſurnamed of a towne or caſtel called Othmenach, which is betwene

                  Sinope and Trebiſond, he lefte a ſonne called Orcan: which ſucceded hym.
               
                  
                     
                        Orcan ye ſonne of Othman maried Orcan the ſonne of Othman. ye doughter of Caramā
                        beg. But afterwarde, he made warre wt him & put Caramanbeges eldeſt ſōne to deth, his wyues brother, whome he toke in bataile. He cōquered ye citie Burſia, or Pruſias. In which tyme it chaūſed yt 
                     Andronicke Paleologo, emperour of Cōstantinople at ye houre of his deathe made tutour of his childrē 
                     Caloianne, & Andronique, one of his familiar ſeruaū
                     tes named Iohan Cantacuſane, whiche man though he behaued hym ſelfe wel & wiſely in ye ſaide tuitiō, neuertheles he was put out of his office thorough ye enuie of ye patriarch of Conſtantinople & an other perſonage of baſe cōdiciō, but of great credit about ye yong emperour Caloianne.
                  
                  
                     
Howebeit, he founde the meanes afterward to retourne, and to becōme the myghtyeſt in Conſtantinople. And for the aſſuraunce of his eſtate, he procured that his doughter ſhoulde be maryed to the ſayde Emperour Caloianne.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge, they coulde not lyue in peace, and therfore the Emperoure wythdrewe hym ſelfe ſecretly into ye yſle of Tenedo. Whether the armye of ye 
                     Geneuoyes came to ſeke hym with .iii. ſcore gallies, and broughte hym agayne to Conſtantinople, and chaſed awaye Cantacuſane, whiche ranne for ſuccour to the venetians, with whoſe aide he came to aſſaute ye 
                     Geneuoyes, beyng in the Canal of Conſtantinople, called ſomtyme Propontis.
                  
                  Neuertheleſſe, ye 
                     Geneuoyes had the victorye, and the towne remayned to Caloianne, which gaue to the

capitayne of the Geneuoyes, Frauncies Cataluz, the Iſle of Methelni, or Leſbos Which they dyd holde to ye reigne of Mahumet, the ſeconde, which toke it from Nicholas Cataluz ye laſte duke therof. This lytle diuiſyon cauſed The cauſe of the warre betwene the Geneuoyes and the Venetiās great warres betwene ye 
                     Geneuoyes and the Venetians. Which broughte the Veuetians to an extremyte, in ſomuche that they wolde haue yelded them ſelues to the Geneuoyes.
                  
                  But afterwarde, the Geneuoyes contrariwyſe, were brought to vtter diſtruccyon & bondage, wherein they continue vnto this daye.
                  For they were cōſtreigned to geue them ſelues to the archebyſhop of Millean, then gouerner of the ſayde towne. And after yt to ſel theyr landes & lordſhyppes to the comunaltie of S. George, which is in their towne. And then they ran for ſuccour to ye king of Fraunce, whiche

gaue to them duke Iohan of Calabrie, ſonne of kynge Rene.
                  
                  Againe, they retourned to Philyppe duke of Millan, & afterwarde lefte hym, ſo yt they knewe not, to what ſaint they ſhulde vowe them ſelues. But the moſte miſchyefe was, that the ſayde warres were an occaſyon of the loſſe of Sirya, & of the realme of Ieruſalem, and that they opened a gate vnto the Turckes in to Grecelande, and Europe, as I wyll declare hereafter. And it was about that tyme, when Loys of Rauiere, & Federike of Auſtrige were at varyance for the empyre of Almanie.
                  The ſayde Orcan reygned .xxii. The reygne of Orcan. yeres, to the beginninge of kynge Iohn of Fraunce, whych was the yere of our lorde a. M .iii. hundred and fyftye. And he lefte his ſonne Amurath to be hys ſucceſſoure.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        AMurath, which ye 
                     Hungariens call Ammerat, and the Turckes Moratheg or Morathey, and Norathegby, which ſignifieth Morath, ye lorde, he ſucceded Orcan, whē 
                     Cantacuſan purſued the Emperoure Caloianne hys ſōne in lawe, wt the ayde of Marcke Carlouich, lorde of Bulgarie.
                  
                  He was fauoured alſo of certayne Barons and lordes of Grece enemies of the emperour Caloianne Whyche forbecauſe he perceaued hym ſelfe to weake, he was conſtreygned to aſke helpe of ye ſayde Amurath, & he dyd ſende to hym .xii. M. horſemen, with ye which he pacified all his maters, & afterward gaue them licence to departe. But they hauing ſene and taſted of the goodnes & pleaſauntnes of ye countree Amurath his iourney into Grece. of Grece (perſwaded as it was eaſy to do) ye ſayde Amurath to gooe

into Grece, lyke as he dyd in dede, accompaigned with .lx. thouſande men, wt whome, by the aide & meanes of two marchauntes ſhyppes of the Geneuoyes, whiche had of him lx. thouſande ducates, he paſſed ouer the ſtrayct, in olde tyme called Helleſpontus, and nowe called Callipolly or the caſtel, by reaſon of two caſtelles being there at this houre where ſomtyme were wonte to be .ii. townes Seſtus & Abidus. And they The two caſtelles Seſtus and Abidus. toke the towne of Calipoli, beynge nere to ye ſaide ſtreyght. And afterwarde Adrianopoli nowe callled Andrinopoli, and Philippoli, ſomtyme called Olimpias. They alſo ouerran all ye countre of Thrace, called of ſome Howe Amurath ouerran all Thrace. 
                     Romanie, euen to ye mounteyn of Rhodope, called by ye Grekes Baſiliſſa, ytis the quene of mounteynes. Otherſome doth cal it yt mounteyn of ſyluer, by reaſō of diuers mines of ſiluer

yt there are. They diſcōfyted in bataile ye ſaid Marcke Carlouich, & toke The dyſcōfyture of Mark Corlouich. pryſoner the Erle Lazare of Seruir, whyche is Miſia the leſſe (called of Froſſarde the erledome of Lazaran) and cauſed him to be behedded, in the meane time ye Emperour Charlys the fourth beynge greatly hindered and damaged wyth the reſyſtaunce of the chyldren of Loys of Bauiar, ſome tyme Emperour, and in defendynge hym ſelfe from Ferray or Federic Marques of Myſue, & frō the Erle of VVirtenberge his purſuers, he was conſtrayned to leaue the Empyre after him to hys ſōne Lancelot, and to ſell the townes and lordeſhyppes of Italye as Myllan to vicountes and dyuerſe other.
                  Finally, the ſayde Amurath was ſlayne by a ſeruaunte of the ſayde The death of Amurath. Erle of Lazare in reuengyng of his maſters death. In the yere of our

Lorde athouſande, three hundred three ſcore and thyrtene, after that he had reygned thre and twentye yeares, euen nere tooe the begynnynge of the reygne of Charlis the fyfte kynge of Fraunce, leuynge two ſonnes behynde hym, the one named Pazait and the other Seleyman
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        PAzait, or Bazait, after ye Turkes which neuer pronoūce the letter. P was called of Froyſſart king Baſant ye ſōne of Lamorabaquin & ſome tyme Amorabaquin after hys fathers name Engner: & maſter Nycole Gilles, whych gathered and compyled the Cronycles of Fraunce, dothe calle hym kynge Baſaac.
                  
                  Thys manne was hardye, The hardines of Bazait. dylygente and a great enterpryſer he ſlewe in one battayle Marcke Carlouich, in the whyche alſo were ſlayne

al the nobles of Seruie and Bulgarie, and thereafter ouer ranne all the country of Theſſalie, & Macedonie, nowe called Thumeneſie, and Albainie
                  
                  He deſtroyed all Grece, euen tooe Athenes called of ſome Cuthine he ſpoyled Boſue whych is ye vpper Miſia, Croace, and Sclauonie, whyche are Dalmacia and Liburnia. The Emperoure The depoſing of ye Emperoure Lancelot. 
                     Lancelot, ſonne of Charlys the fourth, then liuyng, was ſooe peaſyable and quyet, that often tymes he was impryſoned by hys owne ſubiectes, and was depoſed of hys Empyre, by the Almaynes Howe the Almaynes choſe ii. Emperoures. whyche dyd elect two others, that is to wytte Ioce, hys neueiue, and Roberte of Bauyere called Rueprech whyche ſygnyfyeth in theyr language Trouble peace.
                  For tooe returne agayne tooe Bazait, he entred into Hungarie and dyſcomfyted kynge Sigiſmound

whych afterward was made Emperour called by Engnarran, Sagemont in the famouſe battayle of Nicopoli 
                     The battayle of Nycopoly. whych was loſt, becauſe the Frēch men wolde not beleue the ſayde Sigiſmonde nor tarye vpon the approchinge of his battayles nor of the Almaynes, which was rekened to theyr greate pryde and arogancye as ſayeth Froſſarde.
                  In the whyche battayle were taken the Erle of Neuers, Ihon afterward duke of Burgoynie the ſōne The noble mē taken by Bazait, in ye king dome of Hungarye. 
                     Philippe the fyrſt duke. Philippe of Arthois Erle Deu, conſtable of Fraunce. Ihon the Maingre called Boucincalte, and dyuerſe others, to the nomber of .vii. or .viii. which were ſent to Burſir, al the reſt were ſlaine to the nomber of a thouſande ſperes. The whych battayle was on the vygyll of Saynte Myghell in ye 
                     The tyme of the battayle yere of oure Lorde .xiii. C. lxxxxvi
                  
                     
The ſayd pryſoners were after ward redemed (not without great raunſons) by the dylygence of one called Iames of Hely gentelman The raunſomynge of the pryſoners. of Pycardie, whych was taken with theym, and who alſo before, was well beknowen and truſted in the courte of the ſayde Amorabaquin.
                  
                  After thys battayle Bazait aſſyeged Bazait beſeeged Conſtantynople. the towne of Conſtantinople, and had taken the ſame, had not been, that a great prynce of Tartarye dyd enter in the Lanatolie, whyche was called Tamerlā
                      or Tamburlam, by the Turckes called Demirlenge, and by ſome hyſtoryans of Fraunce named Tacon of Tartarie, but he was called of hys owne Temircuthlu, that is to ſaye: fortunate or happie ſwearde, or happie yron. And was the ſonne of Cham of Tartarie called zaym Cham of the Horde, or multytude of zanoltha, and Czahaday, beynge be

twene ye riuers of Rha & Volha, which entre in the ſee of Abacuth, whych ye 
                     Latiniſtes call Mare Caſpiū
                      or Hircanū.
                  
                  And thys zaym, was the verye ſame, whome they of Pole called in theyr hyſtories Bathy the fyrſt Mahumetyſt, 
                     Bathy ye firſt Mahumetiſte of Tartary of al the Tartaryans. Tamerlan ſoone after, was lord of al Tartarie Precopie called by theym Prezelzoth, which ſignifieth diches or trēches lyinge betwixt the ryuers of Tana, called Tanais, and called of the Bory ſehenes Nepar, and by the Turckes Decoz, the whyche countrye in olde time was Scithia ye leſſe, beingnowe in the poſſeſſyon of the Turcke.
                  And the ſayde Tamerlā
                      helde his ſeege in the great towne of Samarcande vpō the ſayd ſee of Abacuth & The ſurname of Tamerlan made him ſelf to be ſurnamed the yre or wrath of God, but his title & ſtile was Vluchā, yt is to ſay, ye great lord. To Bazait now, was cōueniēt

to leaue ye ſeeging of Conſtantinople, for to come vnto ye ſayd innumerable armye. So yt both the armyes dyd mete toward the towne of Angory, in olde time called Ancira, nere to the moūtayne called Stella, & by Enguarran of Mōſtrelet called Appady, wher ſome time Pōpee ye great, diſcō
                     fited king Mithridates. And the ſayd Bazait, was vainquiſhed, & takē in battayl by the ſayd Tamerlan, which The takynge of Bazait. made him to be bound & fettred wt cheynes of gold, & kepte hym in a caige, lyke as he were a Lion, & ſo cauſed hīto be caried aboute with Howe Bazait was bounde wyth fetters of gold & kept in a cage him, throughout al the coūtrye of Aſia, ſo longe as he lyued, whyche was .ii. yeres or therabout, ſo yt he died in ye yere of our lord. M. iiii C after yt he had reigned .xxvii. yeres The death of Bazait. vnto the .xxvii. yere of ye reygne of kīge Charles ye .vi. This very ſame Tamerlā
                      made him to be called Yldrē
                      
                     The ſurname of Tamerlam
                     
that is to ſaye: thonder out of this battayle and preaſe. Certayne ſonnes of the ſayde Bazait dyd eſcape, who thynkinge to paſſe into Europe 
                     Howe the ſonnes of Bazait fled. fell into the handes of the Emperoure of Conſtantinople, whych made the paſſage of the ſea to be ſtraytly kepte. By chaunce, one of the ſaid brethren called Cyris, whom ſome dyd call Calepin or Calapin, paſſed throughe and came to Andrinopoli. And as I do iudge, the erroure of The errour of hys ſurname. that ſurname is come of thys that ſome called him Cyris Chelebi, which is a tytle of honoure and nobylyte geuē and attributed to the children and ſonnes of ye great Turckes, as Achmat Chelebi, that is to ſay gentylman, lyke as the Spaignardes ſayth Don Alonſo or Don Rodrigo, and as the Frenchmenne ſayth Charles Mounſire that is is my lord Charlys, or Loys my Lorde, whych be tytles

of ye bloude royall. This Cyris did reigne .vi. yeres, or therabout, and lefte a ſoonne called Orcan, & thre of his brethrē, the cyldren of Pazait Moyſe, whom thei called Muſach Mehemet, and Muſcapha, whiche wente forth of Cōſtantinople while the Emperour came to ſeke aid and helpe of the ſaied kyng Charles the .vi. againſt the ſaied Cyris. Muſach killed Orcan his nephue, & in recompence One murtherar deſtroieth another. therof, he hymſelfe was ſleyne by Mehemet his brother. Then begāne a cuſtome & vſe emong theim one to ſleye another, whiche ſens that time thei haue metly wel obſerued.
               
               
                  
                     
                        MEhemet the firſt of his name hauing ſlaine Mehemet ye firſt of that name. 
                     Muſach hys brother poſſeſſed the empire and recouered al the countrie of Natolie, which Tamerlan had taken with Bazait,
                     
and remoued his ſee from Burſye tranſportyng the ſame to Andrinopoli. He warred vpon the coūtree of Valachie, called by ſome Frenche hiſtorians Valaigne, and of others Blaquie, whiche in the olde time wer called Buſſe and Triballi. He vainquiſſhed the Emperour Sigiſmonde 
                     How Mehemet vaynquiſſhed Sigiſmunde. in the plaine feldes of Silinubes, and was the firſt of his nacion, yt euer did paſſe ouer the greate ryuer of Danowe who alſo toke Boſue & made Mehemet was the firſte of the Turckes that came ouer Danow warre agaynſt Caraman, and dyed in the yere of God. M .cccc. xviij. & in the .xxxviij. of the ſaied kynge Charles the .vj. after that he had The death of Mehemet. reigned .xviij. yeres, comprehendyng therwith ye tyme of Cyris, whiche ſome others dooe not recken. And he lefte a ſoonne called Amurath.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        AMurath the ſeconde of Amurath the ſonne of Mehemet. that name, called alſo Moratbeg, was i Natolie when his father deceaſed: who aſſone as he was aduertiſed therof, went into Europe, notwithſtandynge that the Emperour of Conſtantinople dyd that was in hym to ſtoppe him of the ſame, ſending agaynſt hym Muſcapha his vncle, ye ſonne of Bazait whom as yet he did reteyne with him after the takyng of his father (as I haue declared before.) But the ſaied Muſcapha not beyng ſtrong to reſyſte his power was diſconfited and ſlayne in battayle by the ſaied Amurath, who ardently intendyng to reuenge hym The purpoſe of Amurath. of thē Emperour of Conſtantinople ſpoyled, and brent all the countree of Thrace, and of Grece called Romanie & tooke from the Venitians the good

towne of Teſſalonyc called Salomachi whiche Andronye Paleologo ſould vn to theim for very ſpyte of the Emperour Conſtantyne his brother. After the ſaied Amurath entreed into Serine, or Raſcie where he cōſtreined George Vucouich deputie or lorde of ye ſaied countree, to geue hym in mariage his doughter called Iriny, yt is to ſay, Peace, ſurnamed Cathacuſine. And yet neuertheles after that he came againſte hym, ſo yt he fled into Hungary toward yt Emperour Albert the ſonne in lawe of the laſte Emperour Sigiſmond, leuyng hys ſoonne George to kepe his countree whiche afterwarde was taken by yt ſaied Amurath, whoſe yies he cauſed The cruelnes of Amurath againſt his brother inlawe. to be thruſte out, notwithſtandynge, that he was his brother in lawe. After the death of the ſaied Albert, Lancelote brother to the kyng of Pole was choſen by the Hungariās
                     
to be their king. Howbeit the ſaied Albert lefte Elizabeth his wyfe great with chylde whiche after his diſceaſſe was delyuered of a ſoonne called Lancelot being brought vp & nouryſhed in the cuſtodie of ye Emperour Frederic the thirde, whiche was the occaſion and cauſe why yt the ſaied Lancelot of Pole durſte not take in hande to medle with the Turckes, ner ones to aſſaille thē fearyng that if ye ſaied Emperour perceiuyng hym eny other where troubled or occupied ſhulde in the meane tyme reſtore the ſaied Lancelote the iuſte and righteous kynge of Hungary to his owne realme. In this meane whyle Amurath whiche could not abyde at the ſiege of Belgrado which thei cal Mandoralba, and Alba Greca, called by the Hungariens Chrieſchiſch, in olde tyme called Taurunum, liynge betwixte the two ryuers

of Danowe and Saua towarde yt parte, wheras both the ſaid ryuers dooe mete together. The whiche towne the ſaied George Vucouich had chaūged for other, with the ſaied emperour Sigiſmonde, becauſe it is ye keye and chief entrey of Hungary. A lytle after, at yt requeſt of the ſaied deputie George Vucouich the forſaied Howe Lancelot prepared an hooſt and preuailed. 
                     Lancelot prepared a great armie, by the whiche he recouered the countree of Seruie and Raſcie, and reſtored theim agayne to ye ſaied George Vucouich. By reaſon of the whiche Amurath ſente agaynſt hym Carabey, (that is to ſaye, ye blacke lord) with a greate armye and power, ſo that both the armyes did mete nere vnto the mountayne of Coſtegnaz, in olde tyme called Hemus where the ſaied Carabey was diſcoumfited & taken priſoner, the whiche two victories The takynge of Carabey. with many other, both afore

& after did come to paſſe throughe the vailliantenes & noble feactes of Iohn of Huniad called by Enguerran of Monſtrelut and Philip of Comynes ye whyte knyght of Valaigne, and by ye 
                     Hungariens Lanco Ban, or Vaiuod, that is to ſay, gouernour of Trāſſiluana nowe called Moldauia, and by yt 
                     Hungariens Sibenburge, that is to ſay Septem Caſtra, or the ſeuē Caſtelles, called in olde tyme Dacia. The which Iohn Huniad was father of Mathias kyng of Hungarye that did reigne in our tyme.
                  After this battaile was a truce A truce cōcluded betwene the Turckes and the Hungaryens. taken for .x. yeares betwene the Turckes and the Hungaryans, by reaſon wherof Carabey was delyuered, paiynge for his raūſone fyftye thouſande Ducates. The The breaking of the truce. whiche truce was ſone after broken, by the ſaied kyng Lancelot, (at the inſtaunce and perſuaſion of ye
                     
Biſhop of Rome, Eugene ye fourth) which chaunſed to his great miſchief, for he was ſlayne in battaile nere to the toune of Verne, which is The death of Lācelot kyng of Hungarye called Dionyſiopolis, on ſaynt Martyns daye the .xi. daye of Nouember in the yeare of our Lorde. M .cccc. and .xliiij. Out of which battayl Ihon Huniad did eſcape. Of this victorie Amurath did nothynge reioyſe, for aſmuche as he bought theſame veray dere, he tooke alſo the Sophie capitalle of Bulgarie, Scopie, and Nouomont. He ranne thorowe the countree of Acarmania nowe called Ducat or Duche, and the countree of ye 
                     Cymera or Eperotee called Epirus 
                     Epirus. from ye ryuer of Achelons, called at this daye Pachicolam, nere vnto the moūtaynes, nowe called the moū
                     taynes of the Demble, in olde tyme called Acrocerannii which are a part of the mountayne called Pindus, he

tooke the porte of the Velon, ſometyme called Aulon, and paſſed ouer the goulfe of Larta, called the Ambracius Beye and went to the toune of Oricus, nowe called Rigo and frō thence towarde Cataro called Riſonicus Beye or goulfe, which is about xxv. myles of lengthe from Raguſa, which was called Epidaurus. He cō
                     ſtreined Iohn Caſtrioch deputee & gouernour of Cymeria to rēdre to him the ſtrong toune of Croya, and to giue his three ſoonnes in pleage whom he made to bee come Turckes, the youngeſt of theim named George, was but .ix. yeres olde or ther aboute, and was ſurnamed Schanderbegge, yt is to ſaie the Lorde Alexander, whiche did beecome a right valiaunt capitain and worthy to be cōpared vnto Pyrrhus & to others his predeceſſours: for vnder Amurath he conquered Saruie, &

toke a greate parte of ye coūtree of Caramanie, retournyng afterwarde to the Chriſten fayth, he cauſed to be taken frō the ſaide Bazait, firſt ye countree of Seruie then Croya. And all the countrees, tounes and caſtelles, which apperteined to ye late Ihon Caſtrioth hys father, beſydes twenty or thyrty battailles which he had agaynſt the Turcke, in the whiche he at all tymes had the victorie, in ſo muche that Amurath the greate Turcke coulde neuer laye any thynge to hys reproche, ſaue onely the good chere, yt he made to hym the tyme he was vnder his power, callyng him his vnthankfull ſonne and chylde, by dyuerſe his writynges ſent to hym, full of many amyable & fauorable good wordes. The ſaide Schanderbeg feared hym ſo lytle, that he left his owne countreye, to gooe and helpe

                     Ferdinand kynge of Naples, agaynſte Howe Schā
                        derbeg lefte his owne coū
                        tree to gooe & healpe Ferdinand kyng of Naples. Iohn duke of Calabre. The which Ferdinand he dyd ſet into his realme and thruſt out theſayde duke whō he conquered. For thewhiche pleaſure theſaide Ferdinand called his ſonnes beeynge ſpoyled of theyr goodes by Mehemet the ſeconde, after the death of their father, and gaue vnto theim greate ſubſtaūce and ryches, ſomuche yt they were made Marqueſſes of ſaynte Ange. Of this ſtocke was Ferdinand Caſtrioth Marques of ſaynte Ange, whiche dyed in the battayle of Pauye. Amurath afterwarde occupyed ye countreye of the Moree, thewhyche in the olde tyme was called Peloponeſus, by the varyaūce and diſcorde of two brethren Thomas and Dimitre or Demetrius deputyes of theſayde countreye and brethrē of Conſtantyne Peleologo the laſt Emperour of

                     Conſtantinople, for becauſe that the Albanoys made warre vpon theim, and therfore they ranne for ſuccoure to theſaide Amurath, and he made theim his trybutoryes. And foraſmuche afterward as they rerefuſed to paye that whiche they had ꝓinyſed him, he chaſed theim. Dimitre he retourned agayne towarde hym, and Thomas wente to Rome to the biſhop therof, where he dyed and left behinde hym two ſonnes and two doughters. Amurath beynge come to extreme age, Howe Amurath woulde haue bene areligeous mā and geuēouer his rule and dominion. wery of the worlde and of his victoryes, wythdrewe hymſelfe wyth certen heremytes and religious perſonnes of theyr lawe, to thentent to lyue from that tyme foorth in ſolytarynes and reſt. Hauynge ſet in his place his ſonne Mehemet whiche was verey young, & therfore he commytted the rule & gouernaunce

of hym to Haly Bacha, whyche ſometyme is called Caly Bacha. But when afreſhe, Ihon of Huniad and the Hungarians had ſente a greate army to aſſayle theim, he was conſtreygned at the deſyre of his ſayde ſonne and of theſayde Haly Bacha to take agayne his admyniſtracion (becauſe they coulde not be obeyed) & to ſet an ordre in theſe affaires▪ goyng agaynſt the Howe Amurath tooke vpon him again, the rule and dominiō of Turckey: 
                     Hungarians, whom he vaynquyſhed and droue backe. And afterwarde he went and aſſeged Croye againſt Schanderheg, but he coulde not gette it. And then in his retournyng by the mounteignes, he was robbed and ſpoyled of the Payſans, whyche Howe Amurath was robbed and ſpoyled. ſlue many of his people. So that what with the greate grefe & dyſpleaſure that he then tooke, and alſo for age, he dyed the. M .cccc. & The death of Amurath. li. yeare of oure Lorde, beeyng of

the age of .lxxv. yeres, & the .xxxii. yeare of his reigne, and the .xxvi. of the reigne of Gharles the .vij. kyng of Fraunce. And he was the firſt that ordeyned the Iannyſſaryes.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        MEhemet the ſeconde of Mehemet the ſecōde of that name. that name (called by Enguerrand and other hiſtorigraphiers) Fraū
                        ces Morbeſan, and I am in doubte whether they would ſay Morbeſalem, whiche is aſmuche to ſaye in the Syryan & Moreſque ſpeche as theſe woordes of the Goſpell (Vade in pace) in englyſhe, goo in peace: ye ſōne of Amurath & of Iriny Vucouich the daughter of George deputye of Seruie, beganne to reygne the .xxi. yeare of his age, and with in two yeares after, he wanne the The wynning of Conſtantinople. ſiege of the toune of Conſtantinople whiche was in the. M .cccc. & .liij.

yere of our Lord, where was ſlayn the Emperour Conſtantyne. And it The firſt and laſte Emperours of Conſtantynople was named Conſtantyne came ſo to paſſe, that lyke as one Conſtantyne the ſonne of Helene was the firſt Emperour of Cōstantinople ſo another Conſtantyne beynge the ſonne of another Helene was ye laſt Emperour therof. This Mehemet was nether Chriſtian, nor Muſulmā
                      or Mahometiſt, for in his youthe he was inſtructed in the Chriſtyan fayth by his mother, and after he learned this doctryne of Mahomet: ſo that when he came to age and dyſcrecion, he nether kepte the one nor the other. In the begynnynge Turckyſhe tyrannye. of his reigne, he cauſed to be ſlain two younge brethren that he had, the one of ye age of .xviij. monethes and the other of .vi. Notwithſtandyng ſome ſay, that in the place of the elder was put another chylde, and he that was his brother was

ſent to Conſtantinople, and frō thence to Venyce and ſo to Rome to Calyxte then byſhoppe of yt ſee, which cauſed him to be baptyzed and named Howe ye brother of Mehemet was Chriſtened. 
                     Calixte Othman, to whome the Emperour Frederick ye thyrde gaue greate gyftes and ſubſtaunce in Auſtria. Mehemet hauyng taken Conſtantinople, as I haue ſaide, he tourned hym to the realme of Hungarye and beſieged Belgrado, from whēce he was dryuen by Ihon Huniad, whiche was within theſame with the Cardinal of ſaynt Ange called Ihon, and a graye freer named alſo Iohn, and ſurnamed Capiſtram.
                  
                  From thys ſiege, Mehemet fled ſhamfully, for he was hurte, & loſt his artillarye and other bagages without hope of the recouerye of Hungarye. So that he was cōſtreined to paſſe vnto Moree whiche the Venecyans had taken from hym

and newlye repeyred the Examilo, whiche is a walle conteignynge vi. myles, or two legues longe, frō the goulfe of Patràs, called ye baye of Corinthiacus, vnto that of Legine, whiche was called the baye of Megaricus, where ſometyme was the toune of Corinthe, whiche nowe is brought vnto a lytle village called Corintho, the whiche Examilo, Amurath his father had beatē downe that he myght entre the eaſelyer into the Moree. Mehemet commynge the Venecyens thought to wythſtande Mehemet diſcomfyted the Venecyans. hym, but they were vaynquyſhed, and loſt that battayll, in the whyche was ſlayne a greate nombre of good capteynes of the Italyans, after whoſe takynge & the veraye ſame tyme, was taken alſo the Iſle of Negrepont called Eubeia, ioynyng to the ſayde land, encloſed wyth a brydge. And afterwarde

the yſles of Stalimene or Stalmini, in the olde tyme called Lennos, and Methelim, called Leſboos, the whiche perteigned to Nycholas Cataluz geneuoye: afterwarde alſo ſaynt Maurye, called Nerytus, and by ſome Leucas and Leucadia, Imate in the olde tyme name zacynthus and Cephalenie called Chifalonye. And recouered agayn Croya, after the death of Schanderbeg, he tooke the toune of Scutari or Scodra from the lorde Arinth Comino or Connenus, ſurnamed Gollent, that is to ſaye Cheuelu, father of the lorde Conſtantyne, that gouerned the Marques of Mountfarrat after the death of the Ducheſſe hys nyece, theſame tyme that kynge Charles the eyght came from Naples. Afterwarde he entred into Boſue and tooke the lorde or deputye named Stephyn Hierchec
                     
(and of ſome hiſtoriphiers the duke of Latic) whoſe heade he commaunded to bee ſtryken of, and cauſed hys ſonne to denye hys faythe and to bee circumcized and ſurnamed Achinath. He tooke from the Geneuoys the toune of Capha, whyche is called Theodoſia, ſette in Precopie, whiche is Taurica Cherſoneſſus, whyche in maner is as longe as the Moree, and on the one ſyde thereof is the goulfe of Nigropila called the baye of Carcinites, and on the other ſyde the blacke ſeea called Bicis Palus, and nere vnto it, is Meotides Paludes whyche at thys daye is called the goulfe of Tanais. Beeynge thus combred and troubled wyth all theſe cares and prouyuyſyons of warre, and trauaylynge and labourynge in all

theſe countryes lyeng ſo farre one from another, he was aſſayled in Natolie by Piramet Caraman, whyche conſtreigned him to leaue his entrepriſes, How Mehemet was aſſailed by Piramet Caraman. and yet notwithſtādyng before that he parted, he tooke the ſtronge caſtell of Mancup, ſituate vpon the ſtreight, whiche by land encloſeth Precopie, that in the olde tyme was called Taphie. Thys thynge done he paſſed into Natolia dryuynge backe Caraman, and entred into his countreye, a greate parte wherof he wanne & brought vnder his ſubieccion. In his commyng backe, he toke Sinope ye head of Paphlago ſytuate vpon the great ſea, and Trapezus called Trebiſonde whiche is an Empire: and he cauſed to be ſlayne the Emperour Dauid Conyno or Commenus whiche was a Chriſtian, of the lynage of the valyaunt Iſaac Conyno, the whyche

from a capteyne, became Emperour of Conſtantinople, next after the Emperour Mychael. And all theſe thynges aforeſayde came to paſſe Note, that ye dyſcorde betwene Chriſtian princes prouoketh ye Turcke to warre. in the tyme that the Hungaryans & theim of Auſtriche made warre agaynſte the Emperour Frederycke, becauſe they woulde haue had Lancelot the ſoonne of Albert theyr lorde and kynge whiche was in the kepyng of the Emperour, and he woulde not delyuer hym to theim, becauſe he was not of leful age. And ſtreyte vpon theſe victoryes aroaſe a newe enemye of theſayde Mehemet, whiche was the How ye kyng of Perſye aſſayled Mehemet. kynge of Perſie, called Vſuncaſſan or Aſſembeg, whiche was accompaigned wyth a greate armye of the Perſians (whome the Turckes call Keſelbach, that is to ſaye redde heddes, becauſe thei vſe to were redde cappes or hattes) he entred into

                     Capadoce and Trebiſonde, and in the fyrſte battayle Mehemet was dyſcomfyted, in the ſeconde Aſſamheg had the woorſſe and loſte a greate parte of his countreye. The whyche Aſſembeg was of the lignage of Dauid Conyno the Emperoure of Trebiſonde, lyke as before I haue made mencyon, and he reigned in the yeare of oure Lorde. M .cccc. and .lxxii. Mehemet beyng delyuered of this trouble, retorned into Caramanie, after the death of Piramet Caraman, and conſtreigned Abraham hys ſonne to ſeke ayde and ſuccour of the Chriſtians and of Pius the ſeconde byſhop of Rome whiche byſhop myndyng to go in his owne perſone agaynſte hym cauſed hymſelfe to be caryed to Ancone, where he prepared a greate armye by the ſeea, and there dyed,

whyle he taryed the commynge of the Venecyans whyche ſhould haue accompaignyed hym in this voyage. Thē it came to paſſe he be ynge dead, that the armye ſkattered and ſo departed wythoute takyng any effect, the Almeignes beynge then in warre wyth the Hungaryans, they founde Caraman alone without helpe or ayde, whō the ſaide Mehemet cauſed to bee ſlayne. And by thys meane, the ſtocke of Caraman was deſtroyed The dyſcomfyture & death of Caraman. and theyr contreye remeyned to Othmans. Mehemet beynge ſure of this quarter he ſente to Marbeye, Samgiac of Boſue, whyche was the ſoonne of a Geneuoye, to ſpoyle the countreye of Iſtrie, called Liburnie, of Craine or Carnie, called Corinthe, & of Stirie, whiche they cal Steirmarck, & in yt old tyme called

                     Valeria, whiche all are compryſed within Illirium, and ſo paſſed forthe to Friol, which was called the merket of Iulii, & trauerſynge betwixte The great ryuers Gue and Nou. 
                     Gue and Nou the greate ryuers, dyſcōfyted the Venecyans which he found before hym, wher wer ſlayn and taken pryſoners, al the reſt of the good capteynes of Italye. On the other ſyde, Mehemet ſent Achmath Bacha ſurnamed Ghendich, (that is to ſaye: to the greate toothe, the ſonne of Stephyn late deputee of Boſne of whome I haue ſpoken before) wt a great armye by ſeea into Italye, & he toke the toune of Otranto called Hydruntus, and in old tyme Iapiginum, in the countree of Pouille or Apulia. Before this alſo Meſithba Paleologue (whiche was of the lignage of the Emperoures of Conſtantynople) had aſſieged the toune of ye 
                     Rhodes, and coulde not get it.

And not content with theſe thre armyes, Mehemet wente hymſelfe againſt ye 
                     Soudiane of Egipt, but beyng arriued very nye to Nicomedie, (whiche ſome at this day call Comedy,) he dyed in the yere of our lord. M .cccc. lxxxii, beyng aboute thage of The death of Mehemet. liiii. yeres and the .xxxi. yere of his reigne. He was called by the Turkes Mehemet Boiuc, that is, the great. And he lefte behinde hym .ij. ſoonnes named, Pazait and zizimi, which dooth ſignifie loue, for Muſcapha Laiſne gouernour of Icony, called Iconium dyed ſone after ye ſeconde battayle of Ambaſſag, in the whiche he bare hymſelfe wel and valyaūtly.
               
               
                  
                     
                        PAzait, or Bazait, the ſeconde Pazait or Bazait the ſecōde of that name. of that name, & the youngeſt of yt thre brethren, (by the ayde and helpe of the Ianniſſaryes, ſpecially of Laga, that is to

ſay a capitayne, whiche was nigh kynne to hym) he ceaſed or poſſeſſed the Empire. And zizimi his brother had poſſeſſed hymſelfe of a Pazait the turckyſh tyranne aſſaileth his brother. toune called Burſye, wherwith he was well ſatiſfyed and contented, yet notwithſtandynge Pazait with the armye that hys father had prepared to haue gone agaynſte the Souldyan, he aſſauted hys brother. To the whiche Souldyā
                      the forſaied zizimi fled, and was by hym ayded bothe of money and menne: but he loſte two battayles and was dyſcomfyted by Achmath Ghēdich Bacha. Wherfore, not thynkynge enye more to recouer, he withdrewe Howe zizimi the ſonne of mehemet fled to ye Rhodes for ſuccoure. hymſelfe to the Rhodes for to haue ſuccoure of the Chriſtians, and zizimi was of the age of .xxviij. yeres Pazait being aduertized hereof ſent greate preſentes vnto the chiefe maiſter and counceler of the Rhodes
                     
deſyryng him to kepe and cheryſh well his brother, for the expences and good entreaty of whome he would pay vnto hym yerely fourty thouſande ducates, that ſo long as he was gentely enterteyned of theim, he woolde make none enter priſe or war wt the chriſtians. The which thynges he kepte and obſerued wt theim. And ye ſaied z zimi for the more ſuretie, & for that he was alwayes kepte in fear & ſubieccyō of the ſaied Pazait he was ſent into Fraunce, where he lyued a greate while in one of yt houſes perteining to ye 
                     Rhodians called Bourgānēſis: afterward he was geuē to Innocēt biſhop of Rome ye .viij. of yt name & ſent to Howe zizimi was vnder the keping of the B. Rome. Rome wher he was yt time yt kyng Charlies ye .viij. went to Naples, which deſired to haue him, hoping by his Howe the emperour deſyred to haue zizimi. ayde to haue recouered the Empire of Coſtantinople, but Alexander
                     
the. vi, byſſhop of Rome, deliuered hym to ye Emperour empoyſened, (as ſome ſaie) in ſuche ſorte that he liued not paſt. iii, daies after, and How the byſſhop of Rome poyſoned zizimi. dyed at Tarracina. Pazait dyſpatched of his brother, went aboute to conquiere yt 
                     Tranſiluana, afterwarde, he tooke Moncaſtro, and Lithoſtomo the one vpon the ryuer of Neper or Boriſthenes, 
                     Howe pazait beyng deſpatched of his brother, beginneth a newe to warre vpō chriſtendome. that is to ſaie Moncaſtro, and Lithoſtomo vpon the mouthe of the Danowe. Afterwarde, he cauſed to bee put to deathe his good capitaine Achmath Ghendich Bacha, whiche he myght haue ſaied had been equall with enie excellēt manne of warre, and he was the ſoonne of his nere kinneſman Stephin depute of Boſne as I haue ſaied before,
                  This beyng done, Pazait to go forwarde with the enterpryſe of his father, and to auenge hymſelf of the Soudian which had fauoured

& meynteyned zizimi his brother agaynſt hym, he ſente a greate armye How Pazait prepareth again the Soudian. into Surie, of the whiche the Mameluchs beyng aduertiſed, did aſſemble theimſelfes at Antioche and came towarde the Turckes to the mount Amanus, called at this preſent mounte Negro, or the blacke mountayne, where they encoūtred and defyed the ſaied Turckes, betwene ye ſaied moūte and yt goulfe Laiaffe, whiche was called the baye of Iſſicus, where ſometyme Alexander the greate diſconfited kyng Darius and there was taken Chirſeogli beyng ye ſoonne in lawe of Pazait, and was brought before yt 
                     Soudian in ye toune of Kair, which the Turckes calle Miſir. But foraſmuche as I am fallen from my matter by the reaſon the Māmaluchs, it ſhall not be farre out of the waye to tell you what is meant by a Māmeluch. Mammeluch
                     
in the Sirians tounge, whiche alſo is Affricane, by vs called Moreſque: but for the better vnderſtandyng, it ſignifyeth in our vulgare tounge, a ſeruaunte or ſouldyour. And ye muſte vnderſtande that the Souldyan and the Mammeluchs are one maner of relygyon, and they profeſſe chaſtite. Vpon theyr other apparel they were a roobe of white Māmeluchs are much like the knyghtes of ye Rhodes. Buckeram bryght and ſhynynge. And lykewyſe as ye greate Turcke hathe weytynge vpon hym foure Viſir Baga, ſo the Souldyā
                      hathe foure Emyr Quiber, that is to ſaye cheife or hed admyralles. Beſyde thys, he hathe a greate or chiefe Coneſtable, whiche they they calle Derdart Quiber. The ſayde Souldyan is made and choſen by the forſayde Howe ye ſouldian is elected and choſen. 
                     Mammeluchs amonge theimſelfes as the knyghtes of the Rhodes thoſe amonge theim ſelfes theyr greate

mayſter and mooſte commonly is one of the Emyrs or hed admiralles and he that is choſen, dooth geue vnto euery of the ſayde Mammeluchs for his welcome an hundred ducates for a preſente. The whiche Mā
                        meluchs were all Chryſten menne or The Mammeluchs wer chriſten mēne Chriſten mennes chyldren, that de nyed theyr faythe and profeſſyon, lyke as are the Iannyſſaries, for by no meanes they wyll receyue into theyr compaignye, eyther Turcke More or Iewe. The whiche Māmeluchs the Tartres tooke & ſolde theim by heapes to the fore ſayd Emyrs, whiche when they had bought theim brought them vp and made them Mammeluchs and they wer made the mooſt vyllaynes and ſlaues of all other menne, and greately geuen to ye feactes of armes, ſpecially on horſebacke, kepynge the lawe of Mehemet.
                     
This religion begāne in the tyme Whē the mā
                        meluchs beganne. that kyng Lewis was taken at Damiate, which ſome call Heliopolis, and the firſt Soudian was named Melech 
                     The fyrſte Soudan. 
                     Sala, whome the Mammeluchs ſlewe, whiche cauſed that the ſaied Lewis was ye ſoner & eaſelyer delyuered.
                  But for to come againe to Pazait, this dyſcomfyture that the Turckes had at Laiaſſe by ye 
                     Mammeluchs, was the greateſt that euer he had. And therfore the ſaied Pazait ſeyng How Pazait retourned into Sclauony that his buſynes framed not in yt quartre, retourned into Sclauonie, & tooke the toune of Duraz, of olde tyme called Dyrrachium and Epidamnus, whiche was ye 
                     Carleuichs, whom they ſaye came out of the houſe of Fraunce, & of Charles of Duraz ſurnamed of the peace, the ſoonne of Peter duke of Grauine, the ſoonne of Charles the ſeconde kyng of Naples, brother to the forſaied Lewis.
                  
                  
                     
In the yeare of oure Lorde a thouſande foure hundred .xciii. Pazait ſent eyght thouſande horſſemenne, conducted by Cadum Bacha to ronne betwene Hungarye and Sclauonye: agaynſte whome came certen lordes of ye ſayde coūtrey of Hungarye, of Croace, and of Sclauonye, & they met together vpon the ryuer The diſcomfyture of the Chriſtians. of Moraua, of olde tyme called Moſchus, where the Chriſtians were ſcatered and dyſcomfyted. Fyue yeares after, Haly Bacha Albanoys Monouc ſente a greate armye by ſeea vnto Iara or Iadera, beynge vpon the goulfe of Venyce, called Mare Adriaticum, on the coaſte of Sclauonye. And then for aſmuche as the armye of the Venecyans, whyche was veraye greate folowed theym, they durſte not aſſayle it, wherfore Haly Bacha then knowynge that the Venecyans

wer afrayed, toke, ſpyght of theyr beardes the toune of Lepantho, called in olde tyme Naupactum.
                  
                  In the .xv. C. yeare, Pazait came hym ſelfe to Modon, which was called Methone, beeynge in the Morce, and tooke it. After that, kynge Lewys the twelfth, and the Venecyans were of allyaunce, agaynſte Ludouic Sforce, ſurnamed the Mor
                           ••
                        , callynge hymſelfe the duke of Millan, Pazait at the requeſt and deſyre of the ſaide Ludouic caſte of .x. M. horſſemen of the Turckes wythin Fryol, thewhyche came vnto Triuiz and wythin the ſight of Venyce, wherfore the Venecyans prepared & ſet foorth by ſeea a greate and myghty armye. With whome the gallyes of Fraunce dyd mete, beynge vnder the charge and gouernaunce of the Lorde of Raueſtaing and Gonſalo Fernando, ſurnamed

the greate capteyne, wyth the gallyes of kynge Ferdinand Daragon, called of the Frenchemenne Iohn Gippon. The whyche armye tooke agayne the yſles of Chifalonie and of ſaynte Maure, whiche afterwarde was geuen agayne to the Turcke by the ſayde Venecyans vpon the concluſyon of peace made betwene theim, by the intreatye of Maiſtre Androwe Gritti afterwarde duke of Venyce. The gallyes of Fraunce went foorthe to the yſle of Methelin, where they coulde dooe no good. Aboute this tyme beganne the renounie and fame of Siach Iſmail kynge of Perſye named Sophi, as was hys father, and he was the ſonne of one of the daughters of Vſuncaſſan, and of one named Seichayder, that is to ſaye: the good Seich. For he was counted for an holy manne,

and as a prophete. And he was called Sophi of that ſecte, or as I The Sophi. ſhould ſaye, that religion, whiche they call Sophi or Sophilar, of ye which I haue ſpoken before, but ſome ſaye that it is becauſe the countreye which they poſſeſſe is ſo called, but neyther the Turckes ner yet the Perſyans knowe what Sophene is.
                  The forſayde Seich after the death of theſayde Vſuncaſſan was ſleyne by Iacobbeg hys brother in lawe, for enuye of thys, that the people of Perſie were more enclyned and affeccionate to hym, fearyng leaſt they would haue made hym kynge.
                  
                     Siach Iſmael beynge then of ye age of eyght yeares, fled and remayned a longe tyme in the toune of

                     Leziam, vpon the ſeea of Dabbaccuth vntyll he came to mannes ſtate. Afterwarde he retourned into Perſie, and founde the meanes to get vnto hym thrye hundred menne, wyth whome he toke the toune of Sumach, beynge then the chiefe or hedde toune of Meſopotamie: afterwarde, the nombre of hys people encreaſynge, he tooke Taurus, and and then Syras, the chief cytie of Armenie: he vaynqueſſhed and cauſed to bee putte to deathe Aluant whyche was made kynge of Perſie, and he ſlewe Iacobegge the ſonne of Vſuncaſſan and vncle of the foreſayde Siach, whyche made allyaunce with Aladule or Alnaudule and the Soudian of Egypte, by whome he was ſturred and perſuaded to make warre vpon Pazait, agaynſte whome alſo he hadde many tymes preuayled. And aboute thys

tyme Selym the youngeſt chylde of the ſayd Pazait departed from Trebiſonde, of the whyche he was gouernoure, and without the knowlege of his father, he maryed the daughter of Chan of Tartaire Precopie, wyth the fauoure of whome, and wyth the healpe of a greate nombre of horſſes whiche his brother in lawe (whome the Turckes call Chamogli or Canogli) had ſente to accompaignye hym, and hauynge alſo on his ſyde the Iannyſſaryes: he compelled his father to geue ouer his realme vnto hym, the whyche whyle they caryed him The death of Pazait whiche was poyſoned by his ſonne Selym who alſo deſtroyed hys owne brethrē 
                        
                           •…
                         is ye father of Solymā ye great Turcke that nowe raygneth. backe ouer the greate ſea to haue lyued there the reſt of his dayes, he dyed by the waye, poyſoned by his ſayd ſōne Selym, as ſome iudge becauſe they dranke together at theyr departynge. Pazait reigned xxx. yeares, and he lyued .lx. yeres

and he dyed the. M. D. & .xij. yere, and the .xiiij. from ye reigne of Lois the twelfth. And he lefte behynde hym .iij. ſonnes, Selym, Achmat and Corcuth.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        SElym beyng come to Selym the ſonne of Pazait. the realme by ye meanes aforeſayd entē
                     ded before all other thinges to dyſpatch his brethren, and firſt of all he cauſed How Selym ſought ye deſtrucciō of his brethren. to be ſleyne Corcuth, which was fled alonge the ſeea coaſte, nere to the Rhodes, where he hyd hymſelfe, waytyng for a ſhyp, to haue gone to the greate maiſter of the Rhodes, but he was betreyed by one of his The death of Corruth brother of Selym. owne folkes and was taken and ſtrangeled with a bowe ſtrenge. Achmet dyed the lyke death, but he was takē in battaile (accōpaignyed with a great armye, whiche he

had made oute, by the ayde of Siach, Iſmail, Sophie and of Campſon Ciauri Soudan) foraſmuche as he was ſo fatte and groſſe, that he neyther The death of Achmath the other brother of Selym. coulde ſaue hymſelfe by flyenge, ner endure to ryde.
                  
                     Selym beeynge thus delyuered & diſpatched of his father and brethren, purpoſed to make warre agaynſt the Sophie, aſwell for ye olde enemyte whyche was beetwene theim, as alſo for the dyſpleaſoure that he dyd in aydyng his brother to make warre agaynſt hym. And the more eaſely to brynge to paſſe this hys purpoſe and entencyon, he found the meane to haue peace with Lancelot kyng of Hungary and to refreſhe and renue agayne (for The cōmyng of the Sophy agaynſt Selym. his more ſuretie) ye allyaūce which he had wyth ye Venecyans: & then he toke the waye of Perſe. And as ye forſaid Sophy was come vnto him

with a great noūbre of horſſes armed and barbed euen vnto Aſſyrie, he was ſcatered and dyſcomfyted with the artillary of the Turkes, with which the horſes of yt 
                     Perſians had not bene accuſtomed. And the battayle was made in the playne of Calderam betwene Tauris and Coye, wher, as I haue ſayde is the toune called Artaxata, and this battayle is peynted or portured in the hall of the councell of Venice, where I haue ſene it, and ſome ſaye that the ſayde Selym ſente it to theim. After this battayle the ſayd toune of Tauris came into the handes of ye Turckes with a great parte of the realme of Perſye: but it remayned not longe, for Siach ſone after recouered it agayne and it is kepte at thys daye by Taanas hys ſoonne. Selym goynge backe agayne from Perſye, dyd wyntre in Trebiſonde,
                     
and the ſomer nexte folowyng, he aſſayled the lorde Amandule, whiche bordreth vpon yt 
                     Soudan toward the towne of Aleph called of the Frēchmenne Halappe, of the Turckes Aldephe, 
                     Aleph is the fyrſt lettre in the Hebrue alphabete, and therof was ye toune named the fyrſt in Surye. and in the olde time Epiphania. And it is called Aleph, foraſmuche as it is the fyrſt toune of Sury. On the other ſyde towarde Amaſie is ioyned to ye Turcke Cony otherwayes called Icony, and to the Perſians by the lytle Armenie. All the countree of the ſaied Amandule was taken, and he hymſelfe alſo, whoſe hedde Selim cauſed to be ſmyttē of Then remayned there none, but the Souldan, whiche came wt a great ſtrength agaynſt Caythbey Emyr of Alep, that dyd rebelle and diſobey hym, beyng accompaignied with xxviij. thouſand horſemen whiche were for the moſt parte Mammeluchs that nothyng regarded nor feared

ye Turckes becauſe thei had many tymes before beatē and vaynquiſſhed theim, as is aforſaied. Selym feyned hym to goo agaynſt the Sophy makyng the bruyte to goo ſo a broade. And as he dyd come vnto ye toune of Aman in olde time called Apamea, beyng ſumwhat betwexte Ale and Damas, he was prayed and deſyred by ye ſaied Caythbey of ayde & ſuccour agaynſt the Soudan, wher unto moſt wyllyngly he dyd agree ſeyng it was the thyng yt he moſte earneſtly deſyred, and the meane & occaſion alſo that he greatly loked for, howbeit, he durſt not open, nor declare his mynde therupon, ſeing theſe two armyes in the feldes, for feare leaſt they ſhuld haue agreed to haue fallē vpon hym, watching and ſekyng a meane howe he hymſelfe myght bryng theim bothe to deſtruccyon, wherfore he dyd incō
                     tinently

ioyne and aſſociat himſelf with the ſayde Emyr Caythbey, and they defyed the Soudan Campſon Ciaury, which died in the batayle like as dyd Cathbey, then Selim remained lorde of Surie, of Damas of Hieruſalem and of Iudee. The Mammeluchs which coulde eſcape & returne into Egipte, with theim alſo that remayned at home chaſe another Soudan, named Tomombey Emir of Alexandrie. Selim followyng hotely this fortune & victory, entreed into Egipte, and vaynquiſhed Tomombey in another battayle, and tooke the toune of Caire, which of ſome is called the wrong full Carra, and by ſome others by more apparaūt reaſōs Mēphis. And as ye ſayde Tomombey ſaued himſelf by paſſyng ouer the ryuer of Nyle, he was purſued by Canogle, who folowyng him, paſſed ouer the ſayde ryuer to Nou with .x. thouſand horſes

of Tartarie, becauſe he foūde the brydge yt was made of botes brokē and deſtroyed by the Ianniſſares: ſo that the ſaied Tomombey was taken and brought backe againe to Selim whiche cauſed hym to be hanged, wherby the ſaid Selim dyd remayne kyng of Egipte which was in ye yere of our lord a. M. D. and eyghtene.
                  
                     Selim beyng retourned agayne to Conſtantinople & wyllyng to go to Andripoli, died, by the way at ye village of Ciorlich, wher as I haue ſaid he had aſſailled his father with ye 
                     Tartarians. And he dyed in the yere of our Lorde a thouſande fyue hundreth and twenty, beynge fourty & ſyxe yeare of age, and the eyght yeare of the reygne of Francoyes the French kyng that nowe preſently doth reygne, after that he had put to deathe theſe thre Baccha Chenden

Baccha, becauſe that he would haue made buſynes with the Ianniſſaries mouyng theim to ryot at his entryng in Perſe. Boſcangi, or Conſtantin Baccha his ſōne inlawe, for dyuer
                        •
                      robberyes and enormitees, which he had cōmytted, and Ianus Baccha none can tel why or wherfore, ſaue onely but that he thought hym to proude or arrogante. This Selym lefte one ſōne onely called Soliman & by ye Turckes Seleyman, leuing him in the cuſtody of Peribaccha whiche did gouerne him in his yoūg age.
               
               
                  
                     THe tyrant Seleiman the which nowe hath the dominion and rule of the Turckes at thys preſent time lord and gouernour ouer the Turckes beganne his reygne the xxviij. yere of his age who in the yere nexte following by counſel of

                     Peribaccha beſeiged Belgrado & wāne and tooke the ſame from Lois kyng of Hungarie, the ſoonne of Lancelot of Hūgarie, which thē was very yoūge the princes and lordes of the hole countree beyng at greate debate & varyaunce for the gouernemente both of the kyng and his realme, wherby it ſo chaunſed that they tooke no heede to prouide for any ayde or ſuccour of the ſaied place. And the nexte yere after he wente agaynſte the Rhodes, lyſtenyng and watchyng at all tymes accordyng to ye cuſtome of his prediceſſours wher he myght heare or perceiue any diuiſion or diſſencion yt ſhuld chaunſe to be among the chriſtian princes, the whiche enterpryſe he dyd take on hand without ye counſell and aduiſe of the ſaied Peri Baccha, whiche did recken the ſame to be very doubteſome and to greate

an auenture. Neuertheles it came to paſſe accordyng to his owne deſyre and that in yt yere of our lorde a. M D .xxvij. when Italie was in warres and troubles Seleiman entered into Hungarie with fauour as he ſaieth of Iohn of ziphs Vaiuod of Sibens 
                     This child is it (the ſōne of Ihon) who hath now occaſyoned the warre in Hū
                        garye, and by whome the Turcke maketh clayme therunto. 
                     borge, whiche pretended the ſayed royalme to apperteyne vnto hym. So that it came to paſſe that the younge kynge Lois was ſlayne as he came to the battayle, and therafter deceaſed the ſayde Iohn, leuyng a very yonge chylde behynde hym which not long ago together with his mother were taken by ye ſayed Seleiman & ſente vnto Coſtantinople as it is reported. As concernyng ſuch thynges as are chaunſed of theſe laſte yeares, it is not neceſſary to wryte to you of ye ſame, ſeyng that the ſame is manifeſtely knowen howe he hath recouered Coron, Patras,

Caſtelno & other places, whiche the Emperours armye and nauie by the ſea had taken from hym. The greate enterpriſe of the Barberouſſe, whiche by greate craft and ſubtiltie tooke the towne of Tunys in Affrique, that we call Barbarie the whiche is euē at our dores, or nere vnto vs, & there is not (if a manne maie ſaie it) but one ryuer to paſſe, betwene vs and the realme of Tunys. The whiche realme of Tunys at this preſent tyme is in holde of ye Emperours maieſtie, who did mooſt victoriouſly cōqueſt ye ſame in the yere of God. M. D. xxvi, chacynge Barbarouſſe from the ſaied realme, ye whiche he did before mooſt wrongfullie holde, poſſeſſe & occupie, to the great hurt and damage of all Chriſtians.
                  How ye great Turcke not long agoe hath diſcōfited in battail the

armie of Ferdinand kyng of hungarie, not by no valiaūt feact, but thorow chaūſe of variaunce & debate betwixte the almaignes & hū
                     garians whō he founde fightyng the one againſte the other in their owne campes. Like as the veniciens were conſtraigned to rendre to hym, the ſtrenght and fortreſſe of Naples, of Romanie, yt was called Nauplias. And it is to bee thought that he ſhall not kepe theim, foraſmuche as he beleueth theim and letteth theim dooe what thei wil.
                  Ye haue cauſed me to enter in this mater whiche requireth to be ſet foorth more largely, and by one of a greater witte and knowelege then I am of. And alſo I haue lightly and briefly ouer paſſed the ſame. And it ſhall be expedient too knowe, that not onlie a kyng, as is this kynge of hungarye, but a

ſmalle lorde, and in maner aſimple gentleman, had had ſtrength and power ynough not onlye to reſiſte and withſtande the aſſautes and entrepriſes of this nacion, but to haue dryuen theim awaye, in deſtroyenge and takynge theim, and that in ye chefeſt of all their ſtrēgth and courage. Wherfore it is not vnpoſſyble but that we maie euen nowe in this tyme dooe as muche and more, when it ſhall pleaſe God to encourage vs therunto
               
            
            
               
               
                  THe lawes of Mahumet cōteine ſome thinges verie madd and diſagreyng frō all reaſō and ſome woorthie to bee abhorred and deteſted of all menne, ſome foliſhe and like olde wifes tales &c. Some haue ſuche colour of honeſte & wiſdome that a manne would thincke theim right holily made. Some bee ſo like Moſes lawe and the euangelicall doctrine, yt you would iudge theim to haue been deriued out of the ſpryng of ye heauenly oracles. For Mahumet crieth out againſt the vnfaithfulneſſe of the Iewes, he affirmeth cōſtantly that Chriſt was conceaued of the holy gooſt and borne of a pure virgin, he calleth Chriſta great prophete of God, the woord, ye ſoule & the ſpirite of God whiche ſhall iudge all the worlde

Nether woulde Mahumet ſeme to be yt enemie of Chriſt, or to abholiſhe his doctrine, but only to correcte thoſe thinges whiche were corrupted, and priuely putte in by other menne. Mahumet alſo fighteth ſtrōgly againſt certain doctrines dāned by God his woord, as of the Anthiopomorphites, whiche faſion the God head with a manes bodie & forme.
               Item, he abraſethe the ſuperſticion of the heathen and deniethe ye pluralite of Goddes, and ſaieth that images be not to bee worſhipped. Briefely this is the ſūme, and chief head of Mahumettes religion yt there is one God, whiche made, preſerueth & gouerneth all thynges, and that Mahumet was his principall ambaſſadour, and one of his priuie coūſel, and that he brought forthe nothyng to bee obſerued & beleued, whiche he drewe not out

of the mouthe and harte of ye true God. So that to beleue the maiſter of truthe is to beleue God, whiche vſed Mahumet familiarlye, and to deſpyſe hym, is to deſpyſe God which ſent ſo heauenly a doctour. And that the folowers of Mahumetes learnyng, be the lawfull ſonnes of faythful Ahraham, heyres of goddes promyſes. And that in the earth they ſhall haue the fruicion of all good thynges and in ye worlde to come they ſhalbe the indwellers of Paradiſe, & that theyr they ſhall haue ſwete waters, pleaſaunt frutes and faire womenne. And whoſoeuer deſpyſeth the lawes publyſhed in the Alcorā, as vngodlye perſonnes, ſhal not only bee puniſhed here temporallye, but alſo in the worlde to comme euerlaſtyngly, whan in the reſurreccion the ſoules ſhalbe called agayne

to their bodyes, he denyeth that Chriſt was put to death of ye Iewes, & farther he ſayth playnly that Chriſt dyed not. Mahumetes do ctryne hathe no holde of the head Chriſte, it is a plantacion which ye heauenly father hath not planted and therfore ſhall Chriſt pul it vp by the rootes. The foundacion of euerlaſtyng truth is buylded vpō Ieſus of Nazareth, whyche was crucifyed, and dyed vnder Ponce Pilate, the ſaueour of the worlde, chiefly of the faythfull.
               Nowe ſeynge yt the Turkyſhe profeſſion denieth this thyng, and fighteth agaynſte it. The euerlaſtynge truthe conſtraigneth vs to graunt yt this infinite multitude, (whiche is an horrible thynge to thyncke) of Mahumetanes, Turkes, Saracenes & other, ſtādeth in daūger of moſt greuous dānaciō.

To whiche ſecte thei that cleaue frely & vnconſtr eynedly, thei entre not in to the waie of true ſaluaciō, but throwe theimſelfes headlynge in to extreme darknes, in to the compaignie of the deuil, in to eternal death, in to ye helpitte of horrible calamite, here thou haſt what to bee thought & iudged of the Mahumetanes.
               
            
            
         
      
   