
      
         
            
            
            
               THE BOOKE OF FALCONRIE or HAVVKING; For the onely delight and pleaſure of all Noblemen and Gentlemen: Collected out of the beſt Authors, aſwell Italians as Frenchmen, and ſome Engliſh practiſes withall concerning Falconrie; Heretofore publiſhed by George Turbervile Gentleman.
            
            
               And now newly reviued, corrected, and augmented, with many new Additions proper to theſe preſent times.
            
            
               NOCET EMPTA DOLORE VOLVPTAS.
            
            
            
               AT LONDON, 
               ❧ Printed by Thomas Purfoot. An. Dom. 1611
            
         
         
            
            
            The Contents of this Booke.
            
               A Deſcription of all kindes of Hawkes that are in vſe, and their properties.
               The reclayming, jmping, mewing, and fleeyng, both the Field and River, of the ſame Hawkes.
               Their diſeaſes and cures, and all ſuch ſpeciall points as in any wiſe appertaine to that moſt excellent and Gentleman-like qualitie.
               Alſo a little Treatiſe tranſlated out of the Italian tongue, touching the diſeaſes happening to Spanyels, with their cures.
            
         
         
            
            The names of thoſe Authors, from whome this collection of Falconrie is borowed and made, both Iatalians and French.
            
            
               Italians.
               M. Franceſco Sforzinoda
               Carcano, Vicentino.
               M. Frederigo Giorgj.
            
            
               French.
               Tardiffe.
               Martin.
               Malopin.
               Mychelyn.
               Amé Caſsyan.
               Artelowche.
            
         
         
            Of Hawking by the Booke.
            If hee that rydes, by Booke,
            Can make his Horſe doe well:
            Then he, by Booke, that makes his Hawke,
            May make his Hawke excell.
            The Hawke can flee as well by Art,
            As Horſe by rule can play his part.
         
         
            
            In commendation of Hawking, George Turbervile.
            I Deeme that no man doubts, but games & all our▪ 
               
                  •
               efe delights,
            Were firſt deuiſde to daunt the dumps of penſiue pained ſprights.
            To cleare the clowds of drowping cares, & miſts of mournfull mind,
            And baniſh bale that heauie harts in cheereleſſe chaines did bind.
            And more than that, to further health, by moouing too and fro,
            That in our lumpiſh lustleſſe limmes, no dire diſeaſe might grow:
            Which otherwiſe (ſet ſport aſide, and ſweet delightfull glee)
            In idle bodies breeds of force, as we by proofe do ſee,
            Not much vnlike the ſtanding lakes, in durtie dampiſh grounds,
            Where water hath no power to paſſe, moſt noyſome filth abounds.
            If games were thus found out at first, for mind and bodies eaſe,
            Aſwell to quite that one of griefes, as th'other of diſeaſe:
            Why then? of force it follow muſt, that thoſe delights are chiefe,
            And most to be imbraſt, that lend to either part reliefe,
            Which if be ſo, I need not bluſh, or deeme it my diſgrace,
            If Hawks and Spanels I preferre, and ſet in highest place.
            For truely no deuiſe delights, the mind of man ſo much,
            No game ſo gladſome to the limmes, there is no pleaſure ſuch.
            No Phiſicke fitter to remooue the dregs of direfull paine,
            And to reſtore to former life, the feeble force againe.
            Of Spanels firſt I meane to ſpeake, for they begin the glee,
            Who being once vncoupled, when they feele their collers free,
            In royſting wiſe about they range, with cheerefull chappes to ground,
            To ſee where in the champion may ſome lurking fowle be found.
            A sport to view them ſtirre their ſternes, in hunting too and fro,
            And to behold how nature doth her power in Spanels ſhow:
            
               Who ſcoure the fields with wondrous skill, and deale in cunning ſort,
            As though indeed they had conſpirde, to make their maſter ſport.
            What merrier muſicke can you craue? what note but halfe ſo good?
            As when the Spaniels croſſe the runne, of Peaſants in the wood?
            Or light vpon the little Poutes, where they haue lately beene?
            Aſſuredlie no better glee, is either heard or ſeene.
            So as by Hawkes doth pleaſure grow, vnto the gazing eie,
            And dogges delight the liſtning eares, before the hawkes do flie.
            What dolt ſo dull but takes delight, when once the Spaniell ſprings
            The fearefull fowle, and when the hawke lyes long vpon her wings?
            What ſence ſo ſad, what mind ſo mazde, but ſets his ſorrowes by,
            What once the Falcon free begins, to ſend amid the skie?
            To turne and winde a bird by ſleight, and eke at laſt to ſlay
            With ſtrong encounter, doues, and duckes, and euery other pray?
            The prettie Partridge, Railes, and Quailes, that haunt the open field?
            And from her mountay to enforce the Hearon haught to yeeld?
            By binding with her cloſe in cloudes, in manner out of ſight?
            For noble Peeres and chiefest States, a paſſing pleaſant flight?
            So ſmall a bird, ſo large a fowle, at ſuch a loftie gate,
            To reach and rappe, and force to fall, it is a game of ſtate.
            No fellow to the flight at Brooke, that game is full of glee,
            It is a ſport the ſtowping of aroyſting Hawke to ſee.
            And if ſhee miſſe, to marke her how ſhe then gets vp amaine,
            For best advantage, to eneaw the ſpringing fowle againe.
            Who if be landed as it ought, then is it ſure to die.
            Or if ſhe ſlippe, a ioy to ſee, the Hawke at randon flie,
            And ſo for head to ſlay the fowle, a noble ſport to view,
            In my conceit no pleaſure like to Hawkes, I tell you true.
            It ſets the ſences all to worke, there may none idle be,
            The tong it lures, the legs they leape, the eie beholds the glee:
            The eares are buſied eke to heare, the calling Spanels queſt,
            Do tell me then what ſence it is, that reſpite hath to reſt?
            And more than that the bart it leaps, and laughes for ioy to thinke,
            How ſuch a ſlender hawke ſhould cauſe, ſo huge a fowle to ſhrink.
            This kind of ſport doth baniſh vice, and vile deviſes quight,
            When other games do foster faults, and breed but baſe delight.
            
               No idle thought can harbor well within the Falconers braine,
            For though his ſports right pleaſant be, yet are they mixt with pain.
            The toyle he takes to find the fowle, his greedy luſt to ſlay,
            The fowle once found cuts off cōceits, & driues ill thoughts away.
            He lures, he leapes, he calls, he cries, he ioyes, he waxeth ſad,
            And frames his moode, according as his hawke doth well or bad.
            Dame Venus harbors not in holtes, no Cupid haunts the hilles,
            Diana dwelles in open place, with bow her game ſhe kils.
            In woodes no wanton Goddeſſe woones: in Citie ſoiournes ſinne,
            There vice in vawts & dungeon dwells, the lecher lurks within.
            Dianas traine doth loue the launds, they long abrode to rome,
            But bawdie Ʋenus ympes embrace, the loitring life at home.
            To dice, to daunce, to coll, to kiſſe, to carde the time away,
            To prate, to prancke, to bowle, to bowſe, and tipple out the day.
            To checke at Cheſſe, to heaue at Maw, at Macke to paſſe the time,
            At Coſes, or at Saunt to ſit, or ſet their reſt at Prime.
            Both Ticktacke and the Iriſh game, are ſports but made to spend,
            I wote not I, to what auaile thoſe trifling games do tend.
            
               Ʋnleſſe to force a man to chafe, to chide, to ſweat, to ſweare,
            To brawle, to ban, to curſe, and God in thouſand parts to teare.
            At cockepit ſome their pleaſures place, to wager wealth away,
            Where Falconers only force the fields, to heare their ſpanels bay.
            What greater glee can man deſire, than by his cunning skill,
            So to reclaime a haggard Hawke, as ſhe the fowle ſhall kill.
            To make and man her in ſuch ſort, as toſſing out a traine,
            Or but the lewre, when ſhe is at large, to whoup her in againe?
            Where birds, & beaſts, & ech thing elſe, their freedome ſo imbrace,
            As let them looſe, they will be thralde no more in any caſe.
            What finer feat than ſo to ympe a feather, as in view,
            A man would ſweare it were the old, and not ſet on a new?
            When hawkes are hurt and brooſde, by raſh encounter in the skies,
            What better skill, than for their harmes a powder to deviſe,
            To drie the bloud within the bulcke, and make his Mummie ſo,
            As no Phyſition greater Art, on pacients can bestow?
            To cure the crampe, and eke the cray, the stone that lies within,
            The Philanders, the Frounce, the Gout, the Panthas, & the pin.
            
               The Rie, the Rhewne, the Canker, & both lice and mytes to marre,
            And all ſuch wormes as with your hawkes do wage continall war:
            To make her mewe when time requires, to bowſe and eke to bath,
            By cunning skill to cauſe her caſt, ſuch glit as breeds her skath.
            To cut her hoods, to ſhape her geſſe, her tyrets, and her line,
            With Bells, and Berrets, Ʋernels eke, to make the Falcon fine:
            Belieue me is no common skill, no bate nor baſe deuiſe,
            But meet for ciuill courtly men, that are reputed wiſe.
            Which if be ſo, then yeeld me thankes, that beat my buſie brow,
            And tooke this toyle for thine auaile, to teach thee when & how
            To worke this practiſe and deuiſe. Accept the Printers paine,
            Who ſhewes thee ſundry ſhapes of hawks, though little to his gaine.
            Both he and I can do no more, than offer our good will,
            And all to further thy delight, and adde vnto thy skill.
            VVhich if we do, we haue the hire of both our meanings than,
            You cannot do a better deed than thanke the painefull man.
            
               George Turbervile.
            
         
         
            
            The Induction or Proeme to this Diſcourſe, and Treatiſe of Hawking.
            
            
               WE finde this a generall rule and obſeruation, and doe hold it for good in all Arts and Sciences, wherein men do trauell & buſie themſelues, either to the benefit of others, or to their owne priuate pleaſure, and humors, in the beginning of their workes to lay downe ye ſubiect of that whereof they meane to treate, which in very déede is nothing elſe but the ground & matter which doth moue them to write: which doth not onely fall out in all liberall ſciences, and ſtudies greatly accounted and reuerenced of the learned of al ages, but alſo in the baſe and groſſer trades of men, dayly practiſed with the hand. As whē the Goldſmith doth determine with himſelfe by curious and cunning art, to faſhion a Iewell of any price and value, he is driuen to make choice of his mettall, eyther gold or ſiluer, whereon to beſtow the excellencie of his art, which cannot be named by a more fite or conuenient tearme, then to be called the Subiect of his Science. Likewiſe here mine Author in this Treatiſe, and Booke of Falconrie, following the accouſtomed order of the learned, and common practiſe of ſuch as doe write, hath laid downe a Hawke, the Subiect of his deuiſe, of which he is determined at large to ſpeake, with full ſhew and declaration of the true nature and properties of all Hawkes, as alſo ſuch other matter as is incident, and appertaining in any reſpect to that ſkill, of all other gentlemanly ſports and practiſes, the moſt pleaſant and

cōmendable. But before he doth aduentdure to deale, ſpecially of any matter concerning Falconrie, to giue the Reader a perfect and abſolute vnderſtanding, both of his conceite, and of the knowledge of the thing, he thinketh it not beſides his purpoſe, but a matter moſt neceſſarie to the attainement of his deuiſe, To frame a generall diuiſion of all Hawkes & Birdes of prey, racking (as it were) and diuiding that one entire and generall name of a Hawke into many members and parts, the better thereby to diſplay the true nature, quality, and condition of a Hawke, as alſo ye ſkill of Falconrie: for the whole being layd out into his members and parts, it ſhall be the more eaſie to come to the notice of that, whereof he is reſolued to write, whoſe nature and ſubſtance is included in his particular members. Wherefore mine Author following that order & preſcribed rule of knowledg, hath vſed this methode, ſetting downe to the view of the reader, in the very entrie and proheme of his worke, a manifeſt and generall diuiſion of Hawks, ye better to decipher the ſpeciall nature of each one Hawke in his own proper kind, which otherwiſe were very hard to do, by meanes of confuſion of ſundry names and termes, as alſo, the number of birds of prey.
         
      
      
         
            
            A GENERALL DIVISION OF Hawkes, & Birdes of prey, after the opinion of one Franceſco Sforzino Vicentino, an Italian Gentleman Falconer.
            FIrſt (ſaith he) you ſhall vnderſtand, that of Hawkes that do liue by prey, and are in knowledge and vſe of men, there are nine kinds.

                  1 The Eagle.
                  2 The Mylion.
                  3 The Gerfalcon,
                  4 The Falcon.
                  5 The Merlin.
                  6 The Hobbie.
                  7 The Goſhawke.
                  8 The Sparowhawke.
                  9 The Matagaſſe.
               
This Hawke whome I terme a Matagaſſe, after the French, is in ye Italian tongue called Regoſtola Falcone a, and among the Germains Thornkretzer, a Hawke not in vſe with vs, & in truth of ſlender regard & eſtimation in nature. Yet neuertheleſſe, both to follow mine Author, and to make my diuiſion perfect, I hold it néedfull to reckon that kind of Hawke among the reſt: and in the latter end of the firſt part of this treatiſe, I will briefly deſcribe you his nature, which is no leſſe baſe than ſtrange. You muſt note, that all theſe kind of hawkes,Addition. haue their male birdes and cockes of euery ſort and gender, [As ye Eagle his Earne, the Mylion his Tercell. the Gerfalcon his Ierkin, the Falcon his Tiercel gentle, the Merlin his Iacke, the Hobby his Robin, the Goſhawke his Tiercell, & the Sparrowhawk his Muſket.] And further, that ye female of al birds of prey & rauine, is euermore huge than the male, more ventrous, hardy, and watchfull, but of ſuch birdes as doe not liue by rauine and prey, the male is more large than the female.
            
               A ſecond or Subdiuiſion.
               MOreouer, you ſhal know, yt thoſe nine ſorts of hawks, may againe be diuided into two kinds, and either differing from the other in condition.
               
                  For ſome of them do prey vpon the foule, by ſtooping downe from their winges, and ſo ſeazing on the foule with their foote, doe breake in ſunder with their beakes the neck bone, being of more force and ſtrength in that part, then in the foot or tallons. And this ſort of Hawkes do neuer vſe to plume or the vypon the fowle whom they haue ſeazed, vntil ſuch time as they perceiue it to leaue buſking and bating in the foote: of which kind and qualytie are,

                     1 The Eagle.
                     2 The Mylion.
                     3 The Gerfalcon.
                     4 The Falcon.
                     5 The Merlin.
                     6 The Hobbie.
                     7 The Matagaſſe.
                  
               
               Now that other ſort which I ſpeake of, doe ſlay their prey and game by maine force of wing, at randon & before heade, not ſtouping at all from their wings, as the other Hawkes do, whome I made mention of before. And thiefe Hawkes haue their chefe force and ſtrength in the foote, and not in the ieake, and therefore no ſooner doe ſeaze vpon the prey, but preſentlie they giue themſelues to plume and tire thereon Of this ſort are,

                     1 The Goſhawke.
                     2 The Tiercel of the Goſhawke.
                     3 The Sparowhawke.
                  
               
               Thus farre haue I made a generall diuiſion of all kindes of Hawkes that doe liue by prey: and again (as you ſée) haue diuided thoſe kinds into two parts. Wherefore now doe I purpoſe to deale more ſpecially in the matter, and more particularly to procéede to the natures of enerie of them, to yéeld you a more perfect knowledge, and light therein.
            
            
               Of the names of Hawkes of prey.
               AL Hawkes and birds of prey, be compriſed and included vnder theſe two names.
               
                  
                     1 Aetos. or
                     2 Hierax
                     
                  
which is to ſay,

                     1 Ahnila or
                     2 Accipiter
                     
                  
which is the

                     1 Eagle. or
                     2 Falcon.
                  
               
               
                  Theſe two kinds doe ſerue to flie the prey for mans pleaſure and paſtime: of which onely Hawkes, my purpoſe is to treate and ſpeake in this diſcourſe here following.
               For all Hawkes and birds of prey, doe not ſerue the Falconers vſe, but only ſuch as are hardy, and frée of mettle, able to flye the field and riuer. And therefore thoſe onely kinds ſhall be the iniect of my booke, and not thoſe baſe, baſterdly refuſe Hawkes, which are ſomewhat in name, and nothing in déede.
               As the Gréekes would, that Hierax, & the Latines that Accipiter, which is a ſpecial terme to one hawke and bird of prey, ſhould giue the generall name and title to all Hawkes, and birds of prey, becauſe of his excellency: So in like manner, the Frenchmen of our age, haue ordayned that the Falcon, which is a tearme peculier and proper to one kinde of birde of prey, ſhal giue generall name and appellation to all Hawkes, & birds of prey whatſoeuer they bée, becauſe the Falcon doth paſſe all other hawkes in boldnes and curteſie, and is moſt familiar to man, of all other birds of prey. And thereof it procéedeth that we ſay, the Falcon Gentle, the Haggard Falcon, the Falcon Sacre, and ſo likewiſe of the other Hawkes, calling them all by the name of Falcon.
               Moreouer, as the Falcon, which is a ſpeciall name of one kind of Hawkes, hath giuen name to all other Hawks & birds of prey: So hath it beſtowed the name and title of a Falconer, to euery one of what ſtate or calling ſoeuer hée bée, that doth deale with any kind of Hawkes and the terme of Falconrie, to the art, profeſſion, and knowledge of luring and manning thoſe birds of prey, by which ſingular ſkill, they are made to flée all other fowles, as well thoſe fowles of the ayre, as of the land and riuer. Which in my conceit, deſerueth no ſlender commendation and praiſe, being a matter almoſt quite againſt the lawes of nature and kind, for one fowle ſo artiffcially to vndertake, and ſo cruelly to murther another, and hauing atchieued his enterpriſe, with gréedy & willing mind, to repaire to man againe, hauing the whole ſcope of the heauens, and the circuite of the earth at their pleaſure to range and peruſe: & to

yéeld themſelues in ſuch franke manner to the priſon, & cuſtodie of man, being by kind ſet free, and at liberty to prey, and diſpoſe themſelues. Such and ſo great is the ſingular ſkill of man, when by art he is reſolued to alter the preſcribed order of nature, which by induſtry and paine wée ſée is brought to paſſe and effect.
            
            
               Of the kinds of Eagles.
               HAuing diuided all thoſe birds of prey and rauine, which ſerue to Falconrie & Hawking, into Eagles & Falcōns, I mean firſt of all to dicipher you the Eagle & Vulture, whome ſome haue thought to be compriſed vnder the kind of an Eagle. And ſo conſequently after that, to ſpeak of Falcōs, which are birds of prey, ſeruing to the vſe and myſtery of Hawking, and taking their names of the Falcon.
               
                  Aristotle was of opinion, that there was ſixe kindes of Eagles, which are named by him, according as it pleaſed the inhabitants of Gréece to enforme him.
               
                  Pliny in making the ſame diuiſion of Eagles, hath varied in that point altogether from Ariſtotle, as touching the names and tearmes of Eagles, for that they were of diuers cōntries, and did write in ſeuerall languages. But for that I meane in this Booke onely to ſpeake of thoſe kindes of Eagles, which ſerue to Falconrie, I will deale but with two ſorts of Eagles: for at theſe dayes, wée haue the vſe and experience but of the browne Eagle, which is the Eagle Royall, and the blacke Eagle, the other kinds being of a baſe and ſlender courage, as no Falconer will paine himſelfe to lure them, or manne them for vſe or pleaſure.
            
            
               
               Firſt of the browne or yellow Eagle.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               THe browne or yeallow Eagle after Aristotles opinion, is called in gréek Guyſeon, which doth ſignifie in the French tong (kindly & no baſtard born) becaus it is of al other kinds of eagles, the true & right eagle, & he doth cal him by ye gréek word Chryſaitos, by reaſon of his goldē mayle, & in latin he is termed

                  Stellaris, and Herodus. This is that Eagle, whome we call the Eagle royall, king of birds, and ſometimes the bird of Iupiter, and that Eagle which ought to bee taken and accounted the principall beſt, being more huge and large then the reſt, and beſides more rare & dainty to be ſéene. For ſhe doth haunt moſt commonly the toppes of high and craggie mountatnes, and doth there prey vpon all ſorts of fowles, as alſo Hares, kidds, Goats, & ſuch other like wild and ſauage beaſts of the field.
               This Eagle doth liue alwayes ſolitary and alone, vnleſſe happily ſhe hath her broode with her, whome ſhe doth conduct and guide from place to place, the better to inſtruct them how to kill their prey, and féed themſelues. But no ſooner hath ſhée made them perfect, & throughly ſcoled them therein, but preſētly ſhe chaſeth them out of that coaſt, & doth abandon them the place where they were eyred, and will in no wiſe brooke thē to abide néere her, to the end, that the country where ſhe diſcloſeth and maketh her eyrie, be not vnfurniſhed of conuenient prey, which by the number & exceſſiue ſtore of Eagles, might otherwiſe be ſpoyled and made bare. For it is very likely, that if her brood and increace ſhould there make ſtay, being ſo huge birds, and of ſo great rauine, there would in ſhort ſpace lacke prey for her ſelfe, and by meane thereof bréede her to a father euill and miſchiefe: for the auoyding of which, this prouident and carefull fowle doth preſently force her brood to depart into ſome other part and Region.
               This Eagle may with eaſe be diſcerned from the Vulture, becauſe this Eagle Royall, being browne, or yellow maylde, hath not her arms or féet in any cōdition couered with plume, as the Vulture hath.
               True it is, that the arme of the Eagle is ſhort, yellow mayld & all beſet with ſcales, ye pounces large, her beake blacke, long, and crooked at the top. The traine of the Eagle Royall, as alſo the traine of the ſlender blacke Eagle is ſhort and ſtife at the poynt, euen as the traine of the Vulture is.
               The Eagle is alwayes of oneſelfe hugeneſſe, in reſpect of her nature, and it cānot be ſaid, in that ſhe is an Eagle, that ſhe is

eyther larger or leſſer, at any one time or other, vnleſſe you giue her the ſurname and addition of blacke, yellow, or ſome other ſuch proper name and tesme, which doth alter her according to her accidents, but nothing at all in regard of her ſubſtance and nature. And were it not that ſhe is ſo maſſy a fowl and not portable on the fiſt, (as in troth ſhe is exceding huge) and beſides, it is ſo hard and difficult a matter to prouide her prey and food, Princes & puiſſant States, would more vſually haue her, and hawke with her for their ſolace and pleaſure, than they now do. But by reaſon ſhe is ſo hugh and ventrous, ſhe might happily offer force and violence to the eyes and face of her kéeper, if at any time ſhe ſhould conceiue diſpleaſure againſt him. And for this cauſe cheiflie, the Eagle is not in vſe, as other meaner howkes, and of leſſe force be in theſe days.
               Hée that will haue the Eagle to be good and tractable, muſt deuiſe to take her an Eyeſſe in the Eirie, māning and accuſtoming her among houndes and greyhoundes, to the end that when hée goeth and addreſſeth him to the field, the Eagle ſoaring aloft ouer the hounds ſtarting the game, Fox, Hare, gote or ſuch like beaſts of the wood, ſhe making her downe-come, & ſtooping from her wings, may ſo ſtay, & ſeaze vopn the game, vntil the dogs come in, and procure the fall thereof. A man may féed her with any kind of fleſh, and chiefly of ſuch game and prey, as ſhée ſlayeth in the field by flight.
               Tawnye or browne mayle in an Eagle, déepe and hallow eyes, ſpecially if ſhe bée bread in the weſt parts of the whrld, is an aſſured ſigne of her goodneſſe: for the tawnie Eeale is euer found good in proofe.
               Alſo the whitenes on the head of an Eagle, or on her backe, is a ſingular token of an excellent Eagle.
               That Eagle, that when ſhée fleeth from the fiſt of her kéeper, wil eyther flée vpon the man, ſoaring round about him, or light on the ground, and take the ſtand, is by all probability & coniectture, no inward Eagle, but a fugitiue, and a rangler.
               At what time the Eagle diſplayes her traine in her flight, & makes a turne in her mounty, it is a very great ſigne that ſhée

determineth to flye on head, and gadde: the next remedy for which miſchiefe, is to throw her out her meat, & lure her with as loude a voyce as you poſſible may. And if it be ſo, that ſhée then ſtoope not to that which is caſt out vnto her, then eyther hath ſhe ouer gorged her ſelfe, or otherwiſe ſhée is too hie, & too full of fleſh. A meane to auoide this inconuenience, is to ſowe the feathers of her train together, to ye end ſhe may not ſpread them abroad, nor vſe the benefite of her traine feathers in her flight. Or elſe another way is, to deplume and make bare her tuell and fundament ſo as it may appeare, and then certainly for feare of the colde ayre ſhe will not aduenture to mount ſo hie: but féeling her traine feathers faſt ſowed together, ſhe wil ſtand in awe of other Eagles, whome by the meane of that deuice and practiſe, ſhe ſhall in no wiſe be able to avoide.
               When the Eagle maketh a ſhort turne vpon her kéeper in her flight, & flieth not out aforehead, that is one principall good token that ſhe will not away.
               It hath béen ſayd, that an Eagle is of force to arreſt, and cauſe a Wolfe to ſtay, and will take him, with the aid and aſſiſtance of doggs, making in to her reſcue, and that it hath béen ſéene and experimented. But for my part I finde the oddes of them ſo great, as I leaue the beleife of it to the Reader, not reciting it as a troth, but a thing written to ſhew the great hardineſſe and vndaunted nature of the Eagle.
               It is reported that the men of the country where the Eagle eyreth, knowing thereof, and intending to bereaue her young broode, doe arme and well furniſh their heads, for feare leaſt ye Eagle do offer them force and violence. And if ſo they ſhew the old bréeder one of her chickens, or tie it to the bough of a trée neare the place where ſhée buildeth, ſhe will call and cauſe the damme to repaire thither by continuall cleping, who findeth her, and pitying her cries, will bring it ſo much prouiſion and prey, as he that commeth to take her from the eyrie, ſhal there dayly be ſped of as much fleſh and prouiſion as will very reaſonably ſerue him and ſixe others. For the old Eagle will conuey thither hares, Conies, fowles, and ſuch other like vittel, &

viands, for the ſupply of her neceſſity.
               The Eagle doth not commonly vſe to prey nere vnto her eyrie, but to kill her prouiſion abroad as farre off as ſhée may. And if ſo it happen, ſhée leaue any fleſh after ſhee is full gorged, that doth ſhe reſerue carefully for the next day, to the end that if foule weather ſhould happily grow to hinder her flight, yet ſhe might be ſtored of ſufficient prey for the day following, without any further trauell.
               An Eagle doth not forſake or change her Eyrie all her life time, but of cuſtome doth yearely returne, and make repayre to one ſelfe place, and there buildeth moſt aſſuredly, by meane whereof it hath béen noted and obſerued in times paſt, that an Eagle doth liue very many yeares. Before her old age, her beake waxeth ſo exceding long and crooked at the topp, as ſhée is much hindered thereby of her féeding: in ſort, as ſhée dyeth not of diſeaſe, or by extremity of age, but onely by reaſon ſhée cannot poſſiblie vſe the benefite of her beake, being accrewd & growne to ſuch an exceding length and diſproportion. Wherof commeth the Prouerbe be as I take it, Aquila ſenectus, the age of an Eagle, which is properly applyed to men that doe liue onely by drinke, as old men are wont to doe.
               The Eagle doth euer wage warre with the little Roytelet, whome the French men doe ſo tearme, for that this fowle is thought to be a little king among birds, as the Etimologie of the worde doth ſéeme to import, the Latines likewiſe they call him Regulus, and the Germanes a Golden line. Allſ
                     •
                   occaſion and chiefe ground of this controuerſie betwixt the Eagle and the Goldhenline is (by the report of Ariſtotle) onely vpon the name, for that ſhe is called the king of birds: of which title & preheminence the Eagle would willingly bereaue her.
               Againe, there is one other kind of little fowle, whome Aristotle calleth a Sitta, the Latines Reptitatrix or Scandulaca, & the Frenchmen Grimperean, that doth the Eagle very great outrage, & offence, For no ſooner perceiueth ſhe the Eagle to be abſent from the eyrie, but preſently in great deſpight ſhée breaketh all her egs in péeces.
               
                  This little ſoule is called.

                     In Frēch,
                     
                        Roytelet.
                     
                     In Latine.
                     
                        Rēgulus.
                     
                     In the German tong.
                     Goldhē
                        lyne.
                  
Theſe two being in a manner ye leaſt birds of all other, are the greateſt and deadlieſt enemies to the Eagle,
               That other,

                     In Gréeke.
                     
                        Sitta.
                     
                     In Latine.
                     
                        Scandulaca
                     
                     In French.
                     
                        Grinpereau
                     
                  
and do contend with her vpon poyntes of principality and rule.
               When I ſaid before, that the Eagle royall was of a yellow mayle, I meant nothing elſe by that ſpeech, but that the Eagle was mayld, of the very colour of a Dears haire, which is in déede not yellow, but browne or tawny. And albeit Aristotle for his pleaſure, termed it by the Gréek word, Chriſatos, which is as much in effect as to ſay, ye Golden Eagle: yet muſt it not therefore be concluded, that this Eagle is of a right Golden mayle, but of a more browne or tawny mayle, then the other kind of Eagle is.
               The Paynters and Statuaries of Rome haue diſguiſed this Eagle in their portraytures, for euery man knoweth that it is farre otherwiſe, then they haue drawne it, As well the browne Eagles as the blacke, are ſkinned and vncaſed, as the Vultures be, and their ſkinnes rent to the Furryers and pellitors of Fraunce, with their wings, heades, and tallons, and euen of the ſame very colour, as I haue here ſet it downe and declared it vnto you.
            
            
               
               Of the blacke Eagle.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               I Haue ſignified vnto you, that there are onely two ſorts of Eagles which ſerue for Falconrie, which are the yellow or tawnie Eagle, whome I haue hitherto treated of, and the blacke Eagle whome I muſt now decypher vnto you.

                  Ariſtotle doth terme the blacke Eagle Melauratus, and Lagoph
                        ••
                     os, becauſe ſhée taketh the Hare: and this Eagle ye Latines call Pulla, Fuluia Leporaria and Valeria, ye oddes and difference betwixt theſe two Eagles is eaſie to be found, for this blacke Eagle is leſſe than the Eagle royall, which is ye yellow and tawnie Eagle, and the blacke Eagle doth as much differ from the yellow Eagle, as ye blacke Milion doth from the Milion Royall.
               
                  Plinie hath placed this blacke Eagle in the firſt order and rancke of Eagles, as one that would willinly prefer hir before oll other kinds of Eagles. And héere Ariſtotle hath ſet her but in the third order and place.
               The blacke Eagle (ſayth he) being leſſe huge and corpulent than the other, is of farre more force and excellencie.
               Moreouer, he affirmeth that the Eagles doe towre vp and mount ſo hie, of purpoſe for proſpect, and to ſée from farre. And by reaſon that their ſight is ſo cleare and perfect, men haue reported them of all others, to be ye only birdes that do participate with the diuine nature.
               Moreouer, for the feare the Eagle hath of her excellent eies, ſhée maketh not her ſtooping from her gate at once, and raſhly, as other kind of long winged hawkes do, but by little & little.
               The Hare is a prey in whome ſhe taketh great pleaſure, yet when ſhe findeth the Hare running, ſhe offereth not forthwith to ſeaze vpō him on the Mountaine, but can forbeare and ſtai
                     •
                   her time, vntill he be on the plain champion, and thē ſeazing on him, ſhée preſently carrieth him not away, but doth firſt make triall and experience of him, poyſing and waying him in her pounces, and after that lifting vp ye ſilke beaſt, doth beare him cleane away, and preyeth on him at her beſt will and pleaſure
            
            
               
               Now as touching the Vultures, and first of the large aſhe coloured or blacke Vulture.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               
                  THere are two ſorts of Vultures, to wit, the aſhe maild, or blacke Vulture, and the browne or whitiſh Vulture.
               Firſt will I ſpeake of the blacke or aſhemaild Vulture, who is in deede more huge than the browne, for the aſhe coloured Vulture is ye moſt larg bird of prey that is to be found, and the female Vulture more large then the male, euen as it falleth out by experience in all kindes of birds of prey and rauine.
               The gréekes, they call the Vulture Gips, and the Latines 
                     Ʋulture.
               
               This Hawke is a paſſenger in Egypt, more known by her coate and caſe thē otherwiſe, becauſe the furriers do vſe their ſkinnes for ſtomachers, to guarde and defend the breaſt againſt the force of feruent cold.
               All other birdes of prey doe differ from the Vulture, in that they are deſtitute and void of plumage vnder their winges, whereas the Vultures be there veſted & couered with an excellent fine downe. Their ſkinne is thicke like a Goats ſkin, and namely you ſhall find vnder their gorge, a certain patch of the breadth of your hand, where the plume is ſomwhat inclining to a red, like the haire of a Calfe, for ye kind of plume hath not a web faſhioned, as other feathers are vſually ſhapt and proportioned, but are like vnto the downe which is to be found on eyther ſide the necke, & on the vpper part of ye pinion & bent of the wing, in which parts the down is ſo white that it gliſtereth, and is as ſoft as ſilke.
               The Vultures haue this one point ſpecial, and peculiar to themſelues, in that they are rough legged, a thing that hapneth not to any other kind of Eagles or birds of prey.
            
            
               
               Of the leſſe Vulture, which is the browne or whitiſh Vulture.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               
                  THe brown or whitiſh Vulture doth differ from ye blacke maylde Vulture, in that hée is ſomewhat leſſe then the blacke Vulture is, hauing the plumage of her throate or gorge, of her backe, the feathers vnder the belly neare the pannell, and of the whole body tawnie, or browne of colour: but the brayle feathers, and of the traine, like to thoſe of the blacke maylde Vulture, which induceth ſome to thinke that there is no difference at all betwixt thoſe two kinds, ſaue that the one is male, and that other female, in the ſame gender and kind. But this is moſt certaine and aſſured, that with Noble perſonages you ſhall ſée aſwell the one kinde as the other. Eyther ſort hath a ſhort trayne in regard of the largneſſe of their wings, which is not the nature and ſhape of other birdes of rauine and prey, ſaue onely that fowle whome the French tearme (Piſcuerd,) the Italians, Pigozo, & in our mother ſpéech, I may call the Wodwall.
               You ſhall euer find the Vultures rough, and hairie legged, which is an euident ſigne that they fret and rubbe them againſt the rockes, where their cheife abode and ſtay is. And further you ſhall note that the browne or blancke Vultures are more rare and dainty to bée ſéene, then the blacke or aſhemaylde be.
               Againe this is peculyer to them in their kind, that the feathers on their heads bée ſhort in reſpect of the Eagles feathers, which hath béene ſome cauſe that they haue béene thought to bée balde and without plume, though in very déede it bée nothing ſo.
               The Vulture that is aſh coloured or blacke maylde, hath ſhort armes all beſet with plume, euen to the very Talons, which is a ſpecially note among all thoſe birds of rauine, onely peculiar to them, and not to any other fowle, hauing crooked Talons, vnleſſe it be the Owle, who is rough legged euen in ſort as theſe Vultures be.
               To diſcerne the browne from the aſhemayled Vulture, you muſt note, that the browne Vulture hath her necke feathers very ſtreight and long, much like to thoſe that ye Cocke hath

or the Stare. In regard of thoſe feathers on her backe, ſides, and the corner of the plye of her wings, which are little and ſlender, in manner of ſcales, but the breaſt feathers, as alſo thoſe on the backe, and the couert feathers of the traine are to the red Vulture red, and to the blacke Vulture blacke, and to both kindes very large: by meane of their hugenes they can not be vpon their wings, nor riſe from the ſtand without ſome aduantage.
               A man ſhall ſeldome ſée them vpon the plaines, and champion of Italie, Almanie, and France, vnleſſe happily ſometime in the winter, for then they raunge and wander into euerie part, for at that time in cheife they abandon and forſake the toppes of the ſtately and high mountaines, to auoyde the extremitie of cold, and do take their paſſage into more hote regions and countries, where the climate doth better ſerue their purpoſe, and better agrée with their nature.
               The Vultures at the moſt, doe not diſcloſe aboue two or thrée Chickens or young birds, and it is a very hard matter, and almoſt impoſſible for any man to robbe their Eyrie, for that moſt commonly they build in ſome hanging cliffe whether there is very hard and daungerous acceſſe. They may bée nouriſhed and fedde with tripes, offall, and inwardes of beaſtes. And becauſe they doe vſually haunt the fieldes of purpoſe to deuoure the offall, and refuſe parts of ſuch beaſtes as men haue ſlaughtered and ſlaine, and ſuch like carrion, ſome men are of opinion, that they doe preſage and betoken great murther and bloodie ſpoyle of men that are in armes.
            
            
               The opinion of William Tardiffe a Frenchman, concerning the diuiſion of birds of prey, and other things worthie the obſeruation.
               
               BIrds of prey (ſayeth he) which we vſe in Falconrie, be of thrée kinds.
               The

                     Eagle.
                     Falcon.
                     Goſhawke.
                  
               
               
                  Of Eagles there are two kinds, the one is abſolutely called the Eagle, the other Zimiech.
               
               
                  
                     Aquila,
                  
                  
                     Zimiech,
                  
               
               A red mayle in an Eagle, and déepe eyes, ſpecially if ſhée be bred in the weſt mountaines (as is before ſaid) is one ſpecial ſigne of her goodnes.
               Whitenes vpon the head or backe of an Eagle, betokeneth the Excellency of the Eagle, which in the Arabian tongue is tearmed,

                     
                        Zimiach, in the Sirian language.
                     
                        Mearan, in the Gréeke.
                     
                        Philadelph, among the Latines.
                     Mylyon.
                  
               
               The Eagle muſt euer bée taken when ſhée is in the eyrie, for her condition is to waxe afterwards very bold & outragious. It is ſaid, that when the Eagle beginneth to grow to liking, neare cawking or calling time, ſhée cōmonly flyeth with other Eagles, bearing with them to their ſtand where they vſe to prey, a péece of Arſenicke, otherwiſe called Orpiment, which doth delay and mortifie their luſt and deſire.
               The Eagle will ſeaze vpon the Goſhawke, and any other fowle of rauine, or prey that doth flée with Ieſſes, making ſure account that it is a fit prey for her. And for that onely cauſe and none other, coueteth to apprehend and take them in their flight, for when they are wild and ramage, vſing the deſerts, ſhée offereth them not any ſuch violence.
               A meane to auoyde the Eagle, when a man is determined to flée with his Hawke, is to plucke off the Hawks Ieſſes before ſhée flée, for otherwiſe let her doe her beſt, ſhée ſhall not eſcape the Eagle.
               That Eagle, which is the kingly and right Eagle indéede, will ſlay the Hare, the Foxe, and ſuch like beaſts of the forreſt and field.
               The Eagle called Zimiech, will kill the Crane, and other leſſe fowles.
            
            
               
               A Deviſe and Remedie for you, when the Eagle doth moleſt and hinder your game in Hawking.
               FInde the meanes to gette an Eagle, and ſéele vp her eyes, but yet in ſuch ſort, as ſhe may haue a little ſight to aſpire and clime to her mountée, into whoſe tuell and fundament, conuey a little Aſſa fetida, and ſow vp the place. Then tye to her legges, eyther a wing, a péece of fleſh, or a redde cloth, which the other Eagles may coniecture to be fleſh, and ſo let her ſlye. For then will ſhée in her flight, for her owne ſafety and aſſurance, pull downe all the other Eagles from their ſtately gate and pitch, which otherwiſe ſhe would neuer doe, were it not for the paine of that which is conueighed into her tuell.
            
            
               Now will I lay you downe the report of Francis Sforzino Vicentino, an Italian, as touching the Diuiſion and Nature of Eagles, and ſo proceede to the Falcon.
               
                  
                  
               
               THere are two ſorts of Eagles, that is to ſay, the huge and royall Eagle, which is the Haggart or paſſenger. And a leſſe Eagle, which is a baſe and baſtard Eagle, in reſpect of the other.
               
                  The right Eagle is bredde in the higheſt clyues of the Leuant, and ſpecially in thoſe of Ciprus. They are as large as a wild Gooſe, and more. Some of them are of a browne mayle, and ſome other of a ſpotted mayle, their gorges and breaſtes are full of ſtraked lynes, tending to redde, they haue long heades, great beakes, and very much crookt, ſtrong armes and rough large ſtretchers, in a manner as great as the palme of a mans hand, boyſtrous talons, and a reaſonable long trayne.
               Theſe Eagles, in the mayne fielde will take the Hare, and by force hold him, and carrye him in the ayre, as they flée, vntill they eſpie ſome rocke or other fit ſtand, where they may prey vpon him. In like ſort they take other beaſtes, and ſundry times doe roue and raunge abroad to beat & ſeaze on Goates, kiddes, and Fawnes. They are in vſe, and price with ſundry noble men, as hath béene reported vnto mée credibly.
               The great Turke of all other Princes, doth moſt vſe to flée with the Eagle, and doth giue his Falconers in charge to man and lure them, as they doe the Goſhawke: and being throughly manned, hath a caſt of Eagles at one time, vpon one pearch: betwixt twoo of his people into the field, when they are there, they flée both together, the one at the mowntée, a very ſtately pitch, and the other more baſe and low, and that Eagle that doth flye the baſe pitch, is taught to make a great noyſe as ſhée roueth too and fro ouer the Forreſt, not much vnlike the queſting or calling of a dogge, by meane of which ſodayne cry and noyſe, diuers times there iſſue out of the couert, ſome wilde and ſauage Beaſtes, which are no ſooner diſcried by that high fléeing Eagle, but ſodainly ſhée bateth of her pitch, and ſtoopeth from her wings, & at the down-come eyther ſeazeth or rifleth ſome one of them, ſlaying them by force, vntill the dogges may make in to her reſkew. And thus betwixt the Eagle and curres, the prey

is taken not without the great pleaſure and liking of that mighty Prince the Turke. You may geſſe of the excellency of this gallant Paſtime, if it be true, as it is vouched by report. Herein I can affirme nothing of my ſelfe, but doe follow mine Author, from whome I collected this kind of hawking, and am bold to make recitall of it in this place, both for the hugeneſſe of the fowle, as alſo the ſtrangeneſſe of the practiſe.
               All theſe kindes of Eagles, haue their Tyercells or male birdes, of whome ſome huge, ſome of middle ſyſe, and other ſome leſſe, which are called Baſtard Eagles, not had in any account.
               Thus (as you ſée) haue I layd downe to your view and iudgements, the kinds and ſorts of Eagles, with their proper deſcriptions due to them, and other poynts incident too their natures: and haue ſtayed more about the matter, than néeded, in mine owne opinion, being a fowle ſo little in vſe with vs, but I haue done it as well to make my diuiſion perfectly, as alſo to decypher that, which euery one perhaps hath not read, as touching the naturall inclynation of this royall bird, who for that ſhée is Quéene and chiefe of all Hawkes, deſerueth ſome larger diſcourſe than the reſt, which are in nature more baſe, though in vſe more familyar and ordynarie.
            
            
               
               Of the Falcon, and how many ſorts of Falcons there are.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               THere are ſeauen kinds of Falcons, & among them all for her nobleneſſe and hardy courage, & withal ye francknes

of her mettell, I may, and do meane to place the Falcon gentle in chiefe.
               1 This Falcon is called the Falcon Gentle, for her gentle and courteous condition and faſhions. In heart and courage ſhe is valiant, ventrous, ſtrong, and good to brooke both heate and cold, as to whome there commeth no weather amiſſe at any time, whereas the moſt part of other Hawkes, eyther are lightly offended with the one or the other, and muſt haue a hand kept vpon them accordingly, or otherwiſe there is no great pleaſure to be taken in them.
            
            
               The Haggart Falcon.
               2 The ſecond, is the Haggart Falcon, which is otherwiſe tearmed the Peregrine Falcon. The Haggart is an excellent good bird, but (as my Author affirmeth) very choyce, and tender to endure hard wheather: but in myne owne conceit ſhee is in nature farre otherwiſe. And my reaſon is this, that ſhée ſhould be better able to endure cold then the Falcon Gentle, becauſe ſhée doth come from forraine parts a ſtraunger, and a paſſenger, and doth winne all her prey and meat at the hardeſt by maine wing, and doth arriue in thoſe parts, where ſhée is taken when the fowles doe come in great flockes, which is the very hardeſt part of the yeare. Moreouer being a hote Hawke by kind, ſhée ſhould the better ſuſtaine the force of weather, and that ſhée is a hote Hawke of nature, may bée gathered by her flying ſo high a pitch, which I take to be, for that in the higher partes, ſhée findeth the colder ayre, for the middle region is more cold then the reſt, becauſe thether commeth no reflexion. And againe, ſhée meweth with more expedition (if ſhe once begin to caſt her feathers) then the other Falcons doe. But theſe points of controuerſie I leaue to the learned, and ſuch as haue the experience of the matter.
            
            
               The Barbarie, or Tartaret Falcon.
               3 The third, is that Falcon which is called the Tartaret, or Barbary Falcon, whome they do chiefly vſe in Barbary, and

moſt account of.
            
            
               The Gerfalcon.
               4 The fourth, is the Gerfalcon, which is generall, and common inough, as well in Fraunce, as in other places.
            
            
               The Sacre.
               5 The fift, is the Falcon Sacre.
            
            
               The Laner.
               6 The ſixt, the Laner, common, as well in Fraunce, as in other Regions.
            
            
               The Tunician.
               7 The ſeauenth, is ye Tunitian Falcon. Theſe ſeauen kinds of Falcons are all hardy and good, according to the prey that belongeth to their force and nature. For they are diuers in nature, and of ſeuerall plumes, and beſides that, diſcloſed and eyred in diuers countries. Wherefore I meane to touch euery one of their natures, and to declare you, wherevnto each is enclined, according as they are manned, & gouerned: and firſt of all I will treate of the Falcon Gentle.
               But before I ſpeake of the Falcon Gentle, I will ſomwhat touch the Etimologie of the name, and lay down the opinons of two learned men, and ancient writers, as touching that matter.
               Firſt Suidas a Gréeke Author doth affirme, that Falco which in our mother ſpéech doth import a Falcon, is a generall name to all Hawkes of prey and rauine, as Accipiter is in Latine, and Hierax in Gréeke.
               
                  Feſtus, he is of opinion, that the Falcon is ſo named, becauſe of her pounces, and crooked talons, which do bend like vnto a ſith or ſickle, which in Latine is called Falx.
               
               But wherehence ſoeuer the name is deriued, this is moſt aſſured, that of all other birds of prey, the Falcon is moſt excellent, and the very Prince of all other Hawkes, both for her goodneſſe of wing, and great hardineſſe and courage.
            
            
               
               Of the Falcon Gentle, and her property.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               THe Falcon gentle, by nature doth loue to flée the Hearon euery way, & is a very good Hearoner, as well from her

wings at the down-come, as from the fiſt, and aforehead, and will flée all other kinds of greater fowles, as thoſe which are tearmed birds of Paradiſe, fowles more large then the Hearō. Moreouer ſhée is good to flée the ſhoueler, a fowle like the Hearon, but ſomewhat leſſe, the wilde Gooſe, and ſuch otherlike fowles, and therefore is excellent at the riuer or brook. If you take the Falcon Gentle an eyeſſe, you may boldly flée the Crane with her, but if ſhée be not an Eyeſſe, ſhée will neuer be ſo hardy as to venture on the Crane. And therefore being an Eyeſſe, and neuer ſéeing, nor knowing any other leſſe fowle then the Crane, if you caſt her off to the Crane, ſhe forthwith thinketh it to be a fowle fit for her, and by meane thereof fléeth the Crane very well, and becommeth a very good Crane fléer, for hawks commonly proue eyther cowards, or hardie after they are firſt quarred.
            
            
               An Obſervation.
               IF a man doe well, he ſhould neuer take the Falcons out of the Eyrie, till time they be fully ſummed & hard penned, or if hée do happely commit that errour, hée ſhould not man her, but preſently cauſe her to be conueighed and placed in an Eyrie that moſt doth reſemble the Eyrie of a Hawke, if hée may conueniently come by any ſuch, and there bréed her, and feede her with good fleſh, ſuch as the fleſh of Pullets, Chickens, Pigeons, and ſuch like, for otherwiſe her wings will not grow to any perfection, and her legs and other parts would quicklie be broken & waxe crooked, and her traine feathers, and for the moſt part, all her long feathers and flags be full of taints.
            
            
               The good ſhape of a Falcon.
               THat you may the better make choyce of your Falcon, and know a good Falcon from a refuſe, I will diſcribe you the perfect ſhape of a right good Falcon, ſuch a one as is very like to bée good, though many times wée ſée, that in proofe, the moſt likely things to ſhew, and to the eye, becom in proofe, the worſt and of leaſt regard.
               
                  The ſhape of a good Falcon therefore is, firſt to haue wide nares, high and large eye-liddes, a great blacke eye, a round head, ſome what full on the toppe, a ſhort thicke beake, blew as azure, a reaſonable high necke, barbe feathers vnder the clappe of the beake, a good large breaſt, round, fleſhly, ſtrong, hard and ſtiffe bonded And that is the true cauſe, why the Falcon doth greatly affie in her breaſt, and ſtriketh with it, and gageth it moſt at her encounter. And by meane ſhée is very ſtrong armed, ſhée vſeth the more fréely alſo to ſtrike a foule with her pounces and talons. Moreouer ſhée muſt be broade ſhouldred, ſhée muſt haue ſlender ſayles, full ſides, long and great thighes, ſhée muſt be ſtrong and ſhort armed, large footed, with the ſeare of the foot ſoft, and all one for hew with the ſeare of the beake and nares, blacke pownces, long wings and croſſing the traine, which traine ought to be ſhort, and apt to bend and bow to euery ſide. For in the traine of a Hawke doth conſiſt a great helpe, when ſhée flyeth. And therefore (as well as for beautie) if a traine feather or couert feather be broken or bruiſed, we doe couet to ympe them againe, or ſet them to right, becauſe it may be the leſſe hinderance to the hawke in her flight.
               You muſt note that thoſe very Falcons, that are of one kinde and ſort, haue very great difference and odds betwixt them, and are called by diuers names, according to the time that a man beginneth to deale with them, and doth vndertake them, according to the places where they haunt, and according to the Countries whence they come.
               They are diuided into mewed Hakes, Rammage hawkes, Sore-hawkes, and Eyeſſes, into large Hawkes, meane hawkes, and ſlender hawes, all which are of diuers and ſeuerall plumes and mayles, according to the diuerſitie of the regions. Alſo they are of diuers prices, according to the goodneſſe and eſtimation of them. Againe, ſome are blacke Falcons, ſome ruſſet Falcons, ſome other blanck Falcons: ſome of which are riuer Hawkes, to ſlay the fowle at the brooke, and other ſome field hawkes, to flye the land, and there to

kill the Feſant, Partridge, and ſuch like fowles. Thus you ſée how diuers and many they be, according to their outwarde accidents, and yet in nature, all Falcons. Therefore becauſe I am to treate of euery kind ſeuerall, I will not longer holde you in this place, with deſcription of the Falcon Gentle: but hereafter when I write in another place of the diſeaſes, cures and the manning of theſe hawkes, I will as neare as I may, let paſſe nothing that ſhall belong in any reſpect vnto the Falcon, but that in one place or other you ſhall finde it.
            
            
               Of the names of a Falcon, according to her age and taking.
               THe firſt name and tearme that they beſtow on a Falcon, is an Eyeſſe, and this name doth laſt as long as ſhée is in the Eyrie, and for that ſhée is taken from the Eyrie.
               Thoſe Falcons are tedious, and doe vſe to crie very much, in their féeding they are troubleſone and painefull to bée entred: but being once well entred and quarred, they leaue a great part of that vice, and doe proue very good to the Hearon, and to the riuer: and all other kinds of fowle they are hardy, and naturally full of good mettle.
               2 The ſecond name is a ramage Falcon, and ſo ſhée is called when ſhee hath departed and left the Eyrie, that name doth laſt, and ſhée is called a ramage Hawke, May, Iune, Iuly, and Auguſt. Theſe Falcons are hard to bée manned by reaſon of the heat, and for that they can ill brooke hunger, or to ſtand emptie panneld: but who ſo can vſe them with patience and iudgement, ſhall find them paſſing good, for that they are without fault.
               3 Thirdly they are called ſore Hawkes, from the end of Auguſt, to the laſt of September, October, and Nouember.
               Thoſe Hawks are of good diſpoſition, they will doe verie well, and are in their prime, and full pride for beautie and goodneſſe. Neuertheleſſe thoſe firſt plumes that they haue, when they forſake the Eyrie, thoſe doe they keepe one whole

yeare before they caſt or mew them, and that kind of feather, is called the Sore-feather. According to the diuerſitie of theſe tearmes and times, theſe Hawkes doe become better and better to be manned and kept.
               4 The fourth ſpéech and tearme that is beſtowed on them, (as my Italian Author doth call them) is, that they are tearmed Marzaroly, and ſo are they called from Ianuary, February, March, Aprill, vntill the middeſt of May. I haue no proper Engliſh phraſe for them, but they are very tedious and painefull, and the reaſon is, for that they muſt bée kept on the fiſt all that ſpace. Diuers of them are great baters, and therefore not very gréedy of meate or hungrie, they are but badde Hawkes, much ſubiect to Filanders and the wormes, who lookes to winne credit or good by kéeping them, muſt be of good experience, and no leſſe patience.
               5 Fiftly, they are called (Entermewers) or Hawkes of the firſt coate, that is, from the middle of May till Iune, Iuly, Auguſt, September, October, Nouember, December.
               Thoſe Hawkes are called Entermewers, for that they caſt the old, and haue new feathers, and they prooue very good, and hardy Hawkes, but no great truſt is to be giuen thē, for that they are giddy headed and fickle: wherefore he that lookes to haue good, or credit by kéeping of them, muſt be very circumſpect, and regard their natures very well, and muſt kéepe a good hard hand on them, and muſt make his fiſt their pearch, & neuer in a maner let them be from the fiſt. [And thus vſed,Addition. they are in that yeare the higheſt flyers, & moſt apt for the riuer.]
               Beſides in thoſe ſeuen kindes of Falcons, which I ſpake of in the firſt diuiſion, there are included ſondry ſortes tearmed according to the Countries and places where they are eyried, and whence they come: the ſpeciall names and properties of all which, I hold it not ſo néedfull to diſcourſe vpon, ſpeaking fully & ſufficiently of thoſe ſeuen kinds of Falcons in their times and places, as they ſhall offer themſelues in order vnto mée to bée decyphered vnto the Reader, to whoſe good

iudgement and induſtrie. I meane to referre and leaue ſondry things which I leaue vnſpoken of, for that there is no man that is deſirous of ſkill, but may with eaſe and will with dilygence (I doubt not) flée ouer to thoſe very Authors in French and Italian, from whence I haue made this briefe collection, where he ſhall be aſſured to find things more at large ſet out: but the effect (vnleſſe I be deceyued) compriſed in theſe few pages of paper aſwell concerning the kinds of Hawkes, as alſo their manning, luring, flights, mewing, diſeaſes, and cures in euery condition, as (I truſt) to the pleaſure and profit of the gentle and willing reader. Wherefore I will now procéede to the Haggart Falcon, a moſt excellent bird, if her nature and property be obſerued in due maner.
            
            
               Of the Haggart Falcon, and why ſhee is called the Peregrine, or Haggart.
               I Haue many times ſtudied with my ſelfe, for what cauſe the Haggart Falcons, the moſt excellent birds of all other Falcons, haue béen tearmed Haggart or Peregrine Hawks. And at firſt was of opinion, that men ſo called thē, for that they are brought vnto vs from farre and forraine Countries, and are in déede méere ſtrangers in Italie, (and as a man may call them) trauailers. And this I know for truth, they are not diſcloſed or eyred in Italie, and beſides that, there are few in Italie that do take them at any time, but the greateſt ſtore of them are brought and conueied thither from forrane Regions, but if they ſhould be tearmed peregrine or Haggart Falcōs, for this only cauſe, & onely in reſpect hereof, & nothing elſe, then might we as well beſtow that name alſo vpon all other Falcons, yt are not bred in Italy, as vpon the Tunitian & other Hawkes that are paſſengers. Wherefore I am of opinion, that for thrée cauſes principally, and in cheife, they are called Haggart or peregrine Falcons.
               1 Firſt, becauſe a man connot find, nor euer yet did any man Chriſtian or Heathen find their eyrie in any Region, ſo as it

may well be thought, that for that occaſion they haue atchiued and gotten that name and terme of Peregrine or Haggart falcons, as if a man would call them Pilgrims or Forrainers.
               2 The ſecond cauſe is, becauſe theſe Falcons do rangle and wander more than any other ſort of Falcons are wont to doe, ſéeking out more ſtrange and vncouth countries, which indeede may giue them that title of Haggart & peregrine hawks for theyr excellency, becauſe they do ſéeke ſomany ſtrange & forraine coaſts, and do rangle ſo farr abroad.
               3 The Third and laſt cauſe, I doe thinke, may be their beauty and excellency, becauſe this word (Peregrino) or Peregrine, doth many times import an honourable & choice matter had in great regard: but it ſkilleth not much which of theſe thrée alleadged is the true cauſe, wée will not ſtand vpon that nice point, for that a good Falconer ought much more to regard the ſcearching out of the true nature and property of Hawkes, then to haue ſo great and ſpeciall reſpect vnto their names, and tearmes.
               Wherefore I conclude, that theſe Haggart Falcons are not of Italie, but tranſported and brought thither from forraine places, as namely from Alexandria, Ciprus, and Candy. And yet this is for certaine, that in Italie there are taken of theſe Haggart Falcons, as in the dominion of the renowned Duke of Ferrara, & in the countrie neare Rauenna, being brought thither by force of weather and wind. And by that meanes there are none of thoſe Haggarts found Eyeſſes, but they are al either ſoare Hawkes, or mewed Haggarts.
               Of ſhape and proportion they are like the other Falcons, & are of thrée ſorts, as touching their making and mould, that is to ſay, large, little, or Falcons of a middle ſize. Some of them are long ſhapt, ſome ſhort truſſed Falcons, ſome larger, ſome leſſe.
               They are ordinarily of foure mayles, eyther blancke, ruſſet, browne, or turtle mayld, and ſome pure white maylde, without any iote or ſport of any other colour, but thoſe a man ſhall very ſeldome ſée. And for that cauſe I meane not to ſay much

of that kind of mayled Falcons, but will deale with ſuch as are more ordinarie in vſe.
            
            
               Of the good ſhape of a Haggart Falcon.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               
                  A Good and right Haggart Falcon ought to haue her head of darke or blanck plume, flat on the toppe, with a white wreath or garland enuironing her head, a large blew bending beake, widenares, a great, ful, blacke eye, hie, ſtately necke, large breaſt, broad ſhouldred, a great feather, in colour like the feather of a Turtle, long vaines and ſayles, but ſlender ſhapte, long traine, high thighes, and white on the inſide, I meane her pendant feathers, ſhort and great armed, large wide foot, with ſlender ſtretchers and falons, and the ſame to bée eyther pale white maylde, or pale blewiſh, tending ſomewhat to azure. Theſe are generally, the moſt aſſured tokens of an excellent Haggart Falcon.
            
            
               How to know a Haggart by her fleeing.
               A Good ſkilfull Falconer, will quickly diſcern a good Haggart Falcon, from a ſleight Falcon, though he be far off, by the ſtirring of her wings. For that a Haggart Falcon vſeth not a thick ſtroke, but ſtirreth her wing by leaſure and ſeldom, & getteth vp to her mountée, without any great making out. And although perhaps ſhe be not ſo large as the fleight or ſoare Falcon, yet to ſéeming and ſhew, ſhe is more large, which happeneth by meane of her ſayles, which in very déed are of greater ſcope and compaſſe than the fleight Falcons are. Contrariwiſe the fleight Falcon ſhee vſeth a more ſhort and quicker ſtroke with her wing then the Haggart doth, & doth not deale ſo leaſurely. There are beſids this one difference, ſondry other betwixt theſe two kinds of Falcons, which in this place I will deliuer you, for that you ſhall the better iudge the ods betwixt them, béeing both very good Falcons, and the beſt of all other, both for field, and riuer.
            
            
               The difference and ods betwixt the Haggart, and the Falcon Gentle.
               FOr that diuers haue delight to know the difference betwixt the Falcon Gentle and the Haggart, I will here ſhew you

certaine ſpeciall points concerning the difference of them both. Firſt the Haggart is a larger hawke then the Falcon gentle, and a longer armed Hawke, with a reaſonable large foot, and her talons more long then the Falcon Gentles are, a hie necke and a long, a fayre ſeaſoned head, and a more long beake then the other hath.
               1 The beam feathers of the Haggart, as ſhée is in her ſlight, are longer then the Falcon gentles, her traine ſomewhat larger, the Haggart hath a flatte thigh, but the Falcon gentle a round thigh.
               2 The Haggart will lie longer on her wings thē the Falcon Gentle, and hath a more deliberate and leaſurely ſtroke then the other Falcon hath, as I ſayd before.
               3 From the fiſt, it is reported by ſome, that the Falcon Gentle doth flie more ſpéedily then the Haggart, but at a long flight the Haggart is farre the better of both, and doth exell all other kind of Hawkes both for good wing, and maintenance of her flight, which is a perfect proofe of a very good backe.
               4 The Falcon Gentle is more haſty and hote in all her doings then the Haggart, and is thought more raſh and outragious of nature then the Haggart is. And when they flée together, the Falcon Gentle will make her ſtooping and downecome more vnaduiſedly, and will vſe the greater haſte to be at her pitch againe then the other, and miſſing the fowle at the ſtooping, the Falcon gentle is in the greater chafe, and will preſētly flée on head at the check, ſo as many times ſhée is hard to come by againe. Whereas the Haggart is more deliberate & better aduiſed, which procéedeth in my opinion, for that ſhée better knoweth the aduantage of her ſlight, than the Falcon gentle, becauſe ſhée hath béen forced often to prey for her ſelfe, & hath not béen ſubiect to the order of any kéeper, neither hath had any hand kept vpon her, to make her eager & gréedy of the prey, more then naturally ſhée is accuſtomed to flée at her ſeaſons to gorge her ſelfe, which ſhe doth both aduiſedly and to great aduantage.
               5 The Haggart Falcon is taken in Candie, Rhodes, and

many other places, of that Sea which is called Archipelagus, or the Aegean Sea.
               6 The beſt ſort of thoſe Haggart Falcons, haue their beakes of the colour of azure.
               7 Thoſe of Ciprus which are ſmall Hawks, and of a ruſſet mayle, they are the moſt hardy and ventrous Hawkes of all others.
               Much more might be ſaid, as touching the Haggart, and Falcon Gentle: but for that the Hawks are dayly in hand and view, and becauſe I haue a larger field to eare, which is to lay you downe the manning of them, and ſuch things as are more neceſſarie to a good Falconer, I leaue it, and will procéede to the next kind of Falcon, which is the Tartaret or Barbarie Falcon. As touching whoſe name and nature I meane to deliuer you, what I haue gathered as well out of the French Copie, as alſo borrowed from the Italian, whome I do much reuerence as well for his language, as for his rare and deepe deuiſe in al things wherein he hoth deale.
            
            
               
               Of the Barbarie Falcon.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               THe Barbarie or Tartaret Falcon, is a Hawke not very common in any Country, and ſhe is called a paſſenger or paſſeby, euen as the Haggart Falcon is.
               
                  They are not full ſo large as the Tiercell Gentle, though ſome men do write otherwiſe of them, they are red plumed vnder the wing, ſtrong armed with long talons & ſtretchers. They are very ventrous vpon all kind of fowles, and will flie at any game that the Haggart doth. With this Tartarot, or Barbary Falcon, and the Haggart alſo, you may flée all May and Iune, for they are Hawkes that are very ſlacke in mewing at the firſt, but when they once beginne, they mew & ſhedd their feathers very faſt.
            
            
               For what cauſe this Falcon is called a Barbary, or Tartaret Falcon.
               THeſe kind of Falcons are called Barbarie Falcons, for that moſt commonly they make their paſſage through Barbary and Tunyſe, where they are taken more often thā in any other place: As namely, in the Iſles of Leuant, Candy, Cipres and Rhodes, where theſe Hawkes do more frequent and vſe, then in any other Region, and the country men will ſooner take them, by endeauour if they may, then any Hawkes that are eyréed in their Country. And truely I do not thinke, that in any other place, there are ſo many good Crane-ſlayers, as there are to be had in the Iſle of Candy. The reaſon of it is, for that the Nobility and ſtates of the Country, are much more enclined to kéepe thoſe kind of Hawks that will kil the Crane, then any other people are elſewhere, and they doe enure and make their Falcons to that kind of game, more than to any other fowle. And ſurely you ſhall there haue excellent good Hawkes.
               Thus much it hath pleaſed mine Author to write of, and in commendation of the Barbarie Falcon: but here with vs in England, I neuer ſaw or heard of the proofe of thoſe hawkes, to be ſo good or excellent, as by his report I find them. Sondry other kind of Falcons proue better with vs here, as namely, the Falcon Gentle, the Haggart, and ſuch like, which eyther are paſſengers, or brought to vs from other Countries. The

Barbarie Hawk is much leſſe then eyther the Falcon gentle, or the Haggart, and therefore I will onely follow mine Author as thuching her prayſe, and ſo procéede to the next kind of Falcons, deliuering you both the opinion of the Italian, and French Gentlemen therein.
            
            
               Of the Gerfalcon.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               
                  THe Gerfalcon is a bird of great force, a very fayre hawke, ſpecially being mewed, ſhe is ſtrong armed, ſhe hath large ſtretchers and ſingles, ſhe is fierce & hardy of nature, by mean whereof ſhée is the more difficult and hard to be reclaymed. A Gerfalcon will looke to haue a gentle hand kept on her, and her keeper to be curteous and full of patience. The Gerfalcon is a gallant Hawke to behold, more huge then any other kind of Falcon, her eyes and her head are like the Haggart Falcon. She hath a great bending beak, large nares, a mayle like vnto a Laner, very long ſayles, and ſharp pointed, a traine much like the Laner, a large foot, marble ſeared, blanck, ruſſet, and brown plumed as other Falcons be, more beutifully to the eye than any other kind of Falcon.
               Theſe kind of Hawkes are made to flée from the fiſt to the Heron, Crane, Gooſe, Buſtard, and ſuch other like fowles. When they are mewed, they doe very much reſemble the Laner, they doe not change the marble ſeare of the foot. Theyr Tiercels, (whome wée call Ierkyns) are had in great prize, they are brought from Leuant, Cipres, Candy, and Alexandria, by Marchants.
               The Gerfalcons by report, do moſt commonly Eyrée in the parts of Pruſſia, and vpon the borders of Ruſſia, and ſome of them come from the confines and mountaines of Norway. But moſt commonly they are taken about Almayne Paſſebyes (as wée tearme them) or paſſengers.
               With the Gerfalcon, you may naturally flée all kinds of fowles, as I haue already written of the Haggart, and the Barbarie Falcon.
               Let it not diſcourage or amaze you, that the Gerfalcon is ſo hard to be reclaymed and manned, for the firceneſſe and hardines of their nature, is the onely cauſe thereof, but in the end being once wonne, they proue excellent good Hawkes.
               They will ſit very vpright and ſtately on the fiſt. Theyr beakes are blew, and ſo are the ſeares of their legs and feete, their pounces and talons are very long, and in troth they will lightly refuſe to flée at nothing.
               
                  At my being in Muſcouia, I ſaw ſundry Gerfalcons verie fayre and huge Hawkes, and of all other kinds of Hawkes, that onely bird is there had in account and regard, and is of greater price then any other. The reaſon whereof I learned of certaine Engliſh Marchants my country men, who tolde me, that the Emperors Maieſtie Iuan Vazaluich, did vſe to flée the Rauen with a caſt of Gerfalcons and tooke no ſlender pleaſure and delight therein.
               The Raven truely is a monſtrous ſtrong flight, by meane ſhee is of ſo great force and weight of wing, & withall doth vſe to make ſo many turnes in the ayre, as you ſhall ſee no other foule do the like. Yet neuertheleſſe as they told me, they had ſéene a caſt of Gerfalcons beate her in ſuch wiſe, as ſhée hath béene forced to take the ſtand, and to pearch in a Pins or Fir trée for her ſuccour and ſafety. But that ſhift little preuayles, for no ſooner is ſhe pearched, but preſently by commandement of the Emperour, each Muſcouite drawing his hatchet from his backe, (without which toole they neuer trauell in that coū
                  try) beſtoweth his force to the felling of the trée, which is lightly done by meane of many hands, and the tenderneſſe of the timber, the hawkes all that while lying vpon their wings, looking for their game: who finding the trée to fayle her, at the fal is driuen to truſt her wings again, and ſo by a freſh flight and new encounter, doth yéeld excéeding pleaſure to his Maieſtie, and ſuch as are in the field, and in fine, is ſlaine by her mightie aduerſaries the Gerfalcons, who moſt gréedily doe ſeaze vpon her, as their kind hath taught them to do. I imagine the flight to be very ſtrong, and truely the paſtime and pleaſure cannot be ſmall, but a game fit for ſuch a mighty Prince as his Maieſtie is. Thus much of the Gerfalcon.
            
            
               Of the Sacre.
               THere be 3. kinds of Sacres, the firſt is called Sephe after the Babylonians and Aſſyrians, that kind of Sacre is

found in Egipt, and in the weſt parts, and in Babylon. Shée will ſtay the Hare, and ſuch like.
               The ſecond kind is called Semy, ſhe kils the Though, as her proper game, wherein ſhe taketh the greateſt pleaſure.
               The third is called Hyuair, or the Peleryn Sacre after the Egyptians and Aſſirians.
               She is called a Peleryn or Haggart, for that her eyrée is not knowne, and becauſe yearely ſhée maketh her paſſage towards Iudea, or Media, ſhée is taken in the Iles of Leuant, Cypres, Candy, and Rhodes. And therefore ſome thinke, ſhée conuneth out of Ruſſia, and Tartaria, and alſo from the great Sea. That Sacre that is taken an entermewer, is the beſt Hawke. The Sacre of all Hawkes the moſt labourſome, and beſt able to brooke her fleight. She is alſo peaceable and verie tractable, & a Hawke that can beſt away with courſe and groſſe diet. The prey of the Sacre are great fowles, the Heron, the Gooſe, the Crane, Bytor, and withall the ſmall beaſtes of the field and forreſt.
               It is well to bée ſéen, that the Sacre is a Hawk ſomewhat larger then the Haggart Falcon, of a ruſty and ragged plume like the kite, the ſeare of her beake and foot like the Laner, her pounces but ſhort, neuertheleſſe, ſhe is of great force, & hardie to all kind of fowle, as I haue already reported of the Haggart and Barbarie Falcons, but not ſo ventrous and frée to flée the Crane, or ſuch like game as the Haggart Falcon is.
               This Sacre is a paſſenger, euen as the Haggart Falcon is. No man is able truly to ſay, when ſhe eyréeth or diſcloſeth, but at the Rhodes they ſay they come from the parts of Ruſſia, & Tartaria, and the Ocean ſea. Theſe Sacres are takēin great number in the Iles of Leuant, Candy, Cipres, & Rhodes, & ſondry other Ilands in the Ocean ſea. But I muſt néeds confeſſe to you, that the Sacre is more diſpoſed to the field a great deale, then to the brooke As to flée the wild Gooſe, the Bittor, the Feſant, the Partridge, and all ſuch like fowles. And is nothing ſo dainty of her dyet, or to be kept, as the long winged hawkes are.
               
                  The Sacre is much like the Falcon Gentle for largeneſſ eand the Haggart for hardines, and is a paſſenger as the Haggart is.
               She is a Hawk chiefly to flée the kite, and yet may be made and manned to flée the field, and ſtay other game of the field as the Falcon doth.
               The noble men that take pleaſure in the Sacre, to make a flight with her at the kite, do vſe this order & deuiſe, to bring the kite downe from her mountée, for that in the heate of the day, ſhée doth vſe to ſoare and flée of an excéeding height in the cloudes, to take the comfort of the cold & freſh ayre, that is in the middle region: They tie a foxe taile to the leg of a mallard or Ducke, whome they cauſe to be born on the fiſt of ſome one Falconer, and do ſo, let the ducke flée in the middeſt of a plaine, whome as ſoone as the kite diſcries from her pitch, ſhe preſently bateth of her gate, and maketh her ſtooping to the ground, and there gazeth and woundreth at the ſtrangeneſſe, and the ſhape of this fowle: then do they caſt off the Sacre to the kite, who forthwith truſting to the goodnes of her wing, getteth vp to her pitch, as hie as poſſible ſhe may, by making often turns and wrenches in the ayre, where it is a very pleaſant ſport to behold the bickering that is betwixt them in the ayre, ſpecially if it be in a plaine where no trées or groues are, to hinder the ſight of the matter, and the day fayre, and not windie, for then will the Kite and Sacre ſoare ſo high, as they will flée clean out of ſight: But that ſerueth not the Kites purpoſe and turne, for the Sacre neuertheleſſe doth conqure her in the encounter, beating her to the ground by meane of the ſondry ſtoopinges & downe-comes that ſhée maketh vpon her.
               They flée with the Sacre at two ſorts of Kites, that is, to the Kite royall, which is called by the Frenchman, the (Milan Royall) and at one other kind of Kite, called the blacke Kite, (the Milan Noyer) which is farre the more nimble bird of the two, and doth more buſily trouble the hawke in her flight then the other doth, by meane ſhe is the leſſe of the two, & vſeth her wings farre better. Of all hawkes this kind of hawk hath the

longeſt traine. We call the Tyercell of the Sacre, the Sacret, which is the male bird, & the Sacre the female, betwixt whom there is no oddes more then in the quantity and proportion: for commonly anong birdes of prey, the male is leſſe then the female. The Sacre is called in Latine Bu
                        •
                     eo, and the Sacret Subuter.
               
            
            
               Of the Laner.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               
                  THe Laner is a Hawke common in all Countries, ſpecially in France, and other places elſewhere, for voluntarylie ſhee maketh her Eyrie, and buildeth in high trées and Forreſts and commonly in Crowes neſts or in the high rockes & cliffes neare the ſea, according as the country is for the purpoſe.
               The Haggart is ſomewhat leſſe then the Falcon gentle, faire plummed when ſhe is an entermewer, but of ſhorter talons then any other kind of Falcon. And ſome hold opinion, that thoſe Laners that haue the largeſt and beſt ſeaſoned heads, & the ſeare of the foot azure or blewiſh, be the Eyeſſes or ſoare Hawkes, they are the beſt and choyeſt Laners.
               With this Hawke may you flye the riuers, a well with the Laner as the Laneret, for they are both good, & likewiſe may you vſe them to other kinds of flights, and ſpecially to the field to kill the Partridge, the Feſant, the Hare, the Choffe, ye Dawe, and all ſuch ſort of leſſer fowle.
               The Laner is not ouer dainty of her féeding, but can better brooke groſſe and courſe victailes then any Falcon elſe can do.
               Mewed Laners and Sacres, are hardly knowne from the ſoare Hawkes, becauſe they do not change their plume. By theſe thrée ſignes you ſhall beſt knowe the Laner.
               They are more blancke Hawkes then any other, they haue leſſe beakes then the reſt,Addition. and are leſſe armed and pounced thē other Falcons be. [The Laners of all Hawkes are the fitteſt for young Falconers, becauſe they will hardly take ſurfaits, & ſeldome be ouerflowne▪ or melt their greaſe.]
            
            
               Of the Italian Author.
               THe Laners doe commonly Eyre in the Alpes that diuide Italy from Almaine: ſome of them are reaſonable hawks, ſome of a middle ſute, and ſome leſſe. Their heads are white, & flat aloft, blacke and large eyed, ſlender nares▪, ſhort beake & thicke, and leſſer then the Haggart Falcons, or the Falcon gentle▪
               
               
                  They are marble or ruſſet mailde, the breſt feathers white, full of ruſſet ſpots, the points and extremities of their feathers full of round white droppes. Their ſayles and traynlong, they are ſhort legged, with a foot ſomewhat leſſe then the Falcons, marble ſeered: but béeing mewed, they change the ſeere of the foot to a yellow.
               Theſe Hawkes will brooke to ffée long on their wings after their maner, and when they eſpie one that goeth abroad with a Sparowhawke to the field, they preſently follow & couer the ſpaniels, ſo as no ſooner is the ſparowhawk caſt off to the partridge, but if ſhée miſſe or come ſhort of her game, the Laner ſtoopeth with great nimbleneſſe of wing, and eyther killeth the fowle, or otherwiſe enforceth it to ſtoope and fall amid the flight to the ground.
               You ſhall neuer lightly ſée a Laner lie vpon the wings, after ſhée hath flien to marke, but after one ſtouping, ſhe maketh a point, and then doth awaite for the fowle after the maner of a Goſhawke: for if ſhe miſſe at the firſt downe-come, of kill not in the foote, ſhe is by nature ſo ſlothfull and dull, as ſhée will ſéeke the aduantage to her greateſt eaſe: and therefore, dooth commonly vſe vpon the queſting, and call of the Spaniels, to attend very diligently, and ſo to prey at her pleaſure.
               They are highly eſtéemed in France, & (as they ſay) ther made to the riuer, and there doe they vſe to flée with the a caſte or leaſh of Laners to the brooke, and ſometimes with the Laners and Lanerets together, and ſometimes doe flée the field with the Laner: but in Italy they doe not vſe this kinde of hawke at all. With vs in England this kind of Hawke is in price, but accounted very ſlothfull and hard mettled, ſo as vnleſſe you kéepe a very hard hand vpon her, ſhée will doe little good, cleane contrary to the nature of a Falcon gentle, who for one good vſage will ſhew a treble curteſie, and the better ſhe is rewarded the better will ſhée flée: but vſe the Laner wel, and ſhée maketh ſlender account therof, but becommeth ſlothfull, and vnapt to flée eyther field, or riuer.
            
            
               
               Of the Tunicion Falcon.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               THe Tunicion is a Falcon euen much of the nature of a laner, yet ſomwhat leſſe than the Laner, but very like her in plume and foote, alwaies more ſluggiſh & heauie in her ſlight,

and yet more créeſe then the Laner, and ſhée hath a large round head.
            
            
               The cauſe why ſhee is called a Tunycian.
               THis Falcon is tearmed a Tunician, for that ordinarily & moſt vſually ſhée is found to eyre in Barbarie, euen as I haue reported to you, that the Laner doth in France and otherwhere. And becauſe Tunyce is the head and chiefe Cittie in all Barbarie, and the Prince and ſtate there commorant and moſt abiding, holding the Court there, and do moſt chifely vſe to flée with theſe kinde of Falcons of all others, they are moſt chiefly tearmed Tunycians.
               The Tunycian may alſo be called a Punycian Falcon, for that which we reade of the warres Punicke, againſt the Carthaginenſes, being maintayned againſt the inhabitants of that pace, where now is ſituated Tunyce.
               The Tunycian is large, approaching néere the nature of a Laner, and very like in plume and male, and not vnlike for the ſeare of her foot, but ſomewhat leſſe, and of a longer ſlight: her head is large and round.
               They are excellent good for the riuer, and will lye well vpon their wings, and flye the field well, as I haue ſayd before of the Laner. They doe naturally take pleaſure to ſtrike and ſeaze vpon the Hare, and all other kind of prey whatſoeuer.
               This kind of Falcons is not ſo ordinarie or common in all parts and regions, as other hawkes are, ſaue onely in Barbarie and Tunyce.
            
            
               
               Of the Merlyn.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               THere is a kind of Falcon that is called a Merlyn. Theſe Merlyns are very much like the haggart falcon in plume, in ſeare of the foot, in beake and tallons. So as there ſameth to be no ods or difference at all betwixt them, ſaue only in the bigneſſe, for ſhe hath like demeanure, like plume, & very like conditions to the Falcon, and in her kind is of like courage, & therefore muſt be kept as choicely, and as daintily as the Falcon.
               Aſſuredly diuers of theſe Merlyns, become paſſing good

Hawkes and very ſkilfull, their property by nature is to kill Thruthes, Larkes, & Partridges. They flee with greater fircenes, & more hotely then any other hawke of prey. They are of greater pleaſure, and full of courage, but a man muſt make greater care, and take good héed to them, for they are ſuch buſie & vnruely things with their beakes, as diuers times they eate off their own feet and talons very vnnaturally, ſo as they die of it. And this is the reaſon and true cauſe, that ſeldom or neuer ſhall you ſee a mewed, or entermewed Merlin. For that in the mew they doe ſpoyle themſelues, as I haue before declared.
               My Italian Authour hath theſe words, both of the ſhape and in commendation of the Merlin.
               The Merline is (ſaith he) of the ſhape of a Falcon, leſſe than the Sparowhawke, more nimble and wight of wing than any other Hawke, ſhe doth kill all ſuch game and prey as the Sparowhawk doth vſe to ſlay, ſpecially ſmal birds, namely Larks, Sparowes and ſuch like, all which ſhée doth purſue with excéeding cruelty and courage.
               She is reported to be a Hawke of the fiſt, and not of the lure, albeit a man may if he will, make her to the lure alſo. She is a very ventrous hawke and hardy, by this we may coniectture it: For though ſhée be little bigger then a pigeon, yet notwithſtanding, ſhe will hazard her ſelfe to flée the Partridge, the Quail, and ſuch other like fowles, more large then her ſelfe, & will purſue them in ſo cruell manner; as ſundry times ſhe followeth them, euen to the villages and townes whether the ſilly birdes doe flee for ayde and reſcue, from their naturall foe the Hawke.
               The Merlin is the only Hawke of all others, in whom as my authour affirmeth, there is no difference betwixt the male & female, but yet by experience we find it otherwiſe, for the female is ye larger bird of the two, & more big then the other in ſight.
               Some are of opinion, that Lidos, Hieraz in Gréek & Levis Accipiter in Latine, is our Merlin of whom we ſpeake, & that thoſe birds of prey whome Aristotle termeth (Leves) to our iudgement ſhould be the Merlins, becauſe they are the leſſe Hawkes of all others that are to be found.
            
            
               
               Of the Hobbie.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               OF all birdes of prey that belong to the Falconers vſe, I know none leſſe then the Hobbie, vnles it be the Merlin. The Hobby is a Hawke of the lure, and not of the fiſt: alſo ſhée is of the number of thoſe Hawkes that are hie flying & towre Hawks, as the Falcon, the Laner, and the Sacre be. If a man be diſpoſed to deſcribe the Hobby, he cannot do better, nor deale more artificially, then to match her for ſhape with the Sacre.

For in good faith there is but ſmall difference or inequality betwixt them, ſaue that the Sacre is farre the huger birde.
               The property of the Hobbye in all countries and regions where they are eyred, or otherwiſe brought, is to ſoar, and flée vpon the Huntſmen and Falconers, & ſo to follow them verie watchfully, to the end that whē they ſpring or put vp any ſmal birds, ſhe may ſtoope from her wings, and ſeaze on them, as on her prey. And this is ſo ordinarie a Hawk, & the practice that I ſpeake of ſo general, as there is not the ſimpleſt bowre or peaſant but doth know it. I can make no fitter nor more apt compariſon, then to reſemble the frye & ſmall fiſh of the Sea, being had in chaſe by the huger ſort of fiſh deſirous to deuour them: to the ſmall fowles and birdes of the ayre, purſued by the Hobby.
               For as ſoone as the ſilly fiſh that is chaſed by the Dolphin & ſuch like, do perceiue their ſafety to be nothing in the Element of water, where, by God and Nature they are allotted to liue, eftſoon haue they their recourſe to the ayre to ſaue themſelues, choſing rather to lye at the mercy of the rauening ſea-fowles, ſoaring vpon the water, then to yeelde themſelues in prey to their naturall aduerſaries the fiſh: Euen ſo the Hobbies perceyuing the Huntſmen or Falconers in the fielde to hunt the poore Leueret, or flée the Partridge, do forthwith accompanie them, ſoaring vpon them, in hope to encounter ſome one ſmall bird or other, whome the hounds or ſpaniels ſhal by fortune put vp, & ſpring by ranging the field. Then the Larks, & ſuch like ſmall fowles, whoſe nature is not to braunch or take the trée, but altogether to liue vpon the groūd, finding thēſelues purſued by the hounds & ſpaniels to beguile thē, are enforſt to truſt to their wings, & to take the ayre, & being there, finding thēſelus moleſted by the Falconers & Hobbies, do make their choyce & election to become a prey rather to the dogs, or ſéeke mercy among the horſe legs, & ſo to be ſurpriſed aliue, then to affie in the curteſie of the cruell Hobbies, and to be taken in their cruell tallons, where they are moſt aſſured to die the death.
               The Hobbie is ſo nimble & wight of wing, that ſhée dares encounter the Crow, and to giue ſouſe for ſouſe, and blow for

blow with him in the ayre.
               This is a naturall and ſpeciall tricke that ſhée doth vſe, eſpying the Falconers in the field, ſhe doth follow them, and attend on them, but it is but for a certaine ſpace as though in verye deede ſhée had her limits and boundes precribed her, and appointed how farre he ſhould flée. For as ſoone as ſhee leaueth them, ſhée preſently ſcoureth along the ſide of ſome groue or high wood, where doth ordinarily vſe to pearch and take the ſtand.
               The Hobby hath a blew beake, but the ſeare of her beak and legges is yellow. The crinet or little blacke feathers vnder her eyes be very blacke, ſo as moſt commonly they continue and procéed from the beake to the temples or eare burres, and in like manner is there an other blacke ſtreak that deſcendeth to eyther ſide of her gorge. As touching the toppe of the head it is betwixt blacke and yellow, but hath two white ſeames vpon the necke. The plumes vnder the gorge, and about the browes are reddiſh without ſpotte or droppe. The plumes vnder the belly (or as I may beſt tearm them) the breaſt feathers are browne for the moſt part, and yet poudered with white ſpots as Ermines. All the backe, the trayne, and the wings are blacke aloft, ſhe hath no great ſcales vpon her leggs, vnleſſe it be a few that begin behind the thrée ſtretchers and pounchies, which are very large in reſpect of her ſhort legges. Her brayle feathers are engouted twixt redde and blacke. The pendant feathers (which are thoſe behind the thigh) are of a ruſty and ſmokie verniſh complection. When a man ſeeth her ſoare aloft in the ayre, he will iudge her vnder the wings, that her plumage and downe, as well of her wings as betwixt her legs is ruſſet and reddiſh mayled.
               There are two fowles, whereof the one is called, (Ian le blancke) which I take to be the Harrohen or capped Kite, and ye other (blanche queue) the ring tayle, who do alwaies flée with her for company, beating and ſouſing the Larks, and if happily they ſpie the Hobby encountring the Larke, whome they put and force to her wings, it is a pleaſure to behold the game

that is betwixt this caſt of buſſards and the hawke. For their deſire and intent is to bereaue the ſillye hobby of her prey: but ſhe being nimble and wight of wing, encountreth with them, entercepting the Larke from them, mauger their might, and ſondry times they buckle ſo together, as you ſhal ſée them come tūbling down both I fear, one faſt griping & ſeazed on ye other.
               Some would haue that this Hobby of whom I write ſhould bée that bird whome Ariſtotle calleth Hipotriorchis, and the Latines Subuteo: but I am not of that mind, but that it ſhould rather be the Sacre, whome Ariſtotle doth meane. But let the learned reader Iudge the controuerſie, I am to lay down their natures and properties, and not to decide any matter of controuerſie, which indéede doth belong to the curious Falconer, and not to him that doth embrace more the ſport, then the diuerſitie and oddes of ſpéech, which in euery Art a man ſhalbe aſſured to find. Let it ſuffice if I giue the Reader to vnderſtand the nature of euery Hawke now a dayes in vſe, and withall (according to my promiſe and meaning) doe let him know the meane to flie with them both the field and brooke, as alſo to giue him to witte, how to Mew, Ympe, and cure them being diſeaſed. Theſe are the ſpeciall points, and ſuch as deſerue thankes from me, and commendation from him. I will procéede in the deſcription of the nature of this Hawke, according to the opinion of the Italian.
            
            
               The Italians opinion of the Hobbie.
               THe Hobbies are more large then the Merlyns, & for beak, eyes, plume & foot, they very much reſemble the Falcon. They will lie vpon their wings reaſonablie wel, following mē and Spaniels, fleeing vpon them many times, to the end that when any Partridge or Quaile is ſprung, they may the better ſtoupe from their wings, and ſo ſeaze on the fowle, which ſundry times they doe.
               Theſe kind of Hawkes are vſed of ſuch as go with nets, and ſpaniels: The order of which game is this.
               The doggs they range the field to ſpring the fowle, and the

Hobbies they accuſtome to flée aloſt ouer them, ſoaring in the ayre, whome the ſilly birdes eſpying at that aduantage, & fearing this conſpiracy (as it were) betwixt the dogs and hawkes, for their vndoing and confuſion, dare in no wiſe commit themſelues to their wings, but do lie as cloſe and flat on the ground as they poſſible may do, & ſo are taken in the nets,Addition. [which with vs in England is called Daring, a ſport of all other moſt proper to the Hobbie.]
               Some Gentlemē haue made report & for truth aſſured me, that the Emperour Ferdinando of famous memorie, did giue his Falconers in charge to kéepe & reclaime ſundry Hobbies. And his Maieſtie diuers times for recreation, would take his Horſe, and into the fields with a Hobbie on his fiſt, holding in his right hand a long ſlender pole, or réed ſeuen foot in length, on the toppe whereof there was conueighed by ſleight a ſtrong line with a ſliding knotte: And when happily his Maieſtie had eſpied a larke on the ground, he would forthwith holde vp, and aduance his Hobbie, to the view of the ſilly birde, whome as ſoone as the Larke ſaw, he would in no wiſe dare to ſpring, but lie as ſtill as a ſtone flat vpon the earth, ſo fearful they are of the Hobbie, in cheif of all other Hawks: then would the Emperour at his good leaſure, and great pleaſure, with his longe pole and the ſliding line, take the ſillye fowle and draw her vp vnto him, and truely tooke no ſmall delight in this kinde of paſtime, and would cauſe his Falconers to doe likewiſe, who by this deuiſe tooke many birdes, and in this ſorte woulde they Hawke frō the beginning of September to the end of October.
               This practiſe did ſomewhat reſemble, and draw to the nature of our deuiſe, in daring of larkes, which we vſe at theſe dayes, but (in my Iudgement) nothing ſo ready and fit as our paſtime and ginne which we haue, which is a very good ſporte and full of delight, to ſée the fearefull nature of the ſilly Larke, with the great awe and ſubiection that the Hobbie hath her in, by the law of kind: for aſſuredly there is no other Hawke, no not the hugeſt, whome the Larke doth ſo much feare, as the Hobbie, which may manifeſtly appeare by this that I haue written, as alſo by dayly experience and practiſe in that behalf.
            
            
               
               Of the Goſhawke, after the opinion of William Tardiffe a Frenchman.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               A Generall diviſion of Goſhawkes, whome the French men call Autour.
               
               
                  THere are (ſaith he) fiue kinds of Authors or Goſhawkes' ſpeaking of the Goſhawke in the largeſt name & nature, compriſed in that word Autour.
               The firſt and moſt noble kinde, is the female Goſhawke, which is with vs moſt ordinarily in vſe.
               The ſecond is named a demy Author, or Goſhawke, as it were a kind betwixt two other ſorts, and that is a ſpare ſlender hawke, and of little regarding reſpect of any good ſhe will doe.
               The third is the Tyercell which is the male, or cocke to the Goſhawke, who doth flay the Partridge, & is not of ſufficient force to kill the Crane. He is termed a Tyercelet, for that there are moſt commonly diſcloſed three birds in one ſelfe eyrée, two Hawkes, and one Tiercell.
               The fourth kinde of Autour is the Sparrowhawke, whoſe nature is to kill all kind of prey that the Goſhawke doth, ſaue onely the larger ſort of fowles.
               The fift kind is called (Sabech) whome the Egiptians term (Baydach) which doth very much reſemble the Sparrowhauk, but is leſſe then the Sparowhawke, and hath a very blew eye.
               There are ſundry ſorts of Goſhawkes, and thoſe brought and conueyed out of ſundry forraine parts and regions, but among them all, that Goſhawke that is bred & eyred in Armenia & Perſia, is the principall beſt hawke, & then next to her in goodneſſe, the hawke of Gréece, and laſtly that of Affricke.
               The Hawke of Armenia hath her eyes gréen, but the beſt of ye kind is ſhe that hath black eyes & black plumes on her backe.
               The hawke of Perſia is large, well plumed, cleare and déepe eyed, with hanging and pendand eye-lids and browes.
               The hawke of Gréece hath a great head, well ſeaſoned, a ſtrong necke, and is reaſonable well plumed.
               The Goſhawke of Affricke hath blacke eyes in her ſoarage, but being a mewed hawke, her eyes become reddiſh and fiery.
               At what times Hawkes begin to fall to liking, which is at Eawking time, all birds of prey do aſſemble themſelues with the Goſhawke, and do flocke together. As namely the Falcon, the Sacre, and ſuch other that liue on prey, and rauine.
               
                  And hereof it procéedeth that the Goſhawkes become ſo diuers in goodneſſe, force, and hardineſſe, according to the diuerſity of their choyce and cawking.
               The beſt Goſhawke ought to be waighty, and a heauie bird, as thoſe of great Armenia be.
               In Syria they make choice of their hawkes, by the Maſſines & poyſe of them, and do eſtéem the moſt weighty hawke for the beſt: as for the male & conditions they doe litle regard or prize.
               The blancke Goſhawke is the largeſt, the fayreſt & moſt apt, and eaſie to bee reclaymed, and withall the ſtrongeſt of all Hawkes of that ſort, for ſhée can kill the Crane. And by reaſon ſhe is eyréed in a very hie and lofty place, & can beſt endure the cold, which is moſt rife in the middle region of the ayre, therefore is ſhée good to flée all fowles of that ſort and condition.
               The Goſhawke that doth encline and tend to a black mayle, and that hath ſuperfluous plumes on her head, reaching down her front or forehead, like a peruque or borrowed hayre, that is a very fayre Hawke for beauty, but nothing ſtrong.
               [But truely there is no Goſhawke more excellent then that which is bread in Ireland in the north parts,Addition. as in Vlſter, and in the Country of Tyrone.]
            
            
               The good proportion and ſhape of a Goſhawke.
               SHée ought to haue a ſmall head, her face long & ſtraight like the Vulture or Eagle, a large wind pipe or throat, great eies déepe ſet, and the apple or middle part of the eye blacke, nares, eares, backe and féet, large and blancke, a blancke long beake, long necke, big breaſt, hard fleſh, long thighes, fleſhie, & diſtant one from the other, the bone of the legge and knée ſhort, long and large pounces, and talons.
               The ſhape from the ſterne or traine to the breaſt forward, ought to grow to a roundneſſe. The feathers of the thighes towards the traine ſhould be large, and the traine feathers ſhort, ſoft and ſomewhat tending to an yron mayle.
               The brayle feathers ought to be like the breaſt feathers, and the couert feathers of the traine ſhould be ſpotted, and full off blacke rondels, but the colour of the very extremity and point

of euery traine feather, ought to be blacke ſtreaked. Of mayle, and colour, the beſt is the red, ſomewhat tending to blacke or plaine grieſeld.
               The ſignes of a good Goſhawke, are hauty courage, deſire and gréedy luſt to féede, often tyring and plucking of her meat, ſodaine ſnatching of her food vpon the fiſt, good enduiug, and great force in aſſayling her game.
               The ſigne of boldneſſe in a Goſhawke is this, tie her in an open light place, and after a while darken and obſcure it, by ſhutting ſome window, or ſuch like deuiſe, then touch her vpon the ſodaine at vnawares, if ſhe then iumpe, and leape to the fiſt without feare or aſtoniſhment, that is an aſſ
                     •
                  red ſigne of hardineſſe in a Goſhawke.
               The token of force in a Goſhawke, is this, tie diuers Goſhawkes in ſundry places of one ſelf chamber or mew, and that Hawke that doth fliſe and mewt hieſt and fartheſt of from her, vndoubtedly is the ſtrongeſt Hawke, for that one point declareth and argueth a good ſtrong backe in the hawke.
               A Token of goodneſſe and excellency in thoſe demie Goſhawkes, whom my Author doth tearme (Petite Autours) is to haue large and cleare eyes, a ſmall head, long neck, low, and cloſe plume or downe, hard fleſh, a gréene ſéere of her foote, large ſtretchers, and not goutie or fleſhie, quicke enduing, large panell, and able to ſliſe farre from her when ſhe mewteth. The point of the beake to be blacke, is a very good ſigne.
            
            
               The ill ſhape of Goſhawkes.
               ALbeit there bee a generall rule, that (contraria contraries dinoſ
                        •
                     unter) which is that one contrarie is knowne ſufficiently by the other, & therfore hauing made you full ſhew of the good ſhape of Goſhawkes, the ill proportion wil eaſily therby fall out, & be diſcerned of it ſelf without any further trauell, yet neuertheleſſe following mine Author, I think it not amiſſe to dicypher you the ill forme of a Goſhawke: which is to haue

a great head, a ſhort necke, to be thick and groſſe plumed, ſoft fleſhed, ſhort thighed, long armed, ſhort tallons, tawnie hewed, tending to blacke, and hard and rough vnder the foote.
               A Goſhawke that when ſhe is looſe in the houſe, flees as though ſhe were at large and liberty, breaking out of a mew, hauing great groſſe feathers, eyes as red as blood, that is euermore baiting, and being ſet on the pearch, offereth to flée at the face of a man, ſuch a Hawke if ſhée be kept low in fleſh cannot be borne on the fiſt; if ſhée bée hie and full of fleſh, ſhée will not then abide with her kéeper, but rangle & gad: wherefore of ſuch Hawkes, there is no account to be made at all.
               A fearefull Goſhawke is hardly to be reclaimed and manned, for the feare ſhee hath, will alwaies cauſe her to refuſe the fiſt and lure, and make her checke, and not willingly repayre to any deuiſe wherewith ſhée is called and rappeld, after her flight, which is a very great inconuenience in a Goſhawke, and no ſmall hinderance to the ſport of him that ſhall happen to haue ſuch a fearefull Hawke: for commonly vnleſſe they be firſt fond of the kéeper, and in loue with the call, they will not flée their game to the liking of their owner; and the tediouſnes in comming by them againe after the flight, doth bréed forgetfulneſſe of the paſtime, how good and delectable ſoeuer it were before.
               That Goſhawke that hath pendant plumes ouer her eyes, and (as they ſay in the Country) whoſe feathers hang in her light, the white of whoſe eye is very watriſh and blanck, that is red maild, or bright tawnie, hath the moſt aſſured token that may be of ill conditions, and is not like to bée well comming. But if happely ſuch a Hawke fall once to bée good, ſhée will then proue a paſſing Hawke.
               Sometimes (though very ſeldome) do wée ſée a Goſhawke of bad ſhake, and in condition cleane contrary to thoſe ſignes that ought to bée lookt for in a good Goſhawke, proue light, luſty, able to hold out and mainetaine her flight, and ſuch a one as will very well ſlay the greater ſort of fowles.
               The Goſhawkes prey is the Freſant, the Mallard, the wild

Gooſe, the Hare, and Conie,: beſides all which, ſhe will ſtrike ventrouſly, and ſeaze on a Kidde or Goat, and keepe him play ſo long, as the dogs at length ſhall come in to aſſiſt her and further the fall of it, which doth manifeſtly decipher the great ineſtimable courage and valour of the Hawke.
            
            
               Out of the French I haue collected this concerning the Goſhawke.
               Some men haue thought, and béene of this reſolute mind, that the (Author) or Goſhawke hath béene of the kinde of a Vulture, for the affinity and neareneſſe of their tearmes and names: for (Autour) in the French, is that Hawke whome we call the Goſhawke, and (Vautour) is the Vulture, which 2. tearmes as you ſée, draw very neare to one ſpeech.
               Some other haue béen of opinion, that betwixt the Goſhawk and Sparowhawke, is no ods or difference in nature, ſaue only in reſpect of the hugeneſſe of that one, and the ſlenderneſſe of the other: but my purpoſe is to treat of the Goſhawke ſeuerally from the Sparowhawke, and ſo to procéede to the Sparrowhawke, of whome I will write according to the French & Italian Authors, in a ſeuerall Chapter by it ſelfe, to avoide the confuſion, which otherwiſe might happen in that behalfe.
               The Goſhawke is euer more regarded than her Teircell, for the males or cockes among Hawkes and birds of prey, doe make euident proofe, and ſhew to the eye, of their difference frō the females and Hawkes.
               Againe we may with eaſe diſcerne the Goſhawke from her Tyercell, for that ſhée is farre larger, then the Tyercell of her kind.
               The Falconers & Oſtregers, haue to theſe two ſorts, added a third kind (as I ſayd before) whome they teranie the Demygoſhawke, as a bird indifferent, betwixt the other twoo.
               Both kinds of them are more hie, and longer armed, then eyther the Falcon, or Gerfalcon: they are Hawkes of the fiſt, and (as we call them) round winged Hawkes, quite contrarie

to thoſe I wrote of before, all which are Hawkes of the lure, and long winged Hawkes, otherwiſe called Towre hawkes.
               The Hawke (I meane the female) is very much like the Eagle in mayle, and if we may make bold to compare ye leſſe with the larger, ſhe hath a more ſtately high necke then the Eagle, & of a more red or yron mayle, the ground of her plume and downe tending to a red colour.
               Thoſe Goſhawkes that are of Slauonia, are good at all maner of game, large, hardy, & faire plumed, their tongs blacke, and their nares great and wide.
               There are Goſhawkes, whome the Italians call Alpiſani, or hawkes of the Alpes, which are much vſed in Lombardie, & Tuſcane, they are more thick thē they are long, fierce, & hardy.
               But thoſe Goſhawks that our Oſtregers haue now adayes, are cheifly conueied out of Almaine, hauing their eyes & the ſeare of the beake, as alſo of their féet and legs yellow, contrarie to the Gerfalcon, whoſe ſeare is blew and azure.
               Their traines are garniſhed with large droppes or ſpottes croſſing the feather, party blacke, and party grey, as alſo the plumes of the necke and head are more towards a ruſſet, and powdred with blacke, but thoſe of the thigh, and vnder the belly or pannell, are otherwiſe marked, for they are not full ſo yellow, hauing round drops on them, not much vnlike thoſe that are on the Peacockes trayne.
               The Goſhawkes of Almayne are not very fayre, though they be large Hawkes, red mayled, and yet not hardy.
               There are ſundry of them good in their ſoarage, but being once mewed, proue nothing worth: there be diuers of them taken in the forreſt of Arde, and in ſundrie places of Almayne. The Gréekes haue called the Goſhawke Hierax, the Latines Accipiter stellaris, and the Italians Aſtuy.
               
               Thus much haue I collected out of another French author, as neceſſarily belonging to the deſcription of the nature of a Goſhawk, becauſe you ſhall ſee the ſeuerall opinions of ſundry writers, and gather to your owne vſe, what ſhall occurre and thwart beſt with your liking, for it is not the mayle and plume

of the Hawke that I ſo greatly regard, or doe meane to ſtand vpon, as the making, reclaiming, diſeaſes, and cures of the ſaid Hawkes, each one after their proper nature and quality, if ſo my health will giue me leaue to runue mine authors through aduiſedly, according to my meaning and reſolution, at what time I firſt vndertooke this collection.
            
            
               Out of the Italian concerning the Goſhawkes, and their kinds.
               THere are ſundry ſorts of Goſhawkes, according to the diuerſity of places and regions. There be hawkes of Armenia, Sclauonia, Sardinia, Calament, of the Aples which they vſe in Lombardy, Tuſcan, Marca and Puglia, ſome other of Ruſſia, Fr
                        •
                     uli, Almania, and otherſome of Lombardie, all which I will briefly touch vnto you, and not long dwell in the matter, hauing out of my French Authors already decyphered the natures of the moſt part of them.
               Firſt of all there are Goſhawkes, calledt Armenia hawkes, much differing from the Goſhawke, in ſort as almoſt, they haue no reſemblance at all to the other kinds of Goſhawkes. They are very faire and huge, the mayle of them is blanke, as ſundry Haggart Falcons be, they flée with great courage and life, all greater ſort of fowles.
               There are others eyried in Slavonia and Dalmacia, and thence are they tearmed Slauon Goſhawkes, which indéed are good for any thing a man will employ them vnto. Very faire and hardy hawkes, large footed, very well penned, their downe and plumage excellent fine, their tongues blacke, and their nares large and wide
               Thoſe of Sardinia are nothing like the other hawkes, they are browne and ruſſet plumed, ſmall hawkes, hard and not ſmall footed, and nothing ventrous.
               Thoſe of Calament are ſhort truſſed hawkes, and large, blanke ſeared on the foot, thoſe flée the greater fowles excéeding

well.
               The Goſhawkes of the Alpes, and of Calabria, are in a maner more large then they are long, very prowde, and hardy Hawkes.
               The Goſhawkes of Lombardy are not very large, browne maylde, and cowardly kytes to do any good.
               The Goſhawke of Ruſſia and Sarmatia, is a large and huge Hawke, the moſt part of them are blanke Hawkes, and taken vp of great Princes and Nobles ſtates, they are apt and able to doe any thing that may be looked for from Hawkes of that kind. My ſelfe haue ſéene great ſtore of them in the Citie of Moſqua, which is the chiefe Dukedome of all Ruſſia. The Moſcovites and Tartarians do vſe to flée with thoſe Goſhawks at the brooke, and there do beat vp the fowle with the drumme, without which you ſhall ſeldome ſée a Boyaron (as they tearme them) which is a Gentleman, ryde at any time. And one ſpeciall thing which I noted among them was, that as well Moſcovites as Tartaros, do vſe to beare their Hawkes on the right fiſt, which is cleane contrary to our manner and guiſe héere in England, or in any other Region that I haue heard or ſéene, ſaue onely in thoſe North parts, no reaſon I can yéeld for it, but that each country for the moſt part hath his faſhion.
               Thoſe of Friulie are good Hawkes and large, but not ſo faire as the Slavon Hawkes.
               Note this, that a good Goſhawke ought to be little, and broad ſhouldred, large breaſted, very round and fleſhly, hauing a long thigh, a ſhort legge or arme, and the ſame great, and a large foote, and not gowty, but ſlender. Contrariwiſe, the Tiercell ſhould be large, for it is a common ſaying,
               A little Hawke, and a large Tiercell, is euer beſt.
               All Goſhawks are by nature gréedy, and catching, of whome ſome doe vſe to flée the riuer, and freſh brookes, and ſome the Sea, and otherſome againe the field, and neuer or very ſeldome the riuer or brooke.
               
                  The firſt ſort for the moſt part doe prey vpon Duckes, Géeſe, Hearons, Shouelers, and ſuch like fowle as do vſually haunt, and liue in the Sea and Riuers. And thoſe diuers times doe ſeaze and take their prey vppon the ſodayne at vnwares, by fléeing low neare the ground, and ſtealing vpon the fowle.
               The other, after a while that they haue vſed to flée the field, do prey on Pigeons, Pullets, Hennes, and Partridges. And being once mewed Hawkes, and paſt their ſoarage, they will take the ſtand vpon ſome trée, and finding eyther Partridge, Fezant, Pullet, Henne, or ſuch other like fowle, they make their ſtooping ſo fiercely, and in ſuch great haſt, and doe flée them ſo farre before head and at randon, mayntaining, and making good their flight, as in the end they kill them, and doe prey vpon them.
               Of the Goſhawkes, thoſe that be ventrous and hardy will kill the Hare, and hauing kilde him, diuerſe times they ſwallow in for haſt great bones, and doe put them ouer very well, and endure them ſafely without any hurte of all.
               Thoſe that are the riuer Goſhawkes, and doe haunt the water, and brookes, are commonly the moſt hardy and ventrous Hawkes of all that kind, and doe at the Riuer of their owne inclination and nature, fall to kill the great Fowles of the Riuer, of which I haue before made recitall and mention.
               Truely the Goſhawke is very much to be regarded for her hardy mettle and courage, for that therein ſhée is not inferiour to any kind of Hawke, but rather more fierce and eager. And againe to bee kept with greater care, for that ſhée is more choyce and daynty, and dooth looke to haue a more nice hand kept on her, then any other kind of Falcon or Hawke, vnleſſe it be the Sparrowhawke, which is all

one in a manner in nature with the Goſhawke, and of whome I purpoſe now to write.
            
            
               Of the Sparowhake, out of the French Authors.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               
                  
                  I Will now write ſomewhat of the Sparowhawke, for that ſhée is in her kind, and for that game that her ſtrength will giue her leaue to kill, a very good hawke, and much vſed in Fraunce. And beſides, he that knowes wel how to manne, reclayme, and flée with the ſparowhawke, may eaſily knowe how to kéepe, and deale with all other Hawkes. Moreouer, it is a Hawke that ſerues both winter and ſummer, with great pleaſure, and the game that ſhée fléeth is ordinarie, and common to be had, and ſhée will generally flée at all kinde of game more then the Falcon, or then any other kinde of hawke will. And the winter Sparowhawke, if ſhe proue good, will kill the Pye, the Iaw, the Chough, the Woodcock, the Thruſh, the black-birde, the Felfare, and ſundry other ſortes of birdes.
            
            
               The Diuerſity of Sparowhawkes according to their times and age.
               THe Eyaſſe Hawke, is ſhée that is taken in the Eyrie.
               2 The brancher, is ſhée that followeth the olde Hawke from branch to branch, and trée to trée, which is alſo tearmed a ramage Hawke,
               3 The Soare Hawke, is ſhée that hath flyen, and preyed for her ſelfe, and is taken before ſhée mew.
               4 The fourth kind, is that Hawke that is mewed, and hath caſt her ſoare feathers.
            
            
               The good ſhape and proportion of a Sparowhawke.
               SParowhawkes are of diuers plumes, ſome are ſmall plumed, & blanke hawkes, otherſom of a larger feather, which are not ſo good in our opinion as for their ſhape. The Hawke that is well ſhapt is large and ſhort, with a ſlender heade, large, and broade ſhouldred, bigge armed, large

and wide footed, and blacke maylde, with a good great beake, her eyes ſomewhat hollow and déepe ſet, blanke eye-lids, the ſeare of her beake twixt gréene and white, a high bigg necke, long wings, reaching quite athwart the body of the Hawke, ſo as the point of the wing méet with the toppe of the trayne very neare, and that her traine be not ouer long, but of a reaſonable broad feather, ſharpe pounces, ſmall and blacke, and euermore well diſpoſed to féede hungerly, and with great appetite.
               The Nyaſſe Hawke is good, and will come to the fiſte very well, and not lightly ſoare away, or be loſt.
               The Soare hawke is hard to bee manned, but will proue good, if ſhée will once brooke company: this Hawke, for that ſhée hath preyed for her ſelfe, is very ventrous and hardy.
               The beſt Sparowhawke, is that Hawke whome wée call the brauncher.
            
            
               What kinds of Sparowhawkes there are.
               THere are Sparowhawkes, whome the Italians call (divoutemiglia) which are large and long Hawkes, with a great beake, large foot, and with 13. feathers in the traine. Thoſe Hawkes are excellent to flée any kind of game.
               There are other called Slauon Hawks, good for all purpoſes and full of hardines, long and large Hawkes, hauing a great long beake, and blacke breaſt feathers
               There are others of Calabria not verye large, but of great courage plumed like the Quaile, that will doe according as they are taught and manned.
               There be Sparowhawkes eyréed in Corſica, & brought from Sardinea, ſmall Hawkes, browne or canuas mayld, that will flée very well.
               Thoſe of Almanya are very ſlender, and nothing good.
               The Hawkes of Verona, and Vicentia, are of meane ſize, and many of them doe proue to be good Hawkes.
               
                  There be Sparowhawkes called Alpiſans, of the Alpes, that are large, wight of wing, and ventrous to flee any kinde of fowle.
               There are others eyréed in the vale of Sabbia, of a reaſonable ſize, ruſſet mayld, entermedled with golden ſpots, or droppes, like the Turtle, thoſe be very good to flée great fowles.
               There is one other kind of Sparowhawks, eyréed in Bergamaſca, in a vallie called the Blacke vale, neare the confines of Voltolina, ſlender Hawkes, browne mayld, good to bée manned and reclaymed, and thoſe are the principalleſt of all other Sparowhawkes.
               I do not here in this place deale exactly of the mayles, and plumes of theſe kinds of hawkes, in part, for that the hawkes are of ſundry and ſeuerall plumes, according to the diuerſity of countries and regions where they are eyréed: and part, for that the hawks themſelues are ſo ordinarily in vſe, as it were to be eſtéemed but a ſuperſluous labour, to waſte much time therein, in penning of that, which is (in the opinion of men) of no great importance. My chiefe care and induſtrye (if health allow me leaue, and ſickneſſe too much offend not my eaſe) ſhall conſiſt in the reclaymed and manning of all theſe kindes of Hawkes, according to their natures and properties, and in diſplaying the meanes to flée with them, and to kéepe them, both for the field and brooke. And after that, in declaration of their diſeaſes, ordinarily incident vnto their kindes, and the beſt remedies for the ſame, which (I doubt not) are the onely and chiefeſt points that the diſcréete and learned reader will accept from mée, and ſuch as will moſt ſtand him in ſteade that doth meane to deale with hawkes. Wherefore I thus make ye Epilogue and concluſion of the firſt part of my treatiſe and collection, wherein are contayned all the kinds, names and the cauſes of thoſe names, of all ſuch hawkes and birds of prey as are moſt in vſe, and regarded among noble men and gentlemen at theſe dayes, crauing the Reader to beſtow no leſſe good liking vpon the tranſlation and collection hereof (if it in any part deſerue it) then I haue employed trauell and

paines in the true ſearch and examination of the ſame, both out of the French and Italian Authors, where I muſt confeſſe, I haue not tranſlated 
                     Ʋerbatim, and by word or line what I found, (for then had I not dealt ſo exactly as I now haue done, for that I found ſondry thinges not ſo well agréeing to our humors and vſe:) but haue taken my pleaſure of them, in making choyce of the chiefeſt matter, which did occurre in them, hoping the more my paynes haue béene, the leſſe ſhall be mine offence, and the greater the liking of the Reader, and the better his acceptance: which if I finde, both I for my trauell, ſhall thinke my ſelfe ſufficyently guerdoned, and the carefull Printer déeme both his coſt and charge well employed, being meant, to the benefite and pleaſure of his natiue Countrymen, whoſe auayle he chiefely reſpecteth herin, and not any great aduantage that ſhall priuately fall out to him.
            
            
               Of the Matagaſſe.
               THough the Matagaſſe bée a Hawke of no account, or price, neyther with vs in any vſe, yet neuertheleſſe, for that in my diuiſion I made recitall of her name, according to the French Author, from whence I collected ſundrye of thoſe points and documents, appertaining to Falconrie: I thinke it not beſide my purpoſe, briefly to deſcribe héere vnto you, though I muſt néedes confeſſe, that where ye Hawke is of ſo ſlender value, the definition, or rather deſcription of her nature and name, muſt be thought of no great regard.
               The ſhape of her is this.
               She is beaked and headed like the Falcon, her plume is of two colours, her breaſt white, her eye, beake, and féete blacke, a long blacke traine, her flags and long feathers partly blacke, and white, and the colour of thoſe feathers ſhee changeth not, though ſhe mew neuer ſo oft.
               
                  Her feeding is vpon Rattes, Squirrells, and Liſardes, and ſometime vpon certaine birdes ſhee doth vſe to prey, whome ſhe doth intrappe and deceiue by flight, for this is her deuiſe:
               She will ſtand at pearch vpon ſome trée or poſt, and there make an exceeding lamentable crye, and exclamation, ſuch as birdes are wonte to doe, being wronged, or in hazard of miſchiefe, and all to make other fowles beleiue & thinke that ſhe is very much diſtreſſed, and ſtands néedefull of ayde, wherevpon the credulous ſellie birdes do flocke together preſently at her call and voice, at what time if any happen to approach neare her, ſhée out of hand ſeazeth on them, and deuoureth them, (vngratefull ſubtill fowle) in requitall of their ſimplicity and paines.
               Theſe hawkes are in no accompt with vs, but poore ſimple fellowes and peaſants ſometimes do make them to the fiſte, and being reclaimed after their vnſkilfull manner, doe beare them hooded, as Falconers doe their other kindes of Hawkes whome they make to greater purpoſes.
               Here I end of this hawke, becauſe I neither accompt her worthe the name of a hawke, in whome there reſteth no valour or hardines, ne yet deſeruing to haue any more written of her property and nature, more than that ſhée was in mine Author ſpecified, as a member of my diuiſion, and there reputed in the number of long winged hawkes. For truely it is not the property of any other Hawke, by ſuch deuiſe and cowardly wile to come by her prey, but they loue to winne it be mayne force of winges at random, as the round winged hawkes doe, or by frée ſtooping as the hawkes of the Tower doe moſt commonly vſe, as the Falcon, Gerfalcon, Sacre, Merlin, and ſuch like which doe lie vpon their wing, roding in the ayre, and ruffe the fowle, or kill it at the encounter.
               I cannot ſay, that at any time I haue ſeene this kinde of Hawke, neyther in any booke read of her nature and diſpoſitifn, as I haue here made mention of it, ſaue onely in my author, who writing of Falconrie, was ſo bold as to ranke her

among other Hawkes of greater account and value, and in Geſner, where he treateth of all kinds of birdes and fowles, where I remember well I haue read of the name and nature of the Matagaſſe, and there haue ſeen her proportion and ſhape ſet down in colours, ſuch as I haue before declared you in this Chapter, and in my Iudgement, no oddes or difference to bée found betwixt Geſuerus, deſcription, and mine Authors, in that behalfe.
            
         
         
            
            The Second Part or Booke of this Collection of Falconrie.
            
            
               Certaine ſpeciall points neceſſary for a Falconer, or Oſtreger, collected out of the Italian Authors.
               
                   Hauing made you ſufficient ſhewe in the former part of this booke, and collection, of all kindes of Hawkes ſeruing to Falcō
                  rie, it ſhall not be amiſſe to deliuer you ſome ſpeciall and neceſſary rules, due to a good Falconer.
               Firſt, it is behoouefull for a Falconer to bée verie diligent & inquiſitiue to learne and marke the qualitie and mettle of his hawkes, & to know which hawke he ſhall flye with all

earely, and with which late, becauſe all Hawkes are not diſpoſed or mettled alike. Wherefore the firſt and ſpeciall obſeruation is, to note the naturall inclination and diſpoſition of his hawkes in that behalfe.
               Then next, it is neceſſarie for him to be found ouer his hawk, patient, and withall carefull to kéepe her cleane out of lyfe, mytes, and all ſuch other diſeaſes, as I ſhall hereafter treate of in the latter part of this collection, with ſuch remedies, as I ſhall lay downe for euery gréefe. And of the two, hée muſt rather keepe his Hawke hie, and full of fleſh, than poore and low. Beſides that, this is one generall rule, which by experience you ſhall find to be moſt true, that all kindes of hawkes are more ſubiect to infirmities, being poore and low, then when they are luſty and full in fleſh.
               Euery night, after he hath flyen with his Hawke the day, eyther at the field or brooke, he muſt giue his hawke caſting, ſomewhiles plumage, ſome other while pellets of Cotton, or ſuch like, & again, ſometimes ſome one medicine or other, according as by her caſting, or mewte, hée ſhall perceiue her to ſtand néedefull thereof, which point I will more at large deſcribe in another place, proper and peculiar to that matter.
               Euery night hée muſt not forget to make the place verye cleane vnder the pearch, ſo as hée may both find the caſting of his Hawke, and be certainely aſſured whether ſhée hath already caſt or not, whereby he may the better iudge and diſcern her ſtate. For by the caſting is found, whether the Hawke doe néed eyther vpward or downeward ſcowrings, or ſtones, or any ſuch like remedy.
               He muſt remember euery euening to tye out his hawke a weathering, ſaue onely in ſuch dayes, as ſhée hath bathed before, for becauſe then the taking ouermuch moyſture, will bréed her a thouſand euils, and inconueniences. For ſuch euenings as ſhe hath bathed the day, ſhée ought of right to be placed in ſome warme chamber on a pearch, with a candle burning by her, where ſhe muſt ſit vnhooded, if ſo ſhe be gentle

and not rammage, to the end ſhee may tricke her ſelfe, and reioyce by enoyling her after the water, before ſhee flee againe.
               Euery morning earely he muſt not forget to ſet her out to wether her, where if ſhée haue not already caſt, ſhée may caſt, and there kéepe her hooded, till ſuch time as ſhee goe to the field.
               In féeding his hawke, hée muſt beware of giuing her twoo ſorts of meat at one time to gorge her withall, neither muſt he giue her ſuch fleſh, as hath any euill ſauour, and is not ſwéet, but muſt reſpect to allow her wholeſome meates for bréeding ill diſeaſes. For hawkes are dainty birds in their kind, and the more to be conſidered of when they are in hand vnder a Falconers kéeping & vſage, becauſe they were wont to prey for themſelues at liberty, and therein follow ſuch law and order, as nature had preſcribed them, but being reſtrayned, the courſe of kind is quite altered in them, and therefore therefore the greater art and regard to be vſage for them. Art muſt ſupply the reſtraints of kind by cunning.
               He muſt beware, if happily he haue occaſion of neceſſary buſineſſe, at his departure from home, not to leaue his hawke tyed on a pearch of any great height from the ground, for feare of bating and hanging by the héeles, for then eyther will ſhée caſt her gorge, or otherwiſe ſpoyle her ſelfe: but ſhée muſt be placed on a low blocke or ſtone, and if there be more hawks then one, they muſt be ſondred ſo farre one from the other, as they may not approach or reach one the other, neither with beake, talons, or otherwiſe, becauſe their nature is to bite, and buckle, together, if they come within reach.
               When hée addreſſeth him to make his flight with his Falcon, it is behouefull for him to haue all her follow Falconers, or ſuch as haue hawkes in the field, to ſet downe their hawkes on the ground, to be in the more readineſſe to aſſiſt him in his purpoſe, and to tye them ſure, for feare of ill accidents that may be fall them.
               And again, at the riuer, he muſt be ſkilfull to land his fowle

ſo placing the reſidue of his company, and their hawkes, as they may flée eke without any encounter, which is not onely the loſſe of the fowle, and hinderance to their ſport, but alſo the ruine and ſpoyle of their hawkes on both parts. He muſt bée carefull that his hawke kéepe her gate, and flée it good, ſo as in no wiſe hée plucke her not downe, nor make her bate of her pitch.
               He muſt alwayes be aſſured to haue mummy in powder in his bagge in a readineſſe, whatſoeuer ſhould happen, with ſuch other medicines as I ſhall hereafter treate of, for that it may ſo fall out, as his hawke may receaue a brooſe at the encounter of a fowle. Moreouer hée muſt not bée vnfurniſhed of Aloes waſht, Cloues, Nutmegs, Saffron, caſting, cryance, and ſuch like neceſſary implements. And he muſt remember that his Aloes bée ſhining and cleare, for then is it of the beſt ſort of Aloes.
               Laſtly, he muſt be able to make his lures, hoods, of all ſorts, Ieſſes, Buets and other néedfull furniture for his hawke, and muſt not bée without ſtore thereof to allow his betters and ſtates in the field, if happily they want any ſuch deuiſes. He cannot well be without his coping Irons, to cope his hawkes beake if it be ouergrowne, which will be a hinderance to her féeding, and to cope her pounces and talons, if néed be. Hée muſt haue his cauterizing buttons, and other yron or ſiluer tooles, to cauterize or burne his hawkes if cauſe require ſuch cure. For hauing all theſe neceſſaries, and doing as I haue and will tell you, all his game ſhall ſuccéede and ſort well, and he be aſſured that for the moſt part of good paſtime in the field, when other ignorant grooms ſhal both lacke ſport, & loſe their hawks, the greateſt corſie that may happen to a gentleman that loues the game. Let theſe few aduertiſements & inſtructions ſuffice in this place, if other poynts neceſſary not recited here, be remē
                  bred at ye full in any other part of this booke, I craue but thanks for my pains, & curteſie at the Falconers hands, for whoſe learning and pleaſure I partly and chiefly wrote this collection.
            
            
               
               The firſt inſtruction is, how to make a Falcon▪ and other Hawkes fleeing, after the opinion of Iean de Frauchiers.
               
               FIrſt let your hawkes be taken on the fiſt and hooded, then let her be watched three dayes and nights, before you vnhoode her, and féede her alwayes hooded in an eaſie rufter hood. At the end of thrée dayes you may vnhoode her, and féede her vnhooded, and when ſhée is fed, hood her againe, ſo that ſhée bée not vnhooded (but when you féed her) vntil ſhe know her meat: then when ſhe beginneth to be acquainted with you, hood her and vnhoode her oftentimes, to the end ſhée may the better abide the hood. But vſe her gently, and be patient with her at the firſt, and to the end your hawke may be the better manned & the ſooner reclaimed, you ſhall do well to beare her commonly in places where moſt people do frequent, and where moſt exerciſes are vſed. And when ſhe is well manned, make her come a little to the fiſt for her meat. And when you haue ſhewed her the pearch or ſtocke, and tyed her vpon it, put with her vppon the ſayd pearch or ſtocke ſome Pullet, or other quicke fowle as often as you may, and let her féed there vpon at pleaſure vntill ſhe be reaſonably gorged, and doe in like manner vpon the lure vntill ſhée know it perfectly. Afterwards you may giue her more liberty, and lure her with a cryance, luring her twice a day further and further off. And when ſhée is throughly lured, you ſhall teach her to flée vppon you vntill ſhée know both how to get to her gate, and to flée round vppon you. Then ſhall you caſt her out ſome quicke Fowle, and when ſhée hath ſtooped and ſeazed vppon it, you ſhall ſuffer her to plume it, and to foote it at her pleaſure, giuing her a reaſonable gorge thereon, as is afore ſayd, and continuing alwayes to reward her vpon the ſayd lure, in ſuch ſort that ſhée neuer find the lure without ſome reward tyed vppon it, and by

that meanes ſhée will alwayes loue the lewer and her kéeper well, and will not lightly rangle or be loſt. Thus you may continue her fortie dayes or thereabouts, and then you may flée with her ſafe inough. But before you ſo doo, let her be ſkowred and bathed, and fed with cleane meat, and well waſhed, giuing her caſting euery night, euen as men vſe to giue fléeing Hawkes.
            
            
               The manner of fleeing with Hawks, as well to the field, as to the River, and firſt to the river, according as Martine teacheth.
               YOu muſt vnderſtand that the riuer hawke ought to be let into the wind, and aboue her prey to get the vantage of her gate, and to be at her pitch: then ſhall you make in towards the prey. And when they are got vp to their full pryde, runne vpon the fowle, and land them, laying them out from of the water, and if you fayle in doing thereof, then you ſhould take downe your hawke with ſome pullet, Pigeon, or other quicke fowle, to teach, and the better to win ſuch hawkes as are but lately entred, vntill they know their prey, and their fléeing perfectly.
            
            
               
               To flye at the Hearon according to Martine.
               
                  
               
               
                  THere is another manner of fléeing, which is called the flight at the Hearon, this is the nobleſt ſlight of all others. For the Hawke ought to be well lured and well trayned to get vp to an high gate, and therewithall ſhee muſt well know a quicke fowle, and ſuch a Falcon as is apt to flée the Hearon, ſhould not bée flowen with to any other kind of fowle, but onely to the Hearon moſt commonly. For aſmuch as amongſt all other flights, there is no ſuch mountey made, nor ſuch force vſed as in the flight at the Hearon, and therefore reaſon would that ſuch Falcons ſhould not be flowen withall, or inured to any meaner or leſſe prey than the Hearon. For if a Hawke be a good Hearoner, it is ſufficient, and if after your Hawke haue flowen the Hearon, you ſhould let her flée any other ſleighter fowle or prey, ſhee will lightly (by your owne default) become a ſlugge and take diſdaine, in ſuch ſort; that (where before ſhée was a good Hearoner) ſhe wil be ſo no more, and will turne to her owne eaſe, ſo that ſhée will neuer care to flée the Hearon. For aſmuch as ſhée will giue her ſelfe to prey vppon fowle, that is more eaſie to reach, and will forget or foreſlowe her valiant hardineſſe, the which is much to bée lamented, if a man haue once a good Hearoner, and doe ſo ſpill her. Neuertheleſſe you may flée with the Sacre all manner of fowle more eaſily than with any other kind of Hawke, becauſe ſhée is alike common to all ſowle, euen ſo is ſhe hard to be made, and of a hard and dull capacity, but deſpaire not therefore, for in the end they proue good, if the Falconer take ſuch paines with them as he ought to doe.
            
            
               For the flight to the field as Maſter Amè Caſſian reach
                     •
                  th.
               SOme kinde of Hawkes there bée which are made for the field. For aſmuch as there be ſome men which delight more to haue Hawkes for the field than for the riuer, the Hawkes

which are good to flee the field, are firſt entred by the Spaniels, and as well accuſtomed to know them by the haire and proportion, as they know their prey by the feathers and flight: and ſecondarily, they are alſo entred by cuſtomary knowledge of their prey, and therefore it is not lightly poſſible that this kind of paſtime ſhould be perfectly handled, vnleſſe the dogs and Hawkes be ſo well acquainted and knowne one to the other, that each of them do loue others, for although naturally the Hawke be hardly entred to become familiar with the dogges, and will not lightly, nor at the firſt loue them, yet maruaile you not thereat, for in the end all field Hawkes will loue them, and become familiar with them, but to bring that to paſſe, you muſt continually beare your Hawke amongſt Spaniels, and acquaint her with them, that ſhée may the better abide them, and that being doone, the oftener that your Hawke flée the field, the truer you ſhall find my opinion: and ſurely you may eaſily haue good hawks to the field, if you kéepe them in good order and dyet as reaſon requireth, giuing them vpon their firſt, ſecond, and third prey, a reaſonable good gorge, and afterwards you may withdraw and abate your reward by little and little, to make your hawke the eaſier forget it, for by that meanes you ſhall make your hawke know her liue fowle the better, if you reward her with the head and braynes of the fowle taken, and ſo of euery one which ſhe ſhall ſlay, vntill you would giue her a gorge, at time and houre conuenient, and by that meanes, you may haue a good field Hawke vnleſſe the fault be your owne.
            
            
               Other ſlights to the field called great flights.
               THere is yet another kind of flight to the field which is called the great ſlight, as to the Cranes, wild Géeſe, Buſtard, Birde of Paradiſe, Bittors, Shouelars, and

Hearons, and many other ſuch like, and theſe you may flée from the fiſt, which is properly tearmed the Source. Neuertheleſſe in this kind of Hawking which is called the great flight, the Falcons or other Hawkes cannot well accompliſh their flight at the Crane, Buſtard, or ſuch like, vnleſſe they haue the helpe of ſome Spaniell, or ſuch dogge, well inured and taught for that purpoſe with your Hawke. For aſmuch as great flights require pleaſant ayde and aſſiſtance, yea and that with great diligence.
            
            
               Advertiſement given by Maſter Martine, to make a Hawke bold and hardy, and to love her prey.
               IF you would haue your Hawke hardy, kéepe her oftentimes all day long vpon your fiſt, and féede her with Pullets fleſh early in the morning, as much as ſhall be ſufficent for a beaching, that doone, ſet her abroade in the Sunne, with water before her, to the end ſhée may bath when ſhée will, and bowze, as naturally they are enclyned to doe, and it doth them ſingular great pleaſure, for bowzing may oftentimes preſerue them from ſickneſſe, and yet ſometimes a Hawke bowzeth after ſome diſeaſe, whereof ſhée hath long languiſhed, and dyeth, or elſe ſhée is thereby recured: for after ſuch a diſeaſe, bowzing doth either cure her, or quite diſpatch her. Now when you haue doone as is before ſayd (whether ſhée bath or not) you ſhall take your Hawke vppon your fiſt, and ſo kéepe her on the fiſt vntill you goe to bedde, and when you goe to bedde ſet a candle before her, which may laſt all the night, and in the morning (if ſhe did bath) you ſhall ſet her in the Sunne for one howre vntill ſhée be well weathered, and then afterwards (if ſhee did not bath) take wine and water, and therwith beſpout her well with your mouth thrée howres after, ſetting her in the Sunne againe, and (for lacke of Sunne-ſhine)

before the fire, vntyll ſhée bée very well dryed, and if you bée well aſſured that ſhee is throughly enſeamed cleane, and hath béen well manned by the ſpace of thirty or fortye dayes, then may you flée the fielde with her, and if you perceyue that ſhée hath good deſire to flée, let her flée, and if ſhée kill any thing giue her a good gorge therevpon, but if ſhée kill nothing, then feede her with the legge or the wing of an Henne or a Pullet waſhed in cleane running water, keeping her ſtill vpon the fiſte as is before ſayd: and the next day flee with her agayne, and if ſhe kill any thing, giue her her reward, and keepe her in this order vntill ſhe be perfectly entred and quarred: but then you muſt haue diſcretion, for ſometimes by this order, you may bring her low, in ſuch ſort that ſhe ſhould not eaſily be recouered to make her flight ſtrongly. Yet Martine ſayth the contrarye, but if an Hawke be very hard and ſtubborne to her Keeper in her flight, then let her be well ſpowted againe with luke-warme water, and ſo ſet abroade all night in the open ayre. In the morning let her bee ſet eyther in the Sunne or before the fire, where when ſhee hath well proyned her, you may goe flee with her, and if ſhee kill and flee well, then keepe her in this order and tune, for elſe ſhe may take ſundry euill toyes. And this precept ſerueth as well for them that deſire to haue good Hawkes for the fielde, as otherwiſe: and if you would haue your Hawkes loue their prey, take Cynamon and Sugarcandye, of each a like quantitie, and make thereof a powder, and when your Hawke hath killed any thing, & that you come to rewarde her, ſprinckle ſome of that powder vpon the part wherewith you reward her, and it ſhall make her loue that kind of prey the better euer afterwardes.
            
            
               
               How a man ſhould vſe an Eyaſſe Hawke.
               IF you haue Eyaſſe Hawks, you ſhall féede them moſt with Poultrie, Beefe, or Goates fleſh: and this is done to keepe them from ill toyes: and when they bée well lured and trayned, then beare them vpon the fiſt hooded, and ordered in all points according to the rule preſcribed before in the firſt chapter, and after thirty or forty dayes paſt, bring them to the flight, and the firſt, ſecond, and third flight, you may bée fond ouer them, abating your fauour, afterwardes by little and little, vntill they be brought in perfect tune, ſpowting them oftentimes with Wine and Water. For (as Martine ſayeth) ſome Eyaſſe Hawkes will not much bath them. Neuertheleſſe you ought therein alſo to vſe diſcretion, for by often bathing or ſpowting, you may bring your Hawke very low, in ſuch ſort, that ſhée ſhould haue more néede of a good gorge, than of bathing or ſpowting, and eſpecially ſuch Hawkes as are fierce of Nature, and will not often bathe of themſelues.
            
            
               A conſideration of the Diverſitie of Hawkes Natures, acccording to Martine.
               THere are ſome ſortes of Falcons which haue this diuerſity of nature, that ſome of them will flye well, being hie and full of fleſh, and ſome other flée beſt when they are kept low. Wherefore a Falconer ſhould haue eſpecyall conſideration thereunto, for Falcons are fitte for all flightes, as is before ſaide, but the blanke Falcons are of one nature, and the blew Falcons of another, and the Falcon of the reddiſh plume hath alſo her properties diuers from the reſt.
               
                  Neuertheleſſe to ſpeake as I haue found, of all other Hawkes, the blancke Falcon is beſt. And both by reaſon and experience I finde that ſhe would be kept higher, and in better plight then other Hawkes, for you ſhall ſée the blanke Falcon kéeping a like hand vpon her, and other Falcons prooue higher and in better plight when ſhée is fléeing then any other Hawke. And the reaſon is, becauſe ſhée is very gentle, and with more eaſe manned then any other kind of Falcon, and loueth her kéeper better, ſo that thereby ſhée kéepeth her ſelfe higher, & in better plight then ſuch Hawkes as bate much, and are froward of condition.
            
            
               
               How to ſeele a Sparrowhawke, and to make her fleeing, according to Guillam Tardiffe.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               A Sparowhawke newly taken ſhould be thus vſed, take a needle threeded with vntwiſted thread, and (caſting your Hawke) take her by the beake, & put the needle through her eye lidde, not right againſt the ſight of the eye, but

ſomewhat nearer to the beake becauſe ſhe may ſee backwards. And you muſt take good heed that you hurt not the webbe, which is vnder the eye-lidde, or on the inſide thereof. Then put your needle alſo through that other eye-lidde, drawing the endes of the threed together, tye them ouer the beake, not with a ſtraight knotte, but cut off the threedes endes neare to the knotte, and twiſt them together in ſuch ſorte that the eye-liddes may be rayſed ſo vpwards, that the Hawke may not ſee at all, and when the threede ſhall waxe looſe or vntyed, then the Hawke may ſee ſomewhat backewardes, which is the cauſe that the threede is put nearer to the beake. For a Sparowhawke ſhould ſee ſomewhat backewardes, and a Falcon forwards. The reaſō is, that if the Sparowhawke ſhould ſee forwards, ſhée would beate off her feathers, or breake them when ſhée bateth vpon the fiſt, and ſéeing the companie of men, or ſuch like, ſhe would bate to much.
               But to trimme your Sparowhawke in her rights, ſhée muſt haue Ieſſes of leather, the which muſt haue knottes at the end and they ſhould be halfe a foote long, or thereabout, at the leaſt a ſhaft-méete betweene the hooſe of the Ieſſe, and the knotte at the end, whereby you tye the hawke.
               She ſhould alſo haue twoo good belles, whereby ſhe may be the better heard. For commonly when a Sparowhawke taketh any prey, ſhée will carrie it into ſome thicke buſh to féede thereon in ſuch ſort, that ſhée cannot lightly be eyther heard or ſéene, and whiles ſhée plumeth it, the plumage doth oftentimes couer both her eyes, or one of them, then to take away the ſayd plumage, ſhée ſtraineth with one of her feet, & thereby her belles diſcouer her. Therefore if ſhee had but one bel, ſhe might happen to ſcratte with that foot which lacketh the bell, and ſo ſhould not be heard. The Sparowhawks which are wonted to be hooded, and which will gently brooke it, are much better than they which wil not be hooded. For they bate leſſe, and are with more eaſe borne in the raine, or any euill weather. For béeing hooded, the Falconer may hide and couor

them with his cloke, which he cannot do to the other. Furthermore, they ſhall bée able to flée better and more ſtrongly, that are good weather Hawkes, for they ſhall be leſſe bruiſed than a Hawke which is not hooded, which will weary her ſelfe with bating, & withall a man may the better flée with them at aduantage, becauſe they bate not, but onely when you would haue them to flée, whereby they haue the greater courage, and alſo a man may beare them in all places, without bating or beating themſelues out of breath.
            
            
               How a man ſhould manne a Sparowhawke, and make her fleeing.
               FOr as much as Sparowhawkes are of ſundry ſortes of plumes, and ſundry ſhapes and proportions, there are alſo ſundry manners of manning them and making them, and there is much leſſe paines to bée taken with ſome one, than with ſome other. For the more eager and ſharper ſet that a Sparowhawke is, the fooner ſhall you winne her, and man her.
               Firſt to winne her to féede, rubbe her féete with warme fleſh, chirping and wiſtling to her, and ſometimes preſent the fleſh vnto her beake, and if ſhée will not yet féed, rub her féet with a quick birde, and the birde will crye, and if the Sparowhawke doe ſeaze it with her féet, it is a token that ſhée will féede. Then teare off the skinne and feathers of the birdes breaſt, and offer it to the Hawkes beake, and ſhée will taſte thereof. For a Sparowhawke which féedeth immediatly after ſhée bée taken, doth ſhew that ſhée is eager, and hath good appetite. And you may giue her as much more at euening, yea and ſometimes in the day time, ſo that ſhée be not gorged firſt, but that ſhée haue put ouer her meat. When ſhée is thus well entred, & will féed when you chirpe or wiſtle to her,

then may you hood her with an hood that is large & déep inough, ſo that it neyther hurt nor touch her eyes when ſhe will indure to be hooded and vnhooded, without bating, & that thée will feede hooded, then muſt you abate her meals, giuing her leſſe meate, and féede her betimes in the morning when ſhe hath endewed, (that is to ſay, when ſhée ſhall haue put ouer her meate, ſo as there remayneth nothing in her gorge,) then may you giue her a beaching in the day time, taking off, and putting on againe her hoode, to make her the more eager. For it will not bée amiſſe, to giue her a bitte or two of meate euery time that you hood her. When it is euening then ſup her vp, giuing her the head or braines of a hen or pullet vntill the morning. And if you perceiue that ſhée is become very eager, then looſe the threade wherewith ſhée is ſéeled, but let it be night firſt, and that ſhée haue ſéene backwards as before ſayd.
               If ſhée may abide Companie, yet watch her all that night that you vnſeele her, to the end ſhée may alſo be accuſtomed to heare people ſpeake, and be acquanted with them, and when you hoode her againe, giue her two or thrée bittes of meate. In the morning betimes, put a birde in her foote, whome if ſhée ſeaze hardilye, and plume thereon eagerly, then may you boldely take off her hoode, but if ſhée bate them, hoode her againe, and watch her vntill ſhée bée thorowly wonne and manned: but if ſhée féede well before company, and become familiar and quiet before them, watch her no longer, but kéepe her on the fiſt ſome part of the night amongſt company, making her to plume, giuing her now and then a bitte or two of fleſh, and putting her hoode on and off therewithall.
               When you goe to bed, ſet your Hawke neare to your beddes head vpon ſome treſtle or ſtoole, that you may wake her oftē in the night. Then riſe before day, & take her vpon your fiſt, & off with her hoode, that ſhée may ſée the people about her, & when ſhée beholdeth them, put a quick birde in her foote, as before ſayd. When ſhée féedeth thereupon, hood her againe, giuing her

the reſt of your bird hooded, and when it is further foorth day, you may looke whether ſhée haue any thing in her gorge, or not. If ſhee haue nothing aboue, giue her ſome little beaching, and beach her oftentimes before company, hooding and vnhooding her. But at night ſhe ſhould be alwayes vnhooded, that ſhée may ſee people, and become acquainted with them, giuing her to féede of a Hen or Pullet. To heale the places where ſhée was ſeeled, to the end thée may ſée the better: when thou goeſt to bed, holde her in a darke corner, & ſpirt a little Water vpon her head, that ſhée may frote her eyes againſt the pinions of her wings. Then in the morning when ſhée perceyueth the day light, and hath warme meate ready vpon your fiſte, and is cleane looſed that ſhee may ſée both before, and behind her, and ſéemeth to bée familiar and bolde amongſt people, then may you make her as before ſayd. But remember that you giue her no plumage that day, in which you haue giuen her waſht meat, yea and allow her no plumage vntill ſhée bée well manned. For vntill ſhée bée throughly manned, ſhée will not dare to caſt. Then if you would throughly manne your Sparowhawke, and kéepe her eager, take her earely in the morning vpon your fiſt, and goe into ſome place where no body ſhall interrupt you, where firſt cauſe her to plume with her beake vpon ſome quicke bird, then vnſeaze her, and ſet her vpon ſome thing, and reach her your hand, and ſhew her your fiſte, giuing her a bitte or two thereof. And if ſhée come therevnto willingly, then call her againe morning and euening, further and further off, but euer before company, to acquaint her the better with them, faſtning a long line or cryance vnto her limmes: if it be fayre weather, and that the Sunne ſhine, you ſhould then proffer her the water, to the end ſhée may bathe her. Prouided alwayes in ſo doing that ſhée bee ſound, well manned, and that ſhe be not poore nor gorged. For bathing is a thing which maketh a Hawke familiar and luſtye. But remēber that alwayes after ſhée hath bathed, you giue her ſome liue birde to féede on, and alwayes when you call her

or féed her, you muſt chirpe with your mouth, or whiſtle, to the end ſhée may become acquainted with your whiſtle, and come therevnto. You muſt féed her amongſt horſes and dogs, to make her alſo the better acquainted with them. If ſhée haue flowen, and you would ſet her in the Sunne to weather, ſet her vpon the ground on ſome cudgell or truncheon, making her faſt, and ſhee will alwaies loue the better to ſit vppon the ground. After ſhée hath bathed, if you perceiue your Sparrowhawke luſty, you may flée with her the next day towards the euening, but firſt you muſt haue reclaimed her to come out of a trée, and called her to you ſitting on horſebacke, béeing alwayes prouided of ſome Pigeon, or other quicke thing, to take her downe the more eaſily. For before a man flee with a Sparrowhawke, ſhée would be throughly well reclaymed by watching, carrying, féeding and plumming before people, that ſhee loue her kéepers fiſt, and his countenance, that ſhée can abide both horſes and dogges, that ſhee be cleane within, as well ſkowred with waſhtmeate, as alſo with plumage, and that ſhée bée ſharpe ſet, and well comming, as well from the pearch, as from off the ground, or out of a trée. (∵)
            
            
               
               The meane to make a Sparrowhawke fleeing.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               FIrſt, he that would flée with a Sparrowhawke lately reclaimed, muſt flée in an euening ſomewhat before Sunſette. For at that time ſhée will bée moſt eager and ſharpeſt ſet. Secondarily, the heate of the Sunne, (if one ſhould

flée in the morning) dooth much trouble the Hawke, and rayſeth and ſtirreth her courage, making her prowde and ramage. So that ſhée léeſeth the eagerneſſe of her appetite, and remembreth it not, thinking on nothing elſe but to ſoare and gadde abroade, whereby ſhe may be eaſily loſt. Furthermore, towards the euening, ſhe cannot ſoare ſo far away from you, (although thee ſhould ſoare) as ſhe would do in the heat of the day, becauſe the night will enforce her to goe to the pearch and ſtand. Alſo to enter your Sparrowhawke, it ſhall be beſt to ſeeke out ſome Champion Country, farre from the woodes, and let her bée vnhooded when the Spaniels bée vncoupled, then if the Partridge ſpring, and ſhée bate, caſt her off, if they ſpring neare you. And if ſhe kill, reward her vpon the ground, of the head, braines, necke, and breaſt of the Partridge. When ſhee hath fed, take it from her, and vnſeaze her, and get vppon your horſe a good way from her. Then whiſtle and call her, and if ſhée come vnto you, reward her better. Aboue all things, you muſt take good héed that ſhée fayle not her firſt flight at great birdes, leaſt ſhée turne tayle and accuſtome her ſelfe to ſmaller game. But if ſhée be once well entred at great game, you may quickly make her flee Larkes and ſmall birdes. If you find that ſhée haue moſt mind to flée Larkes, let her flée them, and reward her on them. For there is no flight pleaſanter than the flight of the Sparrowhawke at the Larke. And foraſmuch as the fleſh and bloud of Larkes is hotte and burning, it ſhall be good when you flée the Larke, to giue your Hawke waſht meate twice in a wéeke, and plumage very often. But giue her no plumage that day that ſhée hath waſht meate, nor the day that ſhée batheth. When there is a knotte of good company mette together, and euery man hath his Sparrowhawke, if one of thē ſee his Sparrowhawke flée when another is alſo from the fiſt, there beginneth the paſtime, & yet they may flée together. But it is a pleaſure to take a Larke towring or clyming. Or if a Sparowhawke haue beaten down a Larke, or that ye Larke be

ſlipt from her,This flight is not vſed in England, neither did I ever heare of it before. and gotten vp towring as high as a man may behold, and then an other Sparrowhawke clyme after her, get ſo high that by often taynting her, ſo as the Larke is conſtrayned to ſtoope to the ground, and the hawke in the ſayle of her. Then the Larke had rather flée for ſuccour betwéene the legges of the men and the Horſes, than to fall in the tallons of her naturall enemy: yet commonly ſhee is there taken alſo. He that would learne to make a Falcon well, let him beginne with a Hobby, and he that would make the Gerfalcon fléeing, let him acquaint himſelfe with the Merlyn. But hée that can kéepe and make a Sparowhawke well, ſhall alſo be able to kéepe a Goſhawke, for by the one that other is learned.
            
            
               To take Tyme from off a Hawkes feathers.
               TO remooue the lyme from a hawke, take dry and fine ſand and cleane aſhes mingled together, put them vppon the place which is lymed, and ſuffer it ſo one night. Afterward you ſhall beat well together thrée yolkes of egges, and with a feather you ſhall lay them vpon the ſayd places, and ſuffer them ſo two nights. Then take as much larde as a plumme, and as much butter with it, melt them both together, and annoynt the ſayd places, and ſuffer the hawke ſo one other night. Then on the morrow waſh her with warme water, and wipe her with a cleane linnen cloath, vntill you haue wiped off all the lime, which by this deuiſe will eaſily be remoued. [Or if you beate Sallet oyle,Addition. and the yolkes of egges together, and ſo annoynt the limed feathers, and then within 12. houres after, waſh them with hote water, and it will take away the lime.]
            
            
               How to right and make ſtraight bruiſed feathers.
               IF you would make ſound a bruiſed feather, then temper the place which is bruiſed, in warme water, and when the webbe

thereof is well ſoftened, and become tender with the hote water, ſet it as euen as you can out of the water. Afterwards take a great ſtalke of a Colwoort, and warme it well vpon the coales, or in the flame: then cleaue it in ſunder, and within the clift put the bruſed feather, ſtrayning the two ſides of the Colewoort ſtalke together, vntill it haue brought the bruiſed feather into his former eſtate. The ſtalke of the hearbe called Br
                        •
                     onie, hath the ſame vertue.
            
            
               To right and mend a Feather broken on the one ſide, and to ympe a bruiſed Feather.
               TAke a ſlender long néedle, lay it in Vineger or ſalte water, that it may ruſte and ſo hold the better within the feather: Afterwards thread it with vntwiſted thread, and draw it through both ends of the bruiſed places, then draw it backe by the thread, vntill it may draw that one part to that other, ſo as the webbe may be cloſe ioyned together: and ſuffer not your Hawke to flée, nor to vſe her wings, vntill it be cloſed and ſtrong againe. But if it were broken on both ſides, cut it off, and take a ſquare ymping néedle like vnto a Glouers néedle, lay it in Vinegar and ſalt water, and thruſt it into both the ends of the web, vntill you haue brought them together, then giue your Hawke reſt vntill the néedle be ruſted in that web. For a feather that is broken or bruiſed within the quill, take another quill that is leſſer, that it may goe into the broken or bruiſed quill, then cutte off the feather in that place, and the ſtalke of the quill being put into the old quil, force the end of the feather into the new quil that is cut: Afterwards ioyne together the two péeces, with the quill that is ſo put in, couering the place where it is ſo ioyned, with Cottō or ſmal downe feathers, with lew or Semond, or if you would

not ympe it, glew it in with Semond or Roſen, and Ware molten together. If the feather be dropt away cleane, then put in another of like ſyze and colour For to bind in a feather that were ſlipped out of the pynion, take flaxe ſmall chopped, & mingle with the yolke of an egge well beaten, put them together vpon a linnen cloath which is very neare worne, with the which you ſhall bind on both ſides the place where the feather ſlipped, or elſe annoynt that place with Myrche and Goates bloud mingled together. To make a feather come againe which is caſt and loſt by bruiſe, or otherwiſe, and eſpecially in the trayne of an Hawke, take oyle of Walnuttes and oyle of Bayes, as much of that one as that other, mingle them together, and droppe them into the place where the feather grew, and it ſhall put out a new feather ſpeedily.
            
            
               
               How to beare and make a Falcon.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               
                  A Falcon lately taken, ſhould be ſeeled in ſuch ſort, that when the ſéeling beginnes to ſlacken, the Falcon may ſée forwards, to ſee the meat before her. For ſhee is better content when ſhée ſeeth the meat plainly before her, than if ſhee ſawe it ſidewayes, or looking backe. And ſhee ſhould not bée ſéeled too ſtraight, neither yet ought the thréed wherewith ſhée is ſéeled, be ouerſtraight bound or knit about her head, but twiſted and twyrled together.
               A Hawke newly taken, ſhould haue new furniture, as new Ieſſes, Leaſſe, and Bewets, all of good leather, and the Ieſſes, mayled, and the Leaſe mad with a button at the end. Then muſt you haue a little round ſticke hanging in a little ſtring, with the which you ſhall oftentimes ſtroke and handle your Falcon. For the more ſhée is handled, the better ſhée will bée manned, and become the gentlier, and the more familiar: and alſo if you ſhould ſtroke or handle her with your hand, you might chance to catch a knappe of her beake now and then. Shée muſt haue two good belles, to the end ſhée may the better be found and heard when ſhée ſtirreth or ſcratteth. She muſt haue a hoode of good leather, well made and faſhioned, well raiſed and boſſed againſt her eyes, déepe, and yet ſtraight inough beneath, that it may the better abide on her head, and yet neuer hurt her. So muſt you alſo a little cope her beake and talons, but not ſo much that you make them bléed.
            
            
               How you ſhall manne a Falcon, and bring her out of her ramageneſſe.
               SOme ſay, that the ſoare Falcon which hath béene timely taken, and hath already paſſed the ſeas, is both the beſt Falcon, & alſo the hardeſt to be wone & māned. Wherfore obſeruing the order which is before rehearſed, you muſt féed ſuch a falcon wt good & warme meats (as pigeōs) & ſuch like quick birds vntil

ſhée be full gorged twice a day for thrée dayes. For you muſt not breake her of her accuſtomed dyet all at once, and being lately taken, ſhee will more willingly féede on warme meats, than any thing elſe. When you féede her, you muſt whoope and lewre as you doe when you call a hawke, that ſhée may know when you will giue her meat. You muſt vnhoode her gently, giuing her two or thrée bittes, and putting on her hood againe, you muſt giue her as much more. But take héed that ſhée bée well and cloſe ſéeled: three dayes being paſſed, if you perceiue her to be eager and gréedy of meat, and that ſhée féedeth with good appetite, then beginne to abate her her meat, that is to ſay, giue her but little at once, and often, ſo that ſhée haue not much aboue at one time, vntill it be Euening, and beare her late vppon your fiſt before you goe to bedde, ſetting her vppon a treſtle or ſtoole very neare you, ſo that you may wake her often in the night. Afterwards you ſhould take her on your fiſt againe before day, with ſome quicke bird or ſuch like meate: and when you haue obſerued this order with her two or thrée nights, and that you perceiue ſhée beginnes to bee much better fellow than ſhée was woont, and that ſhée ſéemeth to beginne to bée reclaymed, and féedeth eagerly vppon good meate, then beginne to change her diet, giuing her often, and little at once, the heart of an Hogge or a Shéepe. In the Euening when it beginnes to bee late, (without caſting of her) lette her féeling thread a little looſe, ſpowting water on her face, that ſhee may ieouke the leſſe, and watching her all the night, hold her vppon your fiſte vnhooded. But if ſhée ſée any thing that miſlikes her, and make ſemblance to bee afeard, then let her bee carryed into ſome darke place, where you haue no more but light to hoode her againe. And afterwardes giue her ſome beaching of good meate, and let her bee watched diuers nights together, vntill ſhée bee reclaymed, and Ieouke vpon the fiſte by day time, although to let her Ieouke alſo ſomeſometimes

in the night, is a thing maketh her the ſooner manned. In the morning by breake of the day, let her haue ſome warme meat to beginne with.
               And becauſe there be ſundry Falcons of ſundry ſortes and conditions, as ſome mewed at large in the Woodes, ſome other taken at ſtand, where they haue long vſed, and ſome other taken ſoare Hawkes (whereof we now treate) whether they be Soare-hawkes, Mewed, or Nyaſſe, yet are they of ſundry natures and properties, and therfore they muſt be diuerſly gouerned and entred, which is the cauſe that it is hard to giue generall Rules. For thoſe which are Gentle, eaſie to be reclaymed, and of a good kind and nature, ought alſo to bée the more fauoured, and the more gently handled. But when your Hawke is brought to the poynt before rehearſed, as well for the hooding, as alſo for her eagerneſſe to féede, if you peceiue that ſhee beginne to be acquainted therewith, you may vnhoode her by day time, farre from company, firſt giuing her a bitte or two of good meate. Afterwardes hoode her againe gently, giuing her a little meate againe hooded.
               Aboue all thinges you muſt beware to hoode or vnhoode her in any place where ſhee may bée frayed, for that were able to marre her at the firſt. When ſhée beginneth to bee acquainted with Companye, if you perceiue that ſhee bée eager or ſharpe ſet, vnhoode her, and giue her a bitte or two of meate, holding her right againſt your face and countenance. For that will cauſe her to dread no company. And when it is night, cut the thread wherewith ſhée is ſeeled, and you ſhall not néede to watch her, if you perceiue her bold inough amongſt company. But yet let her be ſet vpon a treſtle by you, that you may awake her two or three times in the night, and take her on your fiſt before day. For ouerwatching of a Hawke is not good, as long as a man may reclayme her otherwiſe.
               
                  And if by ſuch good gouernment, and by dealing courteouſly with her, and keeping her from ſodayne feare, you perceiue that ſhe beginne to be acquainted with you, and to know you aſſuredly, and that ſhée feedeth eargerly, and ſucketh to her meate before company, then giue her waſht meate, and beach her in the morning, ſo that ſhée may alwaies haue ſomewhat in her gorge: which meat you ſhal lay in cleare water halfe a day, and you ſhall cauſe her to féed in company, giuing her in the morning about Sun riſing the wing of a Hen or Pullet, and at euening, hooding her againe, take the foote of a Cony or an Hare, which is cut off aboue the ioynt, and flay it, ſtripping away the Clawes alſo, and temper and ſteepe the skin in faire Water, (preſſing and wringing it a little) the which you ſhall giue her with the ioynt of the pynion of the Hennes wing.
               You muſt take good héede how you giue your Hawke any Feathers, vntill ſhée be throughly reclaymed. For vntill ſhée be throughly wonne and reclaymed, ſhée dares not caſt vppon the fiſt. And on the fiſt you muſt beare her continually, till ſhée be throughly manned. But when ſhe makes ſemblance to caſt, vnhood her gently by the taſſell of the hoode.
               You may giue her two dayes waſht meat, and the third day plumage, according as ſhée is cleane or fowle within. And when ſhée hath caſt, then hoode her againe, giuing her nothing to feed on, vntill ſhe gleame after her caſting. But when ſhée hath caſt and gleamed, then giue her a beaching of hote meat, in company giuing her two or thrée bittes at once: and at euening make her plume a hennes wing in company alſo.
               When you find her well reclaimed, and throughly manned, and eager, and ſharpe ſet, then it is time to féed her vppon the lure.
               And you muſt marke whether the feathers of your Hawkes caſting bée fowle or ſlimie, and whether the ſlime thereof bée

yellow or not. For if they bee, you muſt bee very circumſpect to make her cleane with waſht meat and caſting, and if ſhee be cleane within, then giue her not ſo ſtrong caſtings as Hares feet or Conies feet: but giue her the Pynions of an old Hennes wing, or the plumage that is to bee taken therevpon, or the necke bone chopped foure or fiue times betweene the ioyntes, waſhed and ſteeped in faire water. To make an end of this Chapter, it is certaine that it requireth more time to winne and to watch a Falcon once mewed in the woode, then one which is taken ſore at paſſage. And likewiſe it is harder to winne a Hawke taken at ſtand, when ſhe hath long time beene accuſtomed, then it is to make a Hawke which hath beene handled before.
            
            
               
               How to lure a Falcon lately manned.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               
                  BEfore you ſhew the lure to a Falcon newly reclaimed, you muſt conſider three things. Firſt, that ſhe be well aſſured, and boldned in Company, well acquainted alſo with dogges, and with horſes. Secondarily, that ſhee be ſharpe ſet, and eager, hauing regard to the howre of the morning or euening when you will lure her. And the third conſideration is, that ſhee bée cleane within, the lure muſt be well garniſhed with meate on both ſides, and you muſt be a part in ſome ſecret place when you would giue her the length of the leaſe. You muſt firſt vnhoode her, giuing her a bitte or twaine vpon the lure as ſhe ſitteth on your fiſt, afterwards take the lure from her, and hyde it that ſhée ſée it not, and when ſhée is vnſeazed, caſt the lure ſo neare her that ſhe may catch it within the length of her leaſe, and if ſhée doe ſeaze vpon it, then ſhall you vſe the voyce and accuſtomed ſpéech of a Falconer vnto his Hawke, and féed her vpon the lure on the ground, giuing her thervpon the warm thigh of a Henne or Pullet, and the heart alſo.
               When you haue ſo lured her at Euening, giue her but a little meat, and let her be lured ſo timely, that when ſhée is therewith accuſtomed, you may giue her plumage, and a iucke of a ioynt. Afterwards, and in the morning betimes, take her on your fiſt, and when ſhe hath caſt and gleamed, giue her a little beaching of good warme meat. Afterwards, when the day is further forwards, and that it is time to féede her, take a Criance and tye it to her leaſe, and goe into ſome faire pleaſant meadow, and giue her a bitte or two vpon the lure, as before ſayd, then vnſeaze her, and if you peceiue that ſhe be ſharpe ſet, & haue ſeaſed vpon the lure eagerly, then giue her to hold vnto ſome man which may let her off to the lure, then ſhall you vnwind the Criance, and draw it after you a good way, and hée which holdeth the Hawke, muſt hold his right hand on the Taſſell of the Hawkes hoode in a readineſſe, that hée may vnhoode

her as ſoone as you beginne to lure, and if ſhée come well to the lure, and ſtoope vppon it roundly, and ſeaze it eagerly, then let her feede two or three bittes vppon it, and then vnſeaze her and take her from off the lure, and hoode her, and then deliuer her againe to him which held her, and goe further off and lure her, féeding her alwayes vpon the lure on the ground, and vſing the familiar voyce of Falconers as they cry when they lure. And thus you ſhall lure her euery day further and further off, vntill ſhe be well taught to come to the lure, & to take it eagerly.
               Afterwardes let her be lured in company, hauing regard that neither dogs nor other thing come in ſodainly to fray her, and when you take her vppe from the ground, hoode her vpon the lure, and when you haue well and often lured her on foote, then vſe to lure her on horſebacke: the which you ſhall the eaſſier winne her too, if when you lure her on foote, you cauſe ſome on horſebacke to come neare you, that ſhée may ſee them, and cauſe them to come neare her when ſhée féedeth vppon the lure, cauſing them alſo to turne and toſſe their horſes about her, but let their horſes be ruly, leaſt they ſhould vpon the ſodaine affright her.
               Furthermore the better to acquaint her with Horſes, and that ſhée may the better know them, carrie your Falcon (whiles ſhée feedeth) on high vppon the lure neare vnto ſome man on Horſebacke, or gette your ſelfe vppe on horſebacke, and reward her vppon the lure amongſt Horſemen, and when ſhée is well accuſtomed to them, and well acquainted with them, making no reſemblance to feare them, you may then lure her on horſebacke in this manner: Hée which holdeth her to let her come to the Lure, muſt be on foote, and you where you Lure ſhall bée on Horſe-backe, and when you call and caſt the Lure about your head, then hee which holdeth her, ſhall take off her hood by the taſſell, and you the

meane while ſhall call and lure in the cunningeſt wiſe you can, as Falconers vſe to doe: and if ſhée ſeare eagerly vppon the lure, and feare neither people nor horſes, then take off the luring line or Creance, and lure her looſe further and further off. And to make a Falcon come which is but newly reclaymed, and to make her come in company of another Hawke, there muſt bee two to hold a caſt of Falcons, and two which ſhall lure them, but hee which holdeth the Falcon that is but lately lured, ſhall not let her come ſo ſoone as the other ſhall do: then ſhall the lure bee throwen out vnto the Falcon which is but lately lured, and when ſhee is fallen therevpon, her keeper ſhall carry her vppon the lure, to féede amongſt the other make Hawkes. This being done twice or thrice, ſhée will follow them and loue them, and if you would haue her loue dogges, which is moſt neceſſary, you muſt call dogges about you when you féed her, or giue her tyring or plumage.
            
            
               How you ſhall bath your Hawke beeing but lately reclaimed, how you ſhall make her fleeing, and to hate the checke.
               WHen your Falcon is well lured aſwell on horſebacke as on foote, and that ſhee is ready to bee caſt off, and hath béene well rewarded vppon the lure, and is now altogether reclaymed from her ramage toyes, and when ſhee is alſo ſomewhat recouered of the paine and trauell which you haue put her vnto in making and reclayming her, and bee yet in good plight, and haue her thighs ploompe, and well brawned, then offer her Water to bath her, ſpie out a faire day when the Weather is cleare and temperate, then take a Baſon ſo deepe that your Hawke may ſtand therein vppe to the Thighes, and fill it with water, and ſet it in ſome ſecret place: afterwards your Hawke being lured and well rewarded in the morning with warme meate, beare her

vp vpon ſome high place or banke, and there hold her in the ſun vntill ſhe haue endued her gorge, taking off her hood, that ſhée may proyne and picke her ſelfe: that being doone, hood her again, and ſet her neare to the baſon, afterwards taking off her hood againe (if ſhée will) let her leape downe into the Baſon or vpon the graſſe by it, and to make her know the water, ſlappe therein with a little wand, and let her bath therein as long as ſhée lift: when ſhee commeth out of the Water, take ſome meat in thy hand, and proffer it vnto her, and be well ware that ſhée come not out before thou proffer her thy fiſte to giue her a bitte or twaine, then take her vp, and hold her in the ſunne, and ſhe will picke and proyne her on your ſiſt, or vppon your knée; if ſhée will not bath her in a baſon, then proffer her to bath in riuer water at ſome foorde. Bathing giueth an Hawke great courage, much boldneſſe, and eager appetite: that day that ſhée batheth, giue her no waſht meat. To make a new lured Falcon, and to make her vpwardes, the morrow after ſhée hath bathed, get on horſebacke in the morning or in the euening, when ſhe is ſharpe ſet, and chooſe out ſome field or paſture, where feweſt doues or choughes bée, then take your lure well garniſhed on both ſides, and hauing vnhooded your Hawke, giue her a bitte or twaine vppon the lure, then taking it away for her, hoode her againe, then going fayre and ſoftly againſt the wind, vnhoode her: and before ſhe bate or find any checke in her eye, whiſtle her from off your fiſt fayre and gently, and when ſhée flyeth about, (trotting forwards with your horſe) caſt out your lure, and ſuffer her not long to flée about you at the firſt. Continue this both morning and euening for a few dayes, and if you perceiue that your Hawke haue no great liſt to flée about you, nor to ſtoope to the lure, and that ſhée maketh no ſemblance to loue other Hawkes, then muſt you make her flée with one which loueth other Hawkes, and which will not gadde out to any change or checke: and that muſt firſt be done at the Partridge, for they flée not farre before an Hawke: and if your

Falcon haue ſlowen, and returne to you twice or thrice, caſt out the lure vnto her, and reward her vpon your Horſebacke, and afterwardes féed her vppe on the lure vppon the ground with good hote meate, to make her reſolute in her fléeing, and that ſhée may returne to you with the better will, and if the fowle which you flew vnto be killed by any other Hawke, let your Hawke feede with the other Hawke, and when ſhée is ſo rewarded a little, take her off, and feed her vpon the lure.
               If you flée to the Riuer with your Falcon, and that the flight be fayre and likely to be landed, ſtaye and draw vnder the wind, and taking off your Hawkes hoode, caſt her off with the reſt. When you would haue your Hawke proue vpwards and a high flying Hawke, you muſt let her flée with a very high fléeing Hawke, but ſée that your Hawke be well taught to hold in the head, and that ſhée loue well to flée with the other Hawkes, and if the fowle be in a poole, or on a pitte or plaſh, you muſt firſt caſt off the high fleeing hawke, and hee which holdeth your new lured hawke, ſhall doe well to gette him vnder the wind, and when hee ſéeth his vantage let him vnhoode her, and if ſhee bate then, it is to get vppe to the other Hawke. Then let him caſt her off, and ſhe will clime againſt the wind right vnto the high fleeing Hawke, and before ſhee weary her ſelfe too much with clyming to reach or couer that other Hawke, lay out the fowle, when the high fleeing hawke ſhall be at her pitch, and lay them out behind her, if ſhe kill the fowle, then giue your Hawke reward of the Heart and the breaſt with the other Hawks. If your hawke goe out to any checke, and kill a Doue or a Crow, or any other checke and feed vppon it, or haue fedde vppon it before you come at her, ſeeme not roughly to rebuke her at firſt, but take her downe to the lure, giuing her a bitte of meat, and hood her vppe, and flee not with her in two or three dayes after, but when you doe flee, flee as neare as you can where there be no checke, but if by no meanes you can keepe her from checking and going out, then for your laſt remedy, doe as followeth. If your

Hawke haue killed a checke, and you come to her before ſhee haue fedde thereon, take the gall of a Henne, and annoynt therewith the breaſt of the checke which ſhe hath killed, when ſhee hath plumed it, and is come to the bloud, and let her feed but little thereon leaſt ſhe make her ſicke, for ſhee will ſurely caſt it againe, yea though ſhe ſhould not caſt it, yet would ſhee haue ſmall luſt to flee at ſuch a fowle againe, but will hate and loath the meat thereof, or put any bitter meat therevppon, as powder of Mirre, or yong ſmall wormes cut in gobbets, but take heed that the bitterneſſe bee not ouer ſtrong, and if that the bitter taſte haue diſcouraged the Hawke, then wette her meat in ſugred water. Some put on two payre of belles vppon their Hawkes legges, or ſtitch together the principall long feathers of their wings, and alſo it ſhall be good when ſhee goeth from checke, to caſt her out the lure, or to lay out an hurt fowle before her which ſhee may kill.
            
            
               
               How to flee a Hearon.
               
                  
               
               
                  TO make your Falcon a good Hearoner, you muſt ſet her very ſharpe, and haue a liue Hearon, whereof you ſhall make your hawk a quarrey in this ſort. In the morning when it ſhall be time to feede your Hawke, if you perceiue that ſhe be very ſharpe ſet, goe to a meadow, and let the Hearon goe after that you haue bruiſed both his féet and his hill, and hide your ſelfe behind ſome buſh: and then he which holdeth the Hawke ſhall vnhood her, the which ſhalbe vnder the wind. And if your Hawke will not flée at the Hearon, caſt out your lure the which you ſhall hold in a readineſſe therefore: but if ſhée doe ſeaze on the Hearon, make her a quarrey thereon, giuing her firſt the heart, and when ſhe hath eaten it, giue the Hearon to him which held the Hawke before, who retyring backe a little ſhall lure, toſſing the Hearon about his head, holding her by one of the legges or winges: then doe you vnhood your hawke againe, and let her flie to him which lureth ſo with the Hearon, and let him not caſt it out vnto her, but ſtay vntyll ſhée take and ſeaze it in his hand as he lureth with it: then deſpoyle the breaſt of the Hearon, and let your Hawke féede vpon it, & take the marrow of the bone in the Hearons wing, and giue it your Hawke: and in this doing two or three dayes, you ſhall now ſle your Hawke therevnto, and make her loue the Hearon, the which you ſhall alſo bring the ſooner to paſſe, if at the firſt you inure her with a make Hawk a good Hearoner. Then hauing found the Hearon at ſiege, you muſt gette you with your Falcon vp into ſome high place, into the wind, and let him which hath the Hearoner (that is the make Hawk) put vp the Hearon, and when he hath caſt off his Hawke to her, let him marke whether the Hearon doe mount or not, for if ſhe mount, then caſt not off your Hawke, nor vnhood her not, but if the Hearon ſéeme to be diſcomfited, and that ſhée fall downe into the water, and that the make Hawke doe ſtoops her, then vnhood your yong Hawke, and aduance her: if ſhée bate to bée gone, let her flée to it.
            
            
               
               How a man ſhall make his Hawke to loue other Hawkes, when ſhe hateth to flee with them.
               THere are ſome Falcons which will not flée with other Hawkes, but draw backward, and ſtirre not: ſome other will crabbe with euery Hawke, and flée of purpoſe to crabbe with them: ſome Falcon hateth to ſitte or to flée with another Hawke, eyther for doubt and feare which ſhée hath of them, or elſe, for becauſe ſhe loueth them not. That hawk which hateth other Hawkes doth crab with them, and ſhee which feareth them, doth flée from them. For remedye hereof you muſt haue a gentle Lanner, which may be ſet vpō a pearch with that Hawke which hateth others, but farre inough off, and by day light, then giue each of them a bitte of meate, as you paſſe by them, and ſet them nearer and nearer, and when they bée neare one to another, put meate betwéene them, that both of them may féede vpon it. Then if the Falcon make no ſemblance to crabbe with the Laner, you ſhall gorge her vppe at night with good meate, and ſet her abroad in the froſt or cold vpon a pearch, if ſhée be high and in good plight, able to abide it, and ſo ſhall you lett her ſitte thrée or foure houres.
               In the meane time holde your Laner neare to the fire, and afterwardes take her vpon your fiſt, then let another bring you your Faldon hooded, and holde her cloſe betwéen your ſide and the Laner, and when ſhee feeleth the warmth of the Laner, ſhée will draw to her, and hugge to her for the heat, and let them ſtand ſo together without ieouking (eyther the one or the other) vntill you ſée that the Falcon doth greatly deſire to ieouke, then vnhood her fayre and ſoftly, and let it be in ſuch a place as ſhée ſée not, but let her ſit ſo all the night vpon your fiſt. And when day appeareth, you muſt ſet them on the pearch, that one neare to the other, yet ſo as they cannot one

reach to another: That being don two or thrée nights together, let them both be ſet abroad the third night in the cold, ſo neare that they may ſit cloſe together on the pearch, and when you ſee them ſit cloſe that one to that other for warmth, then vnhoode them, and afterwardes féede them, pearch them, and lure them both together, and take paine to finde the aduantage.
            
            
               How you ſhall enſeame a Hawke, or giue her caſtings, and skourings, &c.
               SOme Falcons be harder bo enſeame, than ſome others are, or the longer that a Falcon hath béene in the hand, the harder ſhée is to be enſeamed: and an old mewed Falcon of the wood, which hath mewed but one cote in the Falconers handes, is much eaſier to be enſeamed, than a yonger Falcon which hath béene longer in the Falconers handes: the reaſon is, becauſe a Hawke which preyeth for her ſelfe, doth féede cleaner, and better, according to her nature, and vpon more holeſome meates, than ſhée doth when ſhée is in mans handes, ſo that it is no maruaile though ſhée bee not ſo fowle within when ſhée is at her owne dyet, as when another man féedeth her. For a Hawke which is in our kéeping doth féede gréedily both on skinne, feathers, and all that comes to hand. Neyther is ſhée mewed with ſo cleane and holeſome féeding, nor doth endue her meate ſo well, nor hath ſuch open ayre at times conuenient as a Hawke which is at large to prey for her ſelfe. When you draw your Hawke out of the mew, if ſhée bee greaſſe (the which you ſhall know by her thighes if they be round and fatte, and alſo by her body if ſhée bée full in the hand, and that her fleſh bée round as hie as her breaſt bone) and if ſhée be well mewed, and haue all her feathers full ſommed, then giue her when ſhée woulde féede in the Morning a bitte or two of hote meate,

and at night giue her but a little, vnleſſe it bee very colde, and if ſhée feed well without conſtraint or forcing thereunto, then giue her waſht meate thus prepared: take the wings of a Henne or Pullet for her dinner, and waſh them in two waters, and if you giue her Hares fleſh or Beefe, let it be waſht in three waters, on the morrow giue her the legge of a Henne very hote, and at noone meate temperately warme, a good gorge, then let her faſt vntill it be late in the euening, and if ſhée haue put ouer her meate and that there be nothing left in her gorge, then giue her a little warme meate, as you did in the morning, and let her thus be dyetted vntyll it bee time to giue her plumage, the which you ſhall know by three tokens, the firſt is, that feeling the end of the pinion of the Hawkes wing, you ſhall féele the fleſh as it were tenderer, and ſofter than it was before ſhe eate waſht meate: the ſecond, if her mewets bée cleane and white, and that the blacke of the mewt be right blacke, and not mingled with any other fowle thing and colour: the thirde token is, if ſhée be very ſharpe ſet and do plume eagerly, you may giue her caſting either of a Hares foote or a Conies foote, or of the ſmall feathers, which are on the ioynt of the pinyon of an olde Hennes wing: take then the forefoote of an Hare, and beate it with the backe of a knife vntill the bones and clawes doe fall out, becauſe the ſmall bones may mouldre and bee all to fruſhed to pieces, the which you ſhall afterwardes cut and lay it in fayre freſh water, then wring it and giue her it at two morſells, and when you ſet her on the pearch, ſweepe cleane vnderneath it that you may ſee whether the mewte bée full of ſtrakes or skinnes, or not, and whether it be full of ſlime and ordure or not, and if it bée, then continue this kinde of caſting thrée or foure nights together with waſht meat, as is before ſayd, and if you perceiue the feathers digeſted and ſoft, and that her caſting be great and full of ordure, then take the necke of an olde Henne, and cutte it all alongſt betweene the

ioynts, and lay the ioynts in cleare cold water, and giue it to your Falcon without any other thing: and this is done becauſe it beareth downe before it into the pannell, the meate which is vpon the ioynts, and there in the pannell the fleſh conſumeth, and the bones remayne ſharpe & pricking, which break the kels and skins, and the groſſe ordure, and bear them with them: and giue her ſo three nights together, giuing her by day waſht meate as is before rehearſed, & afterwardes giue her caſting or plumage againe, according as her ſtate doth require. And thinke it not ſtrange that a Falcon which is to bée enſeamed, is ſometimes a fortnight or more before ſhée wil take caſting: neyther yet that ſome Falcons will eaſlier be enſeamed in a month, than ſome other in fiue wéekes, according as they be ſtronger or weaker of nature, and fedde with cleaner or fowler meates, or according as they haue béene ſhorter or longer time in mens handes and kéeping. When you haue drawne your Falcon out of the mew, and that her principall feathers be full ſommed, or that ſhée haue ſome yet in the quill, do not giue her waſht meate, but quicke birds, & good gorges thereof, and ſet her as much as may bée in open places, for otherwiſe her feathers may chance to ſhrinke in the quill, & come to nothing.
            
            
               To enter or make a Hawke, after the faſhion of Lombardy.
               WHen a Sparowhawke is māned and reclaymed, thē giue her nine or ten traines at the leaſt, and when ſhe killeth, féed her vp alwayes, and let the Quaile wherewithall you traine her, haue a feather pulled out of each wing, and caſt off the Sparowhawke to her a far off, ſo often that ſhe wil recouer the Quaile farre off, and then caſt her out a Quaile which hath her full wings, afterwards you may flée the wilde Quaile with her: and euermore when ſhée doth kill, féede her

vp with a full gorge: the Almaynes are of opinion, that the tercell of the Goſhawke is more waighty and more valiant than the Hawke, both to Partridge & Fezant. If you would make a Sparowhawke to the Pye, then diſmember the Pye, and caſt her on the ground to the Hawke, and féede her vpon her with a hote meale, as with a Finch or ſuch like birde, & vſe that order with her twiſe or thriſe, and afterwards you may caſt vp a Pye to your Hawke that is ſéeled, beeing diſmembred as before ſaid, and let her kill her, and féede her vpon her, alſo you may take a feather or two out of the Pyes wing, and ſet her vppe in ſome trée, and let your hawke kill her there, and make her as good reward as you can thereof, and this being thus vſed, you may flée with your hawk to the wilde Pye, but euer remember that in making theſe traines your Pye be diſmembred, that is to ſay, her bill and her tallons cut off, or ſo tyed and abated, that ſhée may not ſpoyle or hurt your hawke. Goſhawkes, and Tercels of Goſhawks are better when they are taken haggards of a Cote or two Cotes out of the wood, than they are when they be Soarehawkes, but then they muſt bée kept with more delycate féede than the Soarehawkes, for they are made daungerous. For aſmuch as in the woodes they did commonly prey vpon warme meates, and therewithall they are ſooner loſt then Soarehawks be, by reaſon they remember theyr eyrie, but they ſhould not be aboue one, or two Cotes at the moſt. (∵)
            
            
               
               To enſeame a Falcon and to make her.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               
                  TAke your Falcon, and vſe her as you vſe the Goſhawke in manner before declared, ſauing that when you feede her you ſhall call and lure, as if you called her to the lure: and euery day you ſhall proffer her water, and euery night giue her caſting accordingly as you ſhall ſée that ſhe endeweth: & take off her hoode oftentimes amongſt companye: and to the end ſhe ſhall not bate, hold alwayes the hood by the taſſell in your hand ready. And in the euening when day light beginneth to fayle, take off her hoode amongſt companye of people by the candle light, vntill ſhe rowze and mewte, & then ſet her on the pearch and not before, and ſet light before her, and when ſhée is well wonne to know the fiſt, then beginne to make her know the lure, and ſo by little and little reclayme her, vntyll you may call her looſe without Cryance. Euerye Falcon hath néede of a make hawke to teach her to holde in the head, and eſpecially the Haggart Falcon, the which may be peraduenture an Haggart of two or thrée Cotes, & yet ſhall be the better Hearoner: but if a Haggart mewed will not holde in the head, then cutte off ſome part of her two princypalles in each wing, the long feather, and that which is next to it, and that ſhall force her to hold in. You muſt alſo feat her beake, & cope her reaſonably. They alwayes giue their Hawkes tyring both morning and euening, but the Falconers of the Eaſt parts are of a contrarye opinion, and ſay that it weakeneth a Hawkes backe. If you would make your hawke vpwards, or high fléeing, then after ſhée is reclaymed and lured, and ready comming, when you lure her, and that ſhée commeth towards you, ſtoope the lure vpon her, and let her paſſe by you, and when ſhe retourneth towards you, throw her out the lure, and make much of her, and do thus oftentimes vntill you may ſuffer her to flee longer about you, and to get vp higher, the which you muſt doe in a plaine field where no wood or trées are: & if ſhée get vp to any pitch, then let her flée a turne or two of iollity, and when ſhée is at the higheſt, and right ouer you, throw her forth the lure, or a Pigeon or Pullet, and giue her a good gorge thereon,

making the moſt of her that you can deuiſe, and take héede that you caſt not your lure into the water, leaſt ſhée ſhould thereby be rebuked. And when ſhe is at her gate, if percaſe ſhe gadde out after ſome check, and kill it, then take the prey from her angarly, and beate her therewith about the head, and hoode her vp without any reward: and hereby ſhee will the leſſe delight to rake out after a check. When your hawke hath killed a fowle, take it out of her foot, and caſt her vp againe, and when ſhée is right ouer you, caſt out the lure, and féede her vp vpon it, to make her loue the lure the better. But at the beginning reward her and féede her well vpon the quarry, and that ſhall encourage her and kéepe her from going out to the checke. When ſhee is well in blood, and well quarried, then let her flée with other hawkes, vntill ſhée be well acquainted and invred.
               If you would make your Hawk to the Crane, take an Nyaſſe Falcon gentle, and in entring of her, let her kill the greateſt fowle that you can find. Her lure ſhould alſo be a counterfaite Crane. And when you would make her fléeing, lette her flée from the fiſte, and ſuccour her quickly. For you muſt haue dogges made for the purpoſe, which may helpe and ſuccour her ſooner then a man can doe. And let ſuch dogges féede alwayes with your hawke, to make them the better acquainted. If you would make a Falcon to the hare, her lure ſhould be then a Hares skinne ſtuffed with ſtrawe, and when ſhée is well lured, and that you would enter her, tie the ſayde Hares ſkinne to the end of a cryance, and faſten it to your ſaddle pummell, and when you gallope it will bee like vnto a running Hare. Then vnhoode your Hawke, and cry, Backe with the Greyhounds, backe with the Greyhoundes. And when your Hawke commeth to ſeaze the ſayde Hares skinne, let goe hour cryance, and ſuffer her to take it, and reward her well vpon it, and make the moſt of her that you can deuiſe. And when you go about to enter her the ſecond time, let not ſlippe your cryance at the firſte, but rather pull it from her

by force, and afterwards let her ſeaze vpon it, and ſo by little and little you ſhall teach her to beate it and ſtoope at it. For ſo muſt ſhe doe at a wild Hare. And you muſt feede her alwayes amongſt the dogges, and when ſhe is well nouſled and entred in this manner, take a liue Hare, and breake one of her hinder legs, and let her goe in ſome faire place amongſt your dogs, and your Falcon will ſtoope her and ruffe her, vntill the dogs may take her. Then take her from the dogs, and caſt her out vnto the hawke, and cry backe, backe.
               If you would make your Hawke fleeing to the Partridge, or Feaſant, when ſhe is reclaymed and made, then euery time that you lure her, caſt your lure into ſome low tree or buſh, that ſhe may learne to take the trée or the ſtand. And if ſhée take the ſtand before ſhée eſpie the lure, let her ſtand a while. And after draw the lure out before her and cry, Loe birde, lo, Hey lo bird, hey lo, and rewarde her well. For in this manner ſhée will learne to take ſtand. But feede her alwayes on the ground, and in ſome thicke place, for in ſuch places ſhee muſt encounter with the Feſant at Pearch. And at the firſt flée with her at Feaſant, or Partridge that be young, to giue her the aduantage, and afterwardes at the old. If a Falcon will not take ſtand, but will kéepe her on wing, then muſt you flée with her in plaine places, where you may alwayes ſée her vpon you. Sacres and Laners will commonly take ſtand both in a trée, and on the ground, but the Falcon gentle taketh ſtand more willingly vpon the ground. And when you draw a Hawke out of the mew, bear her not much in hot weather, for feare leaſt by much bating in heate, ſhée may get the Pantiſe. But if there be no remedy, then kéepe her alwayes hooded, and take as good héede to her as you can. If your Hawke be coy and dangerous, then giue her ſalt with her meat, I meane a dramme of the ſalt called Sal Inde, or Sal geme, or Salis albi pulverizati, and giue her water, for ſhée ſhall haue néede thereof. And make her Ieouke all night in payne, &

in a moyſt or colde place, and ſo ſhall ſhée watch moſt of the night, and thereby her greaſe and pride will be abated. Sacres muſt be nouſled and entred as ſoone as they be manned, for elſe they be very hard to be entred. Draw your Hawke out of the mew twenty dayes before you enſeame her. If a Falcon truſſe and carrye, to remedy the ſame, you muſt cope her tallons, her powlſe, and her petty ſinggle. Neuer reward your hawke vpon riuer fowle, but reward her, and make much of her vpon the lure, to the end ſhée may the better know it, and eſtéeme it. The Souldan fléeth to the Crane, wilde Gooſe, & Buſtard, with thrée or foure Hawkes at once, (or more) from the fiſte, yea and thoſe of all kind of Hawkes alſo, as Sacres, Gerfalcons, peregrine Falcons, and Mylanes. And ofterwards a man may make them flée to the mowntye. You ſhould flée to the Crane before Sunne riſing, for ſhée is ſluggiſh and ſlothfull, and you may caſt off to her a caſte or a leaſe of Falcons, or you may hawke to her with the Goſhawke from the fiſt without dogs. Wilde Géeſe are flowen to in the ſame manner. And if you haue dogs to helpe and ſuccour your hawkes, ſée that they be ſtanch and gentle, and well made for the purpoſe, and a Greyhound will be moſt readily made therunto. You ſhall flée but once in a day at the Crane, and therevpon reward her liberally, and make as much of her as you can. The Millaine ſhould be let flée downe the wind. The Almaines doe flee at the Pye with a leaſe or two caſt of Falcons at once, and they make them to mount and to ſtoope, as they doe at the Riuer. But this muſt be in a playne, where there be no trées nor wood, but little ſhrubbs and buſhes. If you vſe to giue your hawke a breakefaſt or beaching very timely in the morning, it will make her eager to flee at ſuch time as will be conuenient for her to flee. And eſpecially a Falcon which you would haue high fleeing, & thoſe ſhould not be highly kept, but ſhould be fed nyne dayes together before Sunne riſing, and at night late in the freſh or coole of the Euening. So ſhall

you make them high fléeing, & by that means they will euery day get gate higher and higher, ſo that they bee flowen with euermore in the plaine champion. The Falcon gentle is commonly better inward when ſhée hath mewed, than in her ſoarage. The Falcon will kill the Hearon naturally, if ſhée be a peregrine Falcon, and yet you ſhall doe well to giue them traines. A Falcon may flee ten ſlights at riuer in one day, if the ſeaſon be not extreame, and that is the moſt that you ſhall flée with her. The Falcons which are riuer Hawkes, ſhould alwayes be borne vpon the fiſte. A hawke ſhall haue forty caſtings before ſhee be perfectly made. For a hawke which hath not caſting euery night, will be ſurcharged with abundance and ſuperfluity of humors, the which doe (from the ſtomake) ſo ouerflow their braine, that they cannot flée ſo high as elſe they would doe. And therefore all hawkes ſhould haue caſting euery night naturally, if you would haue them ſounde and cleane: and it is good to giue them tyring or plumage at night, eſpecially field hawkes, but not riuer hawkes, for weakening their backes. And euery third day you ſhall preſent them to the water at the longeſt. Touch your Hawks feathers as little as you can, for much handling will make them out of order. The Millaine and the Laneret may bée ſet vppon the ſtone incontiuently, as ſoone as they be made. When your hawke hath flowen or bated, féede her not as long as ſhée panteth, or bloweth, nor vntill ſhée be in breath againe. For if you ſhould, it is perilous to bring her into the diſeaſe called Aſtum, and (in a Hawke) the Pantiſe. If a hawke (eyther Falcon, or other) chance to be out of heart, and diſcouraged, (which happeneth oftentimes) then take ſuch paines with her, that ſhée may kill ſome prey, and féede her vpon it with a full gorge euen as long as ſhée will eate, and the ſame night ſette her abroade that ſhée may Ieouke in the open ayre at her owne pleaſure: and on the morrow take her and féede her with ſmall birdes to enſeame her, neyther more nor leſſe than you would doe with an Hawke that were new drawne out of the mew.

If a Falcon or other hawke will not ſeaze or gorge, take the quill of a wilde Gooſes feather, and tye it vnder her long ſingle, and ſhee will ſeaze and gripe. And when ſhe beginneth to ſeaze, take away the ſayd quill, and ſhee will ſeaze long afterwardes. If you cannot giue couert to your Falcon, or your Goſhawke, then caſt her off with the Sunne in her back. All hawkes may be made flee at the ſowrce or ſpring. But in what ſort ſoeuer you flée with your Goſhawke, let her haue the Sunne in her backe.
            
            
               To flee all manner of Fowles.
               ALl traines of Partridge, Rookes, Crowes, & Choughs, ſhould bee ſeeled. Now to enter your hawke at any of them, make a little pit or hole in the ground, and put your traine therein. Then couer the hole with a little borde or ſod of earth, to the which you ſhall faſten to a ſmall cryance or corde, and that you ſhall holde in your hande to drawe away when you liſt. Then you ſhall make as though you vncoupled your ſpaniels to hunt and put vp ye game, and you ſhall carry your hawke vnhooded. And when you perceiue that your hawke looketh that way where you haue layd the traine, then drawe off the borde, and cauſe the traine to ſpringe as though the ſpanels had ſprong it. And if your hawke doe take it, let her féede thereon her fill vpon the ground. And thus muſt you doe ſundry times. If you would haue a good hawke, then nowſle her yong, for ſo will ſhée encreaſe her force by little and little, and in the end, ſhee will ouercome both Feaſant and Partridge, &c. And when ſhée hath killed, let her gripe and ſeaze the prey at her pleaſure. And let her alſo plume thereupon ſo long as ſhée will, & euermore let her bée rewarded vpon the ground. And when ſhee is well nouſled, then reward her neuer but vpon the cockes of all preyes, becauſe that will make her loue that prey the better. And when ſhée killeth a hen of any kind, let her no more but plume vpon it, &

giue her but the heart, and the brayne at the moſt, becauſe ſhée ſhall not loue to flée the Henne ſo well as the cocke. It is much better to nouſle hawkes at yong fowles, than at the olde. For moſt commonly if a yong hawke bée let flee at olde game, ſhee will turne tayle, end cowardly giue it ouer, vnleſſe you doe as before is declared. If you woulde nouzle or enter a Haggart▪ then do not enter her, or ſet her in blood vppon a yong prey, or inure her thereto. For then ſhée woulde not afterwards paſſe much for olde game. And likewiſe for the ſame conſideration you ſhall not nouzle nor enter a mewed Hawke at yong game.
               For the Goſhawke, all fowles generally are good traynes, as Crane, Buſtard, Hearne, wilde Gooſe, Riuer fowle, Cormorants, Choughes, Rookes, Kites, and all other fowle that haunt Riuers or Plaſhes.
            
            
               How to make a trayne or flight for the Goſhawke.
               SEt one of the ſayd fowles vpon the water, and betwéene you and the water let there be ſome ſmall ſhrubs or buſhes, ſo as the Goſhawke may haue couert to take the ſtand if néede bée, as alſo to kéepe her out of ſight of the fowle for her aduantage, then aduance your fiſt, ſo as the Hawke may deſcrye the fowle. After which you may holde it lower again, and ſo caſt off the Hawke. And if ſo be that ſhée ſeaze the fowle, let her féed thereon at her pleaſure on the ground. To make your Goſhawke to the brooke, let her flée thoſe traines afore ſayde, as I haue told you. But when you ſée the Hawke approach the fowle, and to be within danger, then ſtrike vp your drum before ſuch time as the fowle doe eſpie your Goſhawke. For if ſhée once ſée the Hawke before ſhée ſpring, ſhée will by no meanes willingly forſake the brooke, but fall to dyuing and ducking, a defence which nature hath prouided and taught them.
               
                  Thus muſt you deale with the Goſhawke to the brooke, but if you will flée with her to the Hare and Lyueret, (which is a game that the Goſhawke doth much delight to kill, and prey on) then muſt you bréech her, and at no time let her flée without that deuiſe, for feare leaſt ſhée ſpoyle herſelfe. For the Hare is of ſome force, and in ſtriuing to eſcape from her, will force her to ſtretch her arms, and open her ſelfe too wide, which is the vtter vndoing of your hawke. The Sparrowhawkes doe vſe to kill the fowle at the Sowrce or Souſe, as the Goſhawkes doe, which nature hath taught them (for that being round winged Hawkes,) if they dealt not vpon the aduantage, the fowle might eaſily ſlippe from them, and eſcape their danger. But ſo great is the curteſie of kinde, as ſhe euer ſeeketh to recompēce any defect of hers, with ſome other better benefit, or at leaſt, ſuch as ſhall ſerue the turne. Thus haue you the French Falconers opinions layd downe as touching the fléeing with each kind of hawk, or at leaſt the greateſt part of them. For the knowledge to flée with the Falcon, ſerueth for all Towre Hawkes, and the Goſhawks for the round winged Hawkes. (∵)
            
            
               
               To manne, hoode, and reclayme a Hawke, after the opinion of the Italian Falconer.
               
               HE that will furniſh his hawke accordingly, muſt haue eſſes and Bewets of good leather, & ſhrill belles, according to the hugeneſſe or condition of his hawke. So muſt

he alſo haue a hoode for her: and therewithall he muſt oftentimes hoode and vnhoode her, in ſuch ſort that ſhée be not afraid thereof, nor of her kéeper when he handleth her. In 9. nightes he ſhould not ſuffer her to ieouke at all, nor to come on any pearch, but ſhould keepe her continually ſo long vpon his fiſt. And when he will call her, let him obſerue this order: Set the Falcon vpon the pearch and vnhoode her, then ſhew her your fiſte with ſome meate in it, and call her ſo long till ſhee come to it. And when ſhée commeth feede her, and reward her as pleaſantly as you can: But if ſhée come not, giue her nothing at all vntill ſhe be very ſharpe ſet. And this order muſt you kéepe with your Hawke ſeauen or eight dayes together.
               When you would lure her, giue her vnto ſome other man to holde, and call her with a lure well garniſhed with meat on both ſides, as you called her to your fiſt. After you haue vſed that manner of calling 6 dayes or thereabouts, cauſe her to bée held further from you, and caſt the lure about your head, and throwing it out vpon the ground a little from you; And if ſhée come to it roundly, then feede her & rewarde her bountifully. And whiles your Hawke is vpon the lure, go about her fayre & ſoftly, luring and crying, wo, ho, ho, as Falconers vſe. And when you haue thus done by the ſpace of certaine dayes, take your lure garniſhed as before ſayd, and euery day call her to you as farre as ſhée may well heare and perceyue you: and let her bée looſe from all her furniture, that is without eyther loynes or cryance: and if ſhée come ſo far off to you, then féed & reward her wel, and ſtop her in her féeding oftentimes, for that will make her come the better: but take héede that you hurt her not in ſo doing. You ſhall alſo ſometimes call her on horſeback. And when you haue vſed her thus a month, or vntil ſhe come well and roundly, and that ſhée be familiar with the man without any ſtrangeneſſe or coyneſſe, then myy you ſtop the lure vpon her, and make her flée vpon you. But before you do ſo, it ſhall be méet to bath her, leaſt when ſhée is at libertye ſhe rangle to ſéeke water, and ſo you might léeſe your Hawke: & euery ſeuen or eight dayes, your Hawke ſhould be ſet to the

water, for the nature of them ſo requireth. When you haue thus manned, reclaimed and lured your Falcon, go out with her into the fields, and wiſtle her off your fiſte, ſtanding ſtill to ſée what ſhe will, do & whether ſhe will rake out or not. But if ſhée flee round vpon you, as a good Hawke ſhould flée, then let her flée a turne or two: which done, throw her out the lure and let her foot a hen or a pullet, and kill it and féede her well thereupon. Vnhoode her often as you beare her, and ceaſe ſo to doe vntill ſhée haue endewed and mewted ſufficiently.
               When your Falcon is thus made and manned, go abroad with her euery morning when the weather is fayre and calm, and chuſe a place for her to flee in, where there is ſome narrow brooke or plaſh of water. And when you caſt her off, goe into the wind ſo far that the fowle may not diſcrie you. And when ſhe is caſt off, and beginneth to recouer her gate, make you then towards the brooke where the fowle lie, alwayes wyſing & making your hawke to leane in vpon you. And when you perceyue that ſhe is at a reaſonable pitch, then (her head being in) lay out the fowle and land it if you can, and if you cannot, take downe your hawke, and let her kill ſome train, as thus. Take with you a ducke, and ſlip one of her wing feathers, and hauing thruſt it through her nares, throw it out vnto your hawk, & caſt it as hie as you can right vnderneath your hawke that ſhe may the better know your hand, and you. And remē
                  ber that you neuer flee a young hawke without ſome quicke thing carried into the field with you, that if ſhee faile at firſt to kill the wild fowle, you may yet make her kill that traine which you bring with you. And this you ſhall do for a certaine time, vntill your hawke be wel entred and quarried, and that ſhe know a quarrior ſufficiently. Some other Falcons there be of a contrarie nature, which will require great skill to finde their properties. And the ſame being known, you may kéepe them high or poore, according to their conditions. So ſhall you doe more good with them, than if you haue no reſpect to the diuerſity of their nature: for then you ſhould commit great errors, and ſeldome make good hawkes. You may train hawkes

in this wiſe. Firſt you ſhall feede your Hawke well vpon a fowle of the ſame kind that you would traine her withall, or haue her flée to. And you ſhall do ſo vntill you haue acquainted your Hawke with that kind of fowle, the which you may doe in this ſort. Take that fowle that you will make the traine of, and ſet it on foote with meat tyed vpon the backe of it, and goe ſo neare it, that the Hawke may ſée it: and when ſhée ſéeth it, let her ſeaze therevpon, and foote the fowle, and kill it. Or you may thus doe better: Take a Cryance and tye the fowle (which hath the meate tyed on her backe) by the beake, and cauſe one to ſtand cloſe which may hold the ſame Cryance. Then vnhood your Hawke, and ſtand a far off, and let him draw the fowle and ſtirre it with his Cryance, vntill your Hawke may ſée it ſtirre. And if ſhée foote it, then may you afterwards make her this other kind of traine. Take a quicke fowle which can flée, and when you haue halfe ſéeled it, and caſt it out, let your Hawke flée to it, and if ſhe kill it, reward and féede her vp well vpon it. (∵)
            
            
               
               To keepe and make Sarowhawkes.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               IF you would know how to féede and man Sparowhawkes that be taken tender penned out of theyr eyrie, it is méet ye you kéepe them in a freſh and ſwéet place, and giue them as much as they will eate of ſmall birdes, as Sparrowes, Martlets,

and ſuch like. And alſo you may giue them other fleſh, but ſée that it be ſwéet, cleane, & good, ſhred into ſmall pellets vpon a cleane trencher. When they begin to waxe fullſomed, giue them Sparowes, and other ſmall birds whole, that they may learne to plume, foote, and tyre: and ſet them a baſon of cleane water in a heape of ſand, that they may bath therein, & proine and picke their feathers. They that be thus dealt withall doe not know how to prey, & therefore you muſt enter thē bytrains in this maner. Take a yong chicken which is of color & plume like a Feaſant or Partrich, & caſt it out before your ſparhawk. But if ſhe flée not vnto it, nor do foot it, then ſtrip the skin vpō the head of the chicken vntill it bléed, & ſhe will lightly ſeaze it, thinking that it is fleſh to féed vpon. Thē féed her vpon it well, and thus you ſhall vſe her vntill ſhe will ſeaze a chicken of her ſelfe. When ſhe will take a chicken of her ſelfe, goe into ſome fayre cloſe or meadow, where nothing may bee to interrupt you, and take a yong chicken, and throwe it vp vnto your hawke, vntill ſhe flée to it and foot it: then féed her vp therevppon, and coye her as much as you can deuiſe: For Nyaſſe Sparowhawkes are much more daungerous and coy than others be. When your Sparowhawke will foot a chicken well as before ſayd, then you may traine her thus. Cauſe ſome of your ſeruants or others to ſtand cloſe in ſome ditch or other priuy corner, with a liue chicken in his hand: and ſtand your ſelfe with your Sparowhawke vpon your fiſt a little diſtance from him: then cry and ſpeake as you would ſpeake, and cry to your ſpaniels when they range the field. And when you thinke that your ſparowhawk looketh that way as he yt hath the train ſtandeth, let him caſt vp the chicken as high as he can, and let your Sparhawke flée thereat and ſeaze it. That done reward her, and féed her therevpon, making much of her, & chéering her euermore among. Thus ſhall you do twice a day. When you haue thus trained her, moūt on your horſeback, & giue her like trains in the field as before ſaid. Then ſet her ſharpe againſt an euening, and go out to ſéeke ſome game: & if you find, ſéeke to make her one flight at aduantage, and let her flée but once, and

ſup her vp vpon the prey. Thus in foure or fiue dayes at ye beginning I would haue you let her flée but one flight in a day, rewarding her well alwaies when ſhée killeth any thing, to the end ſhée may know her game the better, and take the greater delight therein, vntill ſhe be throughly nouſled. To kéepe your Sparrowhawke in good order, riſe early in the morning, and taking her vpon your fiſt, tap her on the trayne with your two forefingers, and ſtroke on her wings that ſhée may mantle and warble, and aduance her ſelfe bolt vpright, and delicately vpō your fiſt. Sometimes alſo take off her hoode, and put it on againe faire and ſoftly, for rebuking her. When you haue kept her two howres vppon the fiſt, then ſet her in the Sunne to weather her halfe an howre: that being done, call her to your fiſt with meat, and whiſtle to heroften, and chirpe with your lippes, that ſhe may learne to know that voyce when you call her, & when ſhe commeth reward her well. Thus you ſhould vſe her daily, vntill ſhe come well to the fiſt: remēbring alwaies that you deale with her as gently, and as amiably as you can deuiſe. When ſhe is well manned, and well comming, trie if ſhe couet not the water to bath her. And if ſhe do bath, thē may you afterwards flée with her: But firſt, get on horſebacke, and call her from off the ground with a cryance, for feare leaſt ſhée ſhould thinke ſtrange to come to you on horſebacke: and if ſhée come well to you from the ground, being on horſebacke, then may you boldly flée with her. But remember alwaies to eſpie ſome flight with aduātage at the firſt, for diſcouraging of your Hawke: For if ſhe be once well nouſled and entred, you may afterwards be the bolder how and when to flée with her.
            
            
               The manner to feed a Sparowhawke.
               TO féed a Sparowhawke orderly, you ſhould giue her good meates, as thighes of chickens and pullets, yong Sparrowes, Martlets, and other ſmall birds. Alſo ſhéepes hearts, or Lambes hearts: all theſe be excellent meat for a Sparowhawke. And thoſe you muſt giue them cleane and hote, if it

be poſſible: for with hote meates you ſhall kéepe her alwayes in beſt plight, and leaſt danger to abate. And to preuent diſeaſes, you ſhall giue her euery night caſting of Cotton or lynt, or ſuch like. And yet ſome are of opinion, that it is not beſt to giue a Sparowhawke caſting ſo often: But by their leaue I thinke it méet: and my reaſon is, that when you giue her caſting, you ſhall alwaies perceiue the diſpoſition of her gorge, and pannell from time to time, by the ſignes which you ſhall ſée vpon the caſting, and in it: As ſometimes it will be white, ſometimes blacke, ſometimes yellow, ſometimes gréene, and of other colours: and by this meanes knowing the infirmity of your Hawke, you may the better prouide remedy for the ſame. Therefore I thinke it beſt to giue a Sparowhawke caſting, and it ſhall not bee amiſſe to put therein ſometimes a whole Cloue, in a pellet of Cotton, which is a tryed medicine to draw euill humors from a Hawkes head: Or ſometimes you may put a chiue of Saffron in her caſting. And aboue all things, giue her water once in thrée or foure dayes: For Sparowhawkes doe much couet the water, and it is the beſt thing (with other good dyet) that can be, to kéepe a Sparowhawke alwaies ſound and in good caſe.Addition [The hearts of Pigs are very good for a Sparowhawke, and euer after her féeding, let her plumbe vpon a handfull of Parſeley.]
            
            
               Of feeding a Hawke.
               TAke héede that you féed not your hawke with two ſorts of meat at once, for that is perillous. Foraſmuch as the ſubſtances of them being diuers, they ſtriue in diſgeſtion, or endewing, and bréede euill humors and wormes in a hawke, and fill her with wind. And beware alſo that you féede not your Hawke with fleſh of beaſts that be olde, nor that be hurt or tainted: For ſuch meanes are hard to endew, & full of venome and corruption, bréeding diſeaſes. Beware alſo that you giue not your hawke the fleſh of a broode hen. And it ſhall not be amiſſe ſometimes to change your hawkes meat and féeding.
               
                  Goooſe fleſh (if you vſe it oftentimes) will bréed many flegmatike humors in a Hawke, and the cray in the pannell.
               The fleſh of a yong calfe is good for a gorge or two: but if you giue it oftener, it it ingendereth fleame and cold humors in the head,Theſe feedings are for the most part contrary to our Engliſh order in Falconrie. and bréedeth lice in her. The heart is much better for common féeding than the reſt.
               The fleſh of a Ram goate, a female goat, or a gelded goate, is good to ſet vp a hawke. But ſome are of opinion that it bréedeth the gowte, and moiſt watrie humors, and opilations in the gorge.
               Mutton is not good, for it bréedeth humors in the head, as the Rie and ſuch like: it dries vp and enflames a hawke, and makes her hoſe ſit cloſe to her leg.
               Lambes fleſh, and the fleſh of a Kidde, is good giuen with Goates milke, eſpecially when your hawke is poore, and hath béen hardly dealt withall.
               Hares fleſh, or Conies fleſh, either cold or hote, is very good to endew, and ſound meat for a hawke: but take héede that you giue her none of the braines, nor any of the hairs or bones, for they are perilous, and bréed wormes in the gorge, and in the guts.
               Cats fleſh is vnholeſome, and hard to be indured, and bréedeth perilous wormes, and ſtoppeth a hawke in the gorge, and marreth her wind.
               Rattes fleſh is good and wholeſome: it conſumeth choller, helpeth to looſe the head, giueth good appetite and digeſtion.
               Dogges fleſh is good and very ſound, and very méete for thoſe kind of Falcons which are hote Hawkes of Nature.
               
                  This feeding we vſe not.Wolues fleſh is naught, and contrarie to a Hawkes nature.
               The fleſh of a Fox (as mine Author affirmeth) is holeſome, and ſetteth vp a Hawke.
               If your Hawke happen to ſit abroad in the cold ayre, & eſpecially in the night, giue her ſmall birds to féed vppon becauſe they are hote of nature & comfort much: but beware that you

vſe it not continually, for it will make her too ſtately, and cauſe her forget you, in ſuch ſort that you ſhall hardly reclaime her from her coyneſſe.
               To feede with riuer fowle, and ſuch like, there are ſome of them good, and ſome bad, as I will briefly declare.
               Some hold opinion, that the bones and bloud of a Bargander, Moorehen, and ſuch like may be giuen to an hawke: but that the ſkinne, fleſh, or feathers of them are not good, becauſe they breed euill humors.
               The fleſh of a Ducke or of a Crane (as they report) is good and wholeſome.
               The fleſh of a Partrich is moſt excellent when a hawke is ſicke and diſeaſed.
               The fleſh of a wild Gooſe, or of a ſlecked Crow, is good: but you muſt giue your Hawke but litte thereof, and none at all of their blood, for it is ſalt, brakiſh, & of an euill nouriſhmēt.
               The fleſh of theſe fleſh Crowes, and of the Wagtayles, (a Diſhwaſher as we tearme them, in Latine called Motacilla) & the Cormorant, is of euill nouriſhment and digeſtion.
               The fleſh of a white Storke, and alſo of the blacke Storke, called (Saracireſia) is euill of nouriſhment, and hard to be endewed, and ſtincking.
               The fleſh of the Bitter, and Sea Coote, is good and ſound, eſpecially when the Sea Coote doth feed and ſcoure her with ſand, it is good to enſeame and breath a Hawke: although naturally all water fowles are cold of complexion, moyſt, and hard of diſgeſtion.
               The flew of the white Heron, otherwiſe called the Shoueler, and of the blew and aſhe coloured Heron, is of good digeſtion, and nouriſheth well.
               The fleſh of Finches, hedge Sparowes, and ſuch like, are in maner all one: and you muſt beware that you giue not your hawke too much of them at once.
               The Cuckoes fleſh is indifferent good for a hawke.
               The fleſh of a Hearon royall, that is to ſay, the gray Heron, is reaſonable good, according to the opinion of many auncient

Falconers: but Ptholomeus King of Egypt doth alleadge the contrary, ſaying, that naturally all fowles which liue vppon fiſh, frogs, or ſnakes, and ſuch like venemous wormes, are euill of diſgeſtion, and that their blood bréedeth opilations and euill humors, although they ſéeme to delight hawkes to féed on them for their delicate ſwéetnes and taſte.
               The fleſh of the red Hearon is good: but you muſt giue but little of it.
               The fleſh of the Swan, and many other kinds of Water fowles, too long here to be rehearſed, are to bée vſed according to the time and circumſtances of occaſion.
               The fleſh of Sea-crowes, and Rauens, Cormorants, and ſuch like, are of a brakiſh bloud, and therefore you may now and then giue your hawke a gorge thereof: but you muſt not vſe it often.
               The fleſh of rauening birds, as Kites, Puttocks, Harpies, Eagles, Eyrons, and ſuch like, all theſe are very contrary to the nature of Falcons, and are ſtinking, of euill diſgeſtion, & chollericke. Their bloud and braines are worſt of all, for they bréed perillous wormes.
               The fleſh of all birds which féed vppon ſéeds, as Feaſants, Partridge, Quailes, and ſuch like, are the beſt that can be, eſpecially when a Falcon or any other hawke is ſicke.
               Doues fleſh is excellent, either when a Hawke is ſicke, or to mew withall: for it makes a hawke to mew well and quickly.
               Pullets fleſh, and Chickens fleſh, is good at all times, and alwaies in ſeaſon, as the fleſh of that faire fowle Bella Dounais.
               
            
            
               
               To manne and make a Hawke: and firſt of a Nyaſse Falcon.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               THere are thrée ſorts of Falcons, viz. Nyaſſes, Soarhawkes & Hawkes taking preying for themſelues at large, which our

Falconers call ramage or ſleight Falcons. And I am of opinion that they are all made after one ſort, and are manned much a like. But by mine aduice no man ſhall much aſſure himſelfe in a Nyaſſe, becauſe ouer and beſides that (for the moſt part) they prooue not well, they doe alſo require great paines & attendance with extreame patience, to make them kill and ſtoope a fowle well, or to flee a high pitch. Neuertheleſſe if a man will needes bee doing with them, he ſhould firſt make a Nyaſſe to the Hearon from the fiſt, I meane both the blew and redde Hearon, and to ſuch other great fowles. For aſmuch as the Nyaſſe hawkes are naturally good ſeazers, bold & hardy birds, and after they be well in blood, and entred in fléeing to thoſe fowles from the fiſt, then may you make them to the Riuer, going into ſome faire large field, whereas there may be either ſome wild Peacocks, fleſh Crowes, or ſome other great fowle, bearing your Falcon on your fiſt: looſe her hoode in a readines, drawing as neare the fowle as you can, and the firſt fowle or birde that ſpringeth, vnhoode her, and let her flée from the fiſt to the ſame fowle, becauſe they may draw your Hawke vpwards. And when ſhée is at a great gate, or at a reaſonable pitch, then throw her out a Ducke or a Mallard ſéeled with a feather through the nares. And if ſhée kill it, then reward her well, and féed her vpon it with as much fauour as you can deuiſe, alwaies luring and crying to her to comfort and encourage her.
            
            
               Of Ramage Falcons.
               IF a Falconer chance to recouer a ramage hawke which was neuer handled before, let him immediately ſéele her, & therewithall let him euē then alſo put on her Ieſſes, the which muſt bee of Shameuſe, leather, or ſoft calues leather, or ſuch other leather as may bée gentle and plyable to her legge. At the end thereof, it ſhall not bée amiſſe to ſette twoo Veruelles of Siluer, the one thereof may haue the Armes of the King, or Quéen whom you ſerue, and the other a Scutcheon of your

owne armes. For aſmuch as when they flée out, if they chance to be taken vp, they may the ſooner be retourned againe, and reſtored to their owners, the which you muſt then remember to rewarde the taker vp of his hawke liberally. You ſhall alſo put her on a paire of good belles, with two proper Bewets: Being thus furniſhed, you ſhall goe about to man her, handling her often gently, and both to auoide the ſharpenes of her beake, as alſo the better to rebuke her from biting and nipping: you ſhall haue a ſtraight ſmooth ſticke, as bigge as your finger, and halfe a foot long or more, with the which you ſhal gently ſtroke your hawk about the pinions of her wings,& ſo downwards thwart all her train. And if ſhe chance to knap or bite at the ſticke, let her bite hardly, for that will rebuke her thereof, whereas your hand being twitched away fearfully, would make her procéed the more eagerly. To man her wel, you muſt watch all the night and kéepe her on your fiſt: and you muſt teach her to féede ſéeled: and hauing a great and eaſie rufterhood, you muſt hood and vnhoode her oftentimes ſeeled as ſhe is, handling her gently about the head, and coying her alwayes when you vnhoode her, to the end the take no diſdayne or diſpleaſure againſt her Keeper. And alſo make her to plume and tire ſomtimes vpon a wing, and kéepe her ſo on the fiſt day and night without perching of her, vntill ſhe be wearie, and ſuffer you to hoode her gently and ſtirre not: and correct her of her ramage toyes, eſpecially of ſnapping and biting, ſtroking her euermore as before ſaid with your ſticke. But if if it happen (as it doth ſometimes) that your chance be to haue a Falcon ſo ramage & ſhrewde mettled, that ſhe will not leaue her ſnapping & biting, then take a cloue of Garlicke cleane pilled, or a little Aloes Cycatrina, and when ſhe byteth or ſnappeth at your hand or ſtick, offer her the Garlicke or Aloes, and let her bite bite it: For either the ſtrong ſent of the Garlicke, or the bitter taſte of the Aloes, will quickly make her leaue her biting and ſnapping.
            
            
               To vſe a Hawke to the hoode
               IT hapneth oftentimes that Falconers haue hawkes which come from Ciprus, Candya, Alexandria, and other far countryes,

the which hauing béene in the hands of ſuch as could not well ſkill of them, become coy and very vntowarde to bée hooded, and will hardly be wonne to abide the Hoode by any meanes. In this caſe you muſt firſt ſéele your Hawke, and beeing ſéeled, you muſt fitte her with a large eaſie hoode: and hoode and vnhoode her often therewith, watching her a night or two, and handling her oftentimes about the head as before ſayde, vntill ſhée haue forgotten that fault. And when ſhée once doth leaue it, you may vnſeale her in an euening by candle light, handling her ſtill ſoftly with your hand about the head, hooding and vnhooding her oftentimes, vntill ſhée will well abide the Hoode, and brooke to be handled. And here I thinke good to expreſſe mine opynion, that he which taketh in hand to be a Falconer, ought firſt to be very patient, and therwithall to take ſingular delight in a Hawke, ſo that hée may ſéeme to be in loue (as it were naturally) with his Hawke, euen that a man would ſay, it were a thing bread ſo in the bone as it could neuer bee rooted out of the fleſh. For ſuch a man with neuer ſo little paine and induſtrye, will become an excellent Falconer: but he which taketh not that delight in his Hawke, but doth rather exerciſe it for a pompe and boaſt, than vpon a naturall inſtinct: or being a poore man, doth vſe it to get his liuing, ſuch a man in mine opinion ſhall ſeldome proue a perfect Falconer, but a mar-hawke, and ſhall beare the bagge after a right Falconer.
               To turne to my purpoſe, when your hawke beeing ſo ſéeled, doth féede well, and will abide the Hoode: and to bée handled, without ſtriking or byting at your hand: then in an Euening by Candlelight you ſhall vnſéele her, and with your finger and a little ſpittle, annoynt the place where the ſéeling thread was drawne through. And when you haue hooded her, take her on your fiſt, and holde her ſo all night vntill day appeare againe, doing off her Hoode oftentimes, and handling her gently with your hand, ſtroking herſoftly about the wings and the body, hooding and vnhooding of her, and giuing her ſometimes to féede, a morſell or

twaine, or ſometimes tyring or plumage. But aboue all things you muſt watch her on the fiſt ſo many nights together, without ſetting her downe on any pearch, that ſhe may be wearie, and ſuffer you to hoode and handle her gently without any manner of reſiſtance, and vntill ſhée haue altogether left and forgotten her ſtriking and byting at your hand: but ſome hawkes will belong before they leaue that fault, as the more coy or ramage that they be, the longer they will retaine thoſe ill tatches, and will not peraduenture be wonne from them in thrée, foure, or fiue dayes. When ſhée is well reclaymed from it, then may you let her ſit vpon a pearch to reſt her. But euery night you ſhall doe well to kéepe her on the fiſt thrée or foure houres, handling her and ſtroking her gently, and cauſing her to tyre or to plume, alwayes making of her, and hooding and vnhooding her oftentimes, as before ſaid. And the like may you doe alſo by day light, but in a Chamber apart, where ſhée may ſee no great light vntill ſhée feede ſurely and eagerly without dread.
            
            
               To make your Hawke know your voyce,
               IF your hawke be thus in foure or fiue dayes manned, ſo that ſhée begin to féede eagerly and boldly, then you ſhall firſt beginne to make her know your whiſtle, or the chirping of your mouth: and afterwards your voice in this maner Take a quicke Pullette, and going into ſome ſecret place, where your Hawke may well perceiue the fowle, and yet ſee no great open light, let her plume and feede vpon it, as ſhee ſitteth vpon your fiſt: then chyrke with your voice, and vſe thoſe other ſounds which Falconers do to their Hawks: and féed her ſo, hooding her gently: then afterwards you may let her plume a little vpon ſome wing, being ſtill hooded, as well to looſe her in the head, and to make her caſt wat
                     •
                  r, as alſo to teach her the better how to fitte on the fiſte. The feeding for a Falcon ſhall bée Pullets not very old, and Calues heartes,

weathers hearts, and hogs harts, and to giue her a conuenient gorge, to the end the may the better diſgeſt both the groſſe ſubſtance, and the ſlimie matter. But if your Falcon be not eager or ſharpe ſet, then ſhall you do well to waſh her meate ſometimes in fayre water, and ſome other whiles in vrine, wringing it a little, and then féeding her therewith for one, two, or three gorges, and that not continually: but reſpecting a day or two betweene, and that is referred to the diſcretion of the good Falconer. For this done ſomewhat to a bate a Hawke, and to enſeame her. It ſhall not be amiſſe alſo in the morning when ſhe is emptie both in the gorge and pannell, to conuey into her a little Sugar candy, to the quantity of a ſmall nut, for that diſſoluing in her, will make her the better to endure, and will both breake the groſſe ſubſtance, and diſgeſt the glit in her, and alſo wil make her eager as ſhall be further ſaid hereafter.
            
            
               How to make a Hawke know her feeding.
               WHen your Hawk féedeth eagerly, and knoweth your wiſtle and your voyce, then may you teach her to know know her feeding, & to bate at it in this wiſe. You ſhould with your right hand ſhew her meat, crying and luring to her aloud and if bate or ſtrike at it, then muſt you quickly and handſomely let her foote it, and féede on it for thrée or foure bits: and doe thus oftentimes, to the end ſhe may the better know her feeding. And afterwards feede her, and giue her euery night (without intermiſſion) ſome caſting eyther of feathers, or of cotton with two cloues ſometimes cut in foure peeces, and put into the caſting, or a little Aloes, wrapped vp in the Cotten, according as the Falconer ſhall ſee that it is requiſite. For ſuch caſtings make a Hawke cleane and eager. (∵)
            
            
               
               To make a Falcon bolde and ventrous.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               
                  WHen a Falcon hath learned to féede, and to know the call of her Kéeper: then to make her hardy, you ſhall ſuffer her to plume a pullet or good great chicken. And you ſhal goe into ſome cloſe place, where ſhée may not ſée ouermuch light, as before ſaid, where looſing her hood, in a readineſſe you muſt haue a liue pullet in your hand, & knéeling on the ground, luring and crying aloud vnto her, make her plume and pul the pullet a little. Then with your teeth drawing the ſtrings, vnhoode her ſoftly, ſuffering her to plume and plucke it with her beake twice or thrice more, caſt out the pullet vpon the ground before her. Then muſt you with rayſing or holding down your fiſt, encourage her vntill ſhe leape down vpon the Pullet, and ſeaze it. Then when ſhée beginneth to breake it, and to take blood, you ſhall lure & cry aloud vnto her, and encourage her by all the means that you can, féeding her vpon the ground. And therewithall you ſhal take her vp gently and nimbly with the pullet in her foot, whereon let her plume, and féed now and then a little. Then hoode her gently, and at laſt giue her tyring of a wing, or a foot of the ſaid pullet.
            
            
               To make a Falcon know the Lure.
               AFter that your Falcon hath twice or thrice thus killed a pullet in ſom ſecret place, then muſt you make her know the lure in this wiſe, Faſten a pullet vnto your lure, and goe a part. Then giue your Falcon to holde vnto ſome other man, who may draw looſe the ſtrings of her hoode in a readines. And when you are gone a little backe from him, take your lure at halfe the length of the ſtring, and caſt it about your head once or twice luring with your voyce alſo. Then let that other vnhood your hawke, whiles you throw out the lure not far from your hawke, luring and crying ſtll vnto her. And if your hawk doe ſtoope to the lure, and ſeaze the pullet, ſuffer her to plume her, coying her, and luring ſtill with your voyce. Then let her féede on the pullet vpon the lure, and afterwards take her vppon your fiſte together with her meat, and hoode her ſuffering her to plume and tyre, as is before ſaid.
            
            
               
               How to call your Falcon looſe and at large.
               WHen your Falcon hath come well thrée or foure times vnto the lure in ſome ſecret place, as well to a liue pullet as to a dead, then ſhall you goe abroad into ſome fayre meadow, where are no trées, and faſtning a quicke pullet vnto the lure, giue your Hawke to hold vnto another man. Then tying alſo a cryance vnto your hawkes leaſe, cauſe that other which holdeth your hawke to make ready her hoode, and giue her a little bit of meat on his fiſt, chirping and chearing her wt his voyce: Euen therewithall doe you goe backe foure or fiue paces or more, luring twice or thrice, let him which holdeih the hawke, doe off her hood, then do you take the lure at length of the ſtring, and caſt it about your head, crying and luring alowde, throwing it vpon the ground: & if your hawke ſtoope at the pullet, ſuffer her to breake it, and féed her vpon the lure, caſting her to eate the braines and the heart of the pullet with the lure alſo, alwayes crying and luring. And this order, ſhall you obſerue dayly further and further off, vntill ſhée bée well lured, entred, and manned.
            
            
               How to call a Falcon that will come looſe.
               WHen your Falcon wil come a farre off vnto the lure, and ſtoope to it being thrown out, without any coynes or ramagenes, then ſetting her ſharp, you ſhal get on horſbacke in a morning, and go into ſome fayre plaine field, and as neare as you can, where there is no wood nor trées, there giuing your hawke vnto ſome other man to hold (which muſt alſo bée on horſebacke.) Put your cryance to your hawke in ſuch wiſe, that ſhe may not tangle her ſelfe therewith in comming to the lure. Then drawing backe a little as much as you think méet, giue a ſign to him that holdeth the hawk, to make ready her hood, and let him hold vp his fiſt on high. Then lure you thrée or four times, as lowd as you can, alwaies caſting ye lure abour your head, wherunto for ye firſt time I would haue

Pullet faſtned ſtill. And while you ſo doe, let him which holdeth your hawke, plucke off her hoode, and if ſhe come ſtraight to the lure, forbeare vntill ſhée come within eight or ten paces of you, then caſt it vnto her. And if ſhée take the lure, let her plume thereupon, and lure you ſtill with your voyce, lighting off your horſe, and draw néere to your hawk fayre and ſoftly, luring and crying vnto her, & ſo féede her as before ſaid. But after that ſhe be called two or thrée dayes to the lure on horſebacke with a criance, or more or leſſe, according to the towardneſſe or vntowardneſſe of the Hawke, if ſhee come roundly a bow ſhot from you, you may then goe out in a morning, hauing ſet her reaſonably ſharpe for the purpoſe, & call her looſe on horſebacke, that is without eyther leaſe or criance, but looſe, & in company. And ifſhée come to you, féede her vpon the lure, as before ſaid, luring ſtill vnto her, to make her acquainted with your voyce. And the next day you may call her to the drie lure without a Pullette, or any thing vpon it. And when ſhe is come to the lure, caſt her out a quicke Pullette, breaking firſt the féete and legges thereof, and let her kill it vpon the lure, and féede her vp.
            
            
               To make a Falcon fleeing.
               WHen your Hawke will come, and ſtoope to the lure roundly, and without any ramagenes, then if ſhee bee a Haggart, you muſt put her on a payre of great luring belles, and the like ſhall you doe alſo to a Soarehawke. And ſo much the greater ought your bels to be, by how much more you ſée your Hawk giddy-headed, or like to rake out at check. For it can be no hurt to clog her wt great bels at the firſt, vntil her conditions be known & well perceyued. That being done, & hauing alſo ſet her ſharp, go one morning on horſebacke into ſome faire large field, without wood or trées, if it be poſſible, & hauing your hawk vpō your fiſt, conſider of ye wind, & ride you vp into the wind, or towards that way as the wind bloweth,

halfe a bow ſhot. And hauing looſened your Hawkes hoode, whiſtle ſoftly, as it were to prouoke your hawke to flée. Whereupon ſhée will beginne to bate, or at leaſt to ſlap with her flagges and ſayles, and to aduance her ſelfe vpon your fiſte. Then ſuffer her vntill ſhée rowſe or mewt, and when ſhée hath done eyther of them, vnhoode her, and let her flée with her head into the wind. For thereby ſhée ſhall be the better able to get vp on wing, and to get into the wind. Then will your Falcon naturally clime vpwards, rouing & fléeing round. Therefore when you ſée that ſhée hath flowen two or thrée turns, you ſhall cry and lure with your voyce, & caſt the lure about your head, whereunto firſt tye a Pullet, as before ſayde, and if your Falcon come in, when ſhe approacheth neare you, then caſt out the lure into the wind, and if ſhe ſtoope to it, reward her as before.
            
            
               To make a Falcon leaue the ſtand on the ground.
               IF your Falcon at firſt when ſhée fléeeth from the fiſt, will not get vp, but take ſtand on the ground, as the moſt parte of ſoare Falcons doe commonly, you ſhall not yet therefore be diſcouraged, nor out of hope, but rather making towards her with your horſe, & threatning of her, ſéeme to feare with your wand, and driue her from the ſtand, vntill ſhée flée a turne or two. Then take her downe to the lure, and féede her. But if ſo chance that your Hawke will not leaue that fault of taking the ſtand, then muſt you ſéeke to finde out ſome Chough, Starling, or ſome ſuch birdes, making ready your Hawkes hood, draw as neare them as you may vntill they ryſe. Then vnhoode your Hawke, and no doubt if ſhée will flée them, they will traine her well vpwards. Then muſt you haue in a readineſſe a Ducke ſéeled, as before ſaide, and ſo as ſhée may not ſée but backewards, becauſe ſhée may thereby mownt the higher. And holding her faſt by one of the wings, neare vnto the body, in your right hand, and luring with your voyce to

make your Falcon turne the head, forbeare till ſhée bee at a reaſonable pitch, then running vnder her, caſt vp your Duck towards her that ſhee may perceyue it, and that the Ducke may be to her in ſtead of a traine. And if ſhée ſtrike her, or ſtoope her, or truſſe her, then ſuffer her to kill it, and reward her vpon it, taking out one of her legges, or both, if neede require, feede her with a reaſonable gorge. This being done once or twice, or oftner, according to the occaſion, your hawke will leaue the ſtand, and delight to keepe her on wing, and become alſo the more obedient and louing.
            
            
               To make the Falcon to the River.
               WHen your Falcon is accuſtomed to flée for it, and will lye vpon you at a great gate, or at a reaſonable pitch and will come and holde in the head at your voyce and luring, then may you goe to the Riuer where you ſhall finde any fowle, and there ſhall it behoue you to vſe ſuch policie, that you may couer the fowle, and get your hawke to a good gate aboue the fowle. And when her head is in, then lay out the fowle, and cry, Hey gar, gar, gar. And if your Falcon doe ſtoope them, and enew them once or twice, then quickly thruſt your hand in your hawking bagge, and make her a traine with a Ducke ſeeled. And if your Hawke doe eyther truſſe or ſtoop it, ſuccor your hawke immediately, croſſing the Ducks wings, and let your hawk plume, &c. I am of opinion, that for the firſt or ſecond time that you ſhew your hawke a fowle, it ſhall not be beſt to ſhew her great fowle, but rather ſmall fowle, as the Dapchicke, or ſuch like. For if you ſhew them the greateſt fowles at the firſt, it often happeneth that they ſlippe from the Hawke vp the wind, and the hawke cannot recouer them (but raketh out after) whereby the Falconer is fayne to trotte farther than hee would, yea and ſometimes alſo he looſeth his Hawke. Wherefore

in my iudgement it were better at the firſt to be merry and wiſe.
            
            
               To make a Hawke inward at the River, when ſhee raketh out.
               IF it chance that your Hawke rake out with a fowle, and cannot recouer it, and in the end giues it ouer, and comes in againe directly vpon the man, then ſhall you doe well to caſt her out a ſéeled Ducke. And if ſhée ſtoope it, or truſſe it, croſſe the wings, & ſuffer her to take her pleaſure, rewarding her, and giuing her the heart, braines, tongue, and liuer, with a legge or two, according as you ſée occaſion. And for default of a quicke Ducke, take her downe to the dry lure, and let her plume a pullet, and feed her vpon it. Thus doing, your hawke will learne to giue ouer a fowle that rakes out, and hearing the Kéeper lure, ſhée will learne the better to hold in the head, and to make backe againe to the riuer.
            
            
               To make a flight for a Haggart.
               HE that would make a flight for a Haggart, hée ſhall doe well in my conceit, to flée where there be no Crowes, Choughs, or ſuch like for the firſt two or thrée flights, becauſe ſhe ſhall take none occaſion to rake out after ſuch checke. And it ſhall be good alſo, that you let her not flée out on head too farre at the firſt, but runne after, and cry to her (Why loe, why loe) to make her turne head. And when ſhée is come in, take her down with the lure, vnto the which I would haue a quicke Pullet faſtened, as before ſayd. And you ſhall ſuffer her to tyre, plume, and feede as before, &c. It hapneth oftentimes that a Haggart through her gadding moode and gallantneſſe of mind, doth rangle out from her kéeper, more thā vpō any other cauſe. Then ſhall you clogge her with greater luring bels, and make her a traine or two with a ducke ſéeled, to teach her hold in, and

know the man. You ſhall not néede to trayne a Haggard ſo often as a Soarehawke, becauſe they haue beene accuſtomed to prey for themſelues, and doe by experience know one fowle from another. But they doe much better remember eyther the rebukes, or cheriſhings which are made to them, than Soarehawkes doe: and therefore it behooueth to vſe more care and héede about a Haggart, than a Soare Falcon, & aboue all things to take her often downe with the drye lure, and to let her take her pleaſure of her reward. And (as Falconers tearme it) to bée euer well in bloud. For otherwiſe ſhée will not long be at your commaundement, but make you follow her. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to make your Falcon kill her fowle at the firſt.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               WHen a Soare Falcon or a Haggard is well lured, and flyeth a good gate, or a reaſonable pitch, and ſtoopeth

well, then ſhall you firſt caſt off a well quarried, or make Hawke, and let her ſtoope a fowle vppon a brooke or a plaſhe, and watch her vntill ſhe put it to the plunge: then take downe your make Hawke, and reward her and hoode her vp, ſetting her a little way off by the flight, that you may vſe her helpe afterwards if need be. This being done, take your yong hawke which is not yet entered, and going vp the wind halfe a bowſhotte or thereabouts looſe her hoode, and ſoftly whiſtle her off the fiſt, vntill ſhe haue rowſed or mewted, then let her flée with her head into the wind, hauing firſt giuen ſhewe to your company that they be in a readineſſe againſt the Hawke bée at a good gate, and to ſhew water, and lay out the fowle. This order being obſerued, and running and crying as Falconers vſe to doe, hawke on your Falcon, and giue her leaue to get vp, and when ſhée is at a reaſonable pitch, and couering the fowle, giue a ſigne to your companions that they drawe neate to the water, and all at once make in vppon the fowle on all ſides the brooke (as Falconers tearme it) to land her: thē if your Falcon ſtoope, and ſtrike or truſſe it, runne in a pace to helpe her, and croſſing the fowles wings, let your hawke take her pleaſure on it, féeding her as cuſtome is: but if ſo chance that ſhée cannot ſtay it at the firſt ſtooping, then you muſt giue your Hawke reſpite and time to recouer her gate: And when ſhée is at her gate againe, and her head in, then lay out the fowle againe as before ſayd, vntill you may land it at the laſt, alwayes remembring that as ſoone as ſhée ſeaze it, you ſuccour her quickly, and reward her according to order. True it is, that to be aſſured, you ſhall doe well alwayes to haue a quicke Mallard or Ducke in the hawking bag, whenſoeuer you would make a ſlight: and if your hawke kill not the fowle which is ſtooped (as often hapneth by many ouerthwart chances) then may you quickly haue recourſe to the hawking bag, and féeling your liue Ducke (your hawke being at her pitch, and her head in) you may throw her vp to your Hawke, & reward her, &c. For this order ſhall alwayes maintaine your Hawke to be inwards, and in good life and blood.
            
            
               
               How to doe when your river hawke will take ſtand in a tree.
               IF you haue a Falcon which (as ſoone as ſhée hath once or twice ſtooped & endewed a fowle) will take ſtand on a trée, you muſt aſmuch as may be, eſchue to flée in places where trées be, and you muſt haue two or thrée liue traines, and giue them to ſundry Falconers, placing them all of purpoſe, ſome here, ſome there: and when your Hawke hath ſtooped, and would goe to ſtand, then let him vnto whome the hawke doth moſt bend, caſt out his traine ducke ſeeled, and if the Falcon ſtay her, then reward her, &c. And by this meanes ſhee will leaue that fault, but if in this doing twice or thrice, ſhée will not leaue that tricke, then the beſt counſaile I can giue you, is to ridde your hands of ſuch a kite.
            
            
               To make a hawke fond of the Lure.
               WHen your Hawke is well quarrieed, and fléeth well to the riuer, and fléeth a great gate, or a reaſonable pitch, then ſhall you doe well alſo to make her fond of the lure: for when a Hawke hath ſtooped once, twice, or thrice, you ſhall doe well to take her downe with the lure, and to let her kill a Pullet, and feede her vpon it: yea the higher fleeing that a Hawke is, the more néede to take her downe the oftner with the lure, and to regard that you ouerflée her not: For if it happen that a fowle being often ſtooped, will not ſpring againe, but will rather fall to diuing (which Falconers call the ploonge) then muſt you take her with dogges, or kill her with Hawking poles, or vſe ſome ſuch other deuiſe, and be faine to take downe your Falcon with the lure, and giue her the fowle vpon the lure, féeding and rewarding her with as much delight as you can, to make her fond of the lure. It hapneth oftentimes that many Falcons will hardly become fond of the lure, through the great deſire they haue to kill their fowle.

To helpe that, I thinke it not ſufficient onely to kéep her from often killing, but ſometimes you muſt alſo take the quarrey out of her foot as ſoone as ſhée hath fedde vpon a little of the braines, and hood her vp, then giuing her vnto another to hold: goe from her a bow-ſhot, and call her to the lure, and ſo féede and rewarde her well vpon the lure with the fowle that ſhée killed, and this order will make her fond of the lure.
            
            
               How to helpe a Hawke when ſhee is froward and coy through the pride of greaſe.
               SOmetimes a Falcon will become very proude and diſdainefull by being ouer high kept, in ſort that ſhée ſhall not nede to bée fedde nor rewarded according as they feede when they prey of themſelues at large: and although ſhée flée and kill, yet as ſoone as ſhée hath plumed a little, let her kéeper take a ſhéepes heart cold, or the leg of a pullet, and whiles the Hawke is buſie in pluming, let the Falconer conuey the hart of the ſhéepe, or the pullets legge into ſome part of the body of the fowle, that it may take ſome taſte of it: and when the Hawke hath eaten the braynes, heart, and tongue of the fowle then let him take that forth, and call his Hawke with it vnto the fiſt, let him féede her therewith, and giue her a little of the feathers in the necke of the ſayde fowle, to ſcowre her & make her caſt.
            
            
               When a Falcon will not holde in the head.
               IF a Falcon vſe to rake out after checke or otherwiſe, and leane out ſo farre, as neyther for whooping, luring, or for caſting the Hawkes gloue about your head, ſhée will come in againe to the flight, but rather ſtill more and more gad out, and ſo flée away: in this caſe you muſt follow after her,

luring and whooping a good, proffering her to the lure, to make her put in her head againe: and if ſhe doe turne and come to the lure, then féede and reward her. &c. And doe not fayle in any wiſe to be fond of her when ſhe commeth to the lure, becauſe ſhe may thereby the better learne to know your voyce, & to come to the lure another time. Holding this order, (eſpecially with Seare-hawkes, or hawkes of the firſt Cote) they will learne to hold in at the voyce or ſight of the lure, yea, and that with ſuch readines as it will bréed admiration in all them that behold it, to ſée the excellency of art, what it is able by cunning to atchieue, which truely doth appeare in nothing more than in Hawking.
            
            
               How to keepe a Hawke high fleeing.
               WHen a Hawke is well made to the riuer, you ſhould not flée with her aboue two flights in a morning, but féede her vp although ſhée kill not: but if ſhée be a ſtately high fléeing Hawke, you ſhould not in any wiſe flée her aboue one flight in a forenoone, for it will bring her downe, and make her fall off her ſtately pitch by often fléeing, and becomming gréedy and hote of the quarrey. When a good high fléeing Hawke béeing whiſtled, or caſt off the fiſte, doth gather vpwards to a great gate, you muſt haue regard to continue her therein, fléeing with her vpon broade waters and open Riuers, eſchewing little brookes, and gullets, and ſuch places as lie near vnder couert, where there be trées, ſhrubs, and buſhes in ſuch ſort that it will be very hard to land a fowle handſomely from them, at leaſt not without helpe of dogges, and great clapping and a do. Yea ſometimes eke you muſt of force alight from off your Horſe, all which things are able to marre a high fléeing hawke. Foraſmuch as crying, clapping of hands, noyſe, bawling of dogges, and alighting on foote, and furthermore when a Hawke cannot ſée the water vnder her, al theſe things doe teach her to forget her kindly fléeing, and to

play the Kite, houering and winding as the Kite doth in the ayre without any ſhew of ſtate: and in twice or thrice doing ſo, ſhée abateth her gate, and marreth her ſléeping. Therefore let the Falconer take good heede to that conſideration, and kéepe his hawke alwayes as high fléeing as he can, ſuffering her but ſeldome to kill, and not to ſtoope, beyond twice or thrice at the moſt, and euen when ſhée is at the higheſt, let him take her down with the lure: where when ſhée hath plumed and broken the fowle a little, let him féed her vp, and by that means hée ſhall maintaine his Falcon high fléeing, and inward, and very fond of the lure. Here I will not deny but that if ſhée kill euery day, although ſhée ſtoope from a very high gate, yet if ſhée be not rebuked or hurt therewith, ſhe will doubtleſſe become euery day higher fléeing than other, mary therewithall ſhée will ſo much forget the lure, as the more you ſhew it her, the more ſhe will bend from it, and flée out on head from her Kéeper: and oftentimes wil teach you hot poaſting iourneys. Wherefore aboue all thinges, the high fléeing hawke ſhould be made inwards, and (as we tearme it) fond of the lure, becauſe it is no leſſe prayſe worthy in a high fléeing Falcon to make in, and turne head at the ſecond, or third toſſe of the lure, and when ſhée powreth downe like a ſtone vpon it, than if ſhe had killed: nay rather ſuch are more eſtéemed than the other. And ſo is the Falconer more prayſe worthy which doth winne his Hawke thereunto. For to come vnto the lure is a thing taught by art and induſtry, but to kill a fowle is the naturall property of a Hawke.
            
            
               To make a high fleeing hawke vpwards.
               IT hapneth oftentimes that a Hawke (although ſhee bée naturally high fléeing) will yet belong before ſhe be made vpwards, but will fiſh and play the ſlugge: for when ſhe ſhoulde get vp to couer the fowle, ſhee will ſtoope before the fowle bee put out, the which may procéede through two cauſes. Firſt, it may bee that ſhée is too ſharpe ſette, and the ſecond cauſe

may be that ſhee is flowen withall out of time, eyther too ſoone or too late. So that when you ſee a Falcon vſe thoſe euill tatches without apparant cauſe, you ſhall do well to caſt her out a dead fowl or a dead pullet for a dead quarrey (as Falconers tearme it,) and to hoode her vp without any reward, to the end ſhe may take no encouragement to vſe thoſe vile trickes: for there is no greater ſpoyle to an high fléeing Hawke, than when ſhée killeth a fowle from a baſe and low pitch, and ſo much the greater is the loſſe of her, by how much the more ſhee doth vſe thoſe vile buzardly parts. Therefore by my beſt experience I prayſe that order, to throw her out a dead quarrey and hood her vp: then afterwards within halfe an howre, call her to the lure and féede her, and doe this as often as ſhee vſeth to fiſh or to play the baſe flugge on that faſhion, and to find whether it procéed of beeing too ſharpe ſet, or of fléeing out of time, the Falconer ſhall doe well with all diligence to note the naturall diſpoſition of his Hawkes: as which will flée beeing hie and in good plight, and which beſt, when ſhe is kept low, which will flee beſt when ſhee is ſet moſt ſharpe and eager, and which contrary, and which in a meane betweene both, which earely at Sunne riſing, and which when the Sunne is two howres high or more, which ſooner, and which later in an euening. For the natures of Falcons are very diuers and ſondrie, in ſuch ſort as to flee with a hawke at her beſt howre and time, and to flee with her out of that time, is a thing which will ſhew as great difference, as between an excellent good Hawke, and a Kite. Therefore let the Falconer haue eſpeciall regard thereunto, ſetting his Hawkes to flee according to their natures and diſpoſitions, and keeping them alwayes in good order. And heere it is to be noted, that al hawkes, aſwell ſoarhawks, as mewed hawkes and haggartes, ſhould be fet out in the euening two or three houres, ſome more and ſome leſſe, hauing conuenient regard to their nature, as it is ſtronger or weaker: and in the morning alſo, accordingly as they caſt, hooding them firſt, & then ſetting

them abroad a weathering, vntill you get vp on Horſebacke to goe to field, and ſo your hawkes will alwayes be wel weathered and in good order. Theſe be the beſt meanes and obſeruations which I can ſet downe for Riuer Hawkes, which if it ſucceede well to you, then ſhall you ſtand aſſured of your ſport, and I of my deſire.
            
            
               To make a Falcon to the Hearon.
               NOw to teach you to make a flight at the hearon: although it be the moſt nobleſt and ſtately flight that is, and pleaſant to behold, yet there is no ſuch art or induſtry therein as in the other flights. For the Hawke fléeth the Hearon: moued by nature, as againſt her proper foe: but to the riuer ſhée fléeth as taught by the induſtry & diligence of the Falconer. Then muſt it néedes follow, that (ſuch Falconers as haue flowen at the riuer, when the end of the moneth of February, or the beginning of March is come, a time when Hearons beginne to make their paſſage) if you will make thoſe Falcons to that flight, you muſt ceaſe fléeing at the riuer with them any longer: but you muſt pull them downe and make them light, the which you ſhall doe by féeding them with no wilde meats, but the hearts and fleſh of Lambs, Calues, and chickens, and calling of them to the lure with other make Falcons, that is to ſay a caſt at once, to the end they may accuſtome and acquaint themſelues one with another, and ſo may the better flée the Hearon by helping one another, and by ſuccouring each other. Herein you muſt take good héed ſo to acquaint them that they crabbe not together, for ſo would they doe when they come to the flight, whereby they might be in perill to bee ſpoyled or killed. When your Falcons be ſkowred and cleane, ſo as béeing ſharpe ſet, they may be called hungry hawkes, or (as Falconers tearm them) eager hawkes, you muſt get a liue Hearon, vpon the vpper part of whoſe bill or truncke you muſt conuey the ioynt of a réede or Cane, ſo as ſhee may not hurt the

hawke therewith: that being done, tie the Hearon in a Criance, then ſetting her vpon the ground, vnhood your hawke, to the end that when ſhe eſpieth the Hearon, ſhe may flée her: and if ſhe doe ſo, make in apace to ſuccour her, & let her plume, & take blood of it, allowing her the braines, the marrow of the bones, with the heart all together: (the Italians call it Soppa.) Hauing thus laid it vpon your Hawking gloue, giue it your Hawke: and afterwards rippe the breaſt of the Hearne, & let your Hawke feed thereon vntill ſhe bée well gorged. This béeing done, hoode her vp vpon the Hearon, ſuffering her plume thereon with all the fauour that may be: then take her vpon your fiſt, and let her tyre a little vpon the foote or pynion of the wing. But if a Falconer haue not ſtore of Hearons to traine withall (as often it hapneth, by mean the fowle is rare and daintie,) then may he doe thus: When he hath armed or caſed the Hearons tronke with a Cane or réed, as before ſaid, he may take a péece of a Calues ſkinne, or ſuch other like, as long as the necke of a Hearon, & beginning at the head, continuing to the ſhoulders & body of the Hearon, let him ſew it in proportion & ſhape of a ſheath, that it may arme the hearons necke & head: & afterwards with a penſill, pen, & incke, or ſuch other deuice, let him paint it as like as he can to the necke and head of an hearon, with fethers & euery thing to the purpoſe. Then let him ſet the counterfeit Hearon vpon the ground, as before ſaid: and when the Hawke doth flée it and foot it, he muſt haue a quicke yong Pigeon, the which he muſt hanſomly conuey vnder the Hearons wing, and let the Hawke plume and féede thereon, reſeruing the hearon ſafe for an other time, and to make traine againe with it the next day. Then hauing thereupon rewarded your Hawke, and coyed her ſufficiently, you may goe the next day into a meadow, or other conuenient place with your Falcon on your fiſt: and giuing the Hearon armed as before ſaid, to ſome other which may holde it vnder his arme a good way off from the Hawke, as halfe an Arrowe ſhoote or more: Then your Hawke being

vnhooded, giue ſigne vnto him to throw vp the hearon on hie, and if your hawke ſeaze it, reward and féede her with a pigeon as before ſaide, dealing familiarly with her, and the third day you may doe again in like manner, cauſing him that holdeth the traine to hide himſelfe as cloſe as he can, and to caſt out the Hearon as farre from him as he may. All theſe being done, and the Hawke hauing thus often taken her train to your liking, you may the fourth day in a fayre field, put out the Hearon without cryance, or arming her at all: and when ſhée is vp of a reaſonable height, you may caſt off your Hawke, who if ſhe bind with the Hearon and bring it down, then make in apace to reſcue her, thruſting the Hearons bill into the ground, breake his wings and legges that the hawk may the more eaſily foote and plume it. Then reward her as bountifully as you can with the braines, the marrow of the bones and the heart as is before declared (making her the Italian Soppa) many vſe to make a traine another way, which dooth not miſlike me, and that is this: they cauſe one to clime a trée with the Hearon, from thence he caſteth her out to the Hawke, and then they let their hawkes flée as before ſaid. But as touching theſe traines, it behoueth that the Falconer bée of good iudgement, as alſo in diuers other things. For euen as the Hawke doth flée them with better or worſe liſt and life, ſo behoueth if that the traines prouided be ſtronger or weaker accordingly. (∵)
            
            
               
               To make your Hawke flee the wilde Hearon.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               
                  WHen your Hawke will kill a traine luſtily, and boldly, then may you goe into the field to finde a wilde Hearon at ſiege, and when you haue found her, win in as nie to her as you can, and goe with your Hawke vnder the wind, where hauing firſt looſed her hoode in a readineſſe, as ſoone as the Hearon leaueth the ſiege, off with her hoode, and let her flée: and if ſhée clime to the Hearon, and beat her ſo that ſhée bring her down, runne in apace to reſcue her, thruſting the Hearons bill into the ground, and breaking her wings & legges (as is aforeſaide) féede her and reward her vpon your hawking gloue, in manner before declared. But if your hawk ſhould fayle to beate downe the hearon, or doe giue him ouer, then ſhall you flée the Hearon no more with her, vnleſſe it be with ſome other make hawke, which is well entred, and in good fléeing. And thereby the vnſkilfull hawke ſéeing that other Hawke flée at the Hearon, and bind with her, will take courage and flée eake with that other make-Hawke, eyther little or much, and if they kill the Hearon, then ſhould they be fedde and rewarded together while the quarrey is hot, making them an Italian Soppa as before ſaid. And by this means the coward hawke may be made bold and perfect: But if it chance that any luſty royſting hawke will flée the Hearon of herſelfe without trayn, or the Shoueler, the Falconer ſhould let her foote it, plume and breake it vntill ſhée find blood, and ſhould giue her the Soppa, as Falconers do tearm it, for ſo they will become much bolder, and the better Hearoners alſo. But hee that will worke ſurelie to enter his Hawke at the Hearon, let him helpe her by any practiſe or means that he can deuiſe: and theſe bee the means and preceptes to make a Falcon a good Hearoner.
            
            
               
               Of ſuch Hawkes as flee from the fiſt, and firſt of the Sacre.
               
                  depiction of hawk
               
               YOu muſt vnderſtand that all ſortes of Falcons are made to the lure, after one ſelfe maner, but they are not

hawked withall alike: for the Sacres, Lanners, Gerfalcons, Millions, and Merlins, do not flée the riuer, vnles happily the Laners doe, which as I vnderſtand doe flée the riuer in France: but they flée not ſingle, but ſundry Laners at one time, more than a caſt or a leaſſe of them at once, and ſo peraduenture doe the Gerfalcon and the Million. Whereof although there be few in this country which are made or flowen withall, yet wil I not ſpare to write what I haue learned of them by hereſay, beginning with the Sacre. I ſay that they are flowen withall from the fiſt, in a plaine fielde where there are feweſt blocks, or ſtubs, or ſuch other impediments, but that a man may gallop fréely: men hawke with them to the Hearon, the Kite, and ſuch like, as alſo at Feazant, Partridge, Quaile, and ſometimes at the Hare, but with more than one ſingle Hawke at once as I ſaide before. And in Cyprus they hawke with them to the Crane with the help of the peregrine Falcon in this order: When they haue found the Crane, the Falconer doth looſe his Hawkes hoode in a readineſſe, (I meane the peregrine Falcon) & drawing as neare to the Crane as he can vnder the wind, when ſhée riſeth, hee quickly vnhoodeth his hawke, and lets her flée, and after her they caſt off a caſt or a leaſe of Sacres, which follow the peregrin Falcon, that leadeth them as the more waighty and valiant Hawke: and becauſe the Crane ſtriueth not at the encounter in defence as the Hearon doth, but alwayes fleeth right forwards, therefore the peregrine Falcon doth ſeaze vppon the Crane, and buckling with her two or thrée boundes, the Sacres make in and beat her down to the ground vntill the Falconers come in to reſcue their hawkes, who ſpéedily thruſting the Cranes bill into the ground, doe eftſoone breake her wings and legs (as they do the Hearons,) becauſe they doe Hawkes moſt wrong with their legges and féet: which being done, they reward and féede all their Hawkes vpon the Crane, making them an Italian Soppa vpon their hawking gloue, of the braines, marrow, and the heart, but giuing the

peregrine a greater reward than the Sacres, (yet with diſcretion) they reward them altogether. Thoſe peregrine Falcons which are good for the Crane, are much eſtéemed in Cyprus of great ſtates, and ſo much the more, by how much they are more rare and paſſing in perfection. But here amongſt vs this ſlight is not vſed, as well for that wée haue no ſuch ordinary ſtore of Cranes, as alſo becauſe our fields are not ſo playne, and frée without fewel, as theirs are in Cyprus.
               
               This is the order in Cyprus, but in France, the chiefe vſe of the Sacre, is to kill the Kite as I haue touched, and partly made you ſhew in the deſcription of the Sacre, in the former part of this Collection. But by this yée ſée, Euery country hath his cuſtome. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to flee with the Lanner from the fish.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               
                  LAnners are much eſtéemed in France, for they flée with them (a caſt or more at once) to the Riuer alſo. And becauſe they are hawkes (which maintaine long ſlightes,) they tyre a fowle in ſuch ſorte, that with dogges and hawking poles they kill many, and by that meanes they ſpoyle more with a Laner, than with a better hawke. Thus much I haue heard by credible reports. Theſe Laners are flowen withall at Partridge alſo & Feazant, and ſome ſay that many of them proue very good therefore. But in Italie they vſe no ſuch fléeing, pereduenture becauſe there is no great ſkill in it. If you would flée with a Laner, you muſt kéep her maruailous ſhort and ſharpe ſet. For they are of the ſame nature that a Sacre, and that one (in manner) is made euen as that other is: and becauſe they kéepe their caſtings long, by reaſon they are hard metteld hawkes, you ſhall not giue them caſting of cotton, but of towe, or knottes of Hempe, or the ſhauing of a Haſell wand. And if you giue them any cotton caſting, yet put the towe or knottes of Hempe on the outſide of it, and ſo becauſe they take ſmall pleaſure therein, they wil caſt the ſooner. Let this ſuffice to be ſaid of theſe kinds of hawks, becauſe they are ordinary, & their natures too well known of all men.
            
            
               To hawke with the Gerfalcon and the Mylion.
               I Will ſpeake ſome few words of the Gerfalcon and the Milion, which are all (in manner) of one nature, as the hawkes laſt rehearſed, and are made to the lure in the ſelfe ſame manner. Theſe hawkes (as far as I haue vnderſtood) do not flée the Riuer, but alwaies from the fiſt they flée the Hearons, Shouelers, and the Kite with the forked tayle, and at ſuch other flights. In going vp to their gate, they holde not that courſe or way which other Falcons doe. For they clime vp vpon the traine when they finde any fowle, and as ſoone as they haue reached her, they plucke her down, if not at the firſt

yet at the ſecond or third encounter. They are fedee and rewarded as other Falcons are: they are very crafty of nature, and couet to kéepe their caſtings long through ſloth. Therefore you ſhall not giue them caſting of Cotton, hut of Tow, Haſell, or hard things, as you ſhall do the Sacre and Laner. And you muſt kéepe them likewiſe very eager and ſharpe ſet. It is a Hawke that is flowen withall by great ſtates & Princes moſt commonly. And therefore I will write no more of it, as one that haue no great practiſe thereof.
            
            
               To flee with the Merlyne at the. Partridge.
               IF you will flée with the Merlyne at Partridge, chuſe the formall, which is the larger, for they onely will proue good thereunto. And in trayning or making the Iacke, you ſhould but looſe your time. When you haue made the formall Merline to the lure, in maner before deſcribed, and that ſhée will likewiſe abide the hoode, you muſt make her a traine with a Partridge, if you can get any, if not, then with ſome other liue bird, in ſuch order as hath béene ſet downe to trayne other hawkes. And if ſhée foote and kill it, then reward her, ſuffering her to take her pleaſure on it, &c. This being done, you may ſtraightwayes flee with her the wild Partridge: and if ſhée take it at the firſt flight (which ſeldome hapneth,) or if ſhée flée it, to mark and take it at the ſecond flight, being retryued by the Spaniels, féede her vpon it with a reaſonable gorge, chéering her with your voyce in ſuch ſort, that ſhe may know the ſame. But if ſhe proue not hardy at the firſt traine, then you ſhall doe well to proue her with another train, before you flée with her at the wild game. But if at the ſecond traine ſhe proue not hardy, it is a token that ſhee is cowardly, and nothing worth. (∵)
            
            
               
               To flee with the Merlyne at the Larke and Lenet.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               
                  I Like it well that men flée with a caſt of Merlines at once at the Larke or the Lenet. For ouer and beſides that they of themſelues loue company and to flée together, they doe alſo giue greater pleaſure or delight to the lookers on. For now

that one (at the ſtooping) ſtrikes the birde, and then that other at her downe come: and when that one climeth to the mowntie aboue the Larke, then that other lyeth low for her beſt aduantage, which is moſt delectable to behold. Yea and ſometimes the poore birds become ſo fearefull, that they ſhrowde themſelues in the houſes and chambers of ſuch as dwell neare the fieldes. So that both the birde and the Hawke are oftentimes taken both together by the countryman. And therfore it ſhall not be amiſſe to tye vnto their Ieſſes or Bewets ſome veruile bearing the armes of their owner & maſter, (as if they were falcons) to the end they may be reſtored vnto them. But to returne to my purpoſe, I ſay that when the Merlynes are throughly manned, and made gentle, you may carry them into the field, where hauing found a Larke or a Lenet, (making looſe her hoode) you muſt goe as neare as you can into the wind to the bird. And as ſoon as the bird riſeth from the ground, vnhoode your caſt of Merlyns, and caſt them to flée vntill they haue beaten downe the Larke or Lenet, and let them féede on her for their labour indifferently. But herewithall note that there is a kind of Larks, (called cutte Larkes) which doe not mount as the long ſpurd field Larke doeth, but flée foreheade before the Merlyn. In any caſe let them not flée ſuch Larkes, for neyther will they make you like paſtime, nor yet can you flée them without danger of léeſing your Merlynes.
            
            
               Of the time to mewe a Falcon.
               LEtte vs now ſpeake of the order how to mewe hawkes, and of the Mewes. Firſt, to ſpeake of Falcons, they may bée flowen withall vntill Saint Georges day, that is about the middeſt of Aprill. Then ſet them downe. And you muſt diligently marke, whether they haue any lyſe or not. And if they haue, pepper them to kill the ſayde lyſe, and ſkowre them before you caſt them into the mewe. That being done, you may put them into the mewe. There

are two ſundry ſorts of mewing, that is to ſay, mewing looſe at large, or at the Stocke: and I will firſt ſpeake of this laſt kind of mewing.
            
            
               Of mewing at the Stocke or the Stone.
               THe place wherein you ſhould mew a hawke at the ſtocke, ſhould be a low parler or chamber vpon the ground, farre from any noyſe or concourſe of people, and ſituate towards the North or Northeaſt. Place therein a table of a conuenient length, for the number of your Falcons, and let it bée fiue or ſixe foot broad at the leaſt, with little thinne boardes or planckes all alongſt the ſides and ends, nayled on foure fingers high. And let this Table be ſet on treſtles of two foot high, or thrée foot high from the ground, and fill theſe Tables with great ſand, which hath prety little round péeble and grauell ſtones in it: in the midſt whereof you may place ſome great frée ſtones a Cubite high, made like vnto a pillar, flat in the bottome, and playne & ſmooth aboue, growing by péecemeale leſſe and leſſe vnto the toppe of them, Whereunto let your hawkes be tyed, eyther Falcon, Gerfalcon, Myllion, or Merlyne. Then take a ſmall cord of the bigneſſe of a bowſtring or little more, put it through a ring, and binde it about the ſtone in ſuch ſort that the ring or ſwyvle may goe rounde about the ſtone without any ſtoppe or let: And thereunto tye the leaſe of a Falcon, which may ſo ſtand vpon the ſaid ſtone being ſet in the ſand. But you muſt haue regard, that (if you mew moe Falcons than one at once in one roome) you ſet your ſtones one ſo farre from another, that when your hawkes bate, they may not reach one another for crabbing. The great ſtones are ſet, for that a Falcon féeling the freſhnes and coolenes of the ſtone, will delight to ſitte ſtill vppon it, & the litle grauel ſtones are, becauſe a hawke will oftentimes ſwallow them to coole her within, and will kéepe them ſometimes

two or thrée howres, or more within her. The ſand alſo is neceſſary, becauſe when they bate, they ſhal not marre their feathers, and alſo becauſe thereby their mewts are the eaſlier cleanſed, and to be remoued from them. The litle cord or bend with the ring on it, are tyed about the ſtone, becauſe the Falcon bating this way and that way, ſhe ſhall neuer twind nor tangle, becauſe the ring followeth her ſtill. All day your Falcons ſhould bée hooded vpon the ſtone, vnleſſe it be when they would féed, for then onely you muſt take them on the fiſt vntill they haue ſed. At night off with their hoodes, and becauſe ſometimes inconueniences doe happen by night, the Falconer may doe well to haue his bed in the mew, that hée may the ſooner, and in time helpe or redreſſe any thing that ſhall happen amiſſe amongſt his hawkes.
            
            
               Of mewing at large.
               IF you mould mew your Falcon at liberty, and at large, then muſt you mew but one at once in one roome, and yet if the circuit of your mew be great and capable inough, there may two, thrée, or foure Falcons bee mewed therein well inough (with diuiſions.) The ſcope for one Falcon muſt bée 12. foote ſquare, & as much in height, or therabout, with two windows a foot and a halfe broad, or two foot broad at the moſt. Wherof the one ſhould open towardes the North, whereby the mewe may alwayes receiue freſh cold ayre, and the other towardes the Eaſt, for the heat and comfort of the Sun. And each of theſe windowes ſhould haue his cloſe caſementes on the outſide, to ſhut when you liſt, eyther one or both of them, according as occaſion ſerueth. If your hawke be a madbraine Kite, & a great bater, then ſhould it be beſt that this mew or chamber were on the ground, which if it be ſo, you muſt couer the ground with groſſe ſand foure fingers thicke, and thereupon ſet a ſtone in ſuch ſort as before ſaid, becauſe Falcons do couet to ſtand vpon a ſtone. And therwithal you muſt make her two

handſome perches, neare to each window one, that ſitting on the one, ſhee may haue the comfort of the Sunne, and on the other, the freſh of the coole ayre, and euery wéeke, or at leaſt euery fortnight, you muſt ſet her a latten baſon, or a veſſell of ſtone or earth, and at euening fill it with water, that your hawke may to the water, if ſhee deſire it. And if ſhe doe hath therein, then take it away the night following, and haue regard that your baſon, panne, or ſuch other veſſell bee of ſuch bignes and depth, that a Hawke may therein commodiouſlie hath at eaſe. Your mew muſt alſo haue a Portall, wherein there may be a little hole below to conuey in the deuiſe wheron their meat is ſerued, called amongſt the Falconers, the Hacke. And that muſt bée made on this faſhion. Take a péece of thicke boord, a foot and halfe long, and a foot broad, or therabouts, vnder the which faſten two little treſtles, thrée or foure fingers hie. Let them be faſt pinned or nayled to. Then with an awger or a pearcer, boare two holes on each ſide thereof, and through each of theſe put a ſhort corde of the bignes of a bow-ſtring, with the ends downward, through the holes, and knots faſt knit on them vnder the button of the boord, ſo ſtraight knit, that you cannot rayſe the cord aboue the boorde more than a fingers breadth, or there abouts. And when you would giue your Hawkes meat, take a little ſticke ſomewhat longer than the Hacke, and as bigge as your finger, but let it be of ſtrong wood, as Crabtrée, Holly, or ſuch like. And vpon that ſticke binde your hawkes meat, and put the ends of the ſticke vnder the cords, vpon the Hacke, and ſo conuey it into the mew to your hawkes, becauſe the hawke ſhall not truſſe or dragge her meat away into the mew, but may féede there. And as ſoone as ſhee hath gorged her and fed, take it away againe. And it is be vnderſtood, that if you mew more thā one hawke ſingle, then you muſt haue for euery hawke her ſeuerall Hacke. And it ſhall be good to kéepe one ſet howre in féeding your hawke, for ſo ſhall they mew ſooner and better: and thus may you mew hawkes (looſe and at large.) But

vnleſſe it be a Falcon which is ſo hote and madbrayned, that you are forced to mew her ſo at large.
               In mine opinion it ſhall be better to mew at the Stocke or Stone, as before ſaid, or elſe to mew them at the grate, (as we call it.) For in that kind of mewing wee take our hawkes on the fiſte euery day, and ſo may ſee in what plight and ſtate they be. And if they be ſicke, or fallen into any infirmity, then may you giue them ſuch medicines as ſhall be declared in the next diuiſion, the which cannot bee done when you mew at large. And therefore I commend the mewing at the Grate, becauſe many times our happe is to haue Haggarts, or Paſſengers, or Lentiners, the which haue flowen eyther to the riuer, or preyed for themſelues. So that it ſhall bée néedefull to beare them often and euery morning in the coole ayre, vntill midde Iuly, or more, or leſſe, according as you ſhall ſee them ramage and coy, yea and to call them to the lure, and to ride abroad with them alſo ſometimes an howre or two, in the freſh ayre. And it ſhall be a thing moſt neceſſary for a haggart or a hawke that hath preyed for her ſelfe, eyther more or leſſe. This I haue obſerued in mine owne experience, & me thinks it an aduertiſement worthy the noting vnto all Falconers. Sundry Gentlemen doe vſe to mew their hawkes on the pearch, which truely I can moſt commend, as well for that they are then aſſured to bée clean fedde, as alſo to be dayly peruſed for life, wormes, and other diſeaſes, wherto they are by nature ſubiect. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to mew Marlins.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               MArlins are alſo worth the mewing, if they bee hardie, and haue flowen well in their ſoarage. For although ſome men be of opinion, that a mewed Marlin is ſeldom good & that they are not poſſible to be mewed: yet haue I had Marlins that (being good in their ſoarage) haue proued much better

when they were mewed. So that I would wiſh him that hath a good Merlyn to mew her: for ſurely, if you can mew them, they will proue better & better. Some men in the mew do vſe to caſt meale about their Merlyns, becauſe they ſhould not eate theyr féet: but aſwell becauſe they may eat their féete howſoeuer they were mewed, if that were their property: as alſo becauſe in thoſe that I haue mewed, I haue found no ſuch cruelty vſed towards themſelues: therefore I count it but a fable, nor will giue any other rules in the matter, than ſuch as I haue preſcribed already for the mewing of Falcons, & ſuch like long winged hawkes.Addition. [Onely this if you ſhall line her pearch or ſtocke with a blacke Cony ſkinne, & kéepe her mew cloſe, ſhée will doe much better.]
            
            
               Of Goſhawkes.
               YOu ſhal not néed to ſhew any other game to a Goſhawke for her firſt entring, than a Partridge, becauſe in learning to flée the Partridge they proue moſt excellent. And the firſt yeare you ſhall doe beſt to flée them to the field, and not to the couert, for ſo will they learne to hold out, (and not to turne tayle) in the middeſt of their flight. And when they be mewed hawkes, you may make them doe what you will: and vnderſtand you, that you ſhall not néede to take ſuch pain, nor to vſe ſuch art in making of a Goſhawke which is taken a brancher, as with a Nyaſſe, for ſhe will alwayes know of her ſelfe what to doe. Yea and it ſhall be rather better to let her bée a little ramage ſtill, than to man her ouer much. Her féeding would bée good and hote meats. And if you would inſtruct her to kill great fowles, make hor trains therof, as I haue ſhewed in the treatie of Falcons. And if you would haue her continue at thoſe flights, then you muſt not let her flée any leſſer fowles, for that would quickly mar her. If you would make her to flée with a Spaniell or dog to helpe and aſſiſt her, then féede your Goſhawke with great fowles, as Cranes, Wildegéeſe and ſuch like, and giue your dogge fleſh tyed vnder the

wings of ſuch fowles when you train your hawke with them, and let your dog be rewarded with the ſaid fleſh, when you reward yeur Hawke vpon the traine: and alwayes acquaint the dog and the hawke well together. And this order you ſhal obſerue for a moneth, or vntill your dogge will throughly know his dutie. And euermore kéepe your dogge tyed vp: for if you let him goe looſe, it will marre him if he were the beſt that euer was. And neuer giue him reward of fleſh, but whē he maketh in at ſuch fowles to reſcue the Hawke. Call your Goſhawke to none other thing than to your fiſt. Yet ſometimes you may take her downe with a dead Pullet or ſuch like. And oftentimes ſpowte good wine vpon your Hawks Seare, obſeruing the order to ſet her to the water, as is before rehearſed in the Treatiſe of Falcons. Euermore note that a Goſhawke (for that ſhe is dainty) would be cured with ſwéete thinges miniſtred in all ſuch receites as you ſhall giue her.
            
            
               
               To make fleeing the Goſhawke, eyther Nyaſse or Ramage.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               YOu ſhall firſt obſerue many thinges already written of other kinds of Hawkes: as to ſéele and watch your hawk,

winne her to feed, to the hoode, and to the fiſt, and diuers other ſuch points which ſhould be but tedious to rehearſe. Therfore let me write of the order how to make a flight wt a Goſhawk, either Niaſſe or Ramage, the which is very hard to doe well. And for my part I would not counſell any man to trouble himſelfe much with them. But if any man haue a Nyaſſe, or Ramage Goſhawke, whereof he would ſee the proofe, let him man her, and make her to the fiſt: then let him enter her firſt to young Partridges, vntill it be Nouember. In which time the fieldes are ridde cleane, and become emptie, and the trees bare of leaues: then may you enter her to the olde Rewen, ſetting her ſhort and eager. And if ſhe kil at firſt, or ſecond flight, féede her vp for three or four times with the Partridge which ſhe hath killed: by that means I haue ſeene ſome of them come to good perfection.
            
            
               To make the Soare Goſhawke or the Haggart Goſhawke.
               YOur Soare Goſhawkes, or your Haggarts, ſhal be trimmed with Ieſſes, Bewets and Bells, as ſoon as they come to your hands: and you ſhall by all meanes make them abide the hoode well, the which will be beſt brought to paſſe, kéeping them ſeeled, and hooding and vnhooding them oftentimes, & teaching them to feede on the fiſt three or foure dayes, more or leſſe vntill they leaue their ramageneſſe and coyneſſe, & become gentle: that being done, vnſeele them at night by candlelight, cauſing them to plume or tyre vyon a wing or legge of a Pullet, and vſe your hawkes gently, and deale the beſt with them that you can deuiſe, vntill you haue throughly manned and won them, and that in ſecret places where they may not ſee much light, ſetting them vpon a pearch, and vſing all diligence to make them impe to the fiſt by little and little, vntil at laſt they will come three or foure yardes from you, and feeding them moſt with the legges of Pullets or Calues hearts: then you may goe into a garden, or into a cloſe abroad, and cauſing

them to féed firſt a bit or two vpon your fiſt, with their hoods on, and afterwards aſmuch with their hoods off, caſt thē down fayre and ſoftly to ſome pearch, and make them come from it to your fiſt, eyther much or little, with calling and chirping to them, ſaying: Towe, Towe, or Stowe, Stowe, as Falconers vſe, & when they come féede them, crying & calling ſtil to make them acquainted with your voyce, The next day you may call them with a Criance, ſetting them vpon a pearch vntill they come vnto you further off, feeding and rewarding them liberally to make them loue you. And when they come to the fiſt readily, & without checking or ramageneſſe, then lay a little from you a dead pullet vpon the ground, the hawk ſitting vpon the pearch and calling and chirping to her, if ſhe come and ſeaze the pullet let her plume her, and féed a pit or two theron, walking about her vntill you may without danger or mouing of her, come neare and take her vpon your fiſt, and ſo féede her: That being done, let her tyre and plume. Here I muſt aduertiſe you that the wing of a pullet cold, is not good féeding for a Hawke: for it will make a Hawke ſicke: But the legs eyther hote or cold may be giuen. And likewiſe you ſhal mark that I would haue you caſt out a Pullet to a Goſhawke dead, and not aliue: for theſe kind of hawkes are much enclined of nature to play the Poulters. So that if you ſhould vſe to throw them out liue poultry, it might make thē ſomtimes when they flée, turn taile to the Partridge, and ſeaze the pullets or chickens which they ſhall ſée in huſbandmens yards and backſides when they flée. Or in like maner when they are ſet to bath at length of their loines, the which would not only marre them, and make them full of ill properties, but alſo might cauſe the ignorant people, (as women and boyes) to kill them in ſtead of a Puttocke. When you haue thus called your Goſhawke abroade two or thrée dayes, vntill ſhe be well cunning, you ſhall take her on your fiſt, and get vp on horſebacke with her, and ſo riding wt her the ſpace of an houre or thereabouts, vnhood and hoode her ſometimes, and giue her a bitte or two of me at in the preſence and ſight of your Spaniels, becauſe ſhée ſhall not be afearde of

them. That being done, ſet her on a trée with a little ſhort Cryance tyed to her loines, and going ſeuen or eight yardes from her on horſebacke, call her to your fiſt with ſuch voyce and words as Falconers vſe: and if ſhe come, giue her two or thrée bits for reward, and caſt her vp againe to the trée, then throw out the dead pullet eight or ten yards from her. If ſhée flée to it, and ſeaze it, let her féed thrée or foure bits vpon it, riding the meane while about her on horſebacke, and rating backe your Spaniels, becauſe they ſhall not rebuke her at firſt, and ſo make her euer after fearefull of dogges. Then alight off your horſe, gently take her vpon your fiſt, féed her, and when you haue ſo done, hoode her, and let her plume or tyre. Here I will ſay for mine owne opinion, that a deade Partridge, or a counterfeit Partridge, made with the very plumage, wings and tayle of a Partridge, were much better to throw out vnto your Goſſhawke, becauſe it would make her both know Partridge the better, and Poultrie the leſſe.
            
            
               
               To make a Goſhawke flee to the Partridge.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               WHen your Go ſhawk is thus manned and cunning, then may you goe into the field with her, carrying

with you a traine Partridge if need be: and vnhooding your Hawk, bear her as quietly as you can: you may let her plume or tyre a litle to make her eager. And if the Partridge ſpring, let her flée: if ſhe marke one, or two, or more on the ground, then goe to her fayre and ſoftly, and manacing her with your hand, or with a wand, cauſe her to take Pearch on ſome trée thereby. Then if you can retriue the Partridge with your ſpaniels, as ſoone as it ſpringeth, you muſt cry Howit, Howit: and if ſhe flee it to the marke againe, you muſt put her to a trée, and retriue it the ſecond time, crying when it ſpringeth as before ſaid. And if ſhe kill it, féed her vp with it: but if ſo chance that the Spaniels ſhould take it, as oftentimes hote Spaniels light vpon the Partridge, being eyther flown out of breath, or otherwiſe ſurcharged with feare: then alight from your horſe quickly, & taking it from the Spaniel, caſt it out to your hawk crying, (ware hawke ware) and let her féed her fil on it. The next day you ſhal not flee with her, becauſe hauing fed & rewarded her with bloody meat, ſhe wil not ſo ſoon be in good caſe to flée againe. For ſuch meat is not ſo eaſily endewed by a hawke, as the leg of a chicken or ſuch like. Vſing her thus thrée or four times, ſhe will be well in blood, and become well fléeing at this pleaſant field-flight.
            
            
               How to helpe a Hawke that turneth tayle to tayle, and giveth over her game.
               IT hapneth oftentimes, that when you haue let your Goſhawk flée at a Partridge, ſhe wil neyther kill it, nor flée it to mark, but turneth tayle to tayle, as Falconers term it: that is when ſhe hath flown it a bowſhot or more, ſhée giueth it ouer and takes a trée. Then ſhall you call in your Spaniels to the retryfe, that way that your hawke flew the Partridge. And the Falconer drawing himſelfe that way, may caſt her out a quicke Partridge which he ſhall carry for ſuch purpoſes in his Hawking bagge, in ſuch ſort as the Hawke may ſée it, and thinke that it is the ſame which ſhe flew. And ſo crying when

you caſt it out, ware Hawke ware, make her ſeaze it, & feede her vpon it, that ſhe may be encouraged thereby to flée out with a Partridge. The day following you ſhal not flée with her, as is before ſaid, but prepare her againſt the third day, and ſet her ſharpe: and if then alſo your Goſhawke giu
                     •••
                  er, ſerue her with a quicke Partridge againe. But if ſhée 
                     〈◊〉
                   it the thirde time, I would not wiſh you to trouble your ſelfe any longer with ſuch a vile Buzard, but ridde your handes of her, for ſure it is great oddes that ſhée will neuer proue good. And yet if any man will trie his Hawke to the vttermoſt, than let him make her flée a Partridge which is flowne to the marke with ſome other well entered Hawke, at the firſt or ſecond flight. And if ſhe kill that, let him feed and reward her well, vſing her to ſuch flights thrée or fouretimes, and ſo peraduenture ſhée may learne to holde out, and maintaine her flight the better.
            
            
               When a Goſhawke will not flee at all.
               FOraſmuch as the Goſhawks which are takē in September or October, doe not know their prey ſo well as they which are taken later, ſince they haue not preyed ſo long as thoſe old, it hapneth many times that when they are made to the fiſt, and brought euen to the point to flée, if you let them flée at a Partridge, they take a trée and will not flée at all. To redreſſe that, you ſhall goe into a plaine fielde where are no trées, with a quicke Partridge, the which you ſhall giue to ſome of your company, your ſelfe ſhall ride vp and down half an houre with your Hawke vpon your fiſt vnhooded: & then drawing near to your companion which hath the Partridge, when you come within ten or twelue paces of him, let him priuily caſt out the Partridge, and let your Hawke flée at it: which done, reward and féed her wel thereupon. If peraduenture your Goſhawke haue néed of more ſuch trains, then you may continue it thrée or foure times, vntil ſhée be well in blood

with ſuch flights: But ſurely ſuch Hawkes are not greatly to be regarded. The ſame that is ſaid of Goſhawkes, is to be vnderſtood alſo of Tercels. And alwayes remember, that the dext day after you haue rewarded and fed your Hawke vpon the fowle or bird that ſhe killeth, féed her the next day with a ſhéeps heart, or hens legs betimes in the morning, to bring her in order againe to flée.
            
            
               To make a Goſhawke flee quickly.
               SOare Goſhawkes (eſpecially Niaſſes) are commonly very fond of the man, and therfore ſhould bée flowne with a little more ramage, and before they be throughly reclaymed, for elſe oftentimes within two or thrée ſtrokes with theyr wings, they will giue ouer the fowle that they flée, & return ſtraight againe to their Kéeper. Therefore remember to flee with them as ſoone as you can, and that vntill they be perfectly nouſled and in blood. They muſt alſo be ſet in places where they ſée not many folke, for feare they become very fond of the man: But when they haue flowne, and haue killed twice or thrice, then ſet them where people and dogges frequent, the which ſhall bée neceſſary to preuent the inconueniences which might happen, when they are at marke neare to a houſe, or vpon a high way, if then they ſhould bée diſcouraged with ſodaine ſight of any perſon that went by. And yet by this aduertiſement of fléeing quickly with a Soare Goſhawke or a Nyaſſe, I might make ſome Falconer learne a worſe miſchiefe, if by fléeing ouer-ſoone with his Hawke, hee ſhould pull her downe, or make her poore, the which would cauſe her to become fearefull and cowardly, and to giue ouer a Partridge, as I haue ſéene diuerſe, that although they were at the firſt very towarde Hawkes, yet after they haue béene once pulled downe, they haue loſt theyr courage and goodneſſe. And therefore by what meanes ſoeuer a Goſhawke or Tercell, ſhall become poore, it ſhall bée the Falconers parte firſt to ſette her vppe againe,

before he flée with her, vnleſſe it be ſome Goſhawke (whereof there are but few) which will not flée when ſhe is hie, & in good plight. Then the Falconer may ſomewhat bate her fleſh and pinch her with ſcouring, waſht meat, and ſuch like deuiſes: But let him alwayes rather kéep his Hawke in ſuch wiſe that ſhe may flée when ſhe is luſtie: & therewithall let him ſet her abroad (when it is not ouer cold) betimes in the morning for one howre or twaine. For being ſo weathered, when ſhe hath flowne a Partridge to the marke, ſhée will not away, vntill it be retriued by the Spaniels.
            
            
               That a Goſhawke being a good Partridger, bee not flowne with to the Feaſant.
               IF your Goſhawke be once a good Partridger, beware that you let her not flée the Pout, or the Feaſant, for the feaſant fléeth not ſo long a flight as the Partridge doth. And therfore the Goſhawke being naturally more rauenous and deſirous of prey than any other Hawke, would more delight to flée a ſhort flight to the Feazant, and will care leſſe to hold out at a Partridge True it is that ſome are good for both, but thoſe are very rare: And therefore you muſt haue conſideration thereof, as alſo to kéepe them in good order with fléeing, bathing, weathering, tyring, pluming, and diuerſe other points of Falconrie, the which do ſerue alſo for tercels aſwel as for goſhawks.
            
            
               How to vſe a Haggart Goſhawke.
               THe traynes which you vſe to giue ſoare Goſhawkes and Nyaſſes, are not ſo requiſite for a haggart. For the Soarehawkes and Nyaſſes when they are made to the fiſt, & to ſeaze a pullet vpon the ground, wil then abide & neuer ſoare away, and may immediatly be flown withall at a Partridge, ſo that you beare a liue traine Partridge with you to ſerue her if néed be, as hath been heretofore declared in entring of other hawks.

And the principal point of conſideration is, that you encourage any hawke well at the firſt. In fléeing with a Goſhawke, it hapneth oftentimes that fléeing in the ſnow, and killing their prey vpon the ground, they fill their belles with ſnow, ſo that the Falconer canot tell where to finde them. At ſuch times then, faſten a bell vpon the two couert feathers of your Hawkes Stearne or Trayne, and that aloft neare to her rumpe. For ſo doe the Falconers of Dalmatia vſe at all times of the yeare to flée with their Hawkes. And it is a good meane to know at all times where, and what is become of your Hawke.
            
            
               
               To flee with a Goſhawke to the Riuer.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               NOw I haue (in mine owne iudgement) ſet downe as much as is neceſſarie, to make a Goſhawke perfect in

killing of a Partridge or any other field flight: I will alſo declare how you may flée to the Riuer with a Goſhawke, and how you may kill great Fowles with her. A Goſhawke (but no Tercell) may flée to the riuer at Mallarde, Ducke, Gooſe, Hearon, and ſuch like, whether it be becauſe the proueth not to the field, or for any other delight that ſhe or her kéeper hath to the Riuer. And you ſhal hold this order in making her, the which doubtles ſhall bring her to perfection: for Goſhawkes do more willingly flée ſuch flights than at any other. And yet is there great difference ſeene in the proofe of them: for ſome of them proue much hardier & better than ſome other doe. Well, the Falconer ſhall firſt make his Goſhawke to the fiſt, in ſuch ſort as I haue preſcribed, when I taught to flée them vnto the field. Then muſt he carrie her into the field without bels, with a liue Ducke giuen vnto one of his companions. And the Falconer muſt haue with him a little drum or taberd faſtned to the pommel of his ſaddle, together with the ſinew of an oxe leg dried, which ſhal ſerue him to ſtrike vpon his drumſlet or taberd: and cauſing his companion to hide himſelfe in a ditch or pitte, with the Ducke tyed to a Cryance, his Hawke being vnhooded vpon his fiſt, he ſhall draw towards his companion which ſtandeth ſo hid in couert.There hath beene vſed a kind of flight with a Goſhawk called the flight made to the becke, and it is like to this, but it is much ſurer and better. And when hée is neare him within two or three paces, or little more, hée ſhall ſtrike vppon his Tabarde twice or thrice: and his Companion hearing him, ſhall throw out the Ducke aloft. And let the Falconer caſt off his Goſhawke to it, and if ſhe take it at the Sowrce, let him reward her and féede her with a reaſonable gorge, making her all the cheare that may be: then let him take her vpon his fiſt and hoode her, ſuffering her to plume or to tyre vpon a wing or a leg of the Ducke. The next day hée ſhall not flée with her, as before I haue admoniſhed. But the third day he may go again in like maner with his companion, or elſe may ſeeke ſome water plaſh or pitte where Wildefowle lye, as Teales, or ſuch like. Prouided alwayes that he ſeeke the aduantage of his flight, where the Banckes bee

high: for the higher that the banks be, the better he may come to make his flight: and in ſuch a place, hee and his companion, one on the one ſide, that other on the other, may ride fayre and ſoftly vntill they find fowle, and yet put them not vppe. When they haue found them, both of them ſhall draw backe along by the banke, and the Hawke beeing vnhooded, they ſhall trotte both of them right vpon the fowle with their horſes. When they bee neare them, he which hath the Tabarde ſhall beate it, ſo that the Fowle may riſe, and then he may let flée his Hawke: and if ſhée take any of them at Sowrce, let him make in to her apace, and croſſe the Fowles winges, ſo that ſhée may foote it, and plume it at her pleaſure, rewarding her as before, &c. And the better to encourage her, when he hath hooded her, let him ſet her vpon the Fowle, and let her plume it her fill, and after let him take her on his fiſt, and giue her a wing or a leg of the fowle to tyre on: And the next day let him not flee, &c. And when his Hawke is throughly nouzled and in blood, then hee may flee twice in a day or oftner with her, rewarding her as before is expreſſed. Vſing his Hawke thus, hee ſhall ſo well encourage her, that hee may flée the oftner with her at his pleaſure.
            
            
               Of fiecing the Wilde-gooſe and Crane with a Goſhawke.
               SOme delight to flee Wildgeeſe and Cranes with a Goſhawke, and ſuch other great flights. And the traine muſt be made in this wiſe: When the Hawke is made to the fiſt as before ſaid, let him goe on foote abroad into the field with his Goſhawke on his fiſt, carrying with him a wildgooſe or a tame Gooſe of the colour of a wilde-gooſe, tyed by the tayle with a Cryance. And hauing ſette her on the ground eight or tenne Paces from him, lette him vnhoode the Hawke, and twitch the Gooſe with the Cryance vntill hee make

it ſtirre and flicker with the winges. Then if his Goſhawke bate at it, caſt her off, and runne in to ſuccour her, ſo that the Gooſe beate her not with her wings, for diſcouraging her. And if he haue ſtore of traines, then he ſhall reward and féede her on the braines, heart, and thigh of that which hée trayned withall. But if hee haue no ſtore, then it ſhall bée néedefull to ſaue that for another traine. This done, let him cloſely conuey a pigeon vnder the wing of the traine, and reward his hawke therewith, as hath beene heretofore declared in the traines to the Hearon. And the next day let her not flée, but ſet her down, &c. The third day he may giue her another traine ſomewhat further off. And the third train hee ſhal giue it her on horſebacke, fiftie or threeſcore paces off at the leaſt, or ſo farre off as hee may come in to ſuccour his hawke in time. His hawke being thus trayned and entred hee may ride out with his hawke (without belles, becauſe the Géeſe ſhall not riſe before the Falconer haue brought his Hawke to the vantage) then with his Tabard to beate it vp, & ſo foorth, whereof I haue told before. And hauing found any wilde géeſe, he ſhall ſhew them to his hawke, who being naturally mooued, will make from the fiſt to them, and will flee low by the ground, vntill ſhée come neare them. Then the Falconer ſhall ride after apace, and ſtrike vpon his Tabarde, vntill hée rayſe the wildgéeſe. And if his Hawke ſeaze any of them at Source, hée ſhall quickly ſuccour her, and reward her, &c. But foraſmuch as wilde Géeſe will riſe as ſoone as they ſée any body. Therefore the Falconer muſt teach his Hawke to take the aduantage, which is thus done: As ſoone as hée hath found them a farre off, lette him alight from his horſe, and carry his Hawke vnhooded behind his horſe, ſtawking towardes them, vntill hée haue gotten reaſonably neare them, holding downe his hawke couerte vnder the horſe necke or body, in ſuch ſorte that ſhée may finde the Géeſe. Then the Falconer ſhall runne

in apace, and ſtrike vpon his Tabarde, to rayſe the Géeſe. And if ſhe kill any of them, rewarde her, &c. Vſing his hawke in this order, ſhe may be made to kill two or thrée, or more, in a day. And in like manner may ſhee be made to the Crane: And in like ſort may hee creepe to flee at fowle which lye vpon pits or pondes. Firſt ſhewing them to his Hawk, and letting her draw to them, and then running in to put them vppe with his Tabarde. But the Falconer muſt take héed, that as long as he may finde great flights, hée flée not at ſmaller fowle, to the end his Hawke way continue the more boldly to flée great flights. For a man may ſoone make a Hawke a cowarde, and a ſlugge. Yet ſome there bée (but thoſe are very rare) which fleeing at all kindes of Fowles, become ſtill hardier and hardier, and better and better. Now hauing written ſufficiently of ſuch flights, I will paſſe ouer to teach the meanes to mewe a Goſhawke.
            
            
               To mew a Goſhawke.
               WHen you haue flowen eyther with Goſhawke or Tercel, Soar, or Haggart, vntill March, giue her ſome good quarrey in her foot, and foreſéeing that ſhée be cleane from lyſe, cut off the buttons of her Ieſſes, and throw her into the mew, the which may bée a roome eyther below, or on the ground, ſet towards the North if it bee poſſible. And as for the bigneſſe, ſo that it be not too little, lette it be as large as you will, and let the pearches therein be lyned with Cannas or cotton, ſo that the hawke hurte not her féete there vppon: for thereby ſhée might catch eyther the gowte; or the pynne. Let the mewe alſo haue a window toward the Eaſt, and another toward the North, to take freſh ayre, and the comforte of the Sunne. You ſhall alſo prouide in the ſame mewe, a Baſon or other veſſell for water, and euery thrée dayes at the moſt, change and ſhift the water. And feede

your hawke eyther with Pygeons, or with Quailes, or elſe with hote fleſh of a Weather or gelded Goate, for that will make her mew well and quickly.
            
            
               To draw the Goſhawke out of the Mewe.
               ABout the beginning of October, if you perceiue your Goſhawke faire mewed, and hard penned, then giue her eyther chickens, or Lambes hearts, and Calues hearts, by the ſpace of 20. dayes together, to ſkowre her, and to make her ſliſe out the ſlimy ſubſtance, and glytte out of her pannell, and to enſeame her (as Falconers tearme it.) That being done, one euening you may draw her out of the mew, and new furniſh her with Ieſſes, belles, & Bewets, and of all other things that ſhall bée néedefull. And when you haue féeled her, keepe her ſo ſéeled two or thrée dayes, vntill ſhe will be gently hooded. And thereof a Falconer ought to haue a ſpeciall regard. For commonly all mewed hawkes are as coy to bée hooded, as when they were firſt taken. But when you haue won her to abide the hoode gently, then in an euening by candle light you may vnſéele her, and the next day you may goe about to ſhew her the fiſt and the gloue. And as I haue before aduiſed you to deale with Haggarts, or hawkes new taken from the Cage, you ſhall not forget to let her tyre and plume morning and euening, giuing her ſomtimes in the morning, when her gorge is emptie, a little Sugar Candie, for that will helpe her maruailouſly to endew. Sometimes alſo when ſhée is emptie in gorge and panell, you ſhall giue her ſkowrings of Aloes Cicatryne, Cloues and Staueſaker, wrapped in a little péece of cotton, or in towe, or linnen cloth. But hereof ſhall hée written more plainely in the treatiſe of medicines.
            
            
               To make a mewed Goſhawke fleeing.
               WHen the Falconer ſhall perceyue his Goſhawke to féede eagerly, and perceiueth by his iudgement that

ſhe is enſeamed, and that hee may boldly flée with her: then let him goe with her into the field, and finding Partridge, if the hawke bate at them of her owne accord, it is a token, that ſhée is empty, and ready to flée: but if ſhee bate not, then doth it betoken the contrary. Therefore in ſuch caſe féed her ſtill with waſht meats, and thinges conuenient, as long as you ſhall think requiſite. For doubtles if ſhe be once throughly enſeamed and ready, ſhée will flée of her owne accord. And then if ſhée kill, féede and reward her, as hath béene before declared. But if ſhée flée to the marke with a Partridge, then you muſt retriue it and ſerue her as is alſo before expreſſed.
            
            
               
               How to keepe Nyaſse Sparowhawkes.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               SParowhawkes are to bee conſidered as all other kindes of hawkes are, according to their age and diſpoſition. Some of them are named Nyaſſes, ſome Braunchers, ſome Soarehawkes, and ſome mewed hawkes: Some alſo Haggarts,

béeing mewed in the woode, they are called Nyaſſes, which are taken in the eyrée. Branchers are thoſe, that hauing forſaken the eyrée, are fodde by the old hawke vpon the boughes and branches neare about the eyrée, and thereupon they are called Branchers: afterwards they are called Soarehawks. They are called Soarehawkes, becauſe when they haue forſaken the wood, and beginne to prey for themſelues, they flée vp aloft vpon pleaſure, which with vs Falconers is called ſoaring. Mewed hawkes are all hawkes that haue once or more ſhifted their feather: and Haggarts are they which prey for themſelues, & doe alſo mew themſelues eyther in the wood, or otherwiſe at large. To beginne with the Nyaſſe which is of greateſt difficulty to bring vnto any perfection, you muſt firſt féede her in ſome freſh coole Chamber or parler vpon the ground. And the ſame chāber ſhould haue two windows not very large, whereof that one ſhould open towards the North, and that other towards the Eaſt, to take the freſh coole ayre, or the comfort of the Sunne at her pleaſure. Theſe windowes muſt be open, barred ouerthwart with lathes, or thin bordes, ſo thicke that neyther your hawkes may gette out, nor your Catte may come in. And in this Chamber caſte and ſtrew Vine leaues, and other freſh leaues. For it refeſheth a hawke maruailouſly to reſt vpon them. And for the ſame conſideration it ſhall not be amiſſe to ſette two or thrée great frée ſtones in the chamber, whereuppon the Hawkes may ſitte coole and freſh. You muſt alſo haue two or thrée pearches lined or couered, one a little higher than another, ſo that the hawke as ſhe groweth huger and huger, may flée from one pearch to another, and neuer hurt her féete. And when ſhe is full ſommed, ſo as ſhe can flée, then wil it be méete and moſt neceſſarie to ſette ſome large baſon, or other veſſell full of Water, that ſhée may bath her at pleaſure therein. For that is not onely very wholeſome for her bodie, but alſo will make her put out her feathers the better, & the faſter. And you ſhall doe well to ſhift her water euery three

dayes. You ſhall féed her with young Sparrowes, Martelettes, and young Pigeons, and ſometimes with ſhéepes hearts: and whiles ſhee is very young and little, you ſhould cutte her meate, and ſhredde it in ſmall pellets vppon a trencher, or a cleane boorde for the purpoſe, ſetting it ſo neare her that ſhee may reach it with her beake, and feede. Thus you ſhall fade her twice, or more euery day, euen as you ſhall ſée her endew it, or (as Falconers ſay) put it ouer. Beware that you giue her not gorge vpon gorge, for that will make her caſt her gorge. But when ſhee is full ſommed, and fléeth about, then you ſhall doe better to giue her whole birdes, and ſometimes to féede her vpon your fiſt, ſuffering her to kill and ſtraine the liue birdes in your hand: Yea and ſometimes to put quicke birdes into the chamber to her, that ſhée may learne to know them, to foote them, and to kill them, and let her féede vpon them her ſelfe in your preſence. For that ſhall bée very good as well to noule her, as alſo to make her leaue that vile condition which commonly all Nyaſſes haue, which is, to carry and hide their prey in ſome hedge or ditch, or ſecret place: and therein they will ſitte very cloſe for being heard, when they heare or perceiue their Kéeper to ſéeke them. Whereupon their Kéepers are oftentimes euill troubled and diſpleaſed. And alſo it ſhall not bée amiſſe, euery morning to goe into the ſaide Chamber, and to call them to the fiſt, whiſtling and chirping with your mouth, for by that means you ſhall both man them throughly, and alſo you ſhall gaine the time which you ſhould elſe ſpend afterwardes, in making them when they were ready to bée drawne out of the faid chamber.
            
            
               To reclayme and make the Nyaſſe Sparowhawke.
               WHen your Nyaſſe Sparowhawke hath put forth all her feathers, & is full ſommed, then ſhall you take her

out of the chamber and furniſh her with belles, bewets, Ieſſes, and lines. And by my counſell you ſhall alſo ſéele her at the firſt, to make her gentle to abide the hoode, which is contrary to her nature, and to make her tractable to bee handled, vſing her fauourably and louingly alwayes: and at the firſt with a hood, which is too great and large to hoode and vnhoode her oftentimes, ſtroking her head ſoftly with your hand, vntill ſhée will ſtand ſtill, and abide the hoode gently. Then in an euening by light of a candle you ſhall vnſéele her, giuing her ſomewhat to tyre vpon, handling her, and ſtroking her feathers gently, ſometimes hooding and vnhooding her. And becauſe Nyaſſe Sparowhawkes are ſeldome made perfect and good without great paines and diligence, therefore obſerue theſe things and vſe them accordingly, if you wil haue a good Nyaſſe Hawke.
            
            
               To traine a Nyaſſe Sparowhawke.
               WHen your Nyaſſe is well wonne to the hood, and to the fiſt, let her kill ſmall birdes vpon your fiſte, then call her two or thrée dayes together, vntill ſhée wil come farre off. Then you muſt take a quicke Pigeon tyed by one foote with a Cryance, and ſtirre it vntill your Hawke will bate at it, and ſeaze it, though not farre off, yet as you may, and helpe her at the firſt, leaſt the Pigeon ſtrugling with her, bée too ſtrong, and diſcourage her. Then let her plume her, and foot her, and féed her thereupon with as much fauour as you may, and whiſtle to her, to make her know your whiſtle, vntill ſhée haue taken a reaſonable gorge. Then hood her vp, and let her plume or tyre a little afterwards. The day following you ſhal call her to the fiſt, and ſhew her a liue Pigeon, ſo neare that ſhée may reach at her with her beake. Then caſt it out before her, vntill ſhee flee it, and take it.
               That done, reward her, &c. Againe, you ſhall another time throw out a chicken before her, and if ſhée take and foote it, rewarde

her, &c. Afterwards you ſhal cauſe one to hide himſelfe cloſe in a ditch or pitte, and throw her out a pigeon or pullet, if ſhe take it, reward her & féed her vp with the brains, heart, and a leg or a wing, whiſtling, chirping, and ſpeaking to her, to encourage her: and this order you ſhall obſerue a while, ſtill ſeruing her with greater and greater traines: for by that meanes you ſhall giue her courage to flée, yea if it were at a Feaſant, for that chickens are ſome of them not much vnlike a Feaſant poult. As alſo vſing her to great chickins, ſhée will neuer couet to carry as ſhée would doe, if you trained her with ſmaller birds, which is a thing worthy the obſeruation, as you ſhall find by experience.
               And when you haue giuen her ſufficient traines of chicken and ſuch like, you ſhall one day ſet her ſharpe, then take a Quaile tied in a Criance, and in a plaine meadow: Firſt, ſhew her vnto your Sparowhawke, then throw it vp aloft, and caſt your hawk off handſomly after her, & if ſhe take it, reward her with the brains, to nouſle and encourage her, but feed her with the leg of a chicken or pullet, and deale daintely with her.
               The next time you may traine her with a Quaile without a criance, the which hauing a legge broken, and two feathers pluckt out of each wing, giue it to another which may cloſelie throw it out to her, and féede her vppe thereupon with a good gorge. Being thus oftentimes trayned, you may ride out into the fields about nine of the clocke, where calling your Sparowhawke to your fiſt, and giuing her a bitte or two of meat, go with your Spaniels to ſéeke ſome Beauie of yong quailes, aduancing your fiſt aloft, that your Hawk may ſée them whē they ſpring, and let her flée with aduantage at the firſt. If ſhee kill, reward and féede her, &c. but if ſhée miſſe, or that you find no young Quailes, then ſerue her with a traine of a Quaile, as is often before ſaid.
            
            
               
               How to Hawke with a Sparowhawke being mad
                     •
                  .
               WHen your Sparowhawke is once made, you may go freely into the field: and if you find any young Quaile let her flee thereat with aſmuch aduantage as you can: and if ſhée take it, reward and féede her, &c. Remember that at firſt entring of your Hawke you hold your fiſt aloft alwayes, aſwell becauſe your Hawke may ſee the game ſpring, as alſo that ſhée may learne to haue an eye to the Dogges, the which you ſhall alwayes cauſe to hunt on your right hand, whē they raunge, but eſpecially when they queſt and call, to the end you may the better, and at more aduantage caſt off your hawk when you let her flée. And when your Sparowhawke doth know her game and how to flée, then may you flée more than one flight in a forenoone or an afternoone, ſo that alwayes you giue her ſom ſmal reward at euery flight that ſhée killeth. And becauſe it behooueth much alwayes to encourage your Hawke, and to kéepe her well nouzled, you ſhall doe well euer to carry a liue Quaile with you, that if you finde none, or flée and miſſe, you may therewith traine or ſerue your hawke accordingly: and you may cauſe it ſo to be caſt out vnto her, that ſhée will thinke it is ſprung with the Spaniels. As alſo I would wiſh you euermore to kéepe aliue the ſecond Quaile that you ſhall take, and kéepe it in your hawking bagge, ſo as if néede be, it may ſerue you at night, or at any time to reward your Hawke with: for keeping your hawke in this order, ſhee can neuer lightly be diſcouraged. And when your Hawke is throughly entred, and perfectly well in fléeing, and well nouzled, then you ſhall hold your hand low, whereas before you held it aloft. For your Hawk being much quicker ſighted than you are, ſhe will ſooner ſée the game ſpring alſo, and bate at the whurre, as we tearme it: then before the Hawke can recouer your fiſte, the game is flowen farre off to her great diſaduantage: yea, although you ſhould let her goe when ſhe bateth,

yet ſhall ſhée not flée with ſuch aduantage as you might lette her flée when ſhe and you both ſpied the game ſpring at once, Hée therfore that will be a perfect keeper of a Sparowhawke or ſuch like, muſt haue a quicke eye, and a good conſideration and regard to the Spaniels, kéeping them ſtill as neare as he can vpon his right hand, and holde his hand low, becauſe his Hawke ſhall not bate at the game before he ſee it. And alſo it ſhall not be good to be ouer neare the Dogges, but rather a little aboue them, that you may let your Hawke flée, coaſting at the vantage when the Game ſpringeth, and alwayes to be quicke of eye, and nimble of hand, for he that is not ſo, nor regardeth the aduantages of a flight, ſhall hinder his Hawke, whereas hée might further and helpe her.
            
            
               How to make a Sparowhawke, being eyther Soarehawke Ramage or Mewed Hawke.
               NOw I haue ſpoken at large of Nyaſſe Sparowhawkes, it were méet that I ſhould ſet downe ſome inſtructions alſo concerning Ramage Hawkes, and ſuch as are taken when they haue preyed for themſelues. And yet in effect the ſame precepts that ſerue for a Nyaſſe, will ſerue alſo for ramage Hawkes and mewed Hawkes. But yet they, (I meane ramage and mewed Hawkes) require not ſo much paine to make them know their game, nor to enter them, becauſe they haue béene practiſed in preying for themſelues, & the Nyaſſes are altogether ignorant and ſimple: ſo that the Nyaſſes muſt be taught to know their game, in a manner, euen as they are taught by the bréeder in the wood, the which (as I haue heard old Falconers tell) when her yong Hawkes goe out of the neſt, and can hoppe or flecke from one bough to another, commeth in with ſome prey vnto them, and calling

them altogether, ſhe fleeth aloft, and lets the bird fall amongſt them, ſo that which ſoeuer of them catcheth it wt her tallents, féedeth vppon it for that meale, and then returneth the olde Hawke for ſome prey, vntill ſhée haue fedde them all & taught them to foote their prey. And therefore when a man hath them, Nyaſſe which neuer were taught ſo by the bréeder, hee muſt practiſe as neare as he can like the olde hawke, to teach them to foot, and to kil their prey, and to know it, the which you ſhal not be troubled with in a Soare, ramage, or mewed Hawke. For they which beare thoſe names, haue learnt to prey for themſelues: and moſt of all the mewed haggart Hawkes, for they are throughly nouſled and trayned therein, yea and moſt commonly they haue learnt ſuch conditions, that with all the paines wée can take, few of them can bee brought to any good perfection. But he which hath a Haggart Sparowhawk, muſt aboue all thinges take paines in weyning her from that vile fault of carrying, & that ſhall he do by ſeruing her often with great pullets, and other great traines, the which ſhe cannot carry, and thereby ſhe will learne to abide vpon the quarrey. Alſo they which delight in Haggarts, muſt take great héede that they offend them not, but rather coy them aſmuch as they can with all deuiſes of fauour & cheriſhing, for they will remē
                  ber fauor or iniurie much better than any other kind of hawk. And of the ſame condition are Lentiners for the moſt part, the which are called with vs March Hawkes or Lentiners, becaus they are taken in Lent with lime or ſuch like means. And the Italians call them Marzarolli, becauſe they are taken in March or thereabouts: ſo that the Etymologie of the name procéedeth all vpon one cauſe, and they are called ſo whether they be Soar-hawkes or mewed hawkes. Neyther is there any great difference betweene them and Haggarts for euill conditions, but the Lentiners are more ſubiect to moiſt humors, and eſpecially in the head, and therefore you muſt plie them with caſting and ſcowring, as ſhall be more at large declared in the Treatiſe of medicines.
            
            
               
               Certaine obſeruations for an Oſtreger in keeping of a Goſhawke.
               
               MAny times it hapneth that a Goſhawke or a Tercell which was good in her Soarage, doth become nothing ſo toward or good when ſhe is mewed: and that procéedeth becauſe

in her ſoarage ſhée was not cheriſhed to make her take delight in her flight: for in a manner all the ſkill of a Falconer or Oſtreger conſiſteth in coying & delicate vſage of his hawke and ſo cheriſhing her, that ſhée may take pride and pleaſure in her flight. Therefore I would not thinke it amiſſe if hée had alwaies at the firſt entring of his Goſhawke or Tercell, a train Partridge in his bagge, to ſerue her with, when néede doth require, and ſo he ſhall winne her loue. And therewithall let him marke theſe obſeruations, to keepe his hawke in good tune alwayes. Firſt, let him conſider that naturally all Goſhawkes are full of moiſt humors, and eſpecially in the head: & therefore let him plie them with tiring and plumage, both morning and euening, for that will open them in the heade, and make them caſt water thereat. Let the Goſhawks tyring be the rump of a béefe, or the vppermoſt ioynt of a wing which we call the Pynion, or a chickens leg, giuen by the fire, or in the warme Sunne. This will not onely keepe your hawke open in the head, but alſo kéepeth her in exerciſe, and vſe, and from ſlothfulnes, which might marre her, and vtterly ſpoyle her.
               It is good alſo to giue her euery night caſting eyther of feathers or of cotton, and then in the morning to marke whether it be wrought round or not, whether it bée ſwéete or not, whether it be moiſt or drie, and of what colour the water is that droppes out of the caſting, for thereby hée ſhall iudge in what caſe his Hawke is. He ſhould alſo haue regarde to her mewtes, to ſée whether they be cleane or not, and therevpon he may giue medicines accordingly, as ſhalbe hereafter declared. For the infirmity of a Hawke being once knowne, it is the more eaſily cured. He hath alſo to conſider the ſeaſon: for in the winter and colde weather, he muſt ſet his hawk or Tercell warme in ſome place where fire is made: he muſt rolle the pearch with cotton, or ſome ſuch like thing, & the pearch muſt be ſet farre from the wall that his hawk hurt not her feathers when ſhée bateth: but if it be not colde, hee may ſet her euery

morning in ſome place where the Sunne hath power, for an howre or two.
               Remember that no hennes or pultrie come neare the place where your Hawke ſhall pearch, and eſpecially in Lent when Hens haue young chickens commonly following them.
               Remember alſo in the ſpring to offer your hawk to the water euery weeke, for elſe ſhée will ſoare away when ſhée fleeth, and make you ſéeke her.
               If your Hawke bath her at any time of her owne accorde after her flight, goe preſently to the next houſe with her, (if it bée in winter or cold weather) and weather her by a fire with her backe to the fire, and not her gorge, for that would make her ſicke. And likewiſe drie your Hawke if you haue carried her in the raine. Let a good Falconer or Oſtreger alwayes kéepe his hawke luſty and hie, and yet kéepe her in ſuch tune, that ſhée may flée beſt when ſhée is high: for doubtles the plucking downe of a Hawk doth marre her and make her cowardly. Aboue all things an Oſtreger muſt be patient and neuer chollericke.
               A good Oſtreger muſt alſo kéepe his hawke cleane, and her feathers whole, and if a feather bée broken or bruſed, hee muſt ympe it preſently, as ſhall be taught hereafter alſo in this booke, and therfore he muſt haue his ymping néedles, his Semond, and ſuch other things about him euermore in a readineſſe. (∵)
            
            
               
               Certaine obſeruations concerning Sparowhawkes.
               
                  
                     depiction of hawk
                  
               
               SEt your Sparrowhawke euery morning abroade in the Sunne two howres, or neare thereabouts, and ſet her to the water twice in a wéeke at the leaſt, and eſpecially Nyaſſes, for they couet the water more than the reſt. Soar-ſparowhawkes

would not be flowen withall too ſoone in a morning, for they ſoare willigly Take your Sparowhawke from the pearch alwayes with ſomewhat in your hand, to make her loue you, and be fond of you, for that is a thing of no ſmall importance and conſideration. As alſo to make your Sparowhawke foot great fowles, to the end ſhée may not learne nor be accuſtomed to carrion. And as touching mewing of a Sparowhawke, ſome vſe to put their Sparrowhawke in the mew as ſoone as they leaue fléeing with her, cutting off both her bewets, lines, and the knots of her Ieſſes, and leaue herin the mew vntill ſhée be cleane mewed. But if you will haue her to flée at Partridge, Quayle, or Feazent poult, then you muſt draw her in the beginning of Aprill, and beare her on the fiſte till ſhée be cleane and throughly enſeamed. Some other kéepe their Sparowhawkes on the pearch vntill March, and then throw her into the mewe being peppered for lyfe if ſhée haue any. Her mew ſhould bee a chamber aloft from the ground eight or nine foot long, and fiue or ſixe foot broade, with two windowes, to the Eaſt and the North, as is before declared in the deſcription of the mew for a Goſhawke: and ſet her pearches and all other things euen as for a Goſhawke, ſauing that the mewe muſt haue one little window to conuey in her meate at. And your Sparowhawke being thus prouided of her mew, goe in to her in May in an euening by candlelight, and taking her ſoftly, giue her to thy companion to hold, vntill thou haue pulled out all her traine feathers, one after another, holding the princiyall feather with thy one hand (which Falconers doe call the couert feather) and plucking out the other feathers with that other hand, for ſo ſhalt thou doe her leaſt hurt: and this ſhall make her mew the faſter, if thou féed her with hoat meat and birds, and alwayes kéepe an houre certaine to giue her her meat. Some will ſet water in the mewe by their Sparrowhawke continually, ſhifting and renuing the water euery ſecond or third day. Some ſet water before a Sparowhawke in the mew but once in a fortnight, and then

take it away againe within 24. howres after they haue ſet it there. Some will neuer ſet water before their Sparowhawks at all when they mewe them, ſaying that Sparewhawks are very hote, and pluck out their owne feathers for extream heat, and that therefore water is not to bee giuen or allowed them, becauſe it killeth and delayeth the heat in them, which ſhould further their mewing. I like that opinion: but for mine owne part and experience I would leaue the extremities and take the meane. And I would thinke it beſt to ſet water before a Sparowhawke in the mew, once in 14. dayes at the leaſt, or oftner, if the hawke ſéeme to haue néed, the which you ſhall eaſily perceiue, if ſhe haue any feathers or downe that ſtand ſtaring vp on her backe, and when ſhe ſitteth alwayes as though ſhe would rowze, or is twitching at her fethers with her beak, then ſet her water: but to ſet it by her continually, doth forſlow her mewing: and to kéepe it alwayes from her, doth make her that ſhe meweth not her feathers ſo cleane or ſo gallantly, as when ſhée may haue water once in a fortnight. As touching remedies for Hawkes that be ſlow of mewing, it ſhall be ſet downe in the Treatiſe of medicines in this booke alſo. (∵)
            
            
               
               The Third Part, or Booke, of this collection of Falconrie.
               
               BEfore I deale with diſeaſes of Hawkes, and cures due to the ſame, (which is the ſubiect of this third and later part of my collection of Falconrie) I hold it very neceſſary, and of importance,

aſwell to the attainment of the cauſe of each particular diſeaſe, as alſo the deuiſe of remedy for each kind of miſchiefe, to ſpeake ſomewhat of the complexions of Falcons, vnder whoſe name and nature (you know) in the beginning of this Booke of Falconrie, I haue compriſed all other hawkes, in regard that the Falcon is chiefe, and the Quéene of all other hawkes: nothing doubting at all, but that diuers wil muſe at the name and tearme of the complexion of a hawke, as though indéed there were no ſuch matter, led thereunto by their groſſe conceit and blinded imagination, for that they cannot in their opinions iudge ſo eaſily of the natures of Hawkes, as they can of the complexions of men, whoſe clearnes and thinnes of ſkin bewrayes their inclination and complexion, wheras hawkes are not in any condition ſo to bée deemed and iudged, by mean of their plumes: which indéede is farre otherwiſe, for, as in man the naturall complexion is truly diſcerned by the ſkinne, ſo is the naturall diſpoſition and conſtitution of a hawke by her cote and plume: which I aduenture not to report of my ſelfe, for that it ſtriueth too much with common ſenſe and ordinary capacity, but doe follow my Author, and thereupon am emboldened to auow it, not bluſhing to lay you down his ſpéechches as touching this matter, though not in the French Phraſe, wherein he wrote it, but in the Engliſh ydiome, into which I haue tranſlated it.
               
                  Artelowch mine Author, writing of the complexions of Falcons, in his treatiſe of Falconrie, medicines and cures, & ſuch like matter, reporteth, and eke aduiſeth:
               That the blacke Falcons are melancholicke, and therefore ſhould of right be phiſicked with hot and moiſt medicines, by meane of their complexion, which is cold and drie, as with Aloes, pepper, Cocks fleſh, Pigeons, Sparowes, Gotes fleſh, and ſuch like.
               That the blancke Falcons are flegmaticke, and to be phiſicked with hote and drie medicines, becauſe of their flegme, which is cold and moiſt, as with Cynamon, Cloues, Silermont, and Cardamomum, Gotes fleſh, Choghs, and ſuch like.
               
                  The ruſſet Falcons be of ſanguine & chollerike complexion, mixt indifferently, and therfore to be phyſicked with cold medicines, moderatly moiſt, and drie.
               As with Myrtels, Caſſia, Fiſtula, Tamarinds, Vinegar, Pullets, Lambs fleſh, and ſuch like.
               Hauing ſpoken thus much of the complexions of hawkes, a matter not long to be ſtood vpon, I will referre you ouer to the Italian Authors, as touching the diſeaſes & cures, whoſe iudgements I doe very well allow, and in many points preferre beyond the French Falconers, for that they ſeeme to bée the more reaſonable men, and leſſe giuen to friuolous inuentions. Yet neuertheleſſe in the laſt part hereof, you ſhall at your pleaſure, peruſe the French Falconers alſo, for that I would haue you to want nothing that may bee to your better knowledge and furtherance in Falconrie.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſes and cures of Hawkes. The opinion of M. Franceſco Sforzino Ʋicentino, an Italian Gentleman Falconer.
               IT doth belong to a good and ſkilfull Falconer, not alone to knowe all kindes of hawkes, and to haue the cunning how to reclaime, kéepe, fléepe, ympe, & mewe the ſayd hawkes, with ſundry other like matters incident and appertayning to Falconrie: but it is very neceſſary and behoueful for him to haue knowledge and good experience in their diſeaſes and cures: for that they are birdes ſubiect to ſundrie maladies and accidentes, the cure of all which doth reſt in the carefull kéeper. Wherefore hauing (vnleſſe I flatter my ſelfe) in the former parts of this collection, performed my promiſe, made in the very entry and begining of this booke, as touching Hawks, and other matters belonging to the miſterie and ſkill of Falconrie: it is onely left now, and I reſt charged with their diſeaſes and cures, to dicipher vnto you the meane to know the maladies, as alſo a methode to recouer them: wherein if happily

any man deſire a more ample diſcourſe of the natures, & originall cauſes of thoſe diſeaſes, thā herein I ſhall bewray, let him know & bethink himſelf, that I am neither profound Philoſopher, nor learned Phiſition by profeſſion, but that in theſe I deale as a Falconer, manifeſting and making ſhew of cures proper & peculiar to euery diſeaſe, wherwt I could euer yet find a hawk charged, & ſuch as may light vpon any kind of hawke, by miſfortune & caſualty. And as touching remedies for their miſchiefs, I mean to ſpeak of very few which I haue not ſundry times approued wt very good ſucceſſe, wherfore I ſay, that hawkes may be diſeaſed and vnperfect, either in body or feathers, which I intend and mean, when they are vnable by any euil accident to perform their parts and duties in any condition, as not to be able to flée, or ſtrain the prey wt their pounces, or any ſuch like action, which by natur they ought to perform.
               In body they are diſeaſed, eyther by ſome outward cauſe, as by a ſtripe or bruiſe: or els by ſome hidden and inward euill, as by corrupt & contagious humors, procéeding either of too great heat & moiſture of the head, or otherwiſe ouermuch drought & ſiccity of the liuer & inward parts, frō which procéedeth many times the pantas & ſhortnes of breath, & other perilous euils, whereof I mean to write in their peculiar places hereafter.
               Again, hawkes are accuſtomed to be ill affected and diſeaſed (as I may tearm it) in their feathers, for that diuers times being found of body, & in perfect ſtate of health, yet they cannot flée or ſtir their wings, by meane of ſome broken or ſliued feathers, & eſpecially the flags, long feathers, or ſacels, which ſundry times are broken either in the quil, being bloody feathers, or neare the top or point of the feather: the remedy for which miſchief & euil accident, I will reſerue to the laſt part of this treatiſe, as a matter méeteſt for that place. But becauſe ye miſchiefes and diſeaſes that grow within the bodies of the hawks may be beſt diſcerned and known by their excrement, & by that which cōmeth from them, as namely, by the caſting & mu
                     •
                  t of a hawke. Therfore I account it moſt expedient, to haue good iudgemēt to diſtinguiſh and know the diuerſity and difference

thereof, the better to come by the true knowledge of the diſeaſes, wherby there may in good time be had a conuenient remedy for the euill Wherfore let vs firſt ſpeake of their caſtings.
            
            
               How to know the health and diſeaſe of a Hawke by her caſting.
               FAlconers do vſe to giue 2. ſorts of caſting to their hawkes, either plumage, or cotton: & becaus moſt cōmonly they giue the Falcon pellets of cotton for her caſting, I wil firſt ſpeake therof. You muſt make choyce of fine, ſoft, whit cotton, & therof faſhion & frame your caſting as big a great nut, & at euening conuey it into her gorge, after you haue ſupt her: & in the morning betimes make diligent ſearch to finde it, to peruſe it in what maner the hawk hath rolled, & caſt it, becauſe therby you ſhall perceiue her good or euil ſtate: for if ſhe caſt it, round, whit not lothſome in ſmel, & not very moiſt or wateriſh, it is a manifeſt token that ſhe is ſound. But otherwiſe, if ſhée rol not her caſting well, but caſt it long, not white, ſtinking, very moiſt, & ſlimy, it doth argue, that ſhe is ful of diſeaſes, as I ſhall more ſpecially declare vnto you eftſoon. You muſt obſerue this, that theſe caſtings do import & betoken the greater euill, by how much more they doe reſemble the muet of a hawk in color and ſmell. For by that they do make ſhew that your hawk doth abound wt too much euil humor. Wherfore you muſt the more diligently mark it, & wring it betwixt your fingers, to ſée how much, & what kind of moiſture doth drop frō the caſting, & wt
                  al note the ſmel & color therof. But now it is hie time to procéed to a more ſpeciall declaration of thoſe caſtings, that you may be perfect in each condition.
            
            
               Of naughty caſtings.
               IF your hawkes caſting be long, not wrought round,Black caſting. and bée full of water, how much more long and moiſt it is, ſo much more it betokeneth the hawke to be diſeaſed. And againe, if ſo it be blacke, & ſtinking, ſo much the more the hawke is in euil caſe & ſtate. All and euery of theſe ſignes do yéelde a ſhew and proofe, that the hawk hath béen foule fod, & with corrupt fleſh. Wherefore to remedy this miſchiefe, you muſt féede her with hote Birdes, as Swallowes, Sparrowes, young

Doues and ſuch like, giuing them aliue, or as ſoone as they are killed.
               But if it ſo happen, for all this care and good intendaunce, that the caſting continue at one ſelfe ſtay, and be like euill in ſhew, then muſt you néedes giue your Hawke aſkowring, according to art, ſuch as I will teach you to make hereafter.
               If your Hawkes caſting be gréene, it is a ſigne that ſhe is ill affected and diſeaſed in the Liuer,Greene caſting. the cure whereof I will referre to a peculiar chapter for the ſame euil. But know neuertheleſſe, that hawkes when they are ramage, diuers times doe caſt ſuch like gréene caſtinges as I ſpeake of, and make ſuch muets, by reaſon of ſome wilde fowle, that they haue killed and preyed vpon at their owne pleaſure, or otherwiſe haue had the ſame giuen them by Falconers. And a man néede not greatly force thereof, for that with good féeding, they will lightly be recouered, and ridde of this diſeaſe.
               
                  Yellowiſh black caſting.When the caſting hapneth to bée yellowiſh blacke, and very moiſt and ſlimy, it argueth your Hawke to bee ſtuft with euill humors, procéeding of too great heat, or of immoderate and ouer great flights, or too much bating. For recouery of which euill, you muſt as ſpéedily as you may, beſtow good féeding vpon your hawke, and coole her, by waſhing her meat in good freſh water, as endiue water, or ſuch like, as ſhall beſt pleaſe the fancy of the Falconer, allowing her beſides one or two, or moe caſtings of cotton: into which you muſt conuey very excellent good mummy beaten into pouder, and otherwiſe among incenſe, vſed in like manner. But if it ſo fall out that your hawke continue her ill caſting, for all this remedy it ſhall not be amiſſe, fortwice or thrice to giue her this kind of caſting, or vpward ſcowring euery other day.
               Take Aloes waſht and beaten to powder, one ſcruple, powder of Cloue foure graines, of Cubebes beaten to powder thrée graines: all which béeing well confected, and made in mixture, enwrappe in a péece of cotton and giue your hawke being emptie, and hauing no meate aboue, or in her pannell.

And I nothing doubt, but vſing this order which I preſcribe you, your hawke ſhall recouer in ſhort ſpace. In any caſe you muſt be circumſpect and héedefuil, hauing a hawke thus diſeaſed, to marke diligentlie whether the doe mend or payre, whether ſhe waxe high, or abate her fleſh. For that according as ſhe ſhall doe any of theſe, it ſhall be neceſſary for you eyther to augment or decreaſe your ſcowring, and her féeding. And beléeue me, I know this by experiēce, that ſondry hawks doe periſh more by béeing ouer poor and low brought, through negligence of ill kéepers that make ſlender regard of them, thā by the extremity of the diſeaſe. This ſhall be ſufficient as touching caſtings of cotton, which (as I ſaid before) were peculiar to Falcons.
               Falconers are accuſtomed to giue their hawkes caſting of plumage, ſometimes being empty aboue,Caſting of plumage. and eake in feeding to ſuffer thē to take feathers, but ſpecially to Sparowhawks. They giue them ioukes of wings of ſmall birds, & Quailes, when they haue fedde them, tearing them out with their téeth, and plucking away the longeſt feathers, and ſo giue it.
               Theſe caſtings ln the morning being wrought round, and caſt without any ill ſauour or ſtinke, doe make euident ſhewe that the hawke is ſound: and how much more round & ſwéete they are, the better token of the hawkes géed ſtate. But contrariwiſe, if the caſting bée long, ſlimy, and rammiſh in ſmel, with ſome ſmall parts of the fleſh vndiſgeſted, cleaning to the ſame, and withall frothie, hauing a kind of foame ſticking on it, all theſe things together, and euery one ſpeciall by it ſelfe, doe import the diſeaſe of the hawke, and make full ſhew of her ill ſtate. And therefore that ſhée ſtandeth néedfull of a good ſcowring, and good intendance, as I ſaid before.
            
            
               The way to know in what tune hawks are by their mewting.
               WIth that helpe and light that I haue already giuen you by the hawkes caſting, if you diligently obſerue

the mewte,The good mewt. you ſhall eaſily prognoſticate and ſo; eſee her euil, and any ſuch diſeaſe as your Hawke is infected with. For if the mewte be white, and not ouer thicke, nor ouercleare, and beſides not hauing any blacke ſpotte in it, or at the leaſt but little, it is an euident proofe that the hawke is excellently in tune, and not diſeaſed. But if it be white, and very thicke in the middeſt, well it may importhealth, but it argueth the hawke to bee ouer groſſe, and too full of greaſe. And therefore it ſhall bee needfull to cure that miſchiefe, by giuing her liquide and moiſt meat, as the heart of a Calfe, Lambe, or ſuch like. And for one or two mornings, to allow her (being empty and hauing nothing aboue to put ouer) a quantity of Sugar Candy which will ſcowre her, and make her ſliſe, or elſe a gut of a chicken well waſht, of a conuenient length and ſize, ful of good oyle oliue, well clarified in water, in ſuch ſort as hereafter I ſhall inſtruct you.
               It is eaſily ſound, when a hawke is euer greaſie, and not enſeamed, by her mewte, when it is white with ſome blacke in it, which euil is eaſily remoued by giuing her hot Sparows, and young Pygeons.
               
                  The euil mewte.But if her mewte be white, entermedled with red, yellow, grey, or ſuch like colour, it is a ſigne that the hawke is very ill and diſeaſed, & moreouer that ſhe ſtandeth néedfull of a ſcowring, as of mummy purified & beaten to pouder, wrapping it in cotton, or ſome ſuch like matter, to ſet the gorge & ſtomacke of your hawke in tune againe, and other inward partes, as hereafter I ſhall make further ſhew of in a place méet for that ſpéech and diſcourſe. Aſſuredly, when you ſée your hawkes mewte ſo full of diuerſe colours, it is very neceſſary for you to reſpect her cure, and to endeauour your ſelfe to remedy that miſchiefe, or otherwiſe ſhe muſt néeds periſh vnder your hand, for that thoſe are very deadly ſignes, and proofes of the ill ſtate of your Hawke.The white and yellow mewte.
               
               The white mewt, hauing a greater part of yellow in it, thā of any other colour, doth euidently make ſhew, that the

hawke is ſurcharged with chollericke humours, cauſed and engendred by ouer-great flightes, when you flee with your hawke in the heate of the day, as alſo of ouermuch bating. Which euill you may prouide for and eſchue, by giuing your hawkesmeat waſht in cold waters, as Bugloſſe, Endiue, Borrage, and ſuch like holeſome cold waters, very medicinable for that miſchief, alwayes remembring to ſtrain the hawks meat, and wring it in a linnen cloth, after you haue waſht it in the waters aforeſaid.
               And if this fall not out in proofe to your contentment, then if you can giue your hawke a quantity of Agaricke in a ſcowring, for the ſpace of one morning or two, not ſuffering her to flee, or doe any thing, but doe ſet her downe. There is no queſtion, but by the care and diligence of ſuch a kéeper, your hawk ſhall quickly recouer.
               The mewt of a hawke which is very blacke, declareth her liuer to bée infected, and is the moſt deadly ſigne of all others.The blacke mewte. For if it continue thrée or foure dayes, moſt aſſuredly the hawke will pecke ouer the pearch and die. But if it bee ſo but once, and no more, it greatly ſkils not. For then may it procéede of one of theſe two cauſes: eyther for that the hawke in pluming and tyring on the fowle, hath taken of the blood or guts of the prey, which is a matter of nothing: or elſe becaus ſhée hath beene gored with filthy meate. In this caſe it behooues you to reſpect her, and to allow her good warm fleſh, and a cotton caſting, with Mummey or the powder of Cloues and Nutmegs, with a ſmal quantity of Ginger, to ſet her ſtomack in tune againe.
               A gréene méewt is alſo a ſigne of an infected and corrupt Lyuer, and happily of ſome Apoſtume,The greene mewte. vnleſſe ſhée make that kind of mewte vpon this occaſion, that ſhee hath béene gorged with ſome wilde and rammage meate, or her ſelfe be a rammage hawke: for then this rule doth not holde. You muſt looke to this euill as ſoone and with as great ſpéede as you poſſible may, féeding her with meate all powdered with

Mummy prepared, if ſhée will take it with her fleſh, as diuers hawkes will doe of themſelues: but if not, then muſt it be giuen her in a caſting, or ſome frowring, continuing it in this manner, ſometimes after one faſhion, ſometimes after another, vntill you finde the mewte to be changed from the badde colour to the better. But when this miſchiefe doth procéed, and continue long ſpace, then ſhall you be fame to beſtow on her a ſcowring of Agaricke, to rid thoſe euill and noyſome humors which doe offend your hawke, and after that another ſcowring of Incenſe beaten into powder, to recomfort her.
               
                  The mewte that is vndiſgeſted, & tending to redde.The mewte that is not perfectly digeſted, tending to redde, and that is full of ſmall wormes, like vnto fleſh, not perfectly digeſted and endewed, giues manifeſt proofe, eyther that the hawke is not well in her gorge, or elſe that ſhée hath béene fed with ill and corrupt meates, cold and ſtincking, and vnholeſome for a hawke.
               This euill may be cured & helped with good warme meats, and beſides that, with ſcowrings of wormeſéede, enwrapped and conueyed into Cotton, or Lynte And it ſhal not be amiſſe to giue her a ſcowring of powder of Cloues, Nutmegs, and Ginger, which doth maruailouſly ſtrengthen, and ſet the gorge in tune.
               
                  Of the dark ſanguine mewte.The darke ſanguine mewte, with a blacke in it, is the moſt deadly ſigne of all other, & I do not remember that euer I ſaw hawke make that kind of mewt, but ſhee died. Yet neuertheleſſe a man ought not therefore in that caſe to giue ouer his hawk and to diſpaire of hir, but rather to allow her of that receite and medicine, which earſt Iherom Cornerus, that noble man, and cunning Falconer made, or elſe that which was deuiſed by Signior Manolus the Gréeke, which I haue manie times experimented in Falcons, not without good ſucceſſe, and great commendation. And therefore hereafter I will lay it down for your better knowledge and practiſe, as the excellent deuiſes of moſt ſkilfull men in Falconrie.
               And yet for all this, it may be, that a hawke doth make the

like mewte that I wrote of, by meane of tyring on a fowle, & taking the blood of it, and of the rayns and guts, which if it do happen, it is a matter not to be regarded.
               I haue ſundry times ſéene the mewte of a Hawke grey, like milke, when it is turned and waxen ſowre,The grey mewte. which truelie is a deadly token, and ſigne of great danger. Yet it ſhall not be amiſſe, to vſe the receite which I lately ſpake of, deuiſed by thoſe Gentlemen Falconers aforeſaid.
               By this which I haue ſpoken, as touching the mewtes of Hawkes, it may be gathered how greatly it doth import, and how behoouefull it is for a Falconer, or Oſtreger, for the better cure of his hawkes, to peruſe euery morning with greate care the mewte of his hawkes. For that it doth greatly concerne the good health and ſtate of them, to finde out at the firſt their indiſpoſition and diſeaſes, before they bée too déepely rooted and confirmed in them, when truely it will proue a very hard and difficult matter to remoue the euill,
               But now I count it high time to procéede, and deſcend to the knowledge and particular cure of the ordinary euils, and diſeaſes, which doe plague and peſter hawkes. In which diſcourſe, to obſerue ſome methode and order, I will ſpeake generally of all infirmities and ill accidents hapning to the bodies of Hawkes, as namely of the feuer, and ſo conſequently of euery ſpeciall diſeaſe that belongeth to each particular member of a Hawke, aſwell thoſe that are within the body as with out: And beſides all theſe, of the gorge, guttes, and lyuer, of the ſtripes and bruſes that happen to hawkes: and laſtly of their feathers, and other euils. Laying downe to your viewe in the latter part hereof, ſuch inſtruments and tooles as Falconers doe vſe to cauterize their Hawkes withall, with ſuch other ordinarie remedies, as they doe commonly beſtow vpon their diſeaſed and ſicke Hawkes.
            
            
               
               Or the Fever or Ague wherewith Hawkes are wont to bee moleſted and troubled.
               I Haue noted and obſerued, that the Feuer happeneth vnto Hawkes, by reaſon of ſome ſmall colde, and heat enſuing the ſame. And verely in myne opinion, it doth much reſemble the Tertian, wherewith we our ſelues are dayly vexed. You may eaſily geſſe this griefe, when you ſée your hawke ſhake & tremble, and preſently after hold hir wings cloſe vnder hir train, ſtouping down with hir head to the ground-warde. And beſides all theſe tokens, you haue one more, which is, yt your hawke will haue hir barbe feathers vnder hir beake ſtaring, and out of order, and ſomtimes eake ſhe will refuſe hir meate. And if happely you touche hir with youre hande, you ſhall féele ſenſible the extremytie of heate that doth ſurcharge hir. All, or the moſte part of theſe ſignes, do euidently argue your hawke to bée troubled with a Feuer, a very daungerous griefe, but not altogether deadly, for that I haue ſéene many hawkes recured of this diſeaſe. Wherefore all your care muſt bée, to coole and refreſhe hir, becauſe in déede the Feuer is nothing elſe but aninordinate heate. In this caſe, hir féeding muſt be eyther the leg of a chicken or a young pigeon, or ſome other ſmall fowle, but Sparowes laſt of all, for they are not to be allowed in the beginning of the diſeaſe, for their great heate. And you muſt remember to waſh her me
                     ••
                   in the water of Bugloſſe, or Endiue, or in a mucillage of Pſillium, in the iuyce of Cowcombers or Mellons, and afterwards drie it in a cloth, & ſo giue it her to féedeon. Moreouer you muſt (if you do well) bath the perch, and alſo her legs in the Sommer with Plantaine water (or for want of the water, wt the very iuyce of it) wt Lettice water, or Nightſhade water, and ſometimes among with the iuyce of Henbane, Lettice water, Nenuphar, Howſléeke, and ſuch other cooling deuiſes, to delay her inordinate heat & inflammation, ſetting her in ſome out place where the ayr is freſh, but not where ſhe may take the ayr too much,

for that may breed a further inconuenience. If your ſick hawk be very low brought in ſtate, you muſt allow her a gorge twice a day, but with diſcretion and iudgement, not giuing her ouermuch at one time. And if ſo the Feuer ceaſe not by theſe practiſes aforeſaid, it ſhall be well done to giue your Falcon of excellent good Rubarbe, finely beaten to pouder, two ſcrouples, in a Cotton caſting, to purge & ſcower her choler, which is the very originall ground of her Feuer. There are ſome that do wil & preſcribe, that you muſt let your Falcon blood in the thigh, which albert I haue not experimented, yet doth it ſtand with reaſon, that it may doe good, if you can finely doe it: but it were much better in mine opinion, to open the vaine vnder her right wing, becauſe that would chiefely refrigerate, & coole the lyuer out of hand, & ſo by a conſequent, ye whole body throughout. This order aforeſaid is to be vſed, if the feuer be a hoate feauer wherewith your hawke is moleſted. But if it happen to bée a colde feauer which you ſhall perceiue, by that your hawk will be extreame cold, if you touch her. Her eyes looke not of their wonted hew, and beſides all this, ſhée ſeldome mewteth and that with great paine.
               Then you muſt ſet her in ſome warme place, & after her fitte of cold is paſt, ſhée muſt be gently borne on the fiſt. Beſides when the feauer hath left her, for that time you ſhould let her flée a little, it will doe her great good. Looke that her meat wherwith you fée
                     •
                  er, be hote fleſh, as Sparrowes, (which in this cold feuer are very well to be allowed, though in the hoat ague I told you they were hurtful) pullets, pigeons, & ſuch like hote fowles, the fleſh of whome you muſt waſh in wine wherein haue béen boyled theſe hote things following, as Sage, Mints, Pelamountaine, Cloues, Cynamon, & ſuch other ſwéet comfortable deuiſes. Beſides, you may giue your hawke the foreſaid fleſh if it pleaſe you, with hony, and a little powder of Oil, Fenell, & Commin medled together. But ſpetially you muſt obſerue this rule, and remember it wel, not to giue your hawk gorge vpon gorge: and again, if your hawke bee high in fleſh when this diſeaſe taketh her, ſhée muſt bée fed with little and

ſeldome, although in déede it be very good at all times, howſoeuer ſhée bée affected, to keepe a reaſonable hand vpon her, as touching her dyet, whether thée bee diſeaſed or in perfect ſtate. For of ouer great gorges, and too full and liberall a hand, doe procéed a thouſand miſchiefes and diſeaſes to a Hawke, as experience doth dayly inſtruct vs, both to the great paines of thoſe ſilly birdes, and the great griefe and coſt of the vnſkilful Kéeper, whoſe purpoſe and meaning perhaps, is by giuing his hawke liberally, to haue her flée luſtily, and to continue in perfect health and ſtate, whereas in troth nothing doth ſo much offend a hawke, as too great a gorge. As in all other things, ſo in this likewiſe, The meane is beſt.
               
               Some Falconers do preſcribe this methode for cure of the feuerin a hawke, which I doe not greatly commend or allow. They will you to take Reubarbe, Muſke, Sugar Candie, & the iuyce of Motherwoort, and making a pill of thoſe thinges aforeſaid, to giue it your Hawke, feeding her afterwardes with Sparrowes, or young Rattes, which are very hotte meate.
               Otherſome appoint a paſte or mixture to be made, as bigge as a nut, of theſe things following, which being ſtéeped a ſpace in Vineger, muſt be giuen her, not dealing with her in ſixe howres after, at the leaſt. They take to the compoſition of this paſte, Aloes, Muſke, and the ſat of a hen, equall portions, giuing it the hawke in manner aforeſaid.
               The Signes that they giue to know the feuer, are the wrything of the hawkes traine, the coldnes of her foot, and oftentimes the caſting of her gorge. But the firſt rules and remedies do ſatiſfie me ſufficientlie, without theſe, becauſe I find in them ſome more reaſon: yet doe not thinke it amiſſe, to ſet downe diuers mens opinions, becauſe euery man may make his choice: for what likethone, perhappes contents not another.
            
            
               
               Of diſeaſes of the head, and firſt of the Apoplexie or falling evill.
               HAuing in purpoſe to treate of the diſeaſes wherewith hawkes thoſe ſilly birdes are vexed in their heades, I muſt do you to know, that vnder the name and tearme of the head, I doe not onely compriſe that part that containeth the braine, but alſo the eares, eyes, beake, or chap, nares, & mouth of the hawke: al which parts are ſubiect to ſundry diſeaſes and euils. But firſt of all, I meane to ſpeake of the chiefeſt, and moſt principall part of all the reſt, & of ſuch maladies as light vpon the braine, and after that, of ſuch as happen to the externall and outward parts of the hawkes head. Among all which infirmities and griefs, I account the Apoplexie (whom the Italians call Gozza) the greateſt and moſt perillous, as the which doth ordinarily cauſe and bring ſodaine death.
               This miſchiefe doth commonly befall hawkes, by meane of too much greaſe, and ſtore of blood, for that at that time ther doth happily breake ſome one vaine or other in the braine, which doth fill ſome concauity or hollow cell of the braine wt blood, in which Cels, (as the learned do imagine and affirme) the animal ſpirites are engendered, and haue their beginning. Without which animall ſpirits, no liuing creature can eyther haue ſenſe or mouing. Whereupon it doth follow of very neceſſity, and by a méere conſequent, that the paſſage of thoſe ſpirites being ſhut vp, and intercluded, the creature whatſoeuer it be, muſt die.
               Againe, it may happen, for that the Hawke hath béene ſette too long in the heat of the Sunne, for by that occaſion there may bee ſo much humidity and moiſt humor drawne vp into the braine, as may engender this euill, and procure this miſchiefe in the hawke.
               Moreouer it may chance by making a long flight at a Feaſant or Partridge, in the heat of the day, by meane of which the hawke hath ſurcharged her ſelfe with ouermuch trauaile.

Wherefore it ſhall bee behouefull and neceſſary ſo to vſe the matter with care and diligence, as it may be foreſéene, that hawkes incurre not this aduenture and euill. Whereuppon for that hawkes in the mew, are accuſtomed to gather much greaſe, it ſhall bée good for the ſpace of fifteene or twenty daies before the drawing of them out of the mew, to feed them with lyquide and ſlipper fleſh, ſuch as may lightly bee put ouer, and paſſe through them. As namely, with the hearts of Calues, Lambes, or Goates, waſhed in luke warme water, and afterwards dried in a linnen cloth, before you giue it your Hawke.
               Likewiſe may you boldly féede your hawkes before they are drawne out of the mewe with ſmall Pullets, and young Sparowes. When you haue thus done, and obſerued this order of féeding them, when the time is come to drawe them out of the mewe, you muſt remember to draw them verie orderly, and after that, to continue the ſame kind of féeding, and to kéepe the ſame hand vpon them for other twenty daies ſpace at the leaſt, to ſcowre and diſburden your Hawkes of that ſlime and glitte, which doth ſurcharge them, hauing them alwayes for the moſt part on the fiſt, and eſpecially at night. Neyther ſhall it bée euill to ſcowre them, (or as our Oſtregers and Falconers do terme it) to enſeame them, by giuing them a quantity of waſht Aloes, allowing a Falcon as much as the biggeneſſe of a Beane beaten in the powder, wrapped in Cotton, & ſo to make her a ſcowring thereof, and beſides to giue her Sugar Candie two or thrée mornings. But in any condition you muſt beware not to vſe Aloes vnwaſht, becauſe thereof are bred ſundry ill accidents in hawkes. And for that occaſion is it preſcribed you to vſe Aloes waſht, to auoide that vndoubted euill which would otherwiſe happen.
               Moreouer, I haue happily, and with good ſucceſſe approued this remedy. I haue giuen ſo much larde, or butter, as I could well conuey into my hawkes throat, when ſhée hath béene emptie aboue, hauing firſt prepared the lard,

or butter, by waſhing it ſeuen, eight, or more times in clear water, and afterwardes letting it ſoake in Roſe-water a ſpace, and laſtly, by putting vnto it of the beſt Sugar that I could get, or Sugar Candie beaten to powder. And my order was, euer to giue this ſcowring euery ſeuenth or eight day. And this is not alone to bee vſed to hawkes in the mew, but alſo to ſuch as are kept on the pearch and ſtocke. But if it ſo fall out, that by theſe deuiſes and ſcowrings you cannot make your Hawke haue a ſtomacke, and gréedy appetite to féed, it ſhall not bée euill to piſſe vpon her meat, and hauing dried it in part againe, to giue her a gorge ſufficient, ſo much as may ſerue her, and as ſhée will take. For the more liquide and ſlipper fleſh you giue her, the ſooner will ſhée bée enſeamed. And by this meanes doe Falconers preſerue their hawkes from the falling euill, and ſodaine miſchiefe,Adition. and beſides that from ſundry other perillous accidents, that doe follow thoſe ſilly birds. [But if you take fine larde and beat it with Rue and Hyſope till it be all one body, and then make a round pyll and giue it to the Hawke, it will helpe all diſeaſes of the head.]
            
            
               Of the Apoſtumes of the head.
               FAlcons, Goſhawkes, and other birds of prey, are wont to be much cumbred and moleſted with the ſwelling of the head, and the Apoſtume thereof, a very grieuous euill, occaſioned by aboundance of euill humors, & the heat of the head. It is diſcerned by the ſwelling of the hawks eyes, by the moiſtur which ſundry times iſſueth and diſtilleth from the eares, and often eake by euill Sauour, and ſmell of the Apoſtume. Alſo it may be perceyued by the ſmall deſire the hawke hath to mooue or aduance her ſelfe by the wreſting of her heade, and the little regarde ſhée hath to tyre and pull the fleſh that ſhée feedeth on, as though indéede tyring were verie painefull to her, and by that ſhée is ſcarce able

to open her clappe, and beake, after her accuſtomed manner.
               Againſt this moſt perillous euill, it ſhall be very neceſſary firſt of all to ſkowre your Hawke throughly, and after that the head in chiefe.
               As touching the generall ſkowring. I can commend and allow you to giue her thrée or foure morninges, when ſhée hath no meate to put ouer, a pyll as bygge as a nutte of butter waſht ſeuen or eight times in freſh water, and ſtéeped well in Roſe water, mingling it afterward with Honie of Roſes, & very good ſugar, holding your Hawke on the fiſt, till ſhée make one or two mewtes. Which being done, to diſburdē and ſkowre the head, it ſhall be excellent well done to take of Rewe ſéede foure drammes, Aloes Epatick twoo drammes, Saffron one ſcruple, reducing and forcing all theſe to fine powder, and with a quantitie conuenient of honie of Roſes to make a pyll of that bigneſſe and ſyze, as may well be cōueyed into the hawks beake, by which her brayne may bée purged and ſkowred, thruſting the pyll ſo déepe into her throte, as you may well ſée, holding her a ſpace after it vppon the fiſt. And that doone, ſetting her downe on the pearch, in a conuenient place, fit for the time, and two hours after, to féede her at her accuſtomed time with good hotte meate.
               But if happily there bee any of the corruption and filth in the Hawkes eare, it ſhall be very neceſſary, carefully with an inſtrument of ſiluer, or other good mettall for the nones, that the one ende bée ſharpe poynted and edged, of purpoſe to apply lynt, and on the other ende hollow, and faſhioned like vnto the eare of a Hawke, to clenſe and remoue the filth that furreth the hawkes eare. And with that ende, whereon the lynte or bumbaſt is, to ſkowre it very daintily, and preſently vppon the ſame, to infuſe and droppe in a quantity of Oyle of ſwéete Almondes, freſh and luke warme, and after the ſame to conuey into the eare a little lynt or bombaſt, to kéepe in the Oyle, till ſuch time ſhe bée dreſſed againe, to the ende the Oyle, may ſupplie and mollifie the filth, ſo as

it may eaſily bée remoued and clenſed. And this order muſt you obſerue and continue, vntill the Apoſtume be reſolued & throughly ripe. But if it ſo fall out, that the Apoſthume wil not come to maturation, or ripe, in ſorte as it may growe to ſuppuration, and be mundified in manner aforeſaid, but wil reſt at one ſtay in the head of the hawke: then muſt you bée fayne to come to cauterize the head aloft, and beſtow a button there, to cauſe the humor to breath, and to bring the corrupt matter thither, remembring after this fire and cauterie to remoue the eſcarre, by beſtowing on it for the ſpace of eight or nine dayes, butter, by which you ſhall eaſily remoue the cruſt or eſcarre, which is made by the fire.
               You muſt not forget, if it be ſo, as your hawke bée ſo weake as ſhée is vnable, or ſo froward as ſhée will not féede and tyre vpon her meate which you giue her, then to cut it in ſmal pellets, and ſo giue it her, eyther by fayre meanes or fowle, not leauing to vſe it ſo, if it be poſſible, as ſhée may receyue it willingly, and féede her ſelfe, becauſe it may the better nouriſh her. For this is one vndoubted rule, that when a Hawke doth refuſe to féede and tyre, ſhée is very vnluſty, and diſeaſed, and not one among a hūdreth of them, that doth recouer. And for mine owne part, in all my time, I haue recouered but one Falcon being ſo diſeaſed, and that by the meane and cure aforeſaid, and by vſing this cauterie.
               Let this ſuffice, as touching this monſtrous accident, for I meane to referre you to another place for the cauterie and fire, which you ſhall vſe to hawkes where I will ſpeake ſpecially thereof. Only giuing you this caueat before you goe, that this euill of the head, is infectious, and will paſſe from one hawke to another, as the maungie doth among Spaniels, or any ſuch contagious diſeaſe. Wherfore it ſhall be very good to ſequeſter and ſunder the hawke that is thus affected, from your other hawkes, for auoiding of the ſame euill.
            
            
               
               Of the diſtillation and ſwelling of a Hawkes head, and alſo of her eyes and na
                     •
                  es.
               HAwkes are accuſtomed to haue a certaine diſtillation or Catarre in their heads, becauſe when they ard hard ſléen withall, & ſet in great heates, by long and painful flights, they eaſily take cold vpon the ſame, eyther through ſome vnhappy ſtormes of weather, or great windes, or by reaſon of the extreame cold of winter, & chiefly when they are full of groſſe and naughty humors.
               Of this Catarre or diſtillation, ſundry times there grow a thouſand miſchiefes to thoſe poore birdes, and ſpecially the ſwelling of the head, with a kind of dropping humor, which is the cauſe many times, that the hawkes eyes become leſſe, and are contracted in a manner together. Beſide which inconuenience, the nares alſo become to bée ſtuft and ſtopped with exceſſiue excrement that deſcendeth from the braine. All which euill accidents doe require, and ſtand néedfull of ſeuerall cures before they can bée remoued, and the hawkes enioy their accuſtomed health.
               Wherefore firſt of all, it ſhall bée neceſſary to ſcowre your Hawke being thus affected and diſeaſed, with Butter prepaed in manner aforeſaide, or with Oyle Oliue prepared after that faſhion, as I ſhall inſtruct yon in the Chapter of the Pantas.
               I haue in the Catarre of Falcons, (as alſo of other hawkes) diuerſe times vſed with great good fortune and ſucceſſe, to giue them of Agaricke two ſcruples, of Cynamon finely beaten, of the iuyce of Liquoriſh, of eyther one ſcruple, béeing make alſo into powder, and with a quantity of hony of Roſes, to make all thoſe thinges aforeſaid into a pyll, as bigge as a Beane, for the largeſt ſort of hawks, and for other leſſe hawkes, halfe as bigge. And this was I accuſtomed to giue my Falcon, and other Hawkes in

the morning, hauing nothing aboue in their gorges, holding my hawkeon the fiſt, vntill ſuch time the medicine beganne to worke, becauſe ſhée ſhould not caſt the ſcowring, (which then would doe her no pleaſure at all,) and after three houres then to féed her with ſome meat. You muſt remember, and note this very well, that if your Hawke to whom you giue this ſcowring bée greaſie, and ful of fleſh, you may boldly giue it her two or thrée mornings. But if ſhée bée poore, and low, then once or twice to allow this ſcowring, will very well ſuffice her. For there is euer reſpect to bée had of the ſtate of a hawke, when any vpward or downeward ſcowring is giuen them, for otherwiſe it will doe them greater miſchiefe than pleaſure.
               But when you perceiue your hawks head to ſwell, and her eyes to be full of dropping humors, and to waxe leſſe than naturally they were accuſtomed to be, by meane of the ſwelling of her head: It ſhall bée good, hauing giuen her this general ſcowring, that I haue ſpoken of, to ſcowre the head alone, and purge it with ſome deuiſe, to force her ſnite and ſnifle, as men doe accuſtom to ſneze: and to force her therunto, you may take Pepper, Cloues, & muſtard ſéede, of each one a like quantitie, making them all into very fine powder, as is poſſible, & then with a whiſtle of ſiluer, or other like mettell, (yea though it bée but a quill, it will ſerue the turne) being applyed vppon hernares, to blow it into hernares as ſtrongly as you may, to make it pierce the furtherin. And beſides that, you may rub and frot the pallate of your Hawke with the ſaid powder, and not féed her after it, vntill ſuch time ſhée hath left ſniting, and ſnifling. If you continue this practiſe thrée or foure dayes, your hawke ſhall recouer aſſuredly.
               To diſcharge the head of a Hawke, that is ſtuft with ill humor, Staueſaker which the Apothecaries do ſel in the winter, I haue found a very excellent thing, and of great force, giuing of it the biggeneſſe of a Beane vnto my Hawke,

being emptie, and hauing nothing aboue. And withall I was accuſtomed to rubbe the pallate of her mouth, forcing alſo ſome parte of the powder to aſcend vppe into the head, by the hole that goeth to the braine: and after I had ſo done, would caſt my hawke to the pearch, vnhooding her. Which was no ſooner done, but you ſhould ſée her caſt a worlde of ſlimy filth and moiſt humour, and ſnyſe at her nares as faſt.
               But if it be ſo, that the aboundance of humors in the head, by none of theſe aforeſaid remedies will be remoued, applying them neuer ſo often, nor the miſchiefe ceaſe to vexe your hawk which you ſhall eaſily diſcerne by her ſlimy caſtings, and the aboundance of filth that will iſſue at her nares: then muſt you of force be driuen ventrouſly to flée to the actuall cauterie, & with an yron button heat in the fire, to cauterize her vpon the head, vſing no leſſe iudgement and diſcretion therein, than the daintineſſe of the place requires, regarding the bone of the Hawkes head, which is not very ſtrong, or hard. And before you doe vſe the cauterie, it is neceſſary to cutte away thoſe feathers, that are growing about the place where you meane to beſtow your fire.
               If with this monſtrous moyſtneſſe of your hawkes head, there be ioyned a ſwelling, or the dropping of her eyes: in that caſe I doe thinke it beſt to beſtow your button vpon her head, iuſt betwixt her eyes, obſeruing the ſame order that I haue alreadie preſcribed you.
               When the nares of your hawke are ſtuft with filth, and ſurcharged with ſuch diſtillation from the head, as I haue ſpoken of: after a conuenient ſcowring, then ſhall it bée good to take Pepper and Muſtard ſéed beaten into fine powder, and putting it into a cleane linnen cloth, to ſtype it a ſpace in the ſtrongeſt vinegar you can gette: and that done, to beſtow ſome few droppes thereof vpon her nares, ſo as they may enter and pierce her nares. For truely this deuiſe

will ſo ſcowre and drie vp the humor, as it will do great pleaſure. But if ſo with theſe remedies and meanes you cannot reſolue it, then muſt you be faine to vſe the cauterie, not aloft vpon the head, but round about the nares, giuing her a little touch with the fire, ſomewhat below the nares, to make them more large, alwayes vſing the matter ſo carefully as you touch not the root or (or poret) of her nares. When you haue in this manner beſtowed your fire, and actuall cauterie, vntill ſuch time the paine doe ceaſe, and the eſcarre fall away, (which is nothing elſe but the cruſt that is growne there, by meane of the fire,) you muſt annoint the place with freſh butter, and after that you haue ſo done, then procéede to the cure of it with the powder of Maſticke, or Olibanum.
               This is a very good remedy for the ſwelling in the head of a Hawke. Take Staueſacre, a quantity of Pepper, and a little Aloes Epaticke, beat theſe ſaid things into fine powder, and put them into the water of rew, where when it hath béen ſtéeped a ſpace in the ſaid liquor, with a little bombaſt or lint, bath your Hawkes nares twice a day, and you ſhall find it eaſe your hawke greatly, and ridde a great part of the filthie matter that bréedeth the ſtoppage in her head. If all theſe remedies which I haue alleadged generally, nor any one ſpeciall medicine will preuaile, as I ſaid before: then muſt you repoſe your chiefeſt truſt in the cauterie, which muſt bée done eyther on the head with a cauterizing button, or about the nares with a néedle, or ſharp yron, fire hote, or ſome golden or ſiluer Inſtrument, of purpoſe made; applying after the fire, for the remouing of the Eſcarre, and the cure of the ſame, the remedies aforeſaid.
            
            
               Of the giddineſſe and ſhaking of a Hawkes head.
               THere doth diuers times happen vnto Falcons, and other Hawkes a miſchiefe, whoſe nature is, to cauſe the hawke

to ſhake her head continually, ſo as at no time ſhée can holde it ſtill or ſteady, but is euer mouing it to one ſide or other, holding her eyes cloſe ſhut withall. This diſeaſe is called Soda, which in engliſh we may tearm the Megrim, or a kind of palſie, by mean the head is in continuall mouing.
               
                  The Cure.This euill may procéed, eyther by the fowleneſſe of the panell, or of a corrupt and naughty liuer. The remedie for it is this, which I haue found very good, and wherewith I haue cured my hawke in times paſt. You muſt giu & your ſick hawk a caſting of cotton, in which you ſhall enwrappe of Aloes Epaticke one ſcruple, of Cloues two graines, making theſe into powder before you giue it: then two howres after the taking of this ſcowring, féed your hawke with a yong Pygeon, or a hote Pullets legge, vſing this ſelfe ſame order thrée or foure mornings one after another.
               One other remedy for it is this. Take as much vnwaſht Larde as the toppe of your little finger, with a quantitie of Pepper, and a little Aloes Epaticke, beate theſe two laſt into powder, and conuey them into the Larde, which done, thruſt them into your hawkes throat, holding her on your fiſt a ſpace after it: then tie her on the pearch in the Sunne, & there let her ſtay till ſhée caſt both the ſcowring, & the ſlimy matter which is in her gorge. And this medicine you may vſe euery rhird day once, féeding your hawke with hote meats, as Pigeons, and yong Sparowes, and euerytime you giue her this ſcowring, conuey into her a little Aloes, which is an excellent thing to ſcowre her, and quit her of of this diſeaſe.
               If theſe receits and ſcowrings yéeld no remedy, then muſt you to the actuall cauterie, ſhearing away the plumes about that part of the head where you will apply your fire, euer reſpecting the bone, and burning nothing but the very ſkinne, to let the miſchiefe breath, remouing the eſcarre, and doing the cure after the eſcarre remoued, as is before ſaid. Let this ſuffice for this monſtrous miſchiefe which kils many hawkes: yet haue I cured my hawks twice by theſe remedies in my time.
            
            
               
               Of the Cataract in the eyes of a Hawke.
               BEſides thoſe other euils, there is a Cataract which dooth light vpon the eyes of a Hawke, whome we may tearm a ſuffuſion, a miſchiefe not eaſily remoued, and diuers times impoſſible to be recured, as namely, when it is grown too thick and ouerlong, hath béen ſuffered in the eye, without ſéeking remedy for it: but if it be not confirmed, then may it well bee remedied, and I my ſelfe haue cured ſundry hawkes affected with this euill.
               This euill accident doth happen, by meane of groſſe humors in the head, which are wont to dimme and darken the ſight, and ſometimes cleane to put out the hawkes eye without redemption.
               It may bee, that the hoode is the cauſe and ground of this diſeaſe, for I neuer in my life remember that I ſaw any other birde or fowle troubled with it but onely the Falcon: and perhappes it lights on her in chiefe, for that of all other, ſhée is moſt vſed to the hoode, and to be almoſt at no time vnhooded.
               You muſt therefore haue an eye,The Cure. and eſpeciall regard to this inconuenience at the firſt, by giuing one or two morninges a ſcowring of Aloes, or of Agaricke, to ſcowre your Hawke withall, becauſe if you ſhould aduenture vpon any ſharpe or hard painefull medicine, applying it to the eye of your hawke, it would perhaps cauſe a great repaire of euil humors, and accidents to the place diſeaſaid.
               When you haue giuen this ſcowring of Aloes, or Agaricke, to remoue the matter from the eye, you muſt vſe a powder made of waſht Aloes, finely beaten, one ſcruple, and of Sugar Candie two ſcruples, blowing out this powder into your Hawkes eyes thrée or foure times in a day, with the Pipe or quill aforeſaid. This is the gentleſt, and moſt Soueraine medicine that you can apply to the eye in this caſe,

and whileſt you do miniſter this receit, it ſhall bee good ſometimes to bath the eye with the vrine of a little boy.
               If by theſe medicines aforeſaid, the webbe of the eye will not bee remoued, we muſt be driuen to vſe a ſtronger receipt, which is this:
               
                  Another remedy.Take a new ſaid egge, and roſt it ſo long vntill the white of it become like milke. When you haue ſo done, put it into a fine white linnen cloth, and ſtraine it ſo much, and ſo long, vntill you ſée iſſue through your ſtrainer a cleare gréene water, whereof you ſhall now and then infuſe a droppe or two into the hurt eye, vſing it ſo thrée or foure times in the day at the leaſt, vntll you ſée your Hawke amend of her miſchiefe, and waxe ſound.
               Laſt of all, if theſe thinges auayle not to the cure, I do commend and allow aboue all the reſt, that you take the iuyce of Celendine rootes, making them cleane from the earth that doth vſe to hang to the moores: then ſcrape away the outmoſt rynde and pill of the roote, and vſe the iuyce to your Hawke. Truely I haue found this to bee of ſingular force and vertue in the like accident.
               It ſhall not bée amiſſe, in this and ſuch like affections and ill paſſions of the eye of a Hawke, to bath her eyes often with roſe-water, wherein haue béen boyled the ſéeds of Fenygreke. But you muſt remember, that this water or coli
                     •
                  ie, be ſomewhat warme when you vſe it, becauſe the eye is ſo noble, and ſo ſenſible a member, as it can ill brooke thinges eyther ouerhote, or ouer cold, but muſt haue them moderately hot or cold. This deuiſe may you vſe to bath your Hawkes eye withall, vntill ſuch time ſhe be recouered, féeding her mean while with good meats, and ſuch as are light of diſgeſtion.
               Hawkes are of ſo noble and excellent a nature, as the moſt part of medicines that you doe apply to the hurtes and cures of men, you may boldly beſtow on hawkes, as thinges verie holeſome for them, as by their working will be moſt euidently ſéene and perceyued: yet muſt there bee a diſcretion vſed, in

the adminiſtration of theſe ſaid receites, hauing alwayes a regard vnto the weake and delicate nature of Hawkes, in reſpect of men: and therefore the quantities of euery thing muſt be allowed and giuen accordingly. [For when all the medicines recited ſhal faile to worke,Adition. if then you take but a leafe of ground Iuie, and champing it in your mouth, ſpit the iuyce thereof into the hawkes eye, it will not onely take away this euill, but any other griefe in the eye whatſoeuer.]
               It hapneth diuers times, that through the catarre, and paine of the head and eyes, there lights vpon the eares of a Hawke ſo mortall and deadly an apoſtume, as ſeldom when, though there be great care vſed about the cure, ſhée may bée brought to perfect ſtate or recouered. And this procéedeth, becauſe the miſchiefe lies ſo neare a neighbour to the braine, as before it can breake or be cleanſed outwardly, it cauſeth the Hawke to periſh, Beſides that, it is very hard to apply medicines in that place: but if the hawke bée of ſo ſtrong a nature, that ſhée brook the breathing and rupture of this diſeaſe, which you ſhall perceiue by the quitture and filth that dooth iſſue from her eares, giue her this remedie, which is a very noble receit, and approued of me oftentimes, as well in men, as in Hawkes, to my great commendation and glory.
               Take hony of Roſes, and oyle of egges,The Cure. incorporate them together, and powre twice or thrice a day into the eares of your Hawke, ſome few drops of it hote: and if you find by the aboundance of filth, that there néedeth great abſterſion, you may adde thereunto a quantity of Sarcacoll beaten into powder.
               The Wine of Pomegranats is a moſt excellent remedy in this miſchiefe, confected with thoſe things aforeſaid.
               Butter well coyled and beaten in a morter of lead, one howre at the leaſt, and afterwards powred into the hawkes eares reaſonable hote, twice or thrice a day, is a very good remedie.
            
            
               
               Of ſuch evils as happen to Hawkes in their chaps and mouthes.
               THe chaps and mouth of a hawke is ſubiect to ſundry diſeaſes, and in the hawkes mouth there are wont to grow certaine white peeces of fleſh, and ſometimes tending ſomewhat to blacke, which doe hinder the hawke from her feeding, by meane whereof without any other euident cauſe, ſhée becommeth leane and low. Wherefore it ſhall bee very neceſſary to looke into her mouth ſomtimes, both in the pallate, and vnder the tong, beeauſe that many times, there eſpecially, doe grow vp certaine péeces of fleſh like in ſhape to a grain of pepper, ſometimes leſſe, ſometimes bigger than a pepper graine, which it ſhall be neceſſary to cut away, eyther with a payre of cyſers, if you may commodiouſly doeit, or with Roch allome burnt, or with a drop of oyle of brimſtone, applyed vpon a little cotton, wt an yron vnto the place, taking away the corrupt fleſh. You muſt mundiſie the place with hony of Roſes, and bumbaſt, or lynt, vntill you ſée the quicke fleſh vnderneath it, then afterwards vnto the hony of roſes, you may apply and adde a litle pouder of maſticke, or incenſe, to conſolidate the wound, waſhing it ſometimes among with white wine.
               Moreouer and beſides this, there is wont to happen vnto hawkes in the mouth, a certaine frownce or impediment, which doth hinder their féeding, as the other péeces of fleſh do, of which I haue ſpoken before. This frownce may bée verie well perceyued and diſcerned with the eye, and will appeare alſo by the féeding of the hawke.
               Diuers times this kind of euill is cured with hony of Roſes, & with the powder of nut-ſhels bound in a péece of linnen cloth, well bathed and ſtiped together, and thruſt vnder the hote ymbers vntill it may be brought vnto fine powder: this may you continue twice a day, as long as ſhall be néedfull.
               But if this will not ſerue the turne, it ſhall bée very neceſſary to mortifie, and kill the frownce with Aqua fortis, ſuch as

Goldſmithes doe vſe to part their mettals withall, hauing reſpect not to touch it any where, ſauing only vpon the frownce, and part diſeaſed, for that it will fret the good & ſound fleſh.
               After you haue mortified the frownce or canker with Aqua fortis, as I haue told you, then muſt you mundifie and conſolidate it with hony of roſes, which will cure it out of hand.
               Alſo it is very good to apply this receit following in the cure of the Frownce, whome the Italians call Zarvol.
               
               Take a cleane Skellet, whereunto put good White Wine, a quantity of Verdigrece well beaten to powder, of Roche Allom like quantitie, one ounce of hony, and a few drie Roſe Leaues, boyle all theſe things together to the conſumption of halfe the Wine: then ſtraine it, and with the ſtraining hereof twice or thrice a day, bathe the frownce with a little lint or bumbaſt tyed on the toppe of an Inſtrument for the purpoſe. But you muſt well regarde whether the Fleſh bée good or no, and with a toole fitte for it to ſearch and cutte away the deade fleſh, for otherwiſe it will doe little pleaſure, and the Hawke ſhould bée aſſured to ſuffer great paynes, and yet to die at laſt. Hauing mundified the wound with the receit aforeſaid, bath it onely with hony of Roſes, & it will diſpatch the Cure.
               Take Verdigrece a quantity, binde it in a linnen cloth, ſtype it one day and one night in Roſe Water, or Plantine Water, or common water, not hauing the reſt,The Cure. and afterwards waſh the frownce therewith, vntill they bée mortified, which you ſhall well perceyue by the quicke fleſh that will grow vnder: then apply Honey of Roſes in the ende of the Cure, and it ſhall doe your hawke great good.
               
                  Egiptiacum is an excellent thing to cure & kill the frownce in a Hawke,Another which is none other thing but a very Canker ſuch as men are plagued withall. Wherefore take Verdigrece, Roch Alome, of eyther two ounces, Honey of Roſes

one ounce, water of Plantaine, wine of Pemegranats, of eyther two ounces and a halfe, ſet them on a ſoft burning fire, alwayes ſtirring them with a ſticke, or wodden ſplatter, vntil, it turne to the thickneſſe of hony: then take a little of it, and mingle with a quantity of Plantaine water, and you ſhall find this the moſt excellent remedy, aſwell for the frownce in a Hawke, as alſo for the canker in the mouth of a man Thus much is neceſſary to be vſed, when the frownce doth happen vnto a Hawke by ſome poſtume of the head, engendred by a corrupt liuer, or ſome other inward part. But many times it ſo falleth out, that the beake of a hawke is hindred & offended with this kind of euill, and not the mouth ſo much, in ſuch ſort as the Hawke cannot well féede, by meane this miſchiefe doth ſo fret and eate the horne of her chappe and beake. For remedy of that, you muſt take a ſharpe knife, and pare away as much of the beake as is corrupted: but if the malady or frownce haue eaten very farre vnder the horne of the beake, it is not ſufficient to cut it away with a ſharpe knife, as farre as the canker hath eaten, but you muſt afterwardes annoint the place with hony of Roſes twice or thrice: and in ſo doing the Hawke ſhall recouer and doe well, for the hony of Roſes wil both mundifie and incarne.
               Sometimes a hawkes beake or chappe doth ouergrow ſo much, as it is very neceſſary to cope it with an yron, and afterward to ſharpen the beake with a knife, taking away ſo much as is néedefull for the better féeding of your Hawke, but in any wiſe you muſt not meddle with the nether chappe, becauſe that doth not commonly grow ſo faſt, nor ſo farre as to hinder your hawkes féeding. Wherefore that part is to be fauoured. Let this ſuffice as touching the diſeaſes of the hawks mouth, and the frownce, becauſe there is no canker or frownce ſo ill, but béeing taken in time, with theſe receits, it wil be cured aſſuredly.
            
            
               
               Of the Pantas.
               ONe ſpeciall diſeaſe among others that bée lurking and ſecret within the breaſt and couert parts of a Hawke, is the Pantas, a very dangerous euill, and familiar to hawkes: for lightly few eſcape that are once encombred with this infirmity.
               This miſchiefe procéedes when the lungs and thoſe breathing members by exceſſiue heat are ouerdried, and baked in ſuch ſort, as they cannot by any meanes freely draw the ayre to them, nor yet vtter it well being once receyued, for the better cooling of the heart, whoſe bellows the lungs are, by nature ordayned for that ſpeciall purpoſe and office, wherby the hart waxeth inflamed, and by a neceſſary conſequent, the hawke of force muſt periſh.
               Beſide that, the humidity and moiſture of the head diſtilling from aboue vpon thoſe breathing parts, & there encraſſed and waxen thicke, is wont alſo to bee a great furtherance to this miſchiefe, and bréed difficulty of breathing. Wherefore it ſhall be very neceſſary to regard it at the firſt, before the diſeaſe haue taken too déepe roote: for that then, (for any thing I know) there is no remedy in the world to be had for the Pantas, which is commonly tearmed Aſma.
               
               You may iudge of the beginning of this griefe, and know it by this. Your Hawke laboureth much in the panell, mouing her traine often vp and downe, at each motion of her panell, and cannot many times mewte or ſliſe: and when ſhée doth ſliſe, ſhe droppes faſt by her, and makes a ſmall round burnt mewt: theſe are apparant proofes that ſhée hath the pantas growing on her.
               Againe, you may perceyue it by the more violent motion of her gorge then cuſtome was, but the other are the moſt aſſured ſignes that you can deſire, and infallible. Moreouer, when your hawke doth oftentimes open and cloſe her clappes and

beake, then is the diſeaſe very neare confirmed. And looke how much the more ſhée doth it, ye more is the Pantas rootes on her, and then is the cure deſperate, and not to be hoped for.
               The beſt remedie that euer I could finde for the Pantas, was to ſcowre the Hawke with good oyle oliue,The cure of the Pantas. well waſhed in ſundrie waters, ſo long, vntill it became cleare and white.
               
                  The way to waſh oyle.My accuſtomed manner of waſhing it was, to put it in an earthen potte, that had a litle hole in the very bottom of it, of purpoſe made rounde, whereby it might the better bée ſtopte with the toppe of my finger: then do I conuey into this potte that quantitie of Oyle, which I meane to waſhe in it, and with cleare water do there coile it together with a woodden platter, or a ſpoone, that the water waxeth ſomwhat dark with it: after which remouing my finger, the water paſſeth away by the hole, the Oyle remaining behinde, and ſwimming aloft, as it is the nature of it to do. And thus do I fixe, ſeauen or eight times: ſo long vntill I perceiue the Oyle to haue no filth left in it at all. Then of this Oyle thus prepared, I beſtowe vppon my Hawke that hath the Pantas, filling therewith a chickens gutte waſht very cleane, of an inch long and ſomwhat more, for a Falcon and Goſhawke: but for other leſſe Hawkes of a leſſe length, faſt knit at both endes with a threed, to the end the Oyle may not iſſue out, which gutte I conuay into the Hawkes throte, after ſhe hath caſt: and is emptie aboue and in the pannell both, holding her on the fiſte till ſhe make a mewte: and one houre after ſhe hath left mewting, then I féede her with ſome ſlipper fleſh, as the heart of a Calfe, or a Pullets legge, refuſing to vſe olde Pigeons and Sparowes, becauſe they are ouer hote meate, vnleſſe happily the Hawke were very low and poore, but being hie and full of fleſh, thoſe other meates aforeſaid, are not alone holeſome, and ſufficient for her, but they will be much better, being waſht in water of Bugloſſe, and wroong drie in a linnen cloth, and then minged with the powder of

Sugar Candie, vſing this order ſixe or eight dayes, or more, euery other day till my Hawke recouer: giuing her euerie third or fourth day a cotton caſting with Cubebes, & cloues, to ſcowre and diſcharge her of ſuch moiſt humors as diſtilleth from her head, which ſometimes (as I haue ſaid before) is the chiefe and originall ground of this diſeaſe.
               Beſides this remedy, there is one other very good, and that is butter, and Larde well ſliſed, and waſhed in ſundry Waters, till they become very cleane, and White, which you may kéepe in Roſe-water, vntill you haue occaſion to vſe it.
               Of theſe being thus prepared and conſerued, you may take as you haue néed, for euery ſcowring ſuch a quantity, as will ſerue to make a pyll or pellet, ſo great as you may well conuey into your Hawkes throat, vſing it in maner and time aforeſaid: giuing her now and then among that ſcowring of Cubebs and Cloues, as well for the reaſon already alleadged, as alſo becauſe of her liquid meat and ſlipper féeding vpon thoſe hearts, ſo bathed and ſtéeped in water. For Cubebs and Cloues will greatly comfort the ſtomacke and gorge of your Hawke.
               I haue found by experience that oyle of ſwéete Almonds is of wondrous efficacy in the cure of this diſeaſe, giuing it in a chickens gut as aforeſaid.
               If theſe remedies which I haue ſhewed doe not preuaile, nor performe the perfect cure of your diſeaſed hawke, ne yet do make her mewte, which hapned at no time to mée in all my experience and practiſe. But when there is no remedy to bée had at all, I can well allow the vſe of Agaricke with a cotton caſting, becauſe Agaricke is of great force to cauſe a Hawke to ſliſe. But if for all this, the griefe doe dayly procéed and increaſe, then doe I thinke good that you beſtow a Cantery vpon your Hawkes head, betwixt her eyes, & eake at her nares, ſpecialy if there be any imperfection in them. Some men are of opiniō, yt for the cure of ye Pantas you ſhould giue your hawk

two inches of a Lucerts tayle, newly cut off, conueying it into your hawkes gorge, and afterwards ſetting her in ſome dark place, till ſhée haue caſt, and then to giue her goats milke with the bloud of a Doue. Otherſome Writers doe will and aduiſe to let the hawke bloud in the necke.
               But I for my part haue neither tried the one nor the other, if I ſhall tell you the truth of the matter, becauſe I doe not at all like of theſe deuiſes: but doe aſſure you, that with thoſe other remedies and receits, which I haue taught you in this Chapter of the Pantas (I meane the ſcowrings, and the cauterie) I haue done very much good, and recouered my hawks of this diſeaſe, and therefore doe recommend you to them, as vndoubted experiments.
               Betony reduced into the forme of an Electuarie with hony is a very good remedie for this griefe, as well in men, as in Hawkes.
               One other remedy which I find in an Italian Author, is this. Take Mummy, Rheubarbe, Saffron, & Sugar Candy, make all theſe into powder, giuing it to your Hawke, for the ſpace of eight dayes at leaſt in a chickens ſkinne, if ſhée will take it, if not, force it into her. And while you miniſter this medicine vnto her, all that time let her not be borne on the fiſt: and withall among ſometimes, giue waſht freſh butter with ſugar candy, and ſometimes a cotton caſting with incenſe within it. But I doe more commend to giue her Bole Armoniacke in a Pill with hony.
               Theſe remedies no doubt are very good and ſoueraigne againſt the Pantas of a Hawke. Make you choice of them, but let the cautery be the laſt refuge, for that is an extremity. Remember this rule of Phiſicke, that euer it is beſt to begin with the weakeſt: for if they will profite and do ſufficient good, in vaine it were to charge nature with the ſtrongeſt receites, which are rough and churliſh in working.
            
            
               
               Of the infirmity and diſeaſe in the gorge of a Hawke. when ſhee doth caſt her gorge.
               SVndry are the diſeaſes that Hawkes are peſtred withal, by meane of the indiſpoſition of the gorge, when the parte is out of tune: among which, the moſt ordinary and perillous is the caſting of the gorge, when a Hawke doth caſt her meat vndiſgeſted, in the ſelfe ſame forme ſhe receyued it: or elſe corrupted, and of a loathſome ſauour, both which they do many times.
               If ſhée caſt it cleane, and not ſtinking, but of good ſmell, there is no great feare of the matter, nor any great danger: becauſe it may procéede by mean ſome ſmall bone is croſſed and turned in the gorge of the Hawke, which doth cauſe her to caſt it againe for her more eaſe and quiet: Wherefore in this caſe it ſhall bée good for the more ſurety, and to know the worſt of the accident that may happen thereby, to beare your hawke to the water, or to offer her abaſō of water, to trie whether ſhe will bowze or no. For by bowzing, beſides the good that ſhe ſhall receiue by it, you ſhall haue euident proofe and vndoubted ſhew of her diſeaſe, and that indéede ſhée is ſicke, and doth ſtand in néede of Phyſicke: but if ſhée bowze not at all, it argueth her to bée in good tune.
               Thoſe accidents are wont to happen by meane of ouer much moyſture and humidity, and through exceſſiue rotten humors engendred in the gorge.
               Wherefore if the Hawke caſt her meat well ſauouring, and of good colour, neyther ſtinking to ſmell, nor loathſome to viewe, and doe bowze after it, it ſhall bée good to heat and comfort the gorge with the powder of Nutmegges and Cloues, with a quantity of Muſke, all enwrapped in a péece of fine cotton or bombaſt, giuing it to the hawke when ſhée is emptie

pancid, as cuſtome is to doe, holding her on the fiſt, vntill ſhée put ouer her ſaid caſting into her gorge. Then two howres after ſhe hath caſt it againe, it ſhall be very neceſſary to feede her with young Doues, giuing but halfe a gorge, or ſomwhat leſſe at a time: & at night when hée ſups her, to let her plume a little, and if the Hawke will bowze, to giue her leaue to doe it, for truely it will be very holeſome for her. By this meanes I promiſe you, I haue recouered ſundry ſicke hawkes, and chiefly Sparrowhawkes.
               I haue ouer and beſides this, vſed with great good ſucceſſe good Roſe water altred with a quantity of powder of cloues, and muſke, preparing it after this manner.
               I haue taken Roſe water two ounces, powder of Cloues two ſcruples, of fine muſke fiue graines: and of this haue I giuen my hawke fiue ounces, or thereabout, after that as my hawke hath béen eyther poore or hie in ſtate, holding her on the fiſt, vntill ſhe hath made a mewte.
               This medicine will bring her to a good appetite, a ſwéete breath, and will beſides all theſe ſcowre very well.
               But if that which ſhe doth caſt, be corrupted and ſtinking: ouer and beſides the foreſaid remedies, which indéede are excellent good, I can allow well that you take the roote of Celidonie, or Celondine, remouing away the vpper rynde, and pill off the roote vntill it looke redde, and droppe againe, then to infuſe it in a quantity of luke warme water, ſtirring the roote vp and downe in the water, to cauſe it to receiue the effect and quality of the Celydonie the more. Of which root you muſt (after you haue ſo done) conuey a pellet as bigge as a beane for the huger ſort of hawkes, into the beake of your Hawke, thruſting it downe with your forefinger into the very gorge of her, to the end it may the better deſcend into your Hawke. Beſides this, it is very good to open her beake, & conuey into her one ſpoonefull of the water aforeſaid, not all at once, but at twice or thrice, cloſing faſt her clappes againe,

becauſe ſhe may the better kéepe it, and not caſt it vppe preſently.
               This béeing done, kéepe her a ſpace vpon the fiſte, vntill the roote and licout bée well ſetled in her gorge. After which, caſt her on the pearch in ſuch a place where is no reſort, eyther of people, Dogges, Chickens, Cattes, or other ſuch like things, to the end you may the better diſcerne her ſcowring: and beſides, that ſhee may haue the leſſe cauſe to bate. There let her ſtand vntil ſhée hath caſt all the roote which ſhée receyued, and that the water hath made her mewt, and ſ
                     •
                  ſe ſufficiently, which will doe her very great good. Then after two howres it ſhall bee well to giue her a yong Rat or Mouſe, newly ſtripped out of the ſkinne hote, and for lacke thereof, a young Pigeon, whome you ſhall kill, by throwing her forcibly againſt the ground, with the raines downeward, becauſe the bloud may gather together and ſtand: whereof féed your Hawke giuing her the heart alſo, and the raines thereof, without any more allowance of any of the Pigeons fleſh. When ſhee hath diſpatched and ridde this beaching of the Pigeons heart and bloud, or of the young Rat, then giue her in like manner the like quantity, onely of the dead Doue: onely twice a day to a Sparowhawk, but to a Falcon or Goſhawk, foure or fiue beachings in one day, euer obſeruing the ſelfe ſame order that I haue preſcribed you.
               The next morning you may, if néede bée, in a little lint, or flaxe, or ſuch deuiſe, giue a ſcowring of Incenſe or Olibanum, I meane the leaues of it bruſed in your hand, as ſmal as is poſſible, giuing her but a ſmall gorge, to the end that towardes the Euening, you may allow her a reaſonable Supper.
               By this vſage and order haue I cured ſundry Hawes of mine owne, and other mens.
               You muſt note yt when theſe remedies aforeſaid do not profite

nor doe the feate, and that the Hawke doth caſt her more than twice, then is it a deſperate caſe, and ſo much the worſe, if the Hawke bée low and poore, for then in that caſe haue I ſéene very few or none recured.
               Neuertheleſſe I haue ſometimes ſéen a maruaile wrought in this caſe, by making the greater kind of hawkes, as Falcons, Gerfalcons, and ſuch like, drunk with a ſpoonful or two of ſtrong Malmeſey, conueied by force into her gorge: but to the leſſer hawks you muſt not giue ſo much of the malmeſie, but in leſſe quantity. Which done, they haue béen placed vpon a bed or a cuſhion, for on the pearch they cannot ſtand, being drowſie, but will lie as thinges in a trance for the ſpace of a quarter of an howre, and many neuer recouer themſelues againe, but if happily any doe after they are thus dealt withall recouer and ſliſe, and ſcowre away their medicine, no queſtion that hawke ſhall throughly recouer: then is it good to giue her of the bloody parts of a Pigeon vſed in that manner as I foreſhewed you, but this dangerous medicine is not to be giuen, but in deſperate caſes.
            
            
               Of divers Accidents that happen to Hawkes, by meanes of fowleneſſe of the gorge, and indiſpoſition thereof.
               IT hapneth ſometimes that a Hawke can hardly put ouer her meat, which may bée diſcerned by this, when in the morning ſhe hath of her ſupper aboue. This miſfortune chanceth partly by reaſon her meat was ouerdrie, and (as wée may ſay) ſo hard baked in the gorge, as ſhee could not put it ouer, and partly againe, for that the Hawke cannot endue ſufficiently, neyther yet dooth fill in the Pannell as ſhée ought to doe.
               
                  In the firſt caſe, I haue holpen diuers with giuing the Hawke water at will, to bowze her pleaſure, bathing beſides her féet and pearch with freſh cold water: which not ſeruing the turne, I haue thruſt my forefinger into her gorge, and ſo holpen it along, and ſometimes my little finger, or a wax candle: and by that meanes haue cauſed her to fill in the ventricle ſooner than otherwiſe ſhée would haue done. The weakeneſſe of which part diuerſe times is a cauſe that the Hawke doth not well endue, nor fill in the Panel.
               Somewhiles againe I haue vſed, and chiefly to Falcons to giue a ſcowring in Cotton of powder of Mummye, prepared of Cloues and Nutmegs, rolling aloft vpon the cotton a little lynt of Flaxe, becauſe they ſhould the ſooner caſt it. And by this meanes haue recouered them preſently.
               When a hawke doth endew but ſlowly, and hath by that means ſmall luſt to her meat, you muſt thus do, to make her more eager, & ſharp, wrap her meat in the ſéed of Naſturcium, or water craſſies, and ſo cauſe her to take it. But this muſt he vſed only in winter, by reaſon that kind of ſéed is very hote.
               The meat being thus vſed, will bring her to be very ſharpe ſette, and cauſe her to be well breathed, and beſides make her luſty, for indéed it is a medicine very excellent, and of infinite vertue.
               Beſides, ſometimes the gorge is ſo out of tune, as it is the cauſe that the hawke at her accuſtomed hours doth not caſte, but retayneth her caſting within her. Whereupon it behoues ſome art to be vſed to make her caſt. The next remedy for that (as I haue ſaid already) is to giue the roote of Celendine, prepared in forme aforeſaid.
               Moreouer muſtard ſeede, otherwiſe called Senuy ſéede, is an excellent & a preſent remedy for that miſchiefe, being conueyed into the Hawkes throat of the bignes of a beane, to the huger ſort of hawkes: but to the leſſer hawkes a leſſe quantity ought to be giuen: & beſides that, one graine of Cloues, with a little pure Aloes well waſht, albeit that will ſomewhat vexe

and wrong the hawke in this care.
               But aboue all other, doe I hommend and preferre a ſcowring conueyed into a little cotton caſting, that is made of the powder of Aloes Epaticke waſht, of Cloues, Nutmegs and Ginger, of ech of theſe equall portions, roling the Cotton in a little Tow or Flaxe, making it as hard with your hand as you may, & then rolling it in the powder of cloues, and forcing it downe the Hawkes throat: and preſently you ſhall ſée your hawke caſt it vp with the olde caſting which ſhee had before. This, beſides the benefite of that, will comfort greatly, and ſtrengthen the gorge, and ſcowre the head of all ſuch euill humors as are there, ſurcharging the ſame. The vſe of this deuiſe now and then will bee very neceſſary and beneficiall to your Hawkes without doubt.
               If your Hawke will not caſt, take Aloes, Pepper, powder of Cloues, and hony of Roſes, making of all theſe a long pyll, and as bigge as a caſting, giue it your hawke, and ſhée ſhall preſently caſt vpon the taking of it.
            
            
               Of wormes that moleſt and trouble hawkes out of meaſure.
               NOw doe I hold it high time, and the place very conuenient to write of ſuch kinds of wormes, as do trouble and vexe the poore hawke as her mortall enemies, which after a ſort doe depend of the gorge, through whoſe weakeneſſe there are engendred groſſe and viſcuous humors in the bowels of a hawke, where béeing weakely wrought by default of naturall heat, the humor conuerts into ſmall wormes a quarter of an ynch long and more.
               You may perceiue theſe wormes to plague and trouble your hawke, when you ſée her caſt her gorge, when her breath ſtinkes, when ſhee trembleth and writheth her traine, when ſhée croakes in the night, offereth with her beake to her panel, when her mewt is not cleane, white, nor in ſuch aboundance as it ought to be. And beſides all this, when your Hawke

keepes at one ſtay, and is low of fleſh continually.
               In this caſe it behooues you to deſtroy theſe wormes eyther with a ſcowring of waſht Aloes Epaticke, Muſtard ſeede, and Agarick, of each one equall portions, vſing to giue it as I haue taught you before. Or elſe by miniſtring the pouder of the Gal of a Bore pig dryed in the ſmoake: or if theſe fayle, to giue the powder of Harts horne being dried.
               White Dittander, Hiera pigra minore, (for there are ſundry kinds of it) of each two drams, Aloes Epaticke well waſhte thrée drams, Agaricke, Saffron, of each one dram, being al incorporate with hony of Roſes, is an excellent remedie againſt the wormes. You muſt kéepe it well, and giue Falcons, Goſhawkes and ſuch like, the bignes of a beane, but to Sparowhawkes, and the leſſer ſort of Hawkes, as much as a peaſe, in forme of a pyll, thruſting it downe your Hawkes throat, kéeping her after it a ſpace on the fiſt, till ſhe haue ſliſed and mewted her medicine, feeding her afterward with good meat after your wonted maner. And this ſhall recouer her, and kill the wormes.
               For the ſame diſeaſe it is very good to giue a ſcowring of white Dittander, Aloes Epaticke well waſht, Cubebes foure or fiue, a few flakes of ſaffron, enwrapped in a morſell of fleſh, to cauſe the hawke the better to take it.
               This receit no doubt will both make the hawke to ſlyſe and mewt, and withall recouer her. For it is an approued remedy againſt the worms, and ſpecially when the hawke doth writh and wreſt her traine.
               Againe, take Rheuponticum, Sugar Candy, filings of yron, of each like quantity, of theſe, with iuyce of Wormewood, frame pyls, & conueying them into the ſkinne of a chicken, giue your hawke one pyll at a time, and it ſhall doe her pleaſure.
            
            
               Of the Flanders.
               NOw I am entred in ſpéech of worms, I thinke it good to write ſomwhat of ye Filanders, to giue both knowledge &

cure of them. Albeit theſe worms do not al depēd of the gorge, for their natural place, & being is near the the rains of a hawk, where they be enwrapped in a certaine thin net or ſkin, ſeueral by themſelues, apart from eyther gut or gorge.
               Theſe Filanders (as the very name doth import,) are ſmal as thréeds, & one quarter of an inch long, and more proper and peculiar to Falcons, than to any other hawke or fowle. And this makes me to thinke that they are naturally allowed the Falcon, becauſe indéed they doe not at all times vexe & trouble the hawks, but now and then, & eſpecially when the hawk is poor & low of fleſh. But if ſhe be hie & luſty, then by reaſon of the abundance of nouriſhment & food that they receyue from the hawke, they moleſt her not at all, but rather do her good: & my reaſon is this. I cannot be induced to thinke that nature (who doth vſe to make nothing but to ſome end and purpoſe) hath produced and placed thoſe Filanders in that part of the falcon for naught, or to hurt the hawke. But how & in what ſort they pleaſure or profit the hawke, I could neuer yet reach by coniecture.
               When they are troubled and grieued with the Filanders, you ſhall firſt diſcerne it by the pouerty of the hawkes, by ruffling their traines, & by certain twitches and ſtarts that they will make, ſtrayning the fiſt or pearch with their pownce, and laſtly by their crooking in the night time, which kind of noyſe they vtter, when the Filanders pricke and gripe them within. For when they want their ſuſtenance, which they can by no meanes haue when the hawks are low and poore, then do they endeauour to rend and breake that ſlender net wherein they are naturally incloſed, to iſſue out to ſéeke their victuals ſome other where. And many times it hapneth, that, not ſéeing to it in time, and at the firſt, they paſſe through their web, & crall vp as hie as the very heart, and other principall partes of the Hawke, whoreof it muſt néeds conſequently follow, that ſhée periſheth without redemption.
               I haue ſometimes ſéene this peſtilent worme by piercing

and breaking the bed wherein nature hath layde them, aſcend vp ſo hie as they came forth, & appeared at the Hawkes beake and mouth.
               Wherefore it ſhall be neceſſary to reſpect the cure of theſe Fylanders, not by killing them as you would doe other wormes, (for then happily being dead, and rotting in that pléece, from whence they cannot paſſe away with the hawks mewte, they would there corrupt & breed a filthie impoſtume in her) but the way that you muſt take, is, by making them drunke with ſome medicine to entertaine them in ſuch forte, as they may not offend or gripe the hawke.
               The beſt remedy that can bée deuiſed for it, is to take a Garlick head, pilling from the cloues therof the vtmoſt rind: which done, you ſhall wc ſome ſmall yron toole or bodkin heat in the fire, pierce the Cloues, and make certaine holes in thē. And afterwards ſtéeping them in oyle at leaſt thrée dayes, giue your Falcon one of them down her throat: for the Cloue of Garlicke vſed in this manner as I tell you, will ſo enrage & aſtone the Filanders, that for thirty or forty dayes after they will not at all moleſt your Hawke Whereupon ſome Falconers when their Falcons bee low and poore, once in a moneth doe of ordinarie giue them a cloue of Garlicke for feare of the Filanders, to preuent the worſt, and truly to good effect. And for that very purpoſe and cauſe, are ſeldome or neuer without Garlicke ſtéeped in Oyle, where the longer they lye, the better, and more medicinable they are.
               Thus muſt you deale with thoſe Filanders that lie in the raynes. But there is one other kind of Filanders lying in the guts or panel of a hawke, which are long, ſmall and white worms, as though they had dropt out of the raines of ye hawk. If you will deſtroy thoſe Filanders, you muſt take Aloes Epaticke, fylings of yron, Nutmegs, & ſo much hony as will ſerue to frame a pyll, which pyll you ſhall giue your hawke in yt morning, as ſoon as ſhée hath caſt, holding her on the fiſt for the ſpace of an howre after. Thē caſt her on the perch, & when

you geſſe her to haue ſliſed her fill, and mewted it cleane, then féede her with good hote meate.
               There are beſides theſe, yet one other ſort of Filanders in the guts of a hawke alſo, which cauſe a hawk to caſt her gorge as ſoone as ſhée hath fed, and doe make her ſtrong breathed: for them prouide this remedie.
               Take Aloes Epaticke, & wormwood made into very ſmal powder, temper the powder with oyle of bitter Almonds: and that done, annoint therewith the flankes and ſides of your hawke. And if you like not the oyle, for greſing your Falcons feathers and plumes, compound thoſe foreſaid powders with Vineger at the fire: but it is certaine that the Oyle is the better far of both, and more proper to this diſeaſe,
               If you can, giue your hawke oyle of bitter Almonds, and not diſquiet her gorge, and after it beſtow the other cure vpon her, with the annointing her as I haue taught you, you ſhall find it the moſt perfect remedy that may be againſt thoſe Filanders that lodge in the guts and bowels of your hawke.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe of the Liver.
               THe liuer of a hawk is oftentimes enflamed by ouermuch bating and trauell, as it hapneth not ſeldome to Falcons brought from far and forrain countries by ſhip, & again, when they be impatient and bedlam in the mew, or when they flée ſurcharged wc ouer great bels. For the ouerbelling of a Falcon puts her to a greater paine and trouble than néeds. By theſe, & ſuch like occaſions, hawkes become hote liuered. Againe ſomtimes it hapneth by meane of an Apoſtume, which is engendred eyther by ſome pricke of a thorne, or the ſtripe of an other hawkes pownce, by crabbing wc her. For when they haue ſuch a ſtripe or pricke, the ſkin is broken outwardly, but the bloud remaining corrupt within, engendreth the apoſtume. Many times this diſeaſe of the liuer procéedes of ſome bruiſe againſt the ground, or in a trée or the encounter with another fowle.
               You ſhal perceiue this diſeaſe of the inflammation of ye liuer

when your hawke ſtandeth melancholy, caſteth not at her accuſtomed and wonted howres, by her fowle caſtings, by her ſtinking and ill coloured mewts (whereof I ſpake before) by her labouring thicke in the panell, and by féeling of her: For her pulſe doth beat as the pulſe of a man that hath a Feauer. Moreouer, her mewt is as blacke as any incke. The diſeaſe is the moſt peſtilent and dangerous of all others.
               If the heat of her liuer procéede of too much bating, or broiling with her ſelfe, you may eaſily cure her with foure or fiue good liquid and cooling gorges, as to féede her with the legge of a Pullet, or the heart of a Veale, bathed in Water of Bugloſſe, Bowrage, Harts tongue, and ſuch like waters.
               Moreouer, it is very Soueraigne to waſh her meate in the iuyce of Henbane, or elſe (that which doth much more refreſh the Hawke) to take a little larde or bacon without the rinde, and well waſht and conſerued in good Roſe water, and laſt of all rolled in powder of Sugar Candy. With this receyte more than with any other, am I accuſtomed to recomfort and refreſh my hawke when ſhée is ſick of her liuer. Notwithſtanding the other medicines are very wholeſome and good. And ſpecially good freſh butter, or Oyle waſhte and prepared, as I taught you in the former chapter.
               But when the miſchiefe of the liuer is engendred by ſome pricke of a thorne, or the crabbing with ſome other hawkes or foule, as diuers times it happeneth to the Falcon, by encounter with a Hearon, when they binde together in the aire. In this extremity, mummy purified made to powder, is very good. You muſt roll your hawkes meat in this mummy prepared thrée or foure times, and ſo giue it to your hawke: and if ſhée refuſe to take it of her ſelfe then conuey it into her by force, with a cotton caſting, foure or fiue dayes one after an other.
               If ſhée be ill affected in her liuer by a bruiſe againſt ye ground or againſt a trée, or by encounter with ſome other fowle, then

take Rewbarbe of the beſt one ſcruple, drie it vpon a hote yron pan, vntill it may be made into fine powder, of that giue in a canuas caſting, the weight of two graines of wheate to your larger ſort of hawkes, but for the leſſe hawke, the one half wil ſuffice. After ſhe hath taken this caſting, i
                     •
                   ſhee bee hie in fleſh then two howres after féede her with a pullets legge waſht in one of thoſe cooling waters, but if ſhée bee low and poore, with good hote meat. Thus muſt you continue four or fiue dayes, giuing one day the caſting with Rewbarbe, and another day with the mummy aforeſaid. Truly without doubt your hawk ſhall recouer if you follow this methode, vnleſſe the lyuer bée remoued out of his place, which ſometimes dooth happen by ſome great bruiſe or ſtraine. And you ſhall know it by a continuall hardneſſe which you ſhall féele in the hawkes pannell, and by her yellow mewts.
               For this inconuenience there is no remedy in the worlde to bée had, although you would trie all the medicines that are to bée vſed to hawkes, you ſhall profit nothing. It muſt needes follow that within fiue dayes your hawk peke off the pearch. It is not curable.
               
                  Gioroa us an excellent Falconer, for the indiſpoſition and heat of the lyuer, willeth you to take halfe an ounce of Soldanel, and one ounce of I
                        •
                     eos, which is floure de Luce. You muſt beate theſe into fine powder, and conuey it into your caſting, & ſo giue it your hawk. Withal at night hee wils you, when your hawke hath put ouer, and well ſcowred her filth, féed her with good meate waſht in theſe cooling waters following.
               Take water of Endiue, Maydenheare, Cycorie, and Bugloſſe: in theſe waters may you waſh your hawkes meate, as alſo her caſting, if it pleaſe you, wrapping in the caſting the powder aforeſaid. For what with the helpe of the one and the ther, no doubt you ſhall ſee a very good effect.
               Moreouer the ſaid Giordanus ſaith, that the Gerfalcons are of all other the hoteſt hawkes, and therefore to maintaine and kéepe them ſound, he doth aduiſe to waſh their caſtings in this

water following.
               Take Endiue water, Maydenheare, otherwiſe called Capillus Veneris, the water of Scabioſ
                        •
                     
                   of eyther two ounces, one dramme of choice Rewbarbe, of the beſt Agaricke one ſcruple, put thoſe in infuſion, where after they haue béen infuſed ſeuen howres waſh your Hawkes caſting in it. This order vſe euer when your Gerfalcon is out of tune, & it ſhall greatly pleaſure her.
            
            
               Of diſeaſes that happen to Hawkes feet, and firſt as touching the ſwelling of a Hawkes foot.
               SOmetimes the arme and foot of a Hawke doth ſwell, by means of ill humors that deſcend and drop down through weakenes of the foot or arme, through ouer great trauel & toile, through age, by reaſō of ſome blow or bruiſe receiued long before. This miſchiefe may eaſily bée diſcerned aſwell by view of eye, as touch of hand: for beſides that you ſhall plainely perceiue it in ſight, you may feel a very great heat in the member, ſo as ſometimes the Hawke is vnable to ſtand on her legs for paine and auguiſh thereof. Wherefore it is neceſſary to looke to it with all care that may be, and to vſe the matter, as the humor bréed not the goote, or the pinne, which oftentimes hapneth to thoſe poore birdes to their great and continuall plague.
               The way to cure it, is to giue the humor a vent by launſing it, and after that to recomfort the member, by oftē annointing it with the white of an egge, vinegar, and roſewater, well beaten and coyled together, or elſe with very good olde oyle of oliues, ſuch as you can come by out of a bottle wherein oyle hath béen long time kept: for thoſe drops that hardly come out of the bottle, are farre better than any new freſh oyle, and are more medicinable in this caſe.
               Moreouer, beſides the ceaſing of the paine, to delay the ſwelling, you ſhall find it very excellent good, to take the powder of Acacia, & terra Sigillata, of eyther foure drams, incorporating them with vineger, the white of an egge, Roſe-water, and the iuyce of Nightſhade, as much as will ſuffice to make this vnguent ſoft and delicate, and with this receite to annoint the

hawks foot or arme oftentimes for a ſpace: for this vnguent no queſtion, will both take away the immoderate ach and paine, as alſo mollifie and delay the ſwelling, and ſo reſtore your hawke to her former plight againe. [But aboue all there is none more certaine then to take oyle of bay, and beating it wel with aqua v tae,
                  Addition. annoint the hawks féet or legs therwith.]
               An other approued medicine is, to annoint the ſwelling of your hawkes foot with Oleum Petraelium (which is the oyle of a Rocke) and with oyle of white Lillies, taking of each of theſe like quantity, the blood of a pigeon, and the talow of a candle, heating all theſe together a little at the fire. This vnguent wil throughly reſolue the miſchief, or at the leaſt, by reſoluing the thinneſt humors, bring it to that paſſe, as you ſhall ſée the groſſeſt parts well digeſted which you ſhal perceiue by the whitenes and hardnes thereof. Then muſt you make an iſſue by lā
                  cing finely with a knife the ſkinof the hurt place, & afterwards annoint it for certaine dayes with the vnguent aforeſaid, and it ſhall recouer.
               Beſides this, a very good remedy for the ſwelling in a hawks foot after a rupture made, is to vſe this cerot that followeth. Take Gumme Arabicke, Armoniack, Sagapeum a gumme ſo called, of eyther two drams, Gréeke Pitch, and ſhip pitch, of each a reaſonable quantity, powder of Maſticke thrée ounces, of oile of Iuniper, or of the Firtrée, new wax as much as wil ſuffice to make a Cerot according to art: diſſolue your gums in vineger, which done, ſpread of this vpon a plegga
                     •
                  t of linnē cloth, applying it hanſomly both within the foot and without, making certaine holes where through to conuey the hawks ſtretchers or talons: Alwayes remembring if the ſwollen part be broken before the application of your Cerot, to mundifie & clenſe the water and ſlime that is in the wound, and ſo euerie two or thrée dayes to change and renue your Cerot.
               The vertue of it, is to deficcat, comfort, & mundifie the filth and quitture that is in the hurt member, wherby the hurt muſt of force be recouered.
            
            
               Of the Gout in a Hawke.
               
                  MAny times for all the care and remedies aforeſaide, the gowt doth befal a hawk, which is none other thing thā a hard tumor and ſwelling, full of corruption about the ioynts of a Hawks foot and ſtretchers, which diſeaſe is very paineful and offenſiue, by mean whereof the hawke cannot prey. Truly the gowt is an incurable euill, and may bée termed a (nurquam ſanus.) Let Falconers and writers ſay what they liſt, I for my part can thus much aſſure you, that in all my life, I was neuer able by any deuiſe to cure the gowte confirmed, whether it were for want of cunning in me, or by reaſon of the malignity of the diſeaſe, which doth rebel and ſcorn any remedy that ſhall bée applyed vnto it. Yet notwithſtanding becauſe it ſhal not ſéeme that I do it vpon ſloth, & for deſire to be ſilent, I will lay downe ſome one remedy or two vſed by diuerſe Falconers, though oft times to ſmall purpoſe or ſucceſſe.
               Some for the Gowt doe vſe to take the pyls of wild Apples or Crabs, wild and ſowre ſloes, the rind of an Aſh, or the keyes that grow vpon the aſhe beaten into ſmall powder, mingling it with halfe a pound of olde Oyle Oliue, all which they put into a Glaſſe bottle or other veſſell of glaſſe cloſe ſtopt with Paſte, or ſuch like deuiſe, ſo as no breath may iſſue forth of the Veſſell, which done, they couer it in ſand in the ſun, or in horſe dung for the ſpace of forty dayes, and after that they ſtrain it altogether, ſo as the vertue of the ingredience may be incorporated with the oyle. With this forſooth they annoynt the place, hoping to reſolue and cure the Gowt, which I could neuer doe vpon any hawke of mine.
               Otherſome do accuſtome to annoint the Gowt in a hawk, with the milke or iuyce of Selandine, and the marrow of a Bacon hog, & taking a péece of linnen cloth, doe bath the member euery third day with the ſtrongeſt Vineger they can get, and doe cauſe their hawke to ſtand vpon all this for the remedy of the Gowte.
               Againe, there are, that with the iuyce of Selandine, Vinegar, and Hony, doe vaunt they haue made an Vnguent wherewith they hand done great wonders. But becauſe

by experience I could neuer find theſe to preuaile in the cure of the gowte, I leaue to ſpeake or write in commendation of the ſame, putting you out of all hope for recouery of the ſame.
            
            
               Of the Pinne in the Hawkes foot, a diſeaſe much like the corne in the foot of a man. The Italians tearme them Chiodetti.
               
               THere is yet one other euill which hapneth in the foote of a hawke, by meane of matter that powreth down in a maner as hard to bée cured as the Gowte, and as cumberſome to the ſilly hawke as the Gout, for by reaſon of the pinne ſhée is neyther well able to foot her prey, to féed her ſelfe, nor yet to ſtand ſure vpon her pearch.
               The Pinne is a ſwelling diſeaſe that doth reſemble ſharp nayles, riſing vp in the bottome or palme of the hawkes foote: and by reaſon it doth ſo much in ſhape reſemble a nayle, by meane of the ſharpeneſſe thereof, thoſe ſwellings are called by the Falconers of Italy Chiodetti, as a man would terme them in Engliſh ſmall nayles, of which, very few hawks can bee recured.
               Yet for remedy of this diſeaſe, ſome doe aduiſe to open the vain of the leg, a thing not only friuolous to talke of, & a verie old womans fable, or Canterbury tayle, but alſo very perilous to bée put in practiſe. For truly neyther will I my ſelfe at any time practiſe it, ne yet aduiſe others to doe it. I can more commend that you mollifie and make ſoft the ſaid pin with ſtrong Vineger the beſt that may be gotten, which done, pare it til the bloud follow after: then to bring it to maturation, and to ripen it, apply handſomely vpon it in a linnen plegget, a quantity of vnguent made of iuyce of Lemmons, one ounce & a halfe of hennes greſe, thrée drams powder of Maſticke, leaues of Bittony and Frankenſence, or Olibanum a reſonable portion, & ſo much new waxe as will ſerue the purpoſe.
               Beſides this, I doe vſe to boyle it in good white wine, all

theſe things together, Waxe, Oyle of bitter Almonds, of each like quantity, a little Sage, Frankinſence, Rewe, Roſemary, to the conſumption of three partes, then pounding well all theſe with Turpentine and yellow Waxe, I make an vnguent of excellent vertue and operation. And if by theſe remedies aforeſaid, the Pinne become to be ſoft, and forgo his hardneſſe, then doth it behoue you to cut it out from the roote, as low as is poſſible, and to drie it vp with Agrippa, an vnguent ſo called, and with Gratia Dei, mingling theſe two together by equall portions, as much of the one as of the other.
               Ouer and beſides all theſe, the playſter that is called Emplastrum Sacrum and Iſis, whome the Apothecaries do ſo term are of ſingular vertue, becauſe they doe mollifie and deſiccate the wound or diſeaſe. I cannot remember, that aboue twice, I could euer doe any good vpon my Hawkes herewith (nor with any other remedy) and therefore I will leaue to make any further recitall hereof.
               There be ſome ventrous Falconers, that will with a cauterizing yron goe about to roote and burne out the Pinne, which I will at no time endeauour to doe, doubting leaſt thereby I ſhall ſhrinke my Hawkes ſinewes, and ſpoile my Hawke, by meanes they are ſo neare neighbours to the heart.
            
            
               Of the breaking of a Pounce, or Cley of your Hawke.
               SEing that I haue begunne to write and decipher you the miſchiefes that doe happen to hawkes féete, it ſhall not be beſide my purpoſe, nor amiſſe to ſay ſomewhat of the cure of their Pounces and Talons, when eyther by ſtriking the fowle, or by any other accident they breake cleane off, or riue in ſunder.
               Wherfore when your hawk hapneth to haue this miſchiefe the part of the pounce, or the whole pounce being brokē away, you muſt apply vnto it the bladder of the gall of a Henne,

vſing the matter ſo as it may get into the broken Talon, binding it ſo handſomely and artificially to the hawkes foot, as the gall may not iſſue out, nor fall away from the place. This deuiſe will ſtoppe the blood, ceaſe the paine, and within foure or fiue dayes faſten and harden the horne of the Pounce, ſo as the hawke ſhall bée able to flée: and if ſhée be a Falcon ſhee ſhal ſtrike or ruffe a Ducke as before her hurt.
               And to the end your hawk teare it not away with her beak, it ſhall bée neceſſary eyther to clap her on a hoode with a falſe beake made vnto it, or to faſten to her hood a péece of leather artificially, ſo long and large as may ſerue the turn, to arm her beake, ſo as in time her pounce, if it be but broken, may waxe whole againe: or if it bée clean riued away, a new may grow in the place againe. [But if it bée not cleane riuen away, then with a little new red ſealing wax fixt about it,Addition. let her reſt, & it will ſoone conglutinate together again.]
               Let this ſuffice as touching the breaking or riuing of the Pounce of a Hawke.
            
            
               When the thigh or legge of a hawke is out of ioynt.
               BY ſome outward accident many times the thigh or legge of a Hawke is become out of ioynt: wherefore it ſhal be very neceſſary in this caſe, as ſoone as is poſſible, to ſet it in his right and naturall place againe, to the end that no matter nor fluxe of humor deſcend or diſtill to hinder the ſetting of it in ioynt againe, which muſt néeds enſue if it be not regarded in time. Which done, ſet the hawke in ſome ſuch place where ſhée ſhall haue no occaſion to bate or broile with her ſelfe, but bée at the greateſt quiet and reſt ſhee may, applying medicines that haue vertue to deſiccate and ſtrengthen the hurt member which you ſhall doe by bathing a linnen plegget, or a plegget of flax in the white of an Egge, Oyle of Roſes, and Turpentine, with two drams of Sanguis Draconis, and of Aloes incorporated together, and binding it about the thigh or legge which is out of ioynt, and faſtning ouer and aboue the ſaid plegget a ſlender roller of linnen cloth, to conſerue & kéepe

if the more firmely and ſtayedly in the place where you would haue it to remaine. Vſing the matter thus ten dayes together ſhifting and renuing the medicine euery two dayes once, to the end the plegget waxe not ouer drie and ſtiffe to the hurte member.
               I can like very well withall, if before you apply this ſaid medicine, you bath well the thigh or legge of the hawk with a reaſonable warme lotion or bath made of Wine, roſes dried, Myrthe, Sage, Comfrey, Camemill, and Roſemary: for theſe will warme and comfort the nerues and ſinewes, and withall drie vppe ſuch fluxe of humor as ſhall powre down vpon the lame and brooſed member. [But aboue all,Addition. if you bath if wt the oyle of Swallowes & the oyle of Mandrag mixt together, it will take away all paine and tumor.]
            
            
               When a hawke hath broken a thigh or a legge.
               IF by any miſhap your hawke haue broken an arme or a leg, as ſundry times Falcons that are fowle ſlayers doe vſe to doe by ſome ſtripe or encounter at the brooke with a ſtrong fowle, you muſt with all care and ſpeed ſet right the broken bones in their naturall place againe: which done, deplume and plucke away the feathers from the member that is hurt round about the wound.
               Then take

                     Bole Armoniacke,
                     Aloes Epatick of the beſt,
                     
                        Sanguis Draconis,
                     
                  
Of each a reaſonable quantity made into fine powder.
               After that take of

                     Beane flowre,
                     Barly flowre,
                     Linſéed flowre,
                  
Of each one dramme.
               Then take of

                     Oyle of Dill,
                     Oyle of Roſes,
                  
Of each two drams.
               Then take

                     The white of an egge,
                     The mucillage of fenegreke,
                     The mucillage of linſéede,
                     The mucillage of hollihock,
                  
So much of theſe as will ſerue to make a playſter according to art.
               
                  When you haue made this plaſter, ſpread a portion of it thinne vpon Flaxe or Lynte well towſed, applying it vpon the rupture and broken place with as great cunning and care as you can: you cannot vſe it too daintily when you apply it, becauſe of the tenderneſſe of the hurt. This done, binde it with a fine linnen coller to ſtay the playſter. Then make fine ſplets of Timber all of one length, thinne as may be, and in faſhion like the ſcales of a Sword ſcabbard, whome you muſt enwrappe in Lynt for bruſing the member. Theſe ſplets beſtow orderly about your Hawks legge or thigh on euery ſide, binding them with the linnen rollers or fillets artificially, but neyther ſo looſely as the bones may ſlippe out of their place, ne yet ſo ſtreightly, but that the hurt member may receyue his naturall nouriſhment & comfort. For otherwiſe it would be mortified, and the vſe of it loſt.
               This ligature and rolling of the member muſt be continued at the leaſt 30. dayes, for that the bone cannot cloſe againe firmely vnder one moneths ſpace. Yet can I wiſh that you vnbind your rollers, and change your medicine twice at the leaſt in the firſt fiftéene dayes, dealing ſo daintily as the boues may not ſunder thereby. And by meane thereof will your medicine, and the ligature worke the better effect.
               Laſtly, it ſhall not be amiſſe after you haue thus done, to vſe for thrée or foure dayes this lotion or water, to bath your hawkes leg, to ſtrengthen and comfort the place.
               Take Roch Allom one dramme, Roſes dried, the Pill or rinde of Pomegranets, and Frankenſence, of each a ſmall quantitie, white Wine as much as will ſuffice: wherein you muſt boyle theſe things aforeſaid to the conſumption of halfe the wine with this lotion, bath your hawkes thigh and legge plucking away the feathers as aforeſaid. And this ſhall comfort the member ſo as no fluxe of humors ſhall repayre to the place. Beſides all this you muſt not forget during the time of this cure to kéepe your diſeaſed hawke remoued from all noiſe and acceſſe of people: and if this miſfortune befall her in the Winter time, you muſt ſet her warme.
               
                  Moreouer it ſhall bée good and neceſſary in the beginning of your cure to giue your hawke,

                     1 Aloes waſht, or
                     2 Agaricke in Trocyſcks,
                  
to ſcowre her, to the end there grow no inflammations. And withall to féede her with good meat, the better to maintaine her in ſtate during the cure.
               It will bée good for you to vſe the helpe of ſome Apothecary for the confection of the playſter, as alſo for your lotion or bath: for the more artificially it is made, the better effect it wil take. Truly it doth ſtand with good reaſon that it will recure your Hawke, the receit is ſo good. All the care muſt be in the dainty handling of the broken member, and in rolling and ſpletting it orderly.
            
            
               Of the ſtripes and bruiſes in a Hawke.
               HAwks are wont diuerſe times to receiue ſtripes & blows by other fowles, as the Falcon by encounter wt a heron, and ſometimes by ſome other accident, as by carrying her in a hawkes bag vpon occaſion, or by raſhing into buſhes & thorns or ſuch like hurtfull places.
               Theſe ſtripes and hurts either are ſimple hurts (as they are termed) that is to ſay, in the ſkinne and fleſh of a hawke only, or elſe compounds, as when a nerue and ſinow is prickt, or cut in ſunder.
               The ſimple wounds and hurts are of ſlender or no danger at all, and will bee cecured lightly againe, eyther with the iuyce of Orgium, or a bath and lotion made of Maſticke, Aloes and Myrrhe two drammes, Pympernell, Comfrey and Sage, of eyther a handfull and a halfe, of Agreſta cleare and good, ſixe pounds, putting all theſe thinges aforeſaide into a ſtone veſſell made very cleane, or elſe into an earthen potte, there ſuffering it to boyle ſo long with a cloſe couer vppon it, vntill two third parts of the Agreſta be waſted and conſumed. Then ſtrayning it very well, adding vnto it one Ounce

of powder of Myrtils. This may you reſerue to vſe as a bleſſed and ſoueraigne medicine.
               There is yet one other notable medicine deuiſed by Maſter Fredericke Zorz, and oftentimes approued by mée with very good ſucceſſe.
               Take good Aloes, Myrrhe, Olibanum, & Sarguis Draconis, of eyther one dramme, of fine Grains one ſcruple: beat al theſe into powder, and infuſe them in two ounces of Aqua vitae, for the ſpace of twelue howres: then after ſtraine it very wel, & of this vſe to the hurts of your hawkes head, and alſo to her ſhoulders, if they receiue any bruiſe or ſtripe.
               But in any condition I cannot allow the vſe of Oyle of Roſes in hurts of the head, as it ſames that the ſaid Authour would haue it.
               If your hawkes ſkinne of her thigh or hinder parts be broken, fretted away, or hurt by bearing her in a cloſe Canuas bagge, or ſuch like, you may eaſily recouer her with this deuiſe. The leaues of dried Sage beaten to powder, or the powder of Olibanum, or Maſticke, bathing the hurt with white wine, whē you meane to apply the powder, and in two or thrée dayes you ſhall ſée it recouered.
               But if the ſtripe bée ioyned and matched with the offence of any nerue or ſinew, then will it be a harder matter to cure, for that the hurt is of greater importance and danger, for then is it wont to be full of paine, and to cauſe inflammation. Wherfore in this caſe, the beſt remedy that can be deuiſed, is excelcellent good oyle powred reaſonable hote into the hurt, taking away the feathers firſt that are about the wound, and vſing this bath about the member where the hurt is.
               Take Roch Alome one dramme, dried Roſes, rinds of Pomegranates and Myrrhe, of each a quantity, boyling all theſe in good odoriferous White Wine to the conſumption of halfe.
               No queſtion this will greatly comfort the wound, and hinder the fluxe of humors that otherwiſe would flow downe to the place, and bréede an Apoſtume.
               
                  Much more might be ſaid of ſtripes and bruiſes of hawkes, but I doe leaue you ouer to the learned Phiſitions & ſkilfull Surgeons, becauſe I will not ouerweary you with tedious circumſtances: accounting it ſufficient for mée to haue laide downe the cures for moſt ordinary hurts, which do rifeſt happen to hawks, and of ſuch as haue times paſt by fortune come to my handes. If you couet to haue greater ſtore of Medicines for the cure of any member or hurt part of your hawke, I aduiſe you that haue ſkill in the Italian tongue to ſlée ouerto Meſſ er Frederigo Giorgi his practiſe, plainely and excellently ſet downe in his Booke of Falconrie, from whence I haue collected ſundry things. But as touching theſe hurtes and ſtripes of hawkes, I haue not borrowed much of him, but haue in this part of my collection more vſed the briefe cure of Franceſco Sforzino Ʋicentine, that excellent Italian Gentleman Falconer.
            
            
               Of Hawkes Lyſe.
               Hauing hetherto ſpoken of ſuch diſeaſes and gréefes, as for the moſt part hawkes are troubled withall within their bodies: now remayneth that in few ſpéeches I ſhew you a remedy for vermine and Liſe, a particular paſſion and affection that lighteth on the ſkin of a hawke, and ſpecially about her head, the plye of her wings, and her traine: for indéede theſe liſe and mytes doe chiefly raigne and lodge in thoſe thrée parts of the hawkes, more than in any other.
               Falconers doe vſe to ridde theſe vile wormes and liſe in the winter time by takfng of pepper beatē to powder two drams, of warme water one pound, or as much as will ſuffice, mingling the pepper and water well together, and thē to pepper (as we terme it) or waſh all her feathers with the ſaide lotion or bath, and ſpecially thoſe parts of the hawke whereof I ſpake before, where the mites and liſe doe moſt haunt: which done, they ſet the hawke on a perch with her traine and backe to the Sunneward, holding in their hands a ſmall ſtick, one handful

long, on the toppe whereof they faſten a péece of waxe, either red, or gréene, & with that (while the Hawk doth weather her) they take away the liſe and mytes crawling vpon the fethers, ſo as before the hawk be throughly dried and weathered, what with the waxe and their own dropping away, there wil not be a vermine leff about the hawke. For the pepper and water doth ſo much diſeaſe them, as they are enforced to leaue their accuſtomed lodgings: then the heat of the Sun or fire, helps to make them ſhew themſelues: and the waxe by cleauing to thē, vtterly and clearely rids the hawke of them.
               I haue ſéene ſome Falconers adde vnto the pepper & water, a quantity of Staueſager, as an enemy to the liſe and mites, by meane of ſtrength and force that is in it: and I take it to be very neceſſary to be added in this medicine to the Pepper for the better diſpatch of thoſe vile vermines which doe ſo much vexe and annoy the hawke, as ſhée can by no means kéepe her ſelfe in good ſtate whileſt ſhée is incumbred with them.
               You muſt remember to pepper you hawke in this maner as I haue ſhewed you in a very warm ſunny day, when there is no wind at all blowing in the ſkie. But if by fortune you be enforced to doe it in another time when the weather is cold and the Sunne not ſhining, then muſt you ſet your hawke by the fire to weather her, and drie her feathers: but neither muſt the fire bée ouer hote, nor the gorge of your hawk towards the fire, whereof I haue giuen you aduertiſement before, in thoſe precepts which are to be obſerued of a good Falconer. For if you ſet her with the gorge to the fire, no doubt ſhée wil receiue no ſmall harme and inconuenience thereby, and for the moſt part death enſues of it.
               In the Summer time you may diſpatch your hawke of the liſe & mites with Auripigmentum beatē into very fine powder, beſtowing and ſifting it betwixt the hawks feathers wt your fingers, & ſpecially in thoſe places where they do moſt vſually haunt, alwayes hauing regard that none of the powder come into your hawks eyes for offending her. And after the beſtowing of this powder, you muſt in no wiſe beſpowt her wt water

(as ſome vſe to doe) to the great hurt and miſchiefe of thoſe poore birds. For the bathing or ſpowting her with water, is a meane to make the powder to frette away, and conſume the Hawkes feathers.
               Some other affirme that Mint leaues boyled in water, to the conſumption of a third part, bathing the Hawke therwith ſomewhat warm, wil diſpatch the Lyſe and Mites, but for my part I neuer approued this medicine, and therefore can ſay little of it.
               Let theſe ſuffice as touching the peppering of lowſie hawks, for of all other plagues that be fall the Hawke, I account this the leaſt, becauſe they may moſt eaſily be deſtroyed, as dayly experience doth teach vs: and yet the remedies for them good to be knowne, becauſe you ſhall ſeldom or neuer buy a Hawk from the Cage that is not lowſie, or ſet your hawke on a perch where a lowſie hawke hath ſtood, and ſhée ſhall bée aſſured to bée neuer a lowſe the worſe for it.
            
            
               Of miſfortunes that happen to Hawkes in the mew. And firſt of all, of their laying egges in the mew.
               IN the mew hawks are ſubiect to ſundry accidents. Among all which (to paſſe ouer the greaſines and exceſſiue glit that they are ſurcharged withal, hauing ſom what touch
                     •
                   that matter in the Chapter of the Gowt) the greateſt miſhap that may be, is when hawkes fall to laying egges, and to be with egge in the mew. For in very déed this is a great miſchiefe, and diuers times doth kill the Hawke,
               You ſhall firſt perceiue it by the creaking and crying that they vſe in the mew ſomtimes, and other whiles on the perth, albeit now and then they dee it for eagerneſſe and appetite, when they are ſharpe ſet: which as it is eaſily found, ſo is it as quickly remedied.
               A man ſhall know when they fall to liking and laying, by this, from the necke of the hawke down to the very middle of

her traine, there is vpon the feather a certaine thing like the floure of branne of a pale and aſhie colour.
               And becauſe this accident hapneth by meane of too much daintineſſe and luſtfull pride of the Hawke, it ſhall bee good to kéepe her low, and to hold a hard hand ouer her, pinching her of her féeding, giuing her liquid and moiſt fleſh from the midle of Aprill to the end of May, which is the onely tune to be feared of all the yeare for this matter. When the hawk doth leaue her croaking and crying in the mew, it is a manifeſt proofe that ſhée is with Egge, which you ſhall know both by her groſenes and ſilling in the panell, as alſo by her idle ſtanding without liſt to féede. And it hahpily the egges bée growne any thing great within her, you ſhall hardly hinder her but that ſhée wil lay them. Therefore (as I tell yon) it ſhall bée good in time to looke vnto it, kéeping her low in Aprill and May. And in thoſe monethes to miniſter vnto her Aloes Epatick waſht, a quantity of Saffron lapped in bumbaſt or cotton, whereupon conuey a little Flaxe or Towe, and make a caſting or ſcowring of it, thruſting it downe her throat into her gorge, the hawke being both empty paneld, and hauing no meate aboue to put ouer kooping her on the fiſt after it, till ſuch time the ſcowring be in her gorge. Of this and ſuch like ſcowrings may you giue your hawke euery third or fourth day for foure or fiue times, féeding her with liquid meates, ſuch as will lightly be endewed. And vſing this order, no doubt your hawke ſhall doe well.
               Againe, it is very good againſt the ſame miſchiefe, to cauſe your Hawke in foure or fiue bits of meat, to take a quantity of Saffron in Chiues, vſing her after the manner and forme aforeſaid.
               Moreouer, it is a very good way to delay and kill the liſt and liking of a ſparowhawke to féede her for thrée, foure, or more dayes if you thinke good with liquid meates waſht in water, wherein the great pylles of Ornus haue béene infuſed for the ſpace of eight or ten dayes béeing finely cut to péeces. But it ſhould be far better if you cauſe thoſe rinds & pilles to be boiled in water, ſo long vntill they become ſoft and tender, and then

to waſh your hawkes meat therein.
               If your Hawke be with Egge (as they tearme it) ſo as you may perceiue and féele the egs within her, beſides thoſe foreſaid remedies, it ſhall bée good to annoint her tuell with oyle oliue: which being done, conuey in thy forefinger at her tuell, as finely as thou canſt, to féele the egs, which if thou once féele gripe thy hawkes pannel ſoftly for hurting her, forcing downwards the eg towards thy finger in her tuell, & if it be poſſible ſo bring it away cleane, & rid thy hawke of it: but if thou canſt not doe it, breake it euen there right, and afterward beſtow a gliſter vpon thy hawke of things lenitiue, to make her mewt and ſliſe well: for by this meane (as my Italian Author doth informe me) thou ſhalt diſcharge thy hawke of this miſchiefe, and bring her to be in perfect ſtate againe.
            
            
               To cauſe a Hawke to mewe faſt and well.
               SOmetimes it ſo falleth out, that hawkes doe not mewe in time, ſo as they may be flown with in the pleaſant time of the yeare, nor be drawne when other Falconers do accuſtome to draw their hawkes, but they come ſo late as the yeare is far ſpent, and ſmall pleaſure to be taken in kéeping or fléeing with them, for which a man is ſometimes driuen of force to vſe deuiſe to further the matter, and to practiſe to make her mew ſooner than her accuſtomed maner is to mew of her ſelfe. Wherfore to make a hawke mewe timely, theſmoſt and beſt way is to caſt her off into a good mewe for the purpoſe, (made in maner as I haue taught you before) and there to allow her of the beſt hote meats that may be had, as Quailes, Pigeons, and Sparowes, and now and then among to ſet her in the mewe ſome veſſell, large and déepe, conueniently filled with water, wherein your hawke may bouze and bath at her pleaſure.
               But if this ordinary kind of good and kindly mewing will not ſerue the turne (which ſeldome or neuer almoſt hapneth to Goſhawks, for that by this former faſhiō & vſage they

doth vſe to mew very well and orderly (then as I ſaid) it behoueth to aſſiſt and further nature by art and phyſicke, to cauſe a Hawke to mew timely.
               To helpe in this caſe thoſe kirnels or ſmall nuttes, which are growing vnder the throat of a weather, are very good (as mine author affirmeth) vſing them euery third day for thrice, or thereabouts, allowing a Sparowhawke three or foure of them at once, being both empty gorged and panneld. But you may giue a Falcon ſixe or more at one time, holding the hawk on the fiſt, till ſhee beginne to ſliſe and mewte, and after that a ſpace feede her with good hote meat, alwayes remembring that if the hawke do loath the taking of them, (as happily ſhe wil) or doe not very well brooke them after thee hath taken them, then that you giue her reſpite betwixt times for thrée or foure dayes together, to the end ſhee may not finde her ſelfe cloyed with them.
               If at the end of eight dayes ſhée beginne to caſt any feather, then may you into the mew with her without more a doe: but if not, then muſt you fall to giuing her of thoſe glandulous kirnels of the weather againe, once or twice more: for vſing it in this order the ſecond time without queſtiō, within ſix or ſeuen dayes, ſhée will caſt the backe feathers, or her ſarcels or flags: thē muſt you throw hir into the mew, giuing hir water to bath for ſhée will very much couet the water, and you ſhall ſée her within two oor thrée dayes ſo bare, and in a maner cleane without feathers, as ſhée will not bée able for lacke of them to flée to her ordinary ſtand or pearch. Wherefore I can commend and aduiſe you to haue ſome low pearch and ſtand for her in the mew, whereunto ſhée may iumpe when ſhée hath caſt her feathers, ſo as ſhée is vnable to flée. Eſpecially remēbring to ſéed her all that while ſhée is ſo without feathers, twice in a day, allowing her ſuch and ſo much meat as ſhe can endew, & make away with. For all that time will ſhée couet great gorges, and ridde great ſtore of meate vntill ſhe haue recouered her cote againe. And to reſtraine her, or kéepe a hard hand vpon her, hauing mewed her fethers, and béeing now at point to put foorth

new in their places, will bréed her feathers to bée ful of taints and ill fauoured, and beſides that her Sarcelles and principals will not be ſo long and large as they ought to bee, by meanes whereof ſhee will not bee able to ſlée ſo well as ſhée was accuſtomed.
               Some others, to cauſe a hawke to mew ſpéedily, doe will you to enwrappe her meate in the powder of a Frogge dryed in an ouen or fornace.
               Other ſome, in the powder of a Cuttell bone, taking off the powder of this fiſh bone, to the weight of a penny. But theſe practiſes and deuiſes I did neuer approue, and therefore doe committe them to the diſcretion of the Reader.
            
            
               Of Accidents that happen and light vppon a hawkes feathers, and firſt how to vſe the matter when a feather cannot bee ymped.
               DIuers and ſundry times it ſo fals out that a Hawkes feather being drawn out of the wing or traine by violence and force, the hole cloſes vp, and ſhuts after it preſently, in ſuch ſorte as a new feather can by no meanes grow and ſpring vppe in the place to ſerue the hawkes turne and vſe againe.
               For remedie hereof, ſome doe will a man to make the hole againe where it was before, and to open it a freſh with a barley graine, dryed ſo as it bée not burnt. Then after that, to kéepe it open that it runne not together againe, you muſt frame a ſmall Pellette of Larde, or boyled Hony, which béeing conueyed into the hole, will there abide, vntill ſuch time as the ſhooting out of the new feather doe remoue it and diſplace it.
               Some other time it hapneth a feather to bée broken in the quill ſo néere the wing, as it is not poſſible to ympe it againe:

then doe they vſe, (to make the quill to fall and droppe away without paine to the hawke) this deuiſe. They annoynt the place with the bloud of a young Rat, which will cauſe the broken quill to come away. After which, to kéep the hole open they vſe the helpe aforeſaid with the barly corne.
               Theſe two cures I neuer tryed, becauſe it was neuer my happe (I thanke fortune) to ſtand néedfull of the practiſe. But truely I like neither of them ſo well, as I can greatly commend them.
               Otherwiſe it chanceth through the hurt of a Hawkes wing, that one or two of her Flagges, long feathers, or Sarcelles are bruiſed, and thereby both put her to great paines, and eake hinder her fléeing. Wherefore it ſhall bée in this caſe very neceſſary, as ſoone as it hapneth to looke and view the wing well, whether there be any bloud much or little in the quill that is bruiſed in manner aforeſaid: which if it be ſo, it ſhal be needfull to pierce it with a ſharpe néedle, or ſuch like inſtrument to giue the bloud iſſue before ſuch time as it bée congealed and waxen hard. And after that to annoint the bruiſe, (and eſpecially where the blacke bloud is) witholde larde and reſty Bacon.
               Moreouer, it ſhall be very good to ceaſe the paine, to poure vpon the hurt place thrée or foure droppes of good Oyle of roſes ſomewhat hote, which hauing vſed for the ſpace of three or foure dayes, it ſhall not be amiſſe to bath it with Aqua vita to drie and reſolue it. If you vſe this meane in the beginning when the hurt is firſt taken, no doubt it will bréede reſolution.
               But if by negligence or otherwiſe it be foreſlacked at firſt, ſo as the bruiſed Sarcell or other feather grow out of order, and croſſe the next feather to it in fléeing, and by that meane bée a hinderance to the Hawke, and a paine, it ſhall be good to cut it off in the quill. And to the end there may grow an other ſecond feather in the place of that which is ſo ſpoyled and cutte off, it ſhall bée well done to make the quill to drop

away. To bring that to paſſe, firſt of all wipe well the bloud congcaled and corrupted within the place, and after that, fill it with Aqua vita, of the beſt that may bée gotten, and deale ſo artificially as the Aqua vita may ſtay, and not droppeout of the place. Which muſt be done by ſtopping the hole with wax, or ſuch like deuiſe. This Aqua vita by meane of the heat of it, will cauſe the quill to fall away within eight dayes or little more, by meane whereof there may ſhoot out a new feather.
            
            
               The way and manner how to ympe a Hawks feather, howſoever it be broken or bruiſed.
               SOmtimes it ſo falleth out that ye fethers of a hawks wing, or train may be broken, whereupon it is both neceſſarie and néedefull, to ſet other like in their ſteades. Which feat wée tearme the ymping of a hawkes feather.
               This may be done in foure ſeuerall manners and faſhions after that the feather is broken.
               For firſt, in the greater and huger ſort of Hawkes,The first way to ympe a hanke. if a feather be broken one fingers breadth or thereabouts mithin the quill, then your next remedie is, to ſheare it off with a payre of Syſſers or ſheares, to the end it may not cleane or riue any further. Then hauing prepared a like feather to the ſame of ſome other Hawke or Fowle, reſembling the broken Feather: you muſt cut the quill off it, and ſo force it together, as it may enter the broken quill of the Hawkes feather, annointing it before you thruſt it in, or ſéeme to place it for good and all, in the Gummie fatte of a Figge, the Yolke of an Egge, or ſome kinde of Semonde made of purpoſe, thruſting it very directly into the truncke and quill of the broken feather, and as wée may tearme it, graffing the one in the other. And to the ende

it may haue the better hold, and the faſter ſtay, it ſhall not bée amiſſe to clynte or nayle them faſt together with the point of a Partridge feather, taking the very toppe of it, and ſtripping away the Feathers on eyther ſide the webbe: and after that, making a ſmall hole with a ſlender Néedle, ſo as it paſſe through both the quilles, as wel that which ſticketh faſt in the Hawkes wing, as the other borrowed and adopted Feather, drawing through the hole made with the Néedle, the point of the Partridges feather to fill vp the hole againe. Which done, cut it off cloſe by the Webbefinely on eyther ſide, and ſo will it ſtand very handſomely faſt, and almoſt not to be diſcerned, but to bée the hawkes naturall Feather.
               
                  The ſecond manner of ymping.But if a Sarcell, a Flagge, or a Traine feather bée broken or ſliued amid the Quill, ſo as another Feather ymped in him after the maner aforeſaid, can well take no hold, or ſtand ſure: Then ſhall it bée neceſſary to take a Iunyper ſticke, or ſuch like drie timber, and thereof to make a ſmall ſharpe Pegge ſo as it may enter the Quill, which done, dippe the one end of it in Glew, Semond, or the ſlime of the fiſhe, whome my Author tearmeth a Colpiſce, the Germaines a Leymefiſche, (a fiſh as Geſnerus reporteth ſo ſoft and tender, as béeing ſodde or fryed, he falleth all to a gellie, or glew, for which cauſe hée is deteſted greatly, and baniſhed al mens tables.) Hée is headed like an Ape, and for that occaſion (called of diuers Marmotum, as we may interprete it, a marmoſet, or an Ape.) In the ſlime (I ſay) of this Fiſh, dyppe your Iuniper ſticke, thruſting it into the broken quil, remē
                  bring to place it ſo aptly as it may bee without the quill, of iuſt ſize to anſwere the length of the feather whē it was found, and vnbrokē. Then do put the other end likewiſe in the glew or ſemond, conueying it by force into ye quil of the fether which you haue gotten, ſo cloſe as the one quill touch the other directly. After all this, faſten and clynt both the quils to ye iuniper peg, wt a Partridge his feather as before. And if it were ſo, as the

quill were ſliued or rent, pierce it through with a néedle and thréed, and with the threed bind it hard to the ſticke on both ſides the quill, and it will hold very faſt, and ſerue the hawks turne in her flight in ſtead of a naturall feather.
               If a ſarcell or other feathers be broken aboue the quill,The third manner of ymping. towards the point of the feathers two or thrée fingers breadth, you muſt cut it off wt a ſharpe penknife a ſlope, (and as they ſay) a ſwaſh, & then take another like feather to the ſame, cutting it in like maner as you did the other, ſo as it may fit with the ſame feather both for length and cut. Which done, with an ymping néedle layde in vinegar and ſalt, ſo cloſe them together as they may bee thought to bée one feather.
               The laſt maner of ymping is, when a feather is not quite broken off, but bruiſed, and (as it were) but markt, ſo as it cannot be holpen and righted againe with warme water.The fourth & laſt manner of ymping. In this caſe it ſhall be bether rather to cut away the feathers, onely to cut away the nether part of the web, iuſt ouer againſt yt bruiſed place, leauing the vpper part whole and vntoucht: then to take a long ſlender néedle like a Glouers néedle, and to thréed it, and bauing ſo done, to thruſt the eye of the néedle being thréeded into the greater part of the feather towards the quill, forcing the point of it ſo hard with a thimble, as it may bée cleane hid in the feather, and no part of it to bée ſéene. After that, ioyning both ſides of the bruiſed feather together, where you cut the web, draw the thréed as hard & as ſtraight as you can poſſible, ſo as the point of the néedle, by pulling off the thréed that hangeth out, may ſo farre enter the vpper part of the feather, as it may be halfe on the quill ſide, and the other halfe on the point of the bruiſed feather, which will ſtrengthen the feathers maruailouſly. This done, cut off the thréede which was for none other purpoſe put there, but to draw the point of the néedle backe into the vpper part of the feather. (∵)
            
            
               
               How to ympe the traine of a Hawke beeing all broken, and neuer a feather whole or ſound.
               MAny times it ſo fortunes, as the traine of a hawke is quite ſpoyled, and no one feather left to ſerue the turne. Wherefore it ſhall be neceſſary in this caſe, to ſet your hawk a new traine which is done after this manner.
               You muſt take a pée of paper as bigge as your hand, in the middle wherof you muſt ſlit a hole, through which conuey the hawkes traine being broken, vp to the very rumpe of her, drawing backe through the ſayd ſlit of the paper, all the brailes and ſmall feathers of the traine that grow about the hawkes tewell, both aboue and beneath, ſo as there appeare none at all but the long feathers, vpon which you meane to work your feat. Then cut off thoſe long traine feathers with a fine penknife, beginning from the firſt, ſecond, third, fourth, fift, and ſo on the other ſide of the traine in like manner, and you muſt cut them off a ſlope, ſidewayes towards the top of the trunke or quil, vntil you come to the two couert feathers, which two you muſt cut directly and not ſloping, as you did the reſt. So as when you haue done, the traine of the hawke may bee in ſhape like the pypes of a payre of Organs. Then take the trayne of a mewed Iay (if it be poſſible, becauſe they are the fayreſt frathers being mewed) ſetting in euery quill of the hawkes traine, one feather of the Iay orderly, the firſt feather of the Iay, in the firſt quill of the Sparowhawke, and ſo conſequently. And if the Iayes feather will not enter the hawks quill, then muſt you cut it a little, and bruſing it with your finger, force it into the cut quill, annointing the end of the borowed feather in the fat of a figge, the yolke of an egge, or ſuch like ſtuffe, and ſo placing it right and directly with the hawks feather. Hauing ſet one feather in this order aforeſaid, on the one ſide of the hawkes traine, paſſe ouer to the other firſt feather of the other ſide, and doe in like maner, alwayes placing and ymping them ſo, as in length, and each condition elſe, they

may agrée fully with the naturall feather of the hawke: and ſo from one to the other, vntill you come to the two couert feathers, which you muſt ſet laſt of all the reſt, and thoſe in ſo good order, as your eye may iudge them to bee excellently ymped by the iuſt length and ſize of them. After all this, take away your paper, and with a knife wette in a little ſpittle, goe ouer all the ymped feathers, putting the knife betwixt euery quill, cloſe by the rumpe of your hawke, and ſo go along the feather to cutte away all ſuch ſmall feathers, as ſhall bée out of order, by meane of the ymping and cutting off the feather in the trayne of your hawke. Which done feather by feather, ſet your hawke firſt on your fiſt, and ſo after a ſpace on the perch, that ſhe may tricke her ſelfe, and right and enoyle her feathers with her beake.
               Here will I not omitte to remember euery good Falconer, that hée haue in his houſe, and in a readineſſe about him at al times, his ymping néedles, and ſuch like neceſſary implements, to ſerue the turne withall, and to lend his companions if they néed. For it ſhall redound to his credite greatly, and by meanes thereof hée ſhall be accounted a gallant Gentleman, and a good fellow.
               Now in mine own opinion, I haue diſcourſed ſufficiently of all diſeaſes, and made you priuy to the Italians order of phyſicking his hawke, which I can very well commend, as greatly agréeable to reaſon. Yet neuertheles in this laſt part, you ſhal for your greater ſtore of remedies, & better knowledge haue the french falconers maner of dealing with their hawks haue ſet downe. But before I do that, I will write ſomewhat to inſtruct you how to prepare your Mummie, a very neceſſary thing to be learned, and without the which you ought to bée at no time, if you meane to kéepe hawkes, and to haue them in good order and tune.
            
            
               
               The way and meane to prepare Mummy for Falcons, and other birds of prey, and when and how it ought to be given.
               Sythens that in theſe receits for hawks diſeaſed and ſicke, I haue diuers times made mention of Mummey, and of other medicins appropriate and peculiar to ſundry griefes, here I thinke it not amiſſe to lay downe the meane how to prepare it for the vſe and benefite of all Falconers that ſhall haue occaſion to imploy it to any ſicke hawke: For that in cure of a bruiſe, I take it to be the moſt ready and exquiſite way to recouer the hurt hawke againe.
            
            
               Mummie is prepared in this manner.
               Firſt, you muſt take Nutmegs, in number foure, Cloues, Ginger, & Cynamon, of eyther halfe an ounce, Saffron one dramme, reducing all theſe to fine powder. Boyle them in an earthen potte well glazed, & couered cloſe with a reaſonable quantity of good Malmeſie, to the conſumption of a third part: then take Mummy thrée ounces or foure, or ſo much as ſhall content you, beating it to powder, and putting it into a linnen cloth, ſo bound, as it may by no means iſſue out of the ſame. Hang it ſo by a ſtring faſtned to a ſticke, as it may not reach the bottom of the pot, but as it may be infuſed in the very middle of the Malmeſie, which you muſt cauſe to boyle againe at a ſoft fire, ſo long vntil there be a conſumption of another third part. Which done, take it frour the fire, & let the mummy being ſo bound in yt linnen cloth, reſt for ye ſpace of four or fiue hours, to the end the vertue of thoſe powders may pierce and enter the mummie, which by this meane will become very perfect. And hauing done all this, kéepe the mummie out of the ſunne and wind in the ſhade, in the ſelfe ſame cloth wherein it was infuſed, vntil it be perfectly drie againe, and then vſe it in pouder at your néed, eyther ſtrewing it vpon your hawks meat, or giuing it in a caſting of Cotton as I haue taught you before.
               
                  There is a kind of pyll or paſt deuiſed by that noble Gentleman Hierom Cornarus of famous memory for ſicke Falcons, which haue loſt their appetite, and day by day become megre and low, making a blacke mewte, or full of fleſh vndigeſted, which is prepared in this maner following.
               Take Saffron, Agaricke, Cubebes, Frankinſence, Rewe, Cloues; Cinamon, fine Aloes, of eyther two ſcruples, two Nutmegs, choice Mummy, Rewbarbe of the beſt, of eyther one dramme, and the fift part of the marrow of a Béefe, or Veale, as much as will ſuffice to make a mixture of theſe powders aforeſaid: of all which you muſt make a pyll or paſt, giuing thereof to the huger ſort of hawkes as much as a bean in a pyll in manner aforeſaid,
               This is a very good receit, but not ſo good as this vnderwritten which is deuiſed by (Meſſer Manoli) the Falconer to the renowned Signior Bartelmew Alviano, and practiſed vpon his Falcons being ſicke and ill affected in their gorges. Hée was wont to take Triacle, Hiera Pigra, Caſſea Lignea, Cloues, Cinamon, Aloes, Galenga, Agaricke of the beſt, Sirupe of Roſes, confection of Hamech, Diacatholicon, Benedicta, of eyther one ſcruple, choyce Rewbarbe, Mummy waſht and purified, of each two ſcruples, of Nutmegge thrée drams beaten to powder, thoſe thinges that are to bée beaten in powder, and incorporating all with hony of roſes, making thereof a pyll or paſt, which he would kéepe to ſerue his turne at néed, whereof hée would giue his huger hawkes the quantity of half a beane, and to leſſer hawkes a leſſer quantity informe of a pyll, being empty both in gorge and pannell. And truly this would worke a maruailous effect vpon his ſicke Hawkes: & if you vſe the ſame, no doubt you ſhall finde great pleaſure in it.
            
            
               
               Of the cauteriſing inſtruments and tooles, wherewith Falconers doe ſeare their Hawkes in deſperate cures, when nothing elſe will ſerue the turne but fire, the laſt refuge of all others.
               
                  depiction of cauterising instruments
               
               HAuing ſundry times in my collection of Falconrie ſpoken of cawterie, to be beſtowed vpon Hawkes, according to tho diverſity of their diſeaſes & hurts, it ſhall bée very néedfull for me here in the latter end of my third booke, to ſet down the proportion and ſhape of the yrons which are proper to the matter and maner of cure, being a very neceſſary thing for euery good Falconer to haue thoſe yrons about him continually to ſerue his turne.
               
                  Wherefore I ſay that the cauteriſing yrons are made in foure maners, and beare foure ſeuerall kinds of ſhapes, as by their peculiar pictures and portraitures may bée ſéene.
               Wherof the firſt aſſigned to this charact (A) doth ſerue to cauterize the head of a hawke, becauſe it is round,A & ſomwhat plaine on the toppe.
               The ſecond,B ſigned with the letter (B) ſhall ſerue to cawteriſe the nares without danger or hurt to the little ſtert that groweth vp in the middle of the nares, for that it is round and hollow at the top.
               The third, which is (C) is a cawteriſing button to burne or ſeare the head of a Hawke,C and with that other deuiſe on the backe ſide, to cut the ſkin vnder the nares if néed be.
               The laſt, ſigned with the character (D) is oftentimes vſed to cawteriſe and enlarge the nares of a Hawke,D & therefore is made ſo ſmall & ſharp at the point, ye better to enter the nares.
               Of theſe tooles and inſtrumentes, it behoues you to haue larger and leſſer, according to the variety & proportion of your Hawkes, for that the Falcon and Goſhawkes head being more huge than the Sparowhawkes, it ſhall not bee good nor conuenient to cawteriſe the all wt one ſelfe yron of one bignes, but to ſhift your toole, according to the quality of the hawke.
               Ouer and beſide all theſe tooles aforeſaid, a Falconer muſt haue his paire of kniues, one ſtreight pointed, the other bending at the toppe, a ſplatter, his coping yrons, a payre of Siſers and a Surgeons inſtrument to ſerue his vſe in all diſeaſes of a hawke about her beake and pounces.
               Thus much I accept ſufficient as touching Hawkes and birds of prey, ſo as now there remayneth nothing more, but the French Falconers opinion of diſeaſes and cures, and laſtly, one ſmall treatiſe and very neceſſary diſcourſe, as touching the diſeaſes that happen to Spaniels with the cure of the ſaid miſchiefes, which ſhall bée the very laſt part of af all this collection of Falconrie.
               Though I like the Italian Gentleman very well for his

ſingular ſkill and iudgement in Falconrie, yet neuertheleſſe, becauſe I find ſundry things very good and neceſſary in the French practicioners which may ſtand you in ſtead, (as well for manning and luring, as alſo curing your diſeaſed hawks) for whoſe onely benefite I vndertooke the collection of this my booke. And partly, for that the French Gentleman ſhall not grow iealoous of mee that I ſcorne his ſkill in regard of the learned and delicate Italian, waying them both indifferently, if I find them both to deſerue like due commendation and praiſe: I haue here offered to your view and iudgementes ſundry French mens opinions and inuentions as touching this art of Falconrie, crauing you to iudge the beſt both of thē and me: of them your neighbours for their firſt inuentions: & of me your Countryman for my late collection: whoſe paines beſtowed herein, ſhall be nothing but a pleaſure, if I may find my ſelfe guerdoned with good liking, and deſerued thankes from you. And ſo I commit you ouer to the diſcourſe it ſelfe without any farther circumſtance or proteſtation.
            
            
               How to keepe and maintaine all manner of Hawkes in health, good plight, and liking.
               TO kéep Falcons and all maner of birds of prey in health, the chiefe Falconers ſay yt they muſt neuer haue a great gorge giuē thē ſpecially of groſſe meats, as Béefe, Porke, and ſuch other that are hard to be put ouer & endewed. Moreouer you muſt beware in any wiſe that yée féed them not with the fleſh of any beaſt that hath lately gone to rutte, for yt will kill them, and yée ſhall not perceyue how. I find by experience, that the giuing of great gorges, and the féeding of them with ſuch ſortes of fleſh, (ſpecially cold) doth deſtroy and ſurfeite more hawkes than all other miſchances that can happen to them. And therefore I warne all Falconers to beware how

they ouergorge their hawkes: and if they bee driuen to féede them with groſſe fleſh for want of better, let it bée well ſoaked in cleane water, and afterward ſufficiently well wroong. It muſt bée done in Summer with cold water, and in Winter with luke warme water, and it muſt not bée wroong too much with the hand: for the maſſineſſe of the fleſh, and the looſeneſſe of the water will cauſe them to put ouer, and to indew the ſooner and more ſpeedily. And it will cauſe them to haue the larger panels, whereby they ſhall the better ſcowre thēſelues downward of the glit & groſſe humors. And this is to be vnderſtood of all groſſe fleſh wherewith yée ſhall bée faine ſometimes to féede your hawkes: but not of any other féeding that is light and of good digeſtion. For yée muſt haue diſcretion to reward your hawke now and then with ſome good line and warme meat, or elſe ſhée may bée brought too low. Neuertheleſſe the ſeruing of your hawkes with waſht meat (as is ſayd before) is the way to kéepe them in health.
            
            
               Of Aloes Cicotrina, wherewith you muſt make ſcowrings for your Hawkes.
               I Tell you further that to maintaine your Hawkes in good plight, & to kéepe them from all diſeaſes, you muſt euery 15 dayes, giue them the mountenance of a beane of Aloes Cicotrine which muſt bée put into them, wrapped vp in a little of the fleſh, or of the ſkinne of a Henne, to the intent that the taſt of the Aloes which is very bitter, bée not felt of them. And whē your hawke hath ſwallowed it downe, beare her vpon your fiſte, the better to cauſe her to kéepe that which is giuen her, which done, let her afterward caſt vp the water & ſlime which ſhée hath in her body: and take vp the reſt of the Aloes againe which ſhée hath caſt, and let it not be loſt, for it is good and wil ſerue for another time. Then ſet your hawke in the Sunne

or againſt the fire hooded, and féede her not till two howres after, at which time you ſhal giue her a reaſonable gorge of ſome liue birde or fowle. And the ſaid medicine muſt bée giuen in the morning after that the hawke hath caſt.
            
            
               Of common pylles that are given to Hawkes for laxatiue medicines or downeward ſcowrings.
               NEuertheleſſe in ſtead of the ſaid Aloes, yée may at your diſcretion vſe common pylles, ſuch as Apotecaries giue men to make them looſe bodied. And many are of opinion that they be much better than that other of Aloes: for the pils driue downeward, and ſcowre more ſtrongly and with greater Effect. Yet notwithſtanding yée may vſe eyther of thoſe two, making thē at your pleaſure. Of the ſaid pilles you ſhall giue your Hawke one or two after as the quantity of them is, and when ſhée hath taken them, ſet her by a fire, or in the Sunne, and féed her not for the ſpace of two howres after, at which time yée ſhal giue her ſome quicke and liue thing to féede vpon: For the taking of the pylles, will ſet all her body out of temper and tune. And ſo yée ſhall kéepe your Hawkes in good plight, ſtate and health.
            
            
               Another way to ſcowre by medicine.
               
                  Stancſaker is called Filander, becauſe it loues a man, and wil cleaue to him like the burre.TAke Aloes Cicotrine, and graines of Filander, otherwiſe called Staueſaker and Caſſia Fiſtula, as much of the one as of the other to the mountaine of a bean together, and when yée haue beaten it into powder, put it into a Hennes gut of an inth long, tied faſt at both ends: then conuey it into her in the morning, ſo as ſhée may put it ouer, and that muſt bée after ſhée hath caſt, if ſhée had any caſting at all. Then ſet your hawk by the fire or in the Sunne, and féed her with a quicke chicken, or ſome other liue warme meat two howres after, as is ſaid afore: and ſo your hawkes ſhall be kept in good plight and ſtate. And it is to be noted that you muſt not giue ſo much to

a Goſhawke, for they bée not of ſo ſtrong and churliſh nature and mettell as other hawkes are: & much leſſe to a Sparowhawk, becauſe ſhée is not able to brooke ſo ſtrong a medicine as the Goſhawke is. And therefore you muſt beare in minde that your giuing of the ſaid things to your hawkes muſt be according to their natures and ſtrengthes, by the good diſcretion of ſuch as through their noble diſpoſition doe place their care, pleaſure and minds vpon ſuch things.
            
            
               To make a Hawke caſt when ſhe keepeth it too long.
               FOraſmuch as Hawkes doe ſometimes kéepe their caſting too long, and cannot put it vp: or elſe it may now and then fall out that a man knoweth not whether they haue any caſting or no: in ſuch caſes you muſt giue your hawke a little Aloes, and then ſhe will caſt it together with the ſlime, and filth that hindred the caſting of it. And for want of Aloes, giue her the mountenance of a beane of the roote of Celendine, in two or thrée pellets, and it will eaſe her out of hand. And to further the matter, it ſhall not bée amiſſe to giue her one ſpoonefull of water wherein the Celendine rootes haue béene ſtéeped ſome ſpace: for the bitterneſſe thereof will force her to caſt.
            
            
               Of the bathing of Hawkes.
               IF you mind to kéepe your hawkes in time and ſtate to flée well, you muſt make them bath oftentimes, and you muſt ſet water by them, though they liſt not to bath. For ſomtimes a Hawke is deſirous to howze, and take of the water by reaſon of ſome chance, or for ſome heat of her body, or of her Liuer: and then is water good and auaileable to ſet her againe in good plight and health: which thing you ſhal lightly perceiue by that that the Hawke will make countenance of more cheare and reioyce more. When your hawke is bathed (whether it bée Goſhawke or Falcon) lette her bée throughly well

weathered at the ſixe, or in the Sunne. And if ſhe happen to be waſhed or ſowſt with raine, or otherwiſe, let her be throughly weathered as is ſaid before, leſt ſhe ſurfet by cold, ſpecially whē ſhée comes from the field, and from her fleeing. For then is ſhe commonly mard for lacke of good order and looking too, inſomuch that thereupon inſue the Pantas, and other diſeaſes. And therefore when the Falconer perceiueth the time to be dangerous for his hawke to take ſuch manner of colde, as in winter time after her flight, or by taking wet in flying: hée muſt firſt weather her well at the ſire, or in the Sunne, & then giue her fiue Cloues of Maces in her caſting, & that will heate her againe.
            
            
               To keepe Hawkes from inconveniences which they take of themſelues, or which happen to them vnawares.
               FVrthermore, to preſerue Hawkes from miſchiefes which they take lightly by cold or otherwiſe: when ye haue bathed & weathered them, beware of ſetting them in cold & moiſt places, but chooſe ſome warme and drie place, and with ſome cloth roll the pearch or billet that they ſtand on. For diuers times when hawkes haue beaten and bruiſed themſelues at the encounter, with great toyle in the field or at the riuer, they bée ſo tyred, and take cold ſo lightly, & do ſo chafe their féet, that if yée ſhould ſet them downe in that plight vpon a ſtande of ſtone or wood, their legges and féete would ſwell by reaſon of the humors that would fall downe & diſtill from the higher parts, and by that meane bréed gowtes, as hapneth in men by like diſorder. For ſuch diſeaſes light not to men, nor yet to Hawkes, but for want of good héed and looking to when they haue diſtempered themſelues by any immoderate exerciſe. When ſuch diſeaſes light vpon poore birdes, they be hard to

bée cured, vnleſſe a man haue very good ſkil to order them, and to prouide remedy for them.
            
            
               How men ſhould make their Hawkes to tyre every day.
               
                  I Say further, that the good Falconers and ſuch as haue a care to vſe their Hawkes well, and to kéepe them in health, muſt make them to tire towards the euenings before they let them iouke. When your hawke hath put ouer and indued, afterward in giuing her caſting, you may well at your diſcretion giue her (if you liſt) a little Aloes Cicotrine in her caſting, or elſe ſome common pyll, & that doth greatly ſcowre the head, and do her much good. And that muſt bée done eyther once a wéeke, or twice in thrée wéekes: and the ſaid medicine is giuen diuers times by ſuch as like not to giue their Hawks tiring. Neuertheleſſe I ſay that tyring in the morning after the Hawke hath caſt, is very good: And if the tyring bée of plumage, kéepe her from eating of feathers (as well as you may) for feare leaſt ſhee take caſting before the euening: for towards night it is no danger, for then of common courſe ſhée is to haue caſting. Let her tyre againſt the Sunne, ſnyting and ſewing her beake a little at your diſcretion, after as you find your Hawke low and poore, vntill you intend to goe to your paſtime. I haue knowne many Falconers that neuer make their hawkes to tyre, ſaying, that it is but a cuſtom, and néedleſſe: but I ſay the contrary. For inaſmuch as the Hawke is exerciſed by reaſonable tyring, ſhée becommeth the healthier and the lighter both of body and of head, by all moderate exerciſes, yea, and ſhée is the better in ſtate alſo as you may perceyue. And I belieue that the opinion of ſuch as ſay ſo, procéedeth of nothing but of ſloth and of ſmall loue which they haue to their hawkes. Therfore forget not to make your Hawke to tyre againſt the Sunne in the morning: for it riddeth them the better of the watry humors that deſcend out of

their heads, if eyther before the doing of it, or after, you ſet thē vpon a pearch againſt the Sunne, that they may tricke and enoyle themſelues at their pleaſure. This done, yée may ſet them in their accuſtomed places. And becauſe ſome Falconers are ſo ſlothfull (as is ſaid afore) that they will not make their Hawkes to tire, and otherſom haue not leyſure alwayes to do it: in ſtead of tyring, I will giue them a remedy that followeth to eaſe them of their watry humors which they haue in their heades for want of tyring. Take Agarike beaten into powder, and Ierapigra with a little ſaffron, and make a pyll of it as bigge as a beane, and put a third part leſſe of Ierapigra than of Agaricke to binde your pouder together. Let that pyll ſo made bée put into hir wrapped in Cotton, towards Euening when ſhée hath endued her gorge & is emptie, making her ſo receyue it thrée or foure dayes together. And you may vſe this medicine from moneth to moneth at your diſcretion: And by the opinion of all Falconers yée may giue this pyll for all vnknowne and hidden diſeaſes for which you know none other remedy.
            
            
               Another receit to keepe and maintaine your Hawkes in good health.
               IF you entend to kéepe and maintaine your Falcons and al other Hawkes in health: take Germander, Pelamountaine, Baſill, Grimel ſéede, and Broome flowres, of each of them half an ounce: of Iſope, of Saxifrage of Polipodie, & of Horſemints, of each of them a quarter of an ounce: of Nutmegges, a quarter of an ounce: of Cubebs, Borage, Mūmy, Mogewort, Sage of the foure kinds of Mirabolans, Indorum, Kebulorum, Beliricorum, and Embelicorum, of each of them halfe an ounce: of Saffron an ounce, and of Aloes Cicotrine the fifth part of an ounce. All theſe things confect to a powder, and

at euery eight day or at euery twelfth day giue your Hawkes the quantity of a beane of it with their meat. And if they will not take it ſo, put it in a Hennes gutte tied at both ends, or elſe after ſome other means, ſo as yée cauſe them to receiue it downe. And if they caſt vp the fleſh againe by force of the powder, let it no more be giuen them with fleſh, but in the foreſaid maner of the gutte, and let them ſtand emptie one howre after. And according as you ſée your hawke diſpoſed, make her to vſe this medicine, to ſcowre her of the euill humors that are in her body, bred of féeding vpon naughty fleſh, which engendreth ſuch humors, and cauſeth many diſeaſes in hawkes.
            
            
               That the diſeaſes which Hawkes haue in their heads, doe commonly come of giuing them too great gorges, and of fowle feeding: the meane to know it.
               THe chiefe Falconers ſay and agrée, that the diſeaſes in hawkes heads doe moſt commonly bréed of giuing them too great gorges, eſpecially of groſſe and ill fleſh. For when a Hawke hath too full a gorge, ſhée cannot well put it ouer and indue it, whereupon it falleth to corrupting and ſtincking in her gorge by lying too long there, and ſpecially, more in a Hawke that is low and poore, than in one that is high and full of fleſh: inſomuch that ſhée is forced to caſt it all ſtincking. And if ſhee happen to put it ouer ſo ſtinking, it attainteth and rotteth her panel, by meanes whereof the fume and ſtinch aſcend vp to her head, and there cloſe and ſtuffe vp her eares, and the paſſages of her pipes and head, ſo as the humors which were wont, cannot paſſe away as they were accuſtomed, by reaſon whereof the heade ſwelleth inordinately.

For the humor ſéeketh iſſue, and vent eyther at the eares, or at the nares, or at the throat: for want whereof the Hawke falles in danger of death if ſhée haue not ſpéedy remedy. And to diſcerne the diſeaſe of the head, the Hawke will ſniffe often, and ſhut her eyes towards night, and ſometimes ſhut eft the one, and eft the other eye, and make as though ſhée iouked with worſe cheare than ſhée was wont to doe: and then muſt you beware that ſhée ſwell not betwéen the eye and the beake. And if ſhée doe, then cauterize her in that maner that is ſet down hereafter. Whenſoeuer the humor makes a ſhew to ſew out at the Hawkes eares, at her nares, or at her throat, then is ſhée in perill of death, if ſhée bée not holpen preſently.
            
            
               The remedy of the ſaid diſeaſe.
               YOu muſt take the larde of bacon that is not reſtie, nor ouer old, and of the fatteſt of it make ſlices, as it were to larde Partridges, and ſuch ſmall birdes, and let them ſtéep in freſh cold water a whole night, changing the Water three or foure times. Then take the marrow of béefe well picked, and ſugar once boyled and clarified, and of thoſe thrée thinges being ech of like quantity, with the quantity of a little Beane of Saffron in powder well mingled together, make pylls of the bigneſſe of a beane, and giue them to your hawke, cauſing ſome body to caſt her, and opening her beake by force, if ſhee will not take them otherwiſe. This done, ſet her by the fire, or in the Sunne, and anone yée ſhall ſee how ſhée will ſcowre and ſliſe by caſting vpward and downeward the groſſe humors wherwith her body is ouercharged. And when ſhe hath muted well thrée or foure times, let her be taken from the fire or out of the Sunne, and ſet vpon her pearch in her accuſtomed place, and let her not be fedde till two howres after, and then allow her of a chicken or mutton but halfe a gorge. Let

her bée thus dealt withall thrée dayes together, making her to tyre euery day againſt the ſunne both morning and euening. And foure, fiue or ſixe dayes after, giue her eueryday a cloue of Mace in her caſting, and ſhée ſhall recouer.
               When the three dayes are paſt wherein you haue ſo ſcowred her, take a little pepper beaten into very fine powder and mingling it with Vineger in a Sawcer, open her beake, and rubbe the roofe of her chap therewith, and likewiſe put a droppe or twaine of it into her nares, and ſet her by the fire or in the Sunne, and you ſhall ſée how mightily it will open her head. Howbeit you muſt not giue this medicine to a Hawke that is very poore, for ſhée will not bée able to brooke it. And within an howre or two after feede her with a chickens legge: and after let her haue twice a day at her howres a reaſonable gorge, and let the ſaide powder be giuen her no more but once.
               In ſtead of this powder ſome giue this medicine following which you may giue alſo if you thinke good: that is to wit, a little Staueſacre, howbeit that is very ſtrong, if there hée not ſkill vſed to delay the ſtrength of it. Wherefore if you mind to giue your hawke of it, giue her not paſt thrée or foure graines of it wrapt in a cloath or in linte, which you muſt breake afterward, and beat into powder. Then take a little cleane water in a diſh, and put your powder in it, and mingling it together in maner of a Sirop, put thrée or foure droppes of it into your hawkes nares, and ſet her in the Sun or by the fire as is ſaid afore, if it be cold.
               That done, then by Martines aduiſe, take pitch if you will to the mountenance of a beane which you muſt warme betwixt your handes, and afterward cleaue it to the roofe of her Beake, rubbing it ouer with a little of the powder of Staueſacre and Pepper till ſhée féele the pitch well vppon her Palate: and by and by in labouring to ſhake off the ſayd pitch and water from her Palate, ſhée will caſt: and let her caſt her fill till ſhée be throughly ſcowred. And when yée

thinke ſhée is ſcowred ſufficiently, take away the ſaid pitch if it it bée not falne off already, and ſet your hawke to the fire, or in the Sunne, as is ſaide in the medicine of the pepper, and féede her with ſome good meat one howre after.
               And to recomfort your hawke after all theſe Medicines, ye may giue her foure or fiue Cloues of Mace as is ſayde afore, after as the bigneſſe of them is, which you muſt firſt brooze a little, and put into her caſting. For the Cloues ſo giuen, are ſingularly good for hawkes againſt all Rhewmes and humors of the head, ſo that it maketh them to haue a good breath and keepeth it from ſtinking, by ſetting their whole bodies in a temperate heate. And the Cloues béeing ſo giuen euerie eight day, is enough to kéepe a Hawke from all rhewmatike diſeaſes of the head, and from all other diſeaſes that come of cold.
            
            
               Of a confirmed Rhewme that commeth of colde.
               NOw that I haue ſpoken of the diſeaſe of the head which commeth oftentimes of giuing too great a gorge, or of fowle féeding, I will ſpeake of the Rhewme or poſe which bréedeth of the coldneſſe of the braine and vpper part of the head. The hawks that haue this diſeaſe, endure ſuch paine as they cannot holde open their eyes. And of this diſeaſe ſpring many other griefes, as the pinne and the webbe in the eye, whereby they looſe their ſight: and ſometimes they looſe their ſight without hauing the pinne and the webbe in theyr eyes. Beſides that, there followeth the Hawe in their eyes as in the eyes of a horſe, and ſometimes alſo the pyp in their tongs, and another diſeaſe which is called the Eff
                        ••••
                     yllous in the French tong, (I know not what engliſh terme to beſtow vpon it.) And moreouer the ſwelling of the roofe of their pallate which is called the 
                     Ʋvul
                        •
                     , an ill diſeaſe, whereof bréedeth

the Canker. All theſe diſeaſes are very dangerous, and put hawkes in great hazard, if there bée not ſkill to remedy them betimes. And Maſter Amé Caſſian ſaith, that ſuch diſeaſes bréede of flegme which is in the bodies of Hawkes, as I ſayde afore of the other Rhewm: and that flegme commeth of ſetting them in moiſt and colde places. Alſo ſometimes it commeth of bringing them home cold and wet out of the fieldes, and of ſetting them downe vpon their pearches without drying or warming them at the fire or in the Sunne.
               The remedy of thoſe diſeaſes is firſt and formoſt to cauterize them in manner following. Faſhion a little yron with a round head like a peaze (which is called a button) and make it in manner redde hote in the fire, but yet not ouerhote (for yron is very violent if it bée too much heat.) Cauterize her therewith on the toppe of her head, becauſe the griefe and diſeaſe is there grounded. Cauſe your hawke to be well caſt that you may cauterize her at your eaſe and pleaſure, for you muſt beware of burning her too déepe, and therefore that yée may be ſure to do it well, mayle your hawk faſt, and pull off a few of her feathers. As ſoone as you haue done ſo, take another yron with a point as ſharpe as the tooth of a combe, and put it in the fire as afore ſaide, and therewith pierce her nares in the mids. Thē two or thrée dayes after take another flat yron of a finger broad, heat likewiſe red hote, and cauterize your hawke againe therewith handſomely as it were betwéene the eye-lidde and the horne of the beake, & do it with the ſharper ſide of the yron: not that the yron ought indéede to haue any edge, but rather by all reaſon to be blunt. And take good héed that the fire touch neither the ball of her eye nor her nares, and therefore ſée that yée gard her eye with a wet clout to kéepe it from the ſmoak. All ſuch maner of fires muſt bée giuen towards the euening before hawkes are ſupped, when they are empty, for otherwiſe the handling of them would make them caſt their gorges. When all is done as it

ſhould bée, halfe gorge your Hawke, or ſomewhat leſſe with warme meate. And the ſame day make prouiſion of ſuch Snayles as are among vines, or among Fenell, and ſuch as haue gray ſhelles, they are the beſt, for men are wont to eate of them. Stéepe fiue or ſixe of them in the milke of an Aſſe, or of a Gate or elſe (for want of that) in womans milke, and let it be done in a good large glaſſe well couered, that they créepe not out.
               The next morning breake the ſhelles, and waſh them in new milke as it commeth from the Cow, then giue foure or fiue of thoſe Snailes to your hawke, after that they bée of bigneſſe. And as ſoone as that is done, ſet her againſt a fire or the Sunne, and remoue her not away til ſhe haue muted four or fiue times. And if ſhée can abide the heat well, let her alone ſtill for it doth her much good. After noone féed her with a hens legge or with ſome ſmall birds, or with a Ratte or a Mouſe, which are beſt of all, and then ſet her in a warme placa, and giue her not too great a gorge. When euening comes that ſhée hath indued & put ouer her meat, take fiue or ſixe Cloues of Mace, broken a ſunder, and wrapped in a péece of fleſh, or a pellet of Cotton, and make her to receiue it by faire meanes or fowle by opening her beake, and conueying it into her. Continue this medicine fowre or fiue dayes, and your hawk ſhall recouer. Afterward make her to tyre euening and morning and let her féeding bée ſtéeped in milke as is ſaid afore of the Snayles, for the milke ſcowreth her body within, as is very nutritiue, and will quickle bring her to be hie, and in fleſh againe.
            
            
               Another medicine that Mallop in giveth in ſtead of the other aforeſaid.
               TAke the powder of Saffron and Camomill, of each the mountenance of a litle peaſe, & when yée haue mingled thē
                  
together, put thereto larde that is neyther reſtie, nor ouer ſalted, and ſtéepe them a night and a day in thrée of foure changes of water, and then waſh the Larde throughly in faire licour. That done, take Sugar clarified and the marow of a Béefe. Of the things aforeſaid, take as much of the one, as of the other, ſo as you may make fiue or ſixe balls of the bigneſſe of a beane. Then mingle the ſaid mixtures, and the powders together, and euery morning giue your hawke one of the balles till all be ſpent: and as is ſaid afore, ſet your hawke by the fire, or in the Sunne, & féed her not by the ſpace of an howre or twaine after: at which time you ſhall giue her eyther a Hens legge or ſome ſmall birds, or a Rat, or ſome Mice. And in the morning when ſhée hath well indewed, giue her foure or fiue cloues of Maces lapped in a little fleſh, or in the ſkinne of a henne, or in pullets of Cotton. And ſo may you cauterize her before the ſaid medicine after the maner that I haue ſhewed before in the former receit of the Snayles, ſo you draw her meate in milke or in freſh butter.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe of the eares which commeth of the Rhewme, and colde.
               SOmetimes there hapneth another diſeaſe to hawkes, by reaſon of moyſture of the head which is called the diſeaſe the eares, becauſe there iſſue out certaine humors by them. And yée ſhall know the diſeaſe by this, that the hawke wil oft times wryth her head backe, and maketh not ſo good cheare as ſhe ſhould do, and is more vnluſty. Wherfore ſearch & peruſe hereares, and you ſhall find the diſeaſe there. The remedy whereof, by Maſter Amè Caſſians deuiſe, is this.
               Take a little long yron round at the end as a peaſe, and Oyle of ſweet Almonds, or for lacke of that, Oyle of Roſes, which is much better, if you can come by it. Then heate your yron in the fire, neyther glowing red, nor very hote, and put

it into the oyle, and of that oyle ſo heat with the yron, droppe a little into your hawkes eares, putting the yron a little into them that they be not ſtopped. For then of ſuch inconuenience hapneth oftentimes the Canker to the braine which is incurable and killeth the hawke. And beware of thruſting the yron too farre in, or of béeing too hote, for elſe you may kill her. You muſt continue the miniſtring of this oyle foure or fiue dayes, alwayes wiping away the humors gently that iſſue out of her eares, and alwayes reſpecting her caſting whether, it be cleane or no. And if you liſt to ſcowre her with a common pyll or twaine, they will 
                     •
                  aſe her head maruailouſly wel, and doe her excéeding much good: or if you doe it with the ſayd balles of Larde, Sugar, and marrow of béefe, it is good likewiſe, for you may vſe eyther the one or the other at your pleaſure.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe of the eye-lids which commeth of the Rhewme and cold.
               ANother diſeaſe happeneth to Hawkes in the eye-liddes which cauſeth aſwelling vnder the eye-lidde, betwéene the eye & the feare of the beake (wée haue no proper ſpéech for it) if yée remedie it not betimes it will ſwell round about: and thereof commeth the hawe in the eye which will ouergrow the eye and ſtoppe it. And aſſure your ſelfe it is a ſigne of death if it grow too long. For I haue ſéene many die of it in my time for lacke of remedy. Now by Maſter Amè Coſſians opinion, the remedy is this. Heate the little round yron that I ſpake of afore, & cauterize her with it ſoftly vpon her heade as is ſayd for the Rhewm. Likewiſe wt the other cutting yron, feare her betwéene the eye and the beake. Alſo pierce her nares with the little yron, and afterward giue her the Medicine of the Snayles after the manner aforeſaid, foure or fiue dayes together. And for want of that medicine, you may vſe the other of Larde, Sugar, and the Marow of Béefe mingled

with the powder of Saffron and Camomill. [But if they fayle, then take the iuyce of Houſléeke, Roſe water,Addition. and the oile of the white of an egge, and mixe them together, and therewith amount the hawkes eye, and it will cure it without cauterizing.]
            
            
               Of the Hawe in the eye which commeth of moyſture and cold, and how it hapneth.
               MOreouer ſomtimes there grows a great diſeaſe in their eyes which is named the Hawe and commeth after the ſame manner that it commeth in horſes: namely, ſometime by a blow or a ſtripe, ſometime by a diſeaſe in the head, and moſt commonly by hurting of the eye with the ſtreightneſſe of the hoode, or by ſome other miſfortune which cannot ſometimes bée eſchewed. And you ſhall diſcerne the cōming of this diſeaſe, by ſeeing a little filme growing vp from the bending of her beake, and couering her eye by little and little. And this filme is ſomewhat blacke afore, and is called the hawe, which putteth out the eye if it once ouergrow the ball of it. To remedy the ſame, take a little néedle that is very ſharp pointed, and fine thréeded with a ſilke thréed, and therewith take vppe the hawe handſomely, and cut it with a little ſlicer, as horſeleaches doe to horſes, but beware that you cut it not too much for hurting of the eye, which you muſt waſh with Roſe water three dayes together. In theſe cures of diſeaſes that grow in the eyes, there muſt bée great eare vſed for feare of a greater miſchiefe, becauſe of the daintineſſe of the place.
            
            
               Of a blow given to the eye, or of ſome other miſchance.
               SOmetimes the eyes of hawks are hurt by ſome miſhappe, ome ſtripe or otherwiſe as I ſaid afore. Againſt ſuch vnlooked for miſchances, Maſter Amè C
                        •
                     ſſi
                        •
                     r giueth cleare Fenell water, & Roſe water, as much of the one as of the other, & therwith waſheth ye eye twice or thrice a day. Maſter Malopin
                  
in his booke of the Prince, willeth to take the iuice of Celondine otherwiſe called Hearb Arondell,Arondell in French, is Hirundo, a Swalow, otherwiſe called Chelidon. or Swallowes hearbe, and to conuey it into the eye. And if it bee not to be had gréene, to take it drie, and to beat it into powder, and to blow it into her eye with a quill, and this ſhall recure the hawke.
            
            
               Of the Filme in the eye, which ſome call the Veroll, or the Pinne and Webbe.
               THere is another diſeaſe in the eye called a Filme, which commeth ſometimes of diſeaſe in the head, & of Rhewms that diſtill into the eyes, and ſometimes of ſtanding too long, or too cloſe hooded, which happeneth through the fault and negligence of ſuch as haue the bearing and ouerſight of them. For the remedie hereof, Maſter Martine ſayeth, that yee muſt tak Celondine and bray it, putting thereto hony and freſh butter, and of each of thoſe three giue your hawke a like portion with a hote gorge, and moreouer, put the Powder of Pepper and Aloes in her eye Or elſe (as ſayth Maſter Amê Caſſian) you muſt giue her the foreſaide medicine of Larde, Sugar and Marow of Béefe thrée or foure dayes together, to ſcowre her, ſetting her by a fire, or in the Sunne, and féeding her after it with ſome liue Fowle, and kéeping her out of the wind, and from ſtanding colde or moiſt. After ſhée is ſo ſcowred, if yée that the webbe ſhew it ſelfe much, cauterize her vpon the vpper part of her head, and likewiſe a little betwéene the eye and the beake after the manner aforeſaid. When all this is done, ſquirt a little Roſe-water into her eye, and if néed be, miniſter therto the powder or the iuyce of Celondine otherwiſe called Herbe Arondell, as is ſaid before. This diſeaſe of the Pinne and Web, is of ſome men called the Verol, for the remedying whereof, they burne the ſhell of a Tortoiſe in a new potte, and beat it into fine powder, which they ſerce through a fine cloth. Then take they a cockle of the ſea which

is faſhioned like a Hart, and burning it throughly in the fire, make it into fine powder, & ſerce it likewiſe. And finally they take Sugar Candie in powder. Theſe thrée powders mixt together in equall portions, they vſe to put into their hawks eyes till they be whole.
               Maſter Michelin telleth of one other receit for the ſayde diſeaſe, which is this. Make a little hoſe in the toppe of an egge and powre out the white of it: then coyle cleare Roſe water, and Sanguis draconis well together, and fill vp your egge with them, and ſtirre them throughly with a ſmall ſtick. Afterward wrap vp your egge in paſte, and ſtop vp the hole of it, that nothing get out: which done, ſet it ſo cloſed in the fire till the paſt become blacke and red at the taking it from the fire. Then take out that which is within it, and beat it into powder, and ſerce it through a fine cloth: and of that powder you may vſe to put in your hawkes eye till it be cured, waſhing her eye now and then with water of Fenell, and of Roſes.
               Maſter Mallopin makes another medicine for the ſame diſeaſe which is this. Take the dung of a Lyzart, (which is called a Prouinciall) and beat it into powder with Sugar Candy, ſomewhat more in quantity than the other, mingling thē both together. He ſayth, that this powder is much better than all the others, whereof you may vſe as is ſaid afore, conueying into your hawkes eye water of roſes, and of Fenell.Addition. [But the beſt medicine is to put euery day into the Hawkes eye a little of the powder of Tutia, or waſh it with Tutia, and Roſe-water mixt together.]
            
            
               For the diſeaſe that breedeth in Hawkes beakes, commonly called Formicas.
               DIuers times there growes a diſeaſe vpon the horne of hawkes beakes, which eateth and fretteth the beak from the head. Maſter Amè ſayeth, it is a worme that eateth the horne of the beake within, by reaſon wherof the hawke is in great daunger if ſhée bée not holpen in time. Yee ſhall perceyue it by this, that the horne of the beake waxeth rugged,

and the beake beginneth to riue and cliue from her head. Maſter Amè Caſſian giueth this anſwere and remedy thereunto. Take the gall of an Oxe (or of a bull, which is better than of an oxe) and all to beate it, and breake it in a diſh, and put thereto the powder of Aloes Cicotrine, and mingle them well together. Then noynt the horne of your Hawkes clap or beake therewith, and the very place where the Formica growes, twice a day. But beware that you touch neither her eyes nor her nares. And continue your ſo doing till ſhée bée throughly cured, and let her be bathed with Orpiment and Pepper, to kéepe her from vermine and Mites.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe that breedeth in the Nares of Hawkes.
               ANother diſeaſe bredeth in Hawks nares, ſo as they ſwel excéedingly: and ſometime vpon the horne of the beake there ryſeth a cruſt, at the remouing whereof the fleſh is found to be raw vnderneath the clappe, inſomuch that diuers times they looſe the one halfe of their beake. Maſter Amè Caſsian ſaith, that the hawke hath ſmall Mites in her head, which créepe downe alongſt her beake, & entring in at her nares, do bréede the ſaide diſeaſe: and that the hawke féeling them, and being moleſted therwith, thruſteth her talents into her nares. Or elſe it hapneth ſometimes that a caſt of Hawkes doe burcle and crab together, and thereof bréedeth the ſaid diſeaſe. M. Amè Caſſian prouideth for it this remedy following. Make little matches of paper,Here is lefte out the manner of cauterizing a hawks nares becauſe the Italian hath ſet it downe. of ye bignes of the tag of a point, & let your hawke be caſt handſomly, & ſet your matches on fire wc a candle, & ſeare your hawke vpon the place ſwollen, taking good heed yt you do it not too roughly. Which being done, annoint it the next morning with a little Hennes greaſe, and ſo will it heale well, and her beake and nares will not be ſtuft but remayne open. Neuertheleſſe yée muſt be faine ſometimes to touch her with an yron, which is more dangerous than the other.
            
            
               
               The diſeaſe called the Frownce, which breedeth within hawkes beakes, and in their tongues.
               THe Frownce procéedeth of moiſt & cold humours, which deſcend from the hawkes head to their palate, & the roote of the tongue. And of that cold, is engendred in the tongue, the Frownce, otherwiſe called (of the French men the Barbillons, or Sourchelons.) by meanes of which they looſe their appetite, and cannot cloſe their clap, whereof they oftentimes die, and that diſeaſe is named the Eagles bane. For as I reported to you in the firſt part of this collection, the Eagle ſeldome when dyeth of age, but onely by meane her beake doth ouergrow, ſo as ſhée cannot féede and gorge her ſelfe. Yée may perceiue this diſeaſe by loſſe of her appetite to féede And to know it the better, open your hawkes beake, and looke on her tongue whether it be ſwollen or no: And if there appeare not that diſeaſe, open her beake againe within a while after, and ſée if there be any likelyhoode of it, and ſo may yée eaſily diſcrie the miſchiefe. For remedy whereof the ſaid Maſter Mallopin ſayth, that you muſt take oyle of ſwéet Almonds, or oyle oliue waſht in foure or fiue waters, and with that oyle annoynt her throate and her tong thrée or foure times a day with a feather for fiue or ſixe dayes together. And if your hawke cannot féede, let her meate bée cut and ſhredde into very ſmall pellets. This done, open her beake gently, and make her to receiue it downe, by conueying a ſmal ſticke into her throate, giuing her not paſte halfe a gorge at a time, and that muſt be either of Mutton, or of ſome liue fowle, Henne, Chicken, or ſuch like: fiue or ſixe dayes after, open her beake handſomely again, and with a payre of ſharpe Siſſers, cut off the typpes of the Barbyllons, till the bloud follow, but yet beware of cutting away too much. After this, annoint and moyſten well her throate with ſirope of Mulberies, called of the Apothecaries Diamor
                        •
                     n, and then annoint her with oyle of ſweet Almonds, or with oyle Oliue,Addition. till ſhée bée recured. [Nothing cureth the Frownce ſo ſoone as the powder of allom brought to a ſalue with ſtrong wine Vinegar, and annoint or waſh the hawkes mouth therewith.]
            
            
               
               Of the diſeaſe called by the French men Eſcorchillons, a kind of Frownce or Canker.
               
                  Eſcorcer in French, is to rippe off the rind or skin of any thing of which word this diſeaſe ſeemeth to bee derived.SOmetimes there hapneth a diſeaſe to hawkes which is called the Eſcorchillons a hard diſeaſe to bee diſcerned. It bréedeth commonly of a Rhewme confirmed in the head, from whence ſpring many other diſeaſes, (whereof I haue made mention in the Chapter of Rhewmes in the head, and of the diſeaſe called (the Barbillons) which bréedeth in Hawks tongues,) as the Pyppe doth, the diſeaſe of the Palate, and the Canker, which are very dangerous diſeaſes and deadly. If yée will know the Eſcorchillons, let your hawke bee caſt handſomely, and open her beake, and force downe her tongue with yout fingers end, ſo as you may ſée her winde-pipe, and a little beneath her wind-pipe yée ſhall finde the Eſcorchillons like thrée or foure ſharpe priekes growing one againſt another, that ſometimes the Hawke cannot caſt by meane thereof. And that is a perfect way to know this euill. Furthermore, in the ſame place, and on eyther ſide of the windpipe, ye ſhall find two ſmall ſterts of fleſh, which are naturall to all Hawkes. But at the lower end of them doe grow vp many little prickes which are the cauſe that a Hawke cannot well caſt in the morning, inſomuch that ſometimes ſhée is faine to caſt her caſting by péecemele, and not whole. And that is another aſſurance of the ſaid diſeaſe, which may bée well cured & remedied both together.
               The remedy which Amé Caſſian giueth for this diſeaſe, is ſet forth in the former Chapter by Maſter Mallopin, where hée willeth you to take oyle of ſwéet Almonds, or Oyle Oliue, &c.
            
            
               
               The diſeaſe of the Canker which breedeth in the throats and tongs of hawkes.
               YE muſt vnderſtand that the canker bréedeth of fowle féeding your Hawkes, not waſhing of their meate in colde water in Summer, and in warme in Winter, which engendreth in their guts groſſe ſlimie matter. And when thoſe humors come to bée moued, they ſume vp into the head, and (ſo diſtilling again) ingender heat of the liuer which breaketh out in the throat and the tong, and there engender the canker. You ſhall diſcerne this diſeaſe by the féeding of your hawke, for in taking her meat ſhée letteth it fal, and afterward hath much adoe to ſwallow it. Therefore let her beake bée annointed, and you ſhall find the diſeaſe of the Canker. Maſter Amè Caſſian giueth this medicine for it. Take Oyle of Almonds, or oyle Oliue waſhed as is ſayd afore, and annoint well her throat wt it twice or thrice a day. That done, giue her the ſaid medicine of ſugar, lard, and marrow of béefe thrée dayes together, and féede her with mutton or with pullets, or hennes fleſh dipped in the foreſaid oyle, but yée muſt not waſh your oyle of Almonds. After this, you muſt behold and regard the canker, & if you finde it white, take a ſmal yron made at the one end like a Raſor, and at the other end edged and ſharpe. And if her tong bée very much ouergrowne with the canker, ſlit & open it hādſomely alongſt the ſide of her tong, and with your raſor ſcrape away the whitenes ſoftly which you ſée there. Then take a little cotton or lint to drie and drinke vp the bloud of her tong, & ſée that none bée left. And if the other ſide of her tong happen to be ſo too, ſlit it likewiſe: which done, take the iuyce of Maydenhaire and lay vpon it. And for want of that hea
                     ••
                  be take a litle vinegar, or rather the iuyce of a lymond which is much better, and waſh her meat in oyle till ſhée bée throughly recured. Maſter Michelin giueth another remedy which is this. Anoint wel her throat and tong with ſirupe of mulberies (otherwiſe called Diamoron) two or thrée dayes together, after which, take of the foreſaid good oyle: Then take the powder of brimſtone, and

of ſugar candie, or of other white ſugar mingled well together of each a like, and put a little thereof vpon the canker: for if you ſhould lay much, it would fret the tong too ſore. And this maner of dealing is better for a confirmed canker than any other. Therefore waſh her meat with the oyle aforeſaid, & feede her with mutton, or the fleſh of hens or pullets.
            
            
               Of a kind of Pippe that is in a Hawke.
               THe Pip commeth chiefly of cold and moiſtnes of the head: and ſomtimes of féeding your hawke with euil and rotten fleſh without waſhing it, and making it cleane in warme water in the winter, and in cold water in the Summer. Wherof ingendereth ſlimy & groſſe humors in the body, which aſcēd vp to the head, and ingender the pip on the top of the tong as yée ſée commonly fall out in chickens. And yée may perceiue this diſeaſe by your hawkes often ſniting, and by making a noyſe twice or thrice in her ſniting. Maſter Amé Caſſian ſaith, that to remedy this diſeaſe, you muſt caſt your hawke gently, and looke vpon the tip of her tong: and if you find her to haue the pip, yée muſt ſcowre her with a pyll made of Agarik and Ierapigra, giuen two or thrée dayes together with her caſting towards night, and that will rid her of the Rhewm in her head, the rather if ſhée bée made to tire againſt the ſunne in the mornings as is ſaid afore. M. Malopin in his booke of the Prince, ſayth, that to cure the pip, yée muſt bind a little cotton vpon a ſticks end, and dipping it in ſwéet roſewater, waſh her tongue well with it: and afterward annoint it thrée or four daies with oyle of Almonds, and oyle oliue, wel waſhed as is before ſaid: and when yée haue done ſo, yée ſhall find the pip all white and ſoft. Then take an awle, and with the point of it lift vp the pip ſoftly, remouing it as women do pip their chickens. Howbeit yée muſt not remoue it till it bée full ripe: for if yee take it too gréene, you ſhall hurt your hawke. And looke that yée wet her tong and palat twice or thrice a day with the foreſaid oyle, till ſhée be throughly cured.
            
            
               
               Of the diſeaſe of their palate which falleth to ſwelling by reaſon of moyſture of the head.
               SOmetimes it hapneth that the palates or roofes of hawks mouthes are ſwollen, and looke whitiſh: which commeth of moyſture and cold wherewith their heads are ſurcharged. And ye may perceiue this diſeaſe by that they cānot cloſe their beakes, and by that they look not ſo chearly as they were wōt to do, ne can put ouer, or endew their meat but with great pain. To cure your hawke of this diſeaſe, you muſt open her beak, where you ſhal find the roof of her mouth whitiſh and ſwollen. And if you find it not ſo, you muſt ſearch her beake to diſcerne if ſhe haue any other diſeaſe there that lets her to ſhut it: for ſometimes their beakes grow more on the one ſide of the clap than on the other, ſo as they cannot cloſe them. The remedie that M. Amê Caſſian giues for this euill, is this: The hawkes that are ſo diſeaſed muſt haue the ſaid pils of Larde, ſugar, and marow of béefe, giuen them euery morning one or two for foure or fiue dayes ſpace together, and about an howre or two after, feed them with ſome poultrie or mutton drawn through the foreſaid oyle. And after thoſe dayes open her beake again, and ſoftly ſcrape of the whiteneſſe: and if yee find the ſwelling abated, then do none other thing to her but only continue your anointing of her with the ſaid oile. But if ye perceiue the ſwelling to riſe too hie, ye may launce or pricke it, but yée muſt beware that yée ſtrike not too déepe, for ye may ſoone kill your hawke. Afterward lay the iuyce of mayden-haire to it, and continue it till it be throughly cured, and alwayes draw her meat in the ſaid oyle, or elſe in milke or butter.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe of the iawes
               THe diſeaſe of the iaws cōmeth either of drawing ye hood too ſtreit, or for yt it is too cloſe & ſtreit of it ſelf. And yt cauſeth the Rhewme to drop down out of the hawkes head vpon her

gums and iawes (if we may ſo tearme them.) You ſhall know it by this, that ſhée can neyther open nor ſhut her beake.
            
            
               M. Michelins medicine forths ſame.
               ANnoint well the gorge, iawes, and nares of your hawke with oyle of ſwéet Almonds thrée or four dayes together and for want of that, take oyle Oliue waſht in two or thrée waters, & draw her meat through it as is ſaid before, and giue her pyls of lard, ſugar and marow of a béefe, or elſe common pylles to ſcowre her both vpward and downeward.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath broken her clappe by ſome miſchance.
               ANother inconuenience befalleth hawks by the negligēce of ſuch as kéepe them: for in their féeding there cleaueth or remayneth ſome peece of fleſh in their iawes, or in the roofe of their mouth, or on ſome place or other of their beake which marreth their beaks, ſo as it is enforced to fall away in ſliuers & péeces. This hapneth for want of wiping their beaks as they ought to bée after their féeding, by meane whereof both her claps grow ſo much, as at length it falleth to breaking and riuing if it bée not remedied in time. And thereof bréedeth this diſeaſe which we call (Formica Corroſiva) whereby the beake becommeth brittle, & is vtterly marred. Maſter Amé Caſſian appointeth this remedy following. Looke into your Hawkes beake, coping it and keping it very cleane, and if you find any Formica corroſiva there, remoue it. That done, annoint ye horn of her beake with the bloud of a ſnake or an adder, & the bloud of a henne mingled together, to make it to grow the more ſpéedily. Alſo let the meat which ſhee eateth be cut in ſmall pellets, for otherwiſe ſhée cannot féede. And yet for all that, ceaſe not to flée with her. Within 15. dayes or thrée weekes after, when ye ſée her beake begin to grow againe, caſt your hawke handſomely, and cope her nether clap that the vpper clap may ioyn orderly vnto it, as it ſhould doe of his owne nature.
            
            
               
               Of the falling ſickneſſe which happeneth to hawkes as well as to men, and other living things.
               THe chiefe Falconers ſay, that the falling ſicknes hapneth to hawkes through a fuming heat that aſcendeth vp frour the liuer to their heads, and maketh them to fall down vpon ye ſodaine. M. Mallopin ſayth, that to remedy this diſeaſe, the hinder part of their head muſt be peruſed and ſought, where a man ſhall find two litle pits which muſt be cauterized with a wyer of braſſe. And if that help not, then muſt you cauterize her daintily vpon the head wt the foreſaid round yron, or elſe you may hap to kill her. This done, drie red Lentils in an ouē, and make them into fine powder: then take the filing of yron the fineſt of it, as much of the one as of the other, & mingle thē both together with hony, & make it in little bals of the bigneſſe of a peaſe. Then giue your hawk two or thrée of them, putting them as far into her gorge as you can, and hold her vpon your fiſt at the fire, or in the ſun till ſhe haue made a mute or twain, and let her haue no meat till noone, and then ſerue her of a Pigeons wing, dealing ſo with her ſeuen or eight daies together: In the night let her be kept alwayes abroad, and in the day times in the darke with water continually before her.
               M. Amê Caſſian teacheth another medicin: that is to witte, that the ſkin of their heads muſt be launced right ouer againſt the foreſaid pits, where there are little veynes which muſt be taken vp with a ſilke thréed, and annointed ouer with the bloud of a chicken. Which being done, yée muſt giue her the foreſaid pils ſeuen or eight dayes together, taking good heed that yée ſet her not neare any other hawkes, and that your hawking gloue bée very cleane. For that kind of diſeaſe is cō
                  tagious, and will ſoone paſſe from one hawke to another by feeding on the gloue whereon another hath béene fed before. And by night let her ſtand in the wind and open ayre, & by day in darke places, with water alwayes afore her, as is already taught you.
            
            
               
               Of another falling euill, which firſt breedeth in the necke and in the gorge of a Hawke.
               IF you perceiue your hawk to haue a ſwollen neck & gorge, & that ſhe panteth more ſtrongly in ye mornings at one time than at another: aſſure your ſelfe that ſhée hath the falling euill. Martin ſayth, that you muſt take Sanguis Draconis, nutmegges, that kind of Mirabolans which are called Kebulme, Cloues, Cinamon, and Ginger, of each two pennie weight, and making it all into fine powder, ſtrew a quantity of it euery morning vpon her meat, ſupping her euery night with a ratte or a mouſe thrée or foure dayes together, and that will make her whole and ſound.
            
            
               Of the Fiſtula, a griefe that proceedes through paine of the head.
               YE ſhall perceiue when your hawke hath the Fiſtula by the running of her nares, & by the ſtreaming down of the humors from her head. For the which diſeaſe Martine alloweth this remedy. Yée muſt caſt your hawke handſomely, and deplume her head behind in the backer part, and annoint it wt butter and ſwines bloud together. And you ſhall finde a vain that commeth downe to her eyes which you muſt cutt, & knit it againe with a red ſilke thréed, anointing it well & throughly with butter & ſwines bloud for nine dayes together, and then it will recouer her.
            
            
               For the ſwimming in the head of a hawke.
               IF your hawke gape much and beate her wings, then bée yée ſure that ſhée hath the ſwimming in the head. The remedy whereof is this. Take a fine néedle that is ſharpe pointed, and when yée haue well heat it in the fire, pearce her nares with it through on both ſides, and beware that yée goe not awrie, for ſo yée may do her great harme. Then anoint it with oyle and butter together, and it will recouer her by meane of the vente that you ſhall giue the humor by the nares.
            
            
               
               For all manner of diſeaſes in the head, and ſpecially for the ach that is in a Hawkes head.
               WHenſoeuer your hawk hath any great diſeaſe, or pain in her head, take ſixe grains of pepper, four of Staueſaker, and fiue cloues, & beat them together into fine powder, & féede her but thrée dayes together with warme meat mingled with it, and ſhée ſhall recouer. And for want of that ye may vſe the fine powder that is mentioned heretofore. And if your hawke will not bée fed with it, let be conueighed into cotton or into a hens ſkin to take away the ſent of it, and féede her wt none other than warme meat, and ſuch as is light of diſgeſtiō. For the diſeaſes of the head doe ſo weaken her appetite & ſtomacke that ſhée cannot put ouer, nor endew her meat. And to the end ſhe may the better indew it, giue her but ſmall meales till ſhée be throughly recouered. And if ſhée will eate the yolke of an egge, drop vpon it ſome of the ſaid powder, and giue it her with hote meate, and ſo yée ſhal reccouer her. Here are ſundry receits and medicines which I neuer haue proued, and therefore I can warrant little of them: but neuertheles I find them in my French Authors, and therfore am ſo ventrous to place them here in this collection of remedies for hawkes: leauing thē ouer to the deſirous Falconer that hath a will to practiſe vpon his hawk. For ſtore (they ſay) is no ſore, and among many there muſt néeds fal out ſome good and wholeſome receits. Wherefore iudge diſcréetly of all: and make proofe of ſuch as you like: Experience is the mother of skill.
               
            
            
               Of the ſtone, and how, and whereof it commeth.
               YOu muſt vnderſtād yt ther are 3. ſorts of diſeaſes in hawks called by the name of the ſtone, & ſcarſly doth the one come without the other. The one kéepeth beneath in their tuels, and the other in their bowels & panels: & they may be cured both together. Some cal this diſeaſe ye Cray. And M. Amè Caſsian ſayth that the ſtone or Cray cōmeth by the eating of filthy fleſh & by mean of ſoule féeding. For it burneth and drieth in their

bowels (as I ſaid heretofore in the diſeaſes of the head) becaus ye filth which they haue gathered in their panels inflameth their liuer, which doth ſo drie vp the ſubſtance of the guts, that they cānot mute, but muſt néeds die of it if they be not cured. Som ſay that this diſeaſe cōmeth of giuing thē waſht meat hote before it be throughly cold, & that is like inough, for a hawk likes not of water & bloud both together at once. The ſtone in the fundament cōmeth of the filth which the hawke ſhould mute, which thickneth and lies bakte at the tuel: by means whereof ſhe becomes ſo poor that ſhe cannot mute or ſtiſe frō her, and ſo muſt néeds die. Yet notwithſtanding I haue oftē ſeen that whē a Falcon is hie & luſty, ſhée wilſtiſe it out wel inough by mean of her ſtrength. And ye may perceiue when ſhée hath the ſtone by that ſhee muteth with paine & by drops, which is a ſigne yt ſhe néedeth to ſcowre that matter wherof the ſtone doth grow. And when ſhée muteth at twice, & a third time after that, it is a token that the ſtone is throughly confirmed in her guts and panel. Moreouer, when ye ſee that her tuel is chafed, & but litle drops from her, and that the feathers of her train are much filed with her muting, and that ſhe is euermore picking with her beak about her tuel, be ye ſure ſhe hath ye ſtone in her tuel, which we cal ye ſtone Cray. Again, when ſhe muteth & maketh as though ſhe would iouke vpō your fiſt, & in her cies is more troubled thā of ordinary: doubt not but that ſhe hath the ſtone cray. And becauſe ſhe cannot rid it, ſhe is in danger, if ſhe bée not lookt too in time. The remedy therof by the iudgement of M. Amé Caſſian is this: take a ſlice of lard (or a pellet of ſope, wet in ſalet oyle) of the bigneſſe of a gooſe quill, and an ynch long, and put thereon the powder of Aloes Cicotrine: which done, caſt your hawk hanſomly, & conuey it into her tuell as ye would giue a man a ſuppoſitory, & if the lard be too tender and ſoft to handle, ſticke it vpon a hens feather, ſo as the feather appeare not through the Lard, (for ſo may ye do her great harme with the feather,) and ſo conuey it vppe into her tuell drawing away the feather gently, and leauing the Larde behind, and haue ſnayles in a readineſſe to giue her immediately

after yée haue applyed the ſaid deuiſe. And for lacke of ſnayles, giue her the forementioned pyll of lard, mingled with marow and ſugar, and ſet her in the Sun, or by a fire, without féeding of her til one howre after noone. And if thée endure wel to be by the fire, or in the Sun, let her alone, for the heat is very good for her. After this, giue her ſomwhat more than half a gorge of a yong pullet, or if yee can come by any myce or rats, nothing is better. But let her not ſtand in the ayre or in the wind except the weather be fayre & warm. At night when ſhe hath indewed well, giue her foure or fiue cloues of mace broken, and lapped vp in a little cotton, or in the ſkinne of a henne: and do ſo three or four dayes, ſauing the ſuppoſitory or pellet aforeſaid, for it will ſerue twice well inough. And thus ſhall you ſkoure your hawk throughly. Looke well to it that ſhée caſt not vp ye cloues of mace, for they be ſingular good for hawks in all reſpects, ſpecially for all humors that ſurcharge their heads and generally for all Filanders and worms. And if you mind to rid a falcon clean out of the cray, and of the ſaid diſeaſe: giue her meat ſteeped in Goats milke, or in other milke, and doe ſo foure or fiue dayes together: for the ſaid milke is very good againſt the cray. In the booke of the Prince, there is another receit for this diſeaſe of the cray or ſtone. That is to wit: Take the gall of a pigge of thrée weeks old, and conuey it into your hawkes beake, ſo as ſhée may take it and ſwallow it downe whole without breaking, and take héed that ſhe caſt vp none of it againe. Afterwardes, giue her a little péece of the Pigges fleſh, of the bignes of a Beane, and let her ſtand empty panneld vpon the ſame vntill night, ſetting her in the Sun, or by the fire. This medicine is very good for all birds of prey that are encombred with the Cray or Stone. Neuertheles, if a Goſhawke or a Sparowhawke haue that diſeaſe (ſo it bée not too ſore) giue it her no more but once. But as for other hawkes that are of ſtronger mettall, yée may giue it them thrice. And when euening is come, féed your hawke with a pullet or with mutton, or with ſmall birds, and the next morning ſtéepe her meat in Goats milke, or womans milke, féeding her ſo three

dayes together with ſmall gorges, and ſhe ſhall be ſound. And if you will not or cannot vſe the ſaid receit, yée may take a little oyle Oliue, and ſomewhat leſſe hony, and wette your hawkes meate therewith, for it is good to helpe that diſeaſe. Some put the ſaid things into a Hennes gut lied faſt at both ends, becauſe a hawke wil take it the better: and naturally ſhe likes not oyle with her meat.
               Maſter Michelin ſets down another medicin which is this. Take Lard, marow of béefe, Sugar clarified, and once boiled and Saffron in powder, of each a like quantity, prouided that the larde bée firſt ſtéeped in vineger four and twenty howres, and the water ſhifted thrée or foure times, & ſet abroad in the open ayre. Of the which thinges confected together, yee muſt make pyls of the bigneſſe of a beane, whereof you ſhall giue your hawke one or two, ſetting her in the ſun, or by the fire, and féeding her with poultry or with muton, allowing her but reaſonable gorges four or fiue dayes together, and giuing her maces as afore: for they cannot but do the hawke great pleaſure in euery condition and part. Maſter Michelin teacheth another receit for this diſeaſe, ſpecially for Goſhawkes, and Sparowhawkes which I haue tryed oft.
               Cut a ſhéepes heart in ſmall péeces, and when yée haue let it lie ſtéeping all night in aſſes milke, goats milke, or womans milke, put a little boyld Sugar into the milke, and gorge your hawke reaſonably therewith three dayes together. And aſſure your ſelfe that this medicise is very excellent for the Cray, & without danger for all maner of hawks. M. Martin ſaith in auouchment of this matter, that when a hawke cannot well mute with her eaſe, it betokeneth and plainly ſheweth yt ſhee hath the ſtone Cray. For remedy whereof, take the heart of a hogge, & a quantity of his ſewet minced very ſmall, & make them into powder together, & giue it the hawke in her meate thrée dayes ſucceſſiuely. Againe, I haue ſéene ſome take the whit of an egge, or the whole egge, with a little ſaffron in pouder well coyled and beatē together, which being beſtowed vppon the hawkes meat, hath cured her.
               
                  
                  Mallopin ſets down yet one other receit more. Put the iuyce of (water Creſſyes) in a Hennes gut of one inch long, tyed at both ends, and force your hawke to receiue it. Which done, ſet her in the ſun, or by the fire, and féede her not till noone, at which time giue her but halfe a gorge of hote meat, becauſe of the medicine which hath ſet all her body out of temper. Let this be done two or thrée dayes, and if you find the medicine to haue ſcowred & taken much at the firſt of your hawke, giue her leſſe & leſſe, and ſo ſhall ſhe recouer. The booke of Princes ſetteth downe yet one other remedy for the ſame diſeaſe, that yée might put it in vre which ſoeuer liked you beſt. Take a peny weight of Perſly ſéed, as much of Smallage ſéede, a dramme of boyld ſugar, a peny weight of Staueſaker, of wheaten bran one dram, and halfe the ſhell of an egge. Put them altogether into a good large poſnet full of water, & ſéeth it till it be conſumed to the one half, & then ſtrain it through a cloth. Then take of Caſſia Fiſtula one dramme and of Turbith one peny weight, of Hermodactils two peny weight, & of Aloes Cicotrine thrée peny weight. Beat all theſe into fine powder, & put them into the water wherein the other mixture was boyled, & make thereof a Cliſter in the bladder of a Pigge.
               Then take a great quill of a gooſe, or of ſome other bird, and thereof make the necke of your Clyſterbagge faſt tyed to the bagge that nothing may iſſue out of it, and ſo giue your hawk the Clyſter as you haue ſéene it giuen to men at their neede. This done ſet your hawke in the Sun, or by the fire, and kéepe her empty till noone, at which time giue her a pullets legge, and ſo ſhee ſhall recouer no doubt.
            
            
               For the diſeaſe called the Filanders which happen in the bodies of Hawkes: and firſt of ſuch as are in their gorge.
               THe chiefe Falconers ſay that al hawks haue the Filāders at all times, & are neuer wtout thē, like as it is ſaid that no

horſe is without the Bottes. There are foure kinds of Filanders, and one other kind of Filanders, of which I will ſpeake hereafter in their due places. And with all theſe ſorts of Filanders, ſome hawks are more peſtered than other ſome. The cauſe of thē is either their féeding on groſſe & foul meats, which ingender & increaſe thoſe filanders in thē, or els for that in flying eyther ye field or the riuer, they breake ſome ſmall veines within their bodies, at the encounter, by ſeazing too violentlie vpon their prey. By reaſon wherof the bloud burſteth out into their bowels, & there drieth and clottereth, whereof bréede the ſaid Filanders in great aboundance. Afterward by reaſon of ye ſtinch of the ſaid bloud ſo clottered and bakte, béeing corrupted & putrified in the bulke, becauſe it is out of the proper veſſels & vains where it ought to be, the Filanders run about ſéeking the cleaneſt places of the body to ſhun the ſaid noyſome ſtinch, and créepe vp eyther into the hawks heart, or into her gorge, ſo as ſhée dyeth of it. Again, ſome men ſay, that theyr hawkes die of the diſeaſes of the head, or of the Cray, when in déed they die of the Filanders, or (which is worſe) of the (Aignilles) a kind of Filanders, for which wee want an Engliſh terme. I will ſpeake firſt of thoſe Filanders that craule vp to ye hawkes gorges, and from thence to the holes in their palates, whereat the hawkes doe breath, and by them into their brains whereby they be in danger of death. Ye may perceiue this inconuenience in the gorge by this, that when you haue fed your hawke, the Filanders féeling the ſwéetneſſe & taſte of the fleſh, do ſtirre and craule about in ſuch wiſe, as you ſhall ſée your hawk oftentimes gape. By reaſon wherof it commeth to paſſe that now and then ſhe caſteth her gorge. Again, yée may know by this, that your hawke will bee ſtrayning at them with her talons. Therfore caſt her gently, and looke into her throat, and you ſhall ſée them crawling there. To kill the ſaid Filanders, M. Amè Caſſian ſayth thus: take a great Radiſh roote, and make a hole in it, and fill it with water, & ſet it in embers verie hote, putting freſh embers to it continually by the ſpace of halfe an howre or more, til it be throughly well boyled, and as

your water diminiſheth, fill it alwayes vp againe, howbeit that the raddiſh yéeldeth water inough of his owne nature. Than put the raddiſh into a diſh, ſtampe it and preſſe out al the iuyce quite and cleane. This done, put the quantitie of a Peaſe of ſaffron made into powder into the ſaide water, and waſh your hawkes meat therewith when yée féede her, and giue her but halfe a gorge. And if ſhée will not féed on it, let her be kept empty till ſhée bée very gréedy and eager: doe thus to her thrée or foure dayes together, and you ſhall kill the Filanders and make your hawk ſound. [If you waſh your hawks meate in the diſtilled water of Sauin,Additio it will kil the Filanders in any part whatſoeuer, or any other wormes.]
            
            
               Of the Filanders that are in hawkes bowels, and in their Raines.
               YE ſhall diſcerne that the Filanders are in her bowels, and guts, by her heauie cheare and playnt in the night, for ſhe will cry, and make a mournefull noyſe. Alſo ye may perceiue it by this, that when yée take her on your fiſt in the morning, ſhée will ſtretch herſelfe more ſtrongly than ſhe is wont to do of ordinary, and ſometimes ſhée will make as though ſhée would iouke vpon your fiſte, & ſhe will be buſie with her beake about her backe right ouer againſt her raines. When yée ſée theſe ſignes, aſſure your ſelfe that eyther the Filanders or the (Aignilles) doe trouble her: and if ſhe haue not helpe of them betimes, they will kill her, for I haue ſéene many die of that diſeaſe: Maſter Amè Caſſian giueth this remedy for that miſchiefe.
               Take Lentilles of the reddeſt that you can find, and parch them at the fire, and make fine powder of them, with the powder of worme ſéede, leſſe by one halfe then of the powder of Lentils, and mingle and temper them well tothether, and make thereof a playſter, driuen (vpon cloth or leather.) Then deplume your hawke in the place where her griefe is, and lay the playſter to her panel, changing it euery day for four or fiue dayes ſpace together, and ſhe ſhall be cured.
               
                  If yee like not that receit, Maſter Michelin giueth you another which is this. Take the leaues of a Peach trée, of Rew, & of wormeſéed, and of thoſe thrée being brayed together, ſtreine out the iuyce, & afterward take the powder of Wormewoode, and put it into the iuyce, and lay it vpon your hawkes reines playſterwiſe twice a day euening and morning for four or fiue dayes together, & it will kill the Filanders, & ſaue your hawk.
               Maſter Amè C
                        •
                     ſſian telleth yet one remedy more. Take (ſaith hee) a cloue of Garlicke pilled, and giue it your hawke in a hens ſkin, and it will heale her.
            
            
               Of the Filanders or worms that are in hawkes legs & thighs, which the Frenchmen call Vers.
               THere is another maner of Filander called the (Vers,) which commeth ſometimes vpon hawkes that are lately taken, by ſetting them vpon a pearch vnhooded or vnſéeled, for they fall to beating of themſelues with ſo great force that they breake the veines of their legs. And this hapneth ſpecially rather to haggard hawkes than to ſoare hawkes. By means whereof the bloud of thoſe veines ſo broken, poureth and diſtilleth along their legs and panels betwéene the ſkinne & the fleſh, and there lying in lumps doth conuert to wormes, whereof the hawke dieth. This diſeaſe may come alſo by her bating ouermuch vpon the fiſt, where through ſhe bruſeth her ſelfe violently: and ſometimes he that beareth her furthereth it by his raſhnes & impatience. And yée may perceiue that the filanders & worms are in your hawks legs or bowels by this: They plume thēſelues oftentimes, yea, & the pendant feathers of their thighes & of their panels fal off voluntarily M. Mallopin ſaith that ye remedy for this diſeaſe, is to waſh your hawks thighes and belly twice a day for foure or fiue dayes together, with the foreſaid medicin of the leaus of the peach trée, of rew, and of wormſéede, and with the wormeſéede it ſelfe.
            
            
               For the dieaſe called in French the (Aiguils) an evill worſe than the Filanders, for which I know no apt Engliſh terme, and therefore muſt borrow the French terme of mine Author.
               
                  THere are found a kind of Filanders which are called (Aiguilles) becauſe they be ſharpe like a néedle, ſhorter & more perillous thā are the great Filandes, for aſmuch as in ſéeking the cleaneſt parts of the body to ſhun the ſtinch and filth, they pearce the bowels & créepe vp to the hart, ſo that your hawke periſheth of them if ſhe be not regarded in time. Ye ſhal perceiue this diſeaſe by her ſhrinking and ſnyting vpon ye lure, as alſo by her graſping wt her foot more ſtrongly in the morning, than ſhe was wont to do, & again by the often picking, & beaking in her braile feathers, & near her tuel. M. Mallopin giueth this remedy following. Take ſtaueſacre beaten into powder, the herb of Barbarie, otherwiſe called in Gréek Peſtora & Aloes Cicotrine, of each a like quantity, coyled altogether into powder, & giue your hawk the quantity of a bean therof, lapped vp in ſome part of a hens ſkin, or in cotton. Which done, ſet her in the ſun or by the fire, & at noon allow her but halfe a gorge. You may giue her of this powder thrée or foure dayes, ſo ſhe be not too low already: for if ſhe bee not ſomwhat hie in fleſh and in life, ſhe will not be able to beare and brook it. And if this medicine cure her not, take this that followeth, which is of M. Malopins deuiſe alſo. Burn Harts horn wel raked in the embers, & when it is waxen cold, bent it into powder. Thē take yt like quantity of Lupins made into powder, as ye had of the harts horn, & aſmuch againe of the powder of wormſéed, as of both the other, & half aſmuch Aloes Cicotrine, as of the Hartes horn, and half as much Tryacle as of Aloes. Mingle all theſe together wt hony by litle & litle, & force it to that thicknes, yt yée may make bals of it to the bignes of a nut, whereof yée ſhal giue your hawk euery day one by the ſpace of fiue or ſixe daies allowing her but halfe a gorge after it. And if your hawk caſt it againe, let it be lapped in a litle cotton, or in a hens ſkin ye ſhée feel not the bitter taſt of it. M. Amò Caſſian giueth yet another remedy which is the medicin made heretofore for the filanders, yt is to wit, rew & wormwood, of ech alike, & aſmuch of the peachtrée leaues as of thē both, with a litle powder of wormſéed infuſed in the iuyce of the ſaid herbs. Thē fill a hens gut of an inch long therwith tied faſt at both ends, & giue it to our hawke.
               
                  You may vſe any of all theſe at your owne diſcretion and pleaſure.
            
            
               When a Hawke gapeth inordinately vp on the fiſt of her keeper.
               
                  A Hawke will now and then fal to gaping, eyther vpon her kéepers fiſt, or vpon the pearch, and ſpecially when ſhe is ſet in the Sun being ſomewhat hote. And this gaping may bée vnderſtood and conſtrued two wayes. The one is when ſhee doth it of her owne nature, but that is not ſo oft as the other which commeth by miſchance, and that eyther of cold that ſhe hath taken, or of ſome moiſt humor that diſtilleth downe into her gorge. Some are of opinion that the hawke which vſeth it often is diſeaſed with the Filanders which créepe vp & downe in her gorge before ſhée be fed, or after ſhe hath indewed, as I haue declared in the chapter of Filanders of the gorge.
               The remedy by Maſter Amè Caſſians aduiſe, is to take the powder of wormeſéede and of wormewood, of each alike, and one quarter leſſe of Aloes Cicotrine, and of theſe thrée powders mingled together, to giue your hawke the mountenance of a Beane in her caſting, lapped vp in a Hennes ſkinne, or in any ſuch like deuiſe.
            
            
               Of Apoſtumes that breed in Hawkes.
               WHen a Hawke hath any Apoſtume in her body, yée ſhall know it by the ſtuffing of her nares, & by her inordinate panting, which accident commeth ſometimes by ruſhing raſhly into buſhes, or by bating too much vpon the pearch, and moreouer, by ouer frée encounter with her prey. Now when ſhée is ſo bruiſed and chafed, and taketh cold vpon it, Apoſtums bréed therby, becauſe the miſchiefe is not known and looked vnto aforehand. Mallopin in his booke of the Prince, giueth this remedy.
               
                  Take the white of an egge well beaten, and the iuyce of Coleworts well bruiſed, as much of the one as of the other, & giue it your hawke in the morning in the ſmall gut of a hen, and ſet her by a fire, or in the Sun, and at noon féed her with mutton, or with a pullet. The next day take Roſemary dried, and beaten into fine powder, and beſtow it vpon her meat reaſonably. For other thrée dayes giue her ſugar, and thrée dayes next after that plie her again with her ſaid powder, letting her ſtand warme day and night, and féeding her with good meat: and the likelyhood is great ſhe ſhall be recouered.
            
            
               Of a Hawke that hath her Liver inflamed.
               THe inflamation of the Liuer hapneth ſometimes through the negligence of ſuch as haue the kéeping of hawks. For they féede them with groſſe and naughty fleſh, ſuch as is ſtate and ſtinking, without making of it cleane, by means wherof procéedeth the ſaid inflammation of the Liuer. Alſo it hapneth for want of bathing when néede is, & for lacke of water, which they ought to haue, or with ouerfléeing of them, when they be empty paneld. Ye ſhall perceiue this diſeaſe by their féete: for they will be chaſed, and the colour of their chaps will bée changed, and looke whitiſh through the heate of their Liuer. And if yée find her tongue ſcorched and ſcalded blacke, it is a ſigne of death. To remedy this miſchiefe, make the medicin of ſnailes ſtéeped in Aſſes milk, or Goats milk, mentioned in the chapters of the diſeaſes of the head, & of the ſtone: and giue your hawks of it thrée or foure dayes in the mornings. And if yée cannot get that medicin, ye may vſe the other that is made oflard, marow of béef, & of boyled Sugar, with a little Saffron, four or fiue dayes together euery morning, as is ſayd before. For the ſcowring of her will rid and abate her heat. And all that while for ſeuen or eight dayes féed her with poultrie, or with mutton ſtéeped in milke: for milke is very good for the heat of the Liuer. And you muſt beware you féed her not with

Pigeon, nor with other groſſe fleſh for bréeding her to inordinate heat. M. Amè Caſſian ſayth yet further, that to allay the ſaid heat in hawkes, it is very good to ſtéepe or wet their meat in Endiue or Nightſhade water: and likewiſe in white whey newly and lately made. And that this maner of féeding muſt be continued foure or fiue dayes till the Hawke bee wel ſcoured. And that if the hawke haue a deſire to bouze the ſaid whey, ye muſt let her take her fill. Maſter Amé Caſſian ſaith moreouer, that when your medicine hath ſcowred your hawk after that maner, & her tong is not aught in the better tune, ye muſt take oyle oliue waſht in two or thrée waters, and bath her tong & throat therewith with a feather thrée or four times in the day, for four or fiue dayes together, & gently ſcrape her tong and throat with a deuiſe of ſiluer or of other mettell for ye purpoſe. And although ſhe nether cā féed nor will, yet ſhe muſt not be giuen ouer, but haue meate gently conueied into her gorge by ſmall morſels and thruſt down low inough with a fine ſticke that ſhe may take it: for ſhe cannot ſwallow her meat by reaſon of the ſwelling of her tong, & therfore ſhe muſt be aſſiſted in maner aforeſaid. M. Michelin ſaith furthermore that to comfort and ſtrengthen the liuer withall, ye muſt ſtéep Rubarb in a diſhfull of cold water all night, and the next morning waſh her meat therewith, continuing ſo by the ſpace of foure or fiue dayes together.
               
                  Martin giueth yet one other medicine which is this: Take a Pullets gut thrice the length of your little finger, & cutting it in thrée péeces (which you muſt tie faſt at eyther end) fill them with Oyle of Almonds or oyle oliue, & thruſt them into her throat, ſo as ſhe ſwallow them one after another: & within an howre after gorge her reaſonably with a young pullet. And the next morning take the ſéedes of ruſhes and the ſcrapinges of Iuorie, and the dung of Sparows, of ech two peny weight and make thereof a powder, and ſeaſon your hawkes meate therewith, and it will pleaſure her. And theſe two medicines are to be vſed when a hawke is not very fowle within, for if ſhée bée, then are the other former medicines better.
            
            
               
               Of the Canker which breedeth of overgreat heate in the Liver.
               IF a Canker happen in the throat or tongue of a hawke, by meanes of the heate of the Liuer: Make her the foreſaide medicine of Snayles, or that of Larde, as it is deuiſed before, giuing her her meat ſowſt in Milke, or oyle of ſwéet Almonds or oyle Oliue: and let the Canker be waſht twice or thrice a day, till it waxe white and ripe, Then with your Inſtrument ſcrape it cleane away that nothing of it rewayne. And if there happen to bée any dead fleſh in it, put powder of Alom, or the iuyce of Lymons in it, and plye it ſtil with the ſayde Milke or Oyles, till ſhee be throughly recured. And to make new fleſh grow vp againe, put to it a little hony of Roſes.
            
            
               Of the Pantas of the gorge.
               BEcauſe many men ſpeake of the diſeaſe of the Pantas diuerſly, and yet know not what it is: I will ſhew thrée maner of Pantaſes wherewith hawkes are diſeaſed. The firſt in the gorge, the ſecond commeth of cold, and the third is in ye reines and kidneys. The firſt kind of Pantas commeth of bating vpon the perch, or vpon the fiſt of him that beareth them, by meanes whereof ſome little veines of the liuer breake, and the bloud powreth out vpon the Liuer, which drieth and cloddeth into ſmall flakes, and thoſe riſing vp afterward when the hawke bateth againe, doe ſtoppe the paſſages and windepipe, and thereof commeth the Pantas. And ſometime when the Hawke bateth, thoſe flakes doe ſo aſcend into her throat, and he ouerthwart it that ſhe preſently falleth downe dead: inſomuch that ſome hold opinion, it is the Pantas that maketh Hawkes to die ſodenly. For proofe whereof, open your hawke when ſhée is dead, and yee ſhall finde this maladie in her throat. Maſter Amè Caſſian giueth no Medicine to this Pantas in the gorge, becauſe it cannot bée miniſtred to her,

neither by her throat nor otherwiſe. For the diſeaſe holdeth her in the very windpipe, whereby the breath paſſeth in & out. Neuertheleſſe his counſell is to cloſe vp the hawke in ſome conuenient chamber with lattis windows, ſo as yée may not get out, and to ſet her two or thrée perches, that ſhee may flée from one to another, and haue the Sun ſhine in vpon her if it be poſſible, and ſhe muſt haue alwayes water by her. And whē yée féed her, her meat muſt be cut in ſmall pellets, and haue neyther feather nor bone in it, leaſt ſhe ſtrain her ſelf in tyring, and ſhe muſt haue but halfe a gorge at once, and but once in a day. This is his counſell and aduiſe for this miſchiefe.
            
            
               Of another Pantas that commeth of colde.
               ANother Pantas cōmeth of cold when hawks take wet in fleeing the field, or the ciuer, and are not weathered afterward, nor ſet in a place where they may ſtand warme. Againe, this diſeaſe commeth by ſtanding where ſmoak or duſt may annoy them. And ye ſhall know the Pantas by your Hawks panting, for that ſhe cannot draw her breath as ſhe ſhould do. Malopin ſayth, that to remedy this diſeaſe, ye muſt take the filings of yron, and meal of Lentils, of ech like quantitie, which you muſt temper together with hony till it be like paſt, that yée may make it in little bals as bigge as a Peaze. Whereof you ſhall giue your Hawk two or thrée euery morning, and after noo
                     •
                  e féede her with good meat, but not with béefe: which diet you ſhall allow her three or foure dayes. And if ſhe amend not, ſeaſon her meat with powder of Orpiment two or thrée dayes.
               M. Michelm giueth this medicine following: Take Mayden-haire which groweth lightly at the heades of ponds and pits, and therewithall the roots of Perſley, the rootes of Smallage. Of all theſe take like portions, and boyle them in a good bigge pot that is new. Then ſtraine the water through a Colander, and put thereto a quantity of clarified ſugar with a

little marrow of béefe, and ſtirre them altogether, and thereof giue your hawke a portion in the morning, and as much at Euening with a ſmall tunnel, or otherwiſe with a ſpoon or other fit deuice four or fiue dayes together, & let her not féed till noon be paſt, then giue her of pullets fleſh without bloud, dipped in Oyle of ſwéet Almonds, or Oyle oliue waſht in two or thrée waters: and when yée haue ſo ſowſt her meat, let it alſo bée ſeaſoned with a little Saffron and Sugar. And foure or fiue dayes after, if néed be, giue her on her meat the powder of Orpiment without oyle, other thrée or four daies. And afterward ye may return again to your oyle of Almonds, or oyle Oliue, till your hawke bée throughly recured.
            
            
               Of the Pantas that is in the reynes and Kidneys.
               IT hapneth ſometimes that when a hawke hath béene recouered of ſome great griefe by good kéeping and intendance, afterward ſhée waxeth euill againe, and falleth to panting, wherof bréedeth this diſeaſe of the reines and kidneis, in maner of a canker, as big as a bean, which ſwelleth bigger & bigger, in ſuch wiſe that ſhée falleth to caſting ſome part of her meat. This Pantas differeth much from both the other: for it will leaue her ſeuen or eight dayes, & then vexe her again more ſtrongly. And ſomtimes it will take her but from Moneth to Moneth, ſo as ſhe ſhall beare it out a whole yeare. It is diſcerned by this, that when ſhe panteth, ſhe ſtirreth her reins more thā her pineons, wheras in the other ſhe ſtirreth more her pinions than her reines. Againe, to know it truly when it commeth and goeth euery ſeuen or eight dayes, if your Hawke chance to die, rippe her and you ſhall find a knubbe of the bignes of a ſmall beane full vpon the reynes and the ſmall of her backe whereof that diſeaſe procéedeth.
               Maſter Caſsian giueth this remedie for it. Yée muſt take the roots of Capers, of Fenel, of Smallage, and of Parſley and boyle them together in a new potte, to the conſumprion

of a third part. Then take an olde Tyle, the older the better, and make powder thereof. When you ſerue your hawke, féede her with fleſh ſtéeped in the water of the ſaide rootes, a quarter of an howre, or therabouts afore hād. In the morning when yée giue her of that waſht meat, giue her none of ye pouder, and at night waſh not her meat with the ſayde Water, but beſprinckle it with the powder, ſo competently as ſhe may receiue it, and giue her not at any time aboue halfe a gorge: let this be done nine or ten dayes or more. If ye ſée that your Hawke amend not, continue it ſtill: for then was the diſeaſe very much confirmed, and the hawke had borne it out long, & it is hard to be cured. But if yée take the diſeaſe when it is new and gréene, plie her diligently with this Medicine, and it will helpe her.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that is morfounded by ſome miſchance.
               
                  Morfound is the Frēch word which doth ſignifie in Engliſh the taking of cold.SOmetimes it falleth out that hawkes are morfounded by ſome miſchance, and ſometimes alſo by giuing them too great a gorge, ſpecially when they be wet. For then they cānot indew, nor put ouer their gorges, and ſo they ſurfet, becauſe their meat conuerteth into ſlime, and groſſe humors which ouerthrow their appetite, by meanes wherof they come oftentimes to their bane. Yée ſhall know the diſeaſe by this, that if yée giue your hawke a great gorge, ſpecially ouer night, the next morning ſhe will haue no liſt to her breakfaſt, but becommeth cold, and ſo falleth into great diſeaſe. Mallopin in his book of the Prince, giueth this medicine for it. When ye perceyue her to be ſo morfounded, and to haue loſt her appetite, giue her no meat that day, but ſet water before her, and let her bowze or bath at her pleaſure. When ſhee hath bathed and is weathered againe, throw her a liue Pigeon, and let her kill it, and take as much of the bloud of it as ſhe lifteth, but let her not eate paſt one of the legs at that time. Afterward ſet her down on ſome hie thing with water by her, and beware of giuing

her any great gorge. Then for foure or fiue dayes together giue her fiue or ſixe cloues of maces lapped vp in a hens ſkin, and that will recouer her.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe that is called the privie and hidden evill in a Hawke, for which we haue no ſpeciall tearme.
               SOmetimes hawkes periſh for want of knowledge of ſome ſecret diſeaſe that hapneth to them, and therfore I will tell you how you ſhall know it. The hawk that hath that diſeaſe is alwayes gréedy to féed, inſomuch that when yée haue giuen her a great gorge in the morning, ſhe will haue indewed it out of hand, and if ye giue her another at noone, ſhe will put it ouer by & by, and if yée giue her the third at night, ſhe will diſpatch that quickly alſo, and the more ſhée féedeth, the more gréedy & nippie ſhe is. This diſeaſe commeth of this, that when your Hawke is very poore & low in ſtate, and you deſirous to ſet her vppe quickly, thinking to bring her in good plight with great gorges, you féed her with Pigeons and other fleſh which ſhée cannot indew by reaſon of her pouerty & weaknes, for want of heat in the liuer: the heat whereof is the cauſe of all kindly digeſtion & indewing. Alſo you may know this diſeaſe by hir often muting which is watriſh & thin, and beſides ſhe doth ſliſe further thā ſhe is wont to doe by reaſon of ſpéedy induing her meat. M. Mallopin in his booke of the Prince ſayth, that for remedy of this diſeaſe ye muſt ſtéepe a ſhéepes heart cutte in ſmall péeces all one night in Aſſes milke, or Goats milke, and the next day giue your hawk a quarter of it in ye morning for her beaching, as much at noon, & the reſt at night, forcing her to receiue as much of the milke as ye can, and continue it fiue or ſix daies together til ye ſée her mute kindly. Then féed her reaſonably with good meat, ſtéeped in oyle of ſwéet Almonds, continuing it for thrée or foure dayes ſpace twice a day. And as ye find your hawke to mend, ſo increaſe her meals by litle and litle, till ſhee be in as good plight as ſhe was before, alwayes

continuing the ſaid Milke: for ſome are of opinion that milke is good for all diſeaſes of a Hawke. Maſter Amè Caſſian ſaith, that to remedy this diſeaſe, yée muſt take a tortois of the land and not a water Tortois, and ſtéepe the fleſh of it in womans milke, Aſſes milke, or Goats milke, and giue your Hawke a quantity of it for a beaching thrée or foure times, and a little more at her féeding times ſixe or ſeuen dayes together. Afterward féede her with ſhéepes hearts ſtéeped in womans milke, by little and little at once till ſhée bée recouered: and let her not ſtand in a dampiſh or moiſt place, but in warme places in the winter, and in coole places in Summer, and alwayes hooded.
            
            
               Of the diſeaſe and weakeneſſe in there ynes.
               WHen your Hawk cannot iump the length of her lines and cryance to your fiſt, or from your fiſt vp to the perch, nor bate with her wings: Ye may well thinke that ſhée hath the diſeaſe of the reines. Therfore M. Caſſian willeth you to chop a hares ſkin haire and all in very ſmall and fine peeces and to mingle it with cats fleſh, and to féede your hawke with it ſeuen or eight dayes together: and if ſhée indew it, ſhée ſhall recouer of her diſeaſe.
            
            
               Of Hawkes that haue the ague or Fever.
               TO know whether your hawke haue the Ague: Marke whether her féet bée more ſwollen than they were wont to bée or no: if they be, then hath ſhe the ague. To remedy this miſchiefe, Michelin ſayeth, you muſt mingle Arſenicke and Capons greace together well ſprinckled with Vineger, wherof you muſt make a little ball, which you muſt cauſe your Hawke to take by caſting her, and vſe it in ſuch wiſe as ſhee may kéepe it, and it will rid the Ague.
            
            
               
               Of the Hawke that voydeth wormes.
               IF a Hawke voyde worms, by maſter Martins aduiſe yée muſt make this medicine following. Take of the fine fylings of yron and ſtrew it vpon your hawkes meat, which (if you doe well) muſt be Porke: and féed her ſo thrée or foure dayes with that kind of fleſh ſo ſeaſoned, and it will cure her.
            
            
               Of the Teynt in a hawkes feather, and how many kinds of it there be.
               HItherto yée haue read of the inward diſeaſes of hawks: Now I will tell you of the outward accidents: and firſt will ſpeake of the Teynt which the French Falconers call Taigne, the Italians Zignuole and Tarmae, whereof there are thrée ſorts. The firſt is when their principals or long. Feathers begin to droppe off, by meanes whereof many hawkes are marred and caſt away without knowledge how to helpe it. Maſter Amè Caſſian ſayeth, that this commeth ſometimes of the Liuer, and of the exceſſiue heate of the body, by meanes whereof ſmall pimples riſe vpon their winges, or on their traines, which afterward cauſe their Feathers to droppe-off, and when they are gone, the holes where they ſtood doe cloſe againe, where through the hawke doth periſh, if ſhe bée not remedied. This diſeaſe is contagious, and one of them will take it of another, and therefore yée muſt not let the Hawke that is affected with it ſtand neare a Hawke that is ſound, neyther muſt you touch or féed a ſound Hawke on the Gloue whereon a ſicke Hawke hath béene fédde. And yée ſhall know that ſhe hath that diſeaſe, by her often picking with her beake vpon her principall feathers of her winges and traine and by their dropping away. Therefore caſt your Hawke, and let her be well peruſed, and yée ſhall finde the ſaide diſeaſe. For remedy wherof, Maſter Martin, and

M. Caſſian ſay, you muſt caſt your Hawke, and when you haue found the ſmal pimple whence the feather dropt firſt, you muſt get a little ſticke of Firre, which is by nature gummy and fatte, make a little pegge of it, not ſharpe at the forend, nor thruſt it in with violence, but ſoftly as you may. And if ye can get none of that wood, then take a graine of Barley and cutte off the forepoint of it, and annoint it with a little Triacle, or Oyle oliue, and conuey it into the hole, ſo as it may ſticke a little out, and the hole not cloſe together, and ſtoppe againe. Then with a ſmall Launce or Penknife, you muſt ſlitte the pimple, and let out the redde water, which you ſhall find there. After this, take Aloes Cicotrine in powder, and put it into the gall of an oxe, coyled in a diſh, and with thoſe two mingled together, annoint the ſlit round about: and beware that there come nothing in the hole where the feather grew, for it might doe the hawke great harme. This done, take of the reddeſt Lentiles that you can come by, and leſſe than halfe ſo much of the filings of yron, and mingle them together with hony, and thereof make Pilles as bigge as a Peaſe, and then giue your Hawke two or thrée of them euery morning. Then ſet her by a fire, or in the Sunne and after noone giue her a reaſonable good gorge of a Pullet, or of mutton, and if ye liſt ye may giue her of thoſe Pilles towards the Euening alſo. Let her meat be ſtéeped in milke as is ſaide heretofore fiue or ſixe dayes together, and looke alwayes to the inciſions that yée made, and ſhée ſhall bée recouered.
               An other remedy Martin giueth for the ſame diſeaſe. Annoynt the place with ſome good Balme where the feathers fell away, and the Teint will die out of hand, and freſh feathers ſupply the place againe. And he ſayth moreouer, that you muſt take the powder of Petre of Alexandria, which is ſold at the Potecaries, and mingle it with Vinegar, and annoint the diſeaſed place with it three or four times, and it will be whole.
               The ſecond kind of Teynt which fretteth the principalles

of a Hawke to the very Quill, commeth (as the chiefe Falconers affirme) of ill kéeping, when they haue not their due intendāce, being neyther bathed nor ſcowred, nor kept in whole ſome places And therefore we are forbid to kéepe a Hawk in a ſluttiſh corner. Againe, ſometimes both in the mew and out of the mew it hapneth that by féeding them with filthie and loathſome fleſh, they become full of filth both within & without, whereof bréedeth ſuch a ſort of wormes, as doe vtterlie fret aſunder and marre their feathers. The thrée chiefe Falconers ſay, that for this ſecond teynt which fretteth the feathers of a hawke in ſort that they becom like ſticks, yée muſt take vine ſhreds, & make thereof as ſtrong Lie as ye can, and waſh your hawke once a day with it throughly: & when ſhe is weathered again, anoint all her feathers wt hony out of the comb. Then make powder of Sanguis Draconis, and roch alom very ſmall, and powder the foreſaid Quils therewith, & your hawk ſhall be recured. Or elſe take a Mole of that ſort which breedeth in medows, & put her in a new earthen pot wel couered, & ſtopped, & ſet it on the fire one whole day: which done, take her out againe as ſhe is, & make her into powder very ſmall. And when ye haue bathed your hawkes feathers throughlie with the ſaid lée, by and by beſtrew her feathers wt the powder of the Mole a certaine time together, & it wil pleaſure her.
               The third kind of Teynt is knowne in hawkes by the riuing of their principall feathers throughout alongſt the vpper ſide of the web of them. And that hapneth commonly for want of clean féeding and due attendance. To remedy this, Mallopin ſayth, that yée muſt take a gréene réede, and cleane it all alongſt, and ſcrape out the pith of it, and wring out of it as much iuyce as yee can, wherewith you muſt moyſten the ſaid riuen feathers all alongſt the riftes of them, and they will cloſe and ſhut againe as before. And if any feather happen to be dropt away, let a tente made of Firre or of a grayne of Barley as is ſaid heretofore bée put into the hole of it, and vſe it after the foreſaide manner, and a new feather will grow againe out of hand. It this deuiſe, to cauſe a feather

to grow againe be not to your liking, you ſhall in this collection find ſuch as may content you.
               
                  Martin giueth another medicine and aduice for the ſame, which is this: Take two pennie weight of Orpiment, & nine graines of pepper, and make it into powder, and caſt it vpon her meate which muſt be reaſonable warme. Again, take thrée ſlices of bacon of that which is neareſt the ſkinne, and let them bée ſo ſmall as your hawk may ſwallow them with eaſe: ſawce them with a little hony, and ſtrew of the powder of the filings of yron vpon the hony, and giue your hawk therof thrée daies together. After which time take a young chicken, & before yée boyle it in wine, bruiſe the breaſt of it, and open it with a ſharp knife or other inſtrument that the bloud may follow. Thē feed her with the ſaid pullets fleſh warme, ſtéeped in Goats milk, or other milke. Practiſe this two or thrée dayes, and afterwards thereupon giue her good warme meat, and ſhée ſhall recouer.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that indeweth not, ne putteth over as ſhe ſhould doe.
               IT falleth out ſometimes that a Hawke cannot well indew, nor put ouer her meat as ſhe ſhould doe, & that is onely becauſe ſhée is fowle within, or hath taken ſome ſurfet, or elſe that when ſhe was low and poore, her kéeper being deſirous to ſet her vp againe too haſtily, gaue her too great gorges which ſhe by reaſon of her weakenes was not able to put ouer, and indew, where through ſhée ſurfetted and forwent her appetite of féeding altogether. For remedy hereof, Maliopin ſaith, yee muſt féed her with light meats, & little at once, as with young rattes and miſe, or with great rattes, for there is more ſubſtance in them than in the other, whereof yée muſt giue her but halfe gorges, that ſhe may the ſooner indew them, and put them ouer. Or elſe féede her with Chicken, or mutton dipped in Goats milke, or otherwiſe. And for want of thoſe, take the yolke of an egge, & giue her a quarter of a gorge thereof,

and when ye féede her with the fleſh of any liue bird or fowle, ſtéepe it well in the bloud of the ſame fowle, and it will doe her much good. So ſhall your hawke mount of her fleſh apace: if beſides that, you doe alſo ſcoure her with pils made of Larde, marow of beefe, ſugar and ſaffron thrée mornings together, & two howres after giue her a reaſonable gorge.
               Another receit which M. Michelin giueth, ſaying. When a Hawk indews not her meat, ne putteth it ouer as ſhe ought to doe, but hath ſurfeited and wanteth naturall heat: Take very pure white wine, and ſtéepe her meat in it luke warm, giuing it her by little & litle oft times in the day, alwayes changing her meat, and ſée that it be light of digeſtion. Do thus to her till ſhée bee in better tune againe, giuing her fiue or ſixe cloues of maces in the euening wrapped in a little cotton, or in ſome other ſuch like deuiſe: for that will warme her head, & all her other parts very well, and let the cotton bee dipped in odoriferous old wine.
            
            
               Of the hawke that can neyther caſt vp her meat nor endew it as ſhe ought.
               ANother miſchief is wont ſomtimes to light vpon hawks namely, that by taking ouer-great gorges, they can neyther indew nor caſt it againe, & alſo that many times a hawke ſoareth away with her prey, and féedeth ſo gréedily vpon it by reaſon ſhée was kept ouer eager and ſharpe, that ſhe can neyther get it vp nor downe, and thereupon falleth in daunger of death. Wherfore all men ought to vſe diſcretion in feeding their hawks, that they ouer-gorge them not.
               M. Caſſian ſaith, that for remedy thereof, yée muſt ſet cleane water in a veſſell before your hawke, & let her houze thereof at her plaſure. And if ſhe liſt not: then take the quantity of a beane of Porke, of the fatteſt of it, and two parts leſſe of powder of Pepper, with a little ſalt brayed very ſmall, and when ye haue mingled them altogether, make a little bal of it

as bigge as a beane, and put it in your Hawks beake, ſo as ſhe may receiue it. Then ſet her by the fire, or in the Sun, and you ſhall ſée her caſt her gorge. But let not the hawke bée too poore to whome you intend to allow this pill, for if ſhée bée too low, ſhée will hardly beare it.
            
            
               Another medicine to make her caſt her gorge.
               RUb the roofe of her mouth with a little Vineger and Pepper, and ſhe will caſt by and by, And if yée liſt, ye may alſo conuey two or thrée drops of the ſame into her nares, and it will make her caſt her gorge out of hand. And if yée ſée that the Vineger and Pepper doe vexe and diſtemper her too much after the caſting of her gorge, ſpirt a little freſh water with your mouth into her palat and nares.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that caſteth her gorge over much, and cannot indew as ſhe ſhould doe
               MAny times it commeth to paſſe that when a hawk hath fed, ſhée cannot kéepe her meat but falleth to caſting, as ſoone as ſhée hath receyued it. This commeth of féeding her with groſſe fowle, & vnholeſome meat not waſhed: or elſe for that ſhe is foule in the panel, and ſo cannot indew by reaſon of the great ſtore of filth that is within her. Therefore yée muſt beware that ye cut not her meat with a foule knife, or wt a knif that hath cut onions, léekes, chibbols, or ſuch other like things. To remedy this inconuenience, giue not your hawke great gorges. And to bring her well in tune again, ſcoure her with the forementioned pilles of larde, marow, ſugar, and ſaffron by the ſpace of thrée dayes. And aboue all things, let not the hawke that hath caſt her gorge be fed a good ſpace after it, but let her ſtand empty in the Sun with water before her to bowſe at her pleaſure, for that will doe her much good. And when yée féede her, giue her at the firſt time but a quarter of a

gorge, and at the ſecond ſomewhat more, if ſhée kéepe the firſt: and her meat muſt be ſome liue fowle, and good of digeſtion, till ſhée be brought againe to her naturall plight. But if ſhe kéepe not all her meat, giue her yong rats or liue mice: and for want of thoſe, giue her ſmall birds til ſhée bée recouered. If theſe foreſaid things boot not, then by Mallopins aduiſe, take Coriander ſeed beaten in powder, and temper it with warme water, ſtraining it through a cloth, waſh your Hawks meate therewith foure or fiue dayes together, and if ye haue no Coriander ſéed, take the iuyce of Coriander. And if your hawke mend not yet for all this: Follow the counſell of Maſter Michelins here inſuing. Boyle Bay leaues in white wine till halfe the lyquor be waſted, and then let it coole with the leaues ſtill in it. Which done, force a Pigeon by deuiſe to bowſe ſo much of the wine that ſhée may die of it. Then immediately féed your hawke with the ſame Pigeon, and let her not eat more than a legge of it.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath loſt her appetite and will not feed to make her eager without bringing her low.
               A Hawk doth ſomtime looſe her appetite of féeding by ſome miſfortune, as by taking too great gorges towards euening, which ſhée cannot well endew, becauſe the nights are colder than the dayes. Alſo ſhée may looſe her appetite by being foule in the panel, and diuerſe times by coldneſſe, or by ſome other diſeaſe which cannot bée perceyued out of hand. For remedy whereof, Maſter Mallopin ſayeth, yée muſt take Aloes Cicotrine, boylde Sugar, and marrow of beefe, of each a like, ſauing that there muſt bée leaſt of the Aloes, and when yée haue mingled them together, and made them in little Balles or Pilles as bigge as beanes, giue of them to your hawke, and hold her in the Sunne till ſhee haue caſt vppe the ſlime and filth that is within her. And if it happen to ſcowre downeward, lette it not trouble you,

for it will doe her much good: and féede her not till noone, at which time giue her good meat, and ſerue her ſo thrée dayes together.
               For the ſame diſeaſe Michelus ſayth, you muſt take common pils that are giuen to purge men withall, & giue one or two of them to your hawk in the morning, keeping her hooded by the fire, or in the Sun, looking to hir that ſhe caſt them not, (if it may be) to the intent they may cauſe her to ſcowre downward. And the booke of the Prince ſayth, that it is good giuing of thoſe pilles to hawks in the beginning of September. For if they haue the Filanders, or any other inward diſeaſe, it ſcowreth them, and riddeth them of all miſchiefes that may enſew. Three or foure dayes after you haue giuen your hawke theſe Pils, if ſhe haue yet no luſt to feed, caſt the filing of yron vpon her meat three or foure dayes together.
               M. Amè Caſſian ſayth, that for the ſame diſeaſe, when yon perceyue it you muſt giue your hawke a liue ſtockedoue, allowing her leaue to ſeaze and tire vpon it, & to take the bloud of it at her pleaſure. And for want of a ſtockdoue, ſmall birdes are good, and ſo be rattes and miſe, ſo ſhe haue them aliue. And if you will haue her to endew them quickly, giue her but halfe gorges.
            
            
               When Hawkes are low brought, a remedie.
               IT happeneth ſometimes that Hawks are brought ſo low, that a man ſhall haue much a do to ſet them vp again. And that commeth through the fault of vnſkilfull keepers, rather than any other thing. For ſome giue them ill meat, cold, & vnwaſhed. Alſo Hawks do happen to grow poore by ſome diſeaſe that their keepers are not ware of. Again, ſometimes it hapneth that a Hawke ſoares away, and is loſt foure or fiue dayes, and ſo becommes poore for want of prey. M. Caſſian ſaith, that if ye will ſet her vp again, ye muſt feed her a little at once and with good meat, ſuch as rattes and mice are, for they

they be light of digeſtion, or elſe with ſmall birds which are good likewiſe, and of great nouriſhment. Poultrie alſo is good but it nouriſheth not ſo much of his owne nature as Mutton doth.
               Againe, yée may ſet her vp (when ſhe is low) in this maner following. Take a ſpoonefull or twaine of hony, thrée or foure of freſh butter, boyle them together in a new pot of water, thē take Porke well waſhed, & ſteepe it in that water, giuing your hawke a good reaſonable gorge of it twice a day, warming your ſaid water when you intend to féede your Hawke. And if yée can find any Snailes that bréed in running waters, giue her of them in the morning, and they will both ſcowre away the groſſe ſlimie humors that are in her panell, and alſo bée a great helpe to ſet her vp againe, (for they nouriſh very well.) And if yée mind to make your hawke eager, and ſharpe ſet, without bating her ſelfe, take the heart and liuer of a Pie, and when ye haue made it into powder, make your hawke to eat it, and it will ſet her ſharpe and eager. Theſe are the opinions of the French Falconers. You are to conſider of them all, and to vſe the moſt probable at your election and pleaſure.
            
            
               Of a Hawke that hath no liſt to flee, and is become vnluſty, or ſlothfull.
               NOw and then it hapneth, that a Hawke hath no liſt to flée, eyther becauſe ſhe is in euill kéeping, that is to wit, of ſuch as know not how to giue her her rightes: as bowzing, bathing, and ſuch other things, whereof ſometime ſhée hath great néed: or becauſe the hawk is too hie, & full of greaſe, where through ſhe becōmeth coy: or contrariwiſe, becauſe ſhe is too low and poore: or elſe by reaſon of ſome miſhap or diſeaſe which ſhée hath that is vnknown. Therefore M. Caſſian ſaith, if a hawke be vnluſty to flée, ſhe muſt be viewed and peruſed by ſome one of good ſkill, and haue ſuch remedies miniſtred to her, as ſhe hath néed of, as wel for bathing as for bowzing: For

in any wiſe water muſt be ſet before her. And if ſhée bée high and not well enſeamed, her meat muſt bée throughly waſhed, that it may ſcowre her the better. Or elſe if ye liſt, yee may giue her the foreſaide medicine of Larde, Marrow, and ſaffron. And if ye perceiue your hawke to be ſicke or diſeaſed, ye may vſe the remedies ſet downe heretofore, according to the ſeuerall natures of the diſeaſes, till your hawke bae in good plight againe as ſhée was before. [But truely there is nothing better for this euill then to giue herin a morning thrée or foure handſome pyls of Seladine well waſht.Addition.]
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath broken her wing by ſome miſchance.
               IT hapneth ſomewhile that a Hawke breaketh her wing by miſchance, as by bating againſt the ground, or otherwiſe. Maſter Mallopin ſayth, that when a hawke hath her Wing broken after that manner, yee muſt take Sanguis Draconis, Bole Armoniacke, Gum arabicke, white Frankenſence which is called Olibanum, Maſticke, Aloes Cicotrine, of each of them a like quantity, and a reaſonable quantity of fine meale flower. Make a powder of all the ſaid things, tempering it with the white of an egge, and make thereof a playſter, and lay it to the hurt when ye haue firſt ſet it right againe. Then croſſe her wings one ouer another, as though they were not broken, and mayle her well and faſt, ſo as ſhe may not ſtirre them, and let the meat that you giue her be cut in ſmall Pellettes. Remoue not the playſter for ſeuen or eight dayes, and when yée lay on another, in any wiſe beware that that wing be not remoued: For if it be neuer ſo little remoued or diſplaced, your labour is loſt, and your Hawke marred for euer.
               Therefore keepe her in that order by the ſpace of 14. or 15. dayes, ſetting her vpon a very ſoft cuſhion, and let her meate bée good and new killed, and giue her meetely good

gorges of it, for ſhée néedes not to bée kept low to recouer her health the better.
            
            
               Of a Hawke that hath had ſome blow or ſtripe vpon her wing.
               SOmetimes a hawke hath a ſtripe on her wing by ſome miſhappe, ſo as ſhée cannot afterward holde it right, but it hangeth alwayes downe, and lolleth. Maſter Caſſian ſayth, that yée muſt take Sage, Mintes, and Pelamountaine, and boyle them altogether in a new earthen pot full of good wine, and when they be well ſodden, take the potte and ſet it vpon hote Imbers as cloſe ſtopped as may bee. Then make a round hole of the bigneſſe of an Apple, in the cloath that your potte is ſtopped withall, for the ſteame to iſſue out at. Which done, take your Hawke vpon your fiſt, and holde out her hurt wing handſomely a great while ouer the hole, that it may take the fume which ſeameth vp out of the potte. Afterward let her be well dryed by kéeping her warme by the fire, for if ſhée ſhould catch ſodaine cold vpon it, it would become worſe than it was before. Vſe her thus twice a day, for thrée or foure dayes together, and ſhée ſhall bée recouered.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath her wing out of ioynt.
               WHen a hawkes wing is out of ioynt, yée muſt take her handſomely, and put it vp, ſo as yée may ſet it in his right place againe. Which done, lay a Playſter to it, made of Sanguis draconis, Boli Armoni, Maſticke, and flower tempered together with the white of an egge, and maile her vp letting it lie by the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes, and it wil be whole.
            
            
               
               Of a Hawke that hath her pinion broken.
               IF a hawke chance to haue her pynion broken by treading vpon her, or by ſtriking againſt ſome thing, M. Mallopia ſayeth, that there is no better remedie, than the foreſaide Receit made for her wing broken: and that if neede be, ſhe muſt be mayled, that it may the better ioyne together againe, and the playſter renewed euery fiue dayes. Or elſe let the hurt be ſplented by and by, and bound vp with conuenient deuiſes for the purpoſe, giuing her her meat cut in ſmall pellets, and let her continue mailed, that ſhe trouble not her ſeife with tyring.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath her legge or thigh broken.
               TAke Firre or Frankinſenſe, pill off the barke of it, & beat it into powder, and mingle it with the white of an egge: & if yée can, put in alſo a little Sanguis Draconis, & make a plaiſter of it. Then deplume your hawks thigh, and lay the playſter to the broken place, taking good héed that ye bind it not too ſtraight for feare of fluxe and repaire of accidents to the place, for ſo yée may do her great harme. And for want of Firre, or Frankinſence, take the barke of an Oke: for Firre is not to bée had in many places. Afterward renew your playſter euery fiue or ſixe dayes, till your Hawke be throughly whole, alwayes cutting her meat to her as aforeſaid, and keeping her hooded. And if it bee broked beneath the thigh, lay the ſame playſter to it, taking good héed that yée binde it not too hard: for in ſo doing yée may make her foot to wither away, and mortifie the member, which is a very great negligence. For Hawkes are daintie birdes, and daintily to bée dealt withall.
            
            
               
               Of the Hawke that is wounded with a ſtripe, or ſome other miſfortune.
               IF a Hawke happe to bée wounded by an Eagle, or any other bird of prey, by crabbing together, or by encounter in fleeing: or by a iobbe with the truncke of a Crane, Hearon, or other water fowle: or by taking ſome great blow againſt a tree or 
                     •
                  ocke, whereby ſhe is greatly pained, and in daunger to be marred, if there be not ſkill to helpe her with ſpéed. By M. Ame Caſſian aduiſe, take the iuyce of the herbe called Culuerfoote, otherwiſe named Hearbe Rebert: and if yée find your Hawkes ſtripe to bée great and blacke, and yet that it hath no great gaſh, you muſt make inciſion, and ſlitte the ſkinne a little more by your diſcretion, that yée may the more eaſily conuey in the ſaid iuyce. That done, lay a leafe of the ſame hearbe vpon the wound to couer it, ſpreading the feathers handſomely againe ouer it, and let it not be remoued 24. howres after. And know yée, that the ſayde hearbe hath ſuch vertue, that what wound ſoeuer you lay it on, it ſhall neuer ſwell nor rancle. For want of the hearbe it ſelfe, take of the Powder of it, and put it into the wound, kéeping it alwayes cleane by waſhing it with a little white Wine, as is aforeſaid. And if yée ſée that the iuyce or powder of that hearbe doe no good, take the medicine that Mallopin ſpeaketh of. Take Oyle of Roſes, and Capons greaſe, of each alike quantity, with a little leſſe Oyle of Violetes, and leſſe of Turpentine by the one halfe, and confect them altogether. Then take Maſticke and Frankinſenſe in powder, of each alike: and if yée can finde the ſaid hearbe called Culuerfoote, drie it, and beat it into powder alſo: and when yée haue ſerced your powders, put them into the ſaide Capons greaſe, and ſtirre them together with a ſticke, till they bée throughly incorporated, and ſo ſhall your vnguent be perfect. And the chiefe Falconers ſay, you muſt make handſome tentes of Cotton, bebeſtowing

on them this vnguent, and ſo apply them to the wounded places of your hawke from time to time till they be recured. And if the Hawkes ſkinne be much broken or torne, yée muſt ſow it vp handſomly, leauing a little hole in one ſide for an iſſue, which you muſt kéepe open with a tent noynted with the foreſaid vnguent till it be throughlie whole.
               Maſter Michelin ſetteth downe another medicine, ſaying, that if a Hawke happen to haue a ſtripe or a wounde, you muſt plucke away the feathers round about the hurt place, and that if the wound bée ſo déepe, as it can by no means be ſtitched vp: yée muſt put of the powder hereafter following into it. Take Sanguis draconis, white Frankinſence, Aloes Cicotrine, and Maſticke, and of thoſe foure being all in like quantity, make a fine powder, and lay it vpon the wound, and afterward annoint it round about with oyle of Roſes, or Oyle Oliue warme to comfort it. And if the wound bée not ſo large but that it may well be ſtitched: ſow it together again leauing a little hole for an iſſue. Then make a playſter with the white of an egge, and hauing firſt annointed it with the ſaid Oyle, lay of the powder vpon the ſore, and put a tent in it dipped in the ſaid vnguent to kéepe the iſſue, and lay your playſter vpon it, dreſſing it after that manner ſtill, till your Hawke be ſound.
               There is yet another medicine very good and auaileable, which is this. Take the powder of fine Canell which is nothing elſe but Cinamon, & put it in the wound, ſupplying it afterward with good oyle of Roſes, or oyle Oliue.
            
            
               Another medicine of Maſter Caſſians making.
               TAke halfe an ounce of Maſticke, a quarter of an ounce of Bolo Armoniacke, halfe an ounce of Roſes, an ounce of

Capons greaſe, an ounce of Oyle of Roſes, an ownce of Oyle of Violets, and a quarter of an ounce of virgine waxe. Of all theſe, let the things that may be molten, be molten together: and let thoſe things that are to be beaten into powder, be beaten to fine powder. And when yée haue ſtreyned al your liquors into a new pot, put your powders into them, ſtirring them about wt a ſticke till they be well incorporated together, taking good héed that ye put not too much fire vnder your pot, and ſo ſhall your vnguent be perfect. Which you may vſe in handſome pleggets for your hawke, tenting her with ſmall tents dipped in the ſame vnguent, after the maner mentioned in the former receit, till ſhée hée throughly recured.
               And if your hawke bée hurt or bruiſed without any ſkinne broken, take the powder of Mummy mingled with the bloud of a wood Culuer, or of a Pullet, and conuey it into her throat ſo as ſhée may receiue it down, and two or thrée howres after giue her a reaſonable gorge of good meate. If the brooſe bée apparant, annoynt it with good oyle of Roſes, and if néede require, for the largeneſſe or ſoreneſſe of her woundes, let her be mailed, as is afore ſaid, for her more quiete, and more ſpeedy recouerie.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath ſwollen feet.
               IT happeneth diuers times that hawkes haue a ſwelling in their feete, & that cōmeth by chaſing of their féet in fleeing their prey, & in ſtriking it, & by taking cold vpon it, for want of rolling the perch with ſome warme cloath: or elſe becauſe they bee ful of groſſe humors, and fowle within, which humors beeing remoued by their labour and trauell in fléeing, droppe downe vpon their féete, and there ſwell, ſpecially in Sacres more than in any others. For they be of their owne nature very heauie hawkes and haue groſſe feete. Againe, it hapneth ſometimes that a Hawke pricketh her ſelfe vpon a thorn by ruſhing into hedges and buſhes ouer ventrouſly, wherupō
                  
follow ſuch ſwellings as are dangerous, and hard to be cured. Therefore Maſter Caſſian ſayeth, that when a Hawke is in that taking, ſhee muſt bée ſcowred thrée mornings together with the Pyls of Lard, Marow, Sugar, and Saffron, and ſet in the Sunne, and fed two dayes after with ſome good meat. Then muſt yee take Bole Armoniacke, & Sanguis Draconis, leſſe by one halfe, & make it in powder, & temper them well together with the white of an egge & Roſe-water, and anoint her féet with it thrée or foure dayes twice a day, ſetting her vpon ſome cloth to kéepe her féet warme. And if this medicine do her no good, take this that followeth.
               
                  Mallopin ſayeth, that if a Hawkes féet be but ſwolne, and haue not any knubs in the ball of the foot, take a payre of ſizzers or coping yrons, & cope the talons of her ſwolne foote, till the bloud follow: which done, take Capons greaſe, oyle of Roſes, & oyle of Violets, of each alike, & twice aſmuch of Bele Armoniacke. Whē ye haue mingled thē all well together, make therof an vnguent, & anoint your hawks féet therewith twice a day til they be throughly whole, alwaies ſetting ſome ſoft & warm thing vnder her feet. And if this doe her no good, then trie the receits aboue mentioned till your hawke be throughly recured.
            
            
               Of the ſwelling in the legges or thighes.
               SOmetime a hawke hath her legs ſwellen, and ſometime her thighes & not her legs: & that cōmeth eyther by ouer-laboring her ſelfe in fléeing,How to make oyle of agges. or by ouermuch ſeazing her prey, and by taking colde vpon it. Alſo by like labour and bating, the humors being ſtirred within her, droppe downe to her thighes & legs, and thereof commeth this ſwelling.
               Wherefore firſt let your hawke be ſcowred with the pylles made of Lard, Marow, Sugar & Saffron, then roſte nine or ten egs hard in their ſhels, & when they be cold againe, take the yolks of them, & breake them with your hand in an yron poſſenet ouer the fire. Thē take an yron Laddle, and ſtir them

handſomely without ceaſing, and when ye ſee them become blacke that yée would thinke they were mard and burnt, boile them ſtill: which done, gather them together and preſſe out the oyle of them, then heate them againe as before to preſſe out as much oyle of them as is poſſible, and put it vp in a glaſſe. And when yée mind to vſe it for the ſaid diſeaſe, ye muſt take ten drops thereof, put thereto thrée drops of vineger, and thrée of Roſe-water, and mingle them well together. This medicine is ſingular good againſt all ſwellinges of their thighes, legs & feet, and moreouer it ſupplyeth and mollifieth their ſinewes. But firſt yée muſt anoint the ſwellinges with a litle Adiantum, and afterward with your oyle prepared as aforeſaid till your hawke be cured.
            
            
               Of the ſwelling in a hawkes foote which wee tearme the pin, or pin Gout.
               DIuerſe times there riſe vp knubs vpon the féet of hawks as vpon the féet of Capons which ſome call Galles, and ſome Gouts. They come ſometimes of the ſwelling of the legs and thighes, which I haue ſpoken of before, or of other diſeaſes that bréed of the aboundance of humors within the Hawke, which muſt firſt be ſcowred with the laſt mentioned pilles thrée or foure dayes together And Maſter Amè Caſſian ſayth, that when a hawke hath the ſaid pinnes and gowtines in her féet, ye muſt make round matches of paper as bigge as the agglet of a point, and feare or cauteriſe the pinne round about. And if the knub ſticke farre out, ye may ſlit it mannerly with a hote ſharpe knife, and put a little ſlice of fatte Lard into the ſlit to kéepe it open, and ſet your Hawke vpon a little heape of very fine ſalt. And if there grow any dead fleſh it in, lay the powder of glaſſe, and two parts of Hermodactels vpon it, and when the Sore is ſcowred, annoint it with Swines greaſe and hony together, alwayes laying ſalt vnder

her feete to the end of your cure. And to remedy the ſame, Mallopin in his Booke of the Prince ſayth, that when a Hawke is gowty or hath the pin on her féete, ye muſt take of Rew thrée ownces, of Barberies three ownces, of Colewort leaues three ownces, of Oyle of Violets a reaſonable quantitie, of Turpentine two ounces, of Shéepes ſewet as much ſhall ſerue, of the fatte of a yong Pullet one ownce and a halfe, of Vergin waxe one ownce, of maſticke one ownce, of white Frankincence one ownce, of Opopaner one ownce, and of Allom two ownces. Firſt ſtraine out the iuyce of the ſaide Herbes brayed together, then put thereto all your other mixtures made into powder. Which done, melt all your ſewets together in a new earthen potte, and put your iuyces and powders therevnto, ſtiring them continually with a ſticke ouer a ſoft fire, and ſo cooling them by little and little, whereby your vnguent will become perfect, and you may kéepe it two yeares good. And when yée occupie it, ſpread it playſterwiſe vpon leather, or linnen cloth, laying it vpon the pin gowt, remouing it each other day till it be whole, for 15. dayes together. And if the pin open not of it ſelfe, ſlit it and open it with a little ſharp lance of ſteele made hote, then clenſe the filthie matter and quitture, and ſo ſhall your Hawke recouer aſſuredly.
               Maiſter Caſſian ſetteth downe another good and wel tried receit for the ſame which is this: Take a quantity of Turpentine, halfe as much white Sope, making the Sope into powder. That done, make aſhes of vineſhreds, and take thereof ſomewhat leſſe thā of the powder of the ſope. Set theſe thrée mixtures together vpon the coles in a new pot, and ſtirre them ſoftly with a ſticke till they be incorporate together. Thē make plaiſters thereof, and beſtow them on the pume-gowte ſo as they may not fall off, nor be remoued by the hawke, ſhifting them euery two dayes till fiftéene daies be paſt, and that the diſeaſe grow to maturation. Alterward you may ſlitte the pinne, drawing out all the matter and quitture cleane, but let your launce be ſomewhat hote wherewith you ſlit it, and if

the pin open of it ſelfe, it is better. After this you muſt apply another playſter of Draculum magnum, which you ſhall find at the Apotecaries: or it is a great drawer, and if it haue any dead fleſh in it, lay a little Verdegréece to it, for that is a coroſiue and a fretter.
               
                  Martine ſayeth, that to ſoften the pinne on the hawks foot and to make it grow to a head, yee muſt take the rootes of Flower deluce which beares the blew leafe, drie it and beate it into powder, and make thereof a ſalue with hony of Roſes, and lay it to the pinne till it be throughly whole.
               Maſter Caſſian ſayth further, that if your hawkes féete bée chafed, and fall to ſwelling, take the fyling of yron beaten into powder to the mountenance of a beane or twaine, and the quantity of a beane of a gad of ſtéel fyled into powder, and twice as much of the barke of an oake, as of the fyling of yron, of which barke of the Oke, you muſt take away the vttermoſt part, and of the reſt make fine powder, féered through a cloth. When ye haue mingled all theſe powders together, boyle them in a new pot with a potſle of good vineger, to the conſumption of a third part. Then let it ſettle, and put the cléereſt of it alone by it ſelfe, and the grounds of it alſo by it ſelfe in a long narrow bagge that the hawke may reſt both her feet vpon it. And with the water yée may vſe to bath, her féete euery day thrée or foure tymes a day. Likewiſe yée muſt wet and refreſh the bagge with the ſame water, that the grounds may lie the cloſer vnder the féet of the hawke, which muſt ſtand vppon it night and day till ſhée bée recured. And truely this is good for all manner of griefes and ſwellinges of the féet.
               
                  Martin is of opinion that yée muſt take halfe an ounce of Aloes and the white of an egge, with halfe an ounce and two penny weighte of Glew, mingle them all together, and put them in preſſe, ſo as all may bée reſidence, and make thereof a playſter, and lay it to your Hawkes

féet till there be ſome iſſue and vent, then annoint them with ſoft ſope. And when there hapneth any rupture, take Saltepéeter and Allom, of each two penny weight, making it into powder, beſtow it vpon the broken place to fret the dead fleſh away, for this is a good coroſiue for that purpoſe.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that careth away her owne feet
               THis inconuenience hapneth to Merlions in chiefe, aboue all other hawkes, and to few or none elſe that I can read of. Maſter Caſſian ſaith, it is a kind of Formica which maketh them to eate their féet in that order. For remedy hereof, make your hawke a collet of Paper to conuey about her necke, ſo as ſhe may not touch her féet. Afterward, take an Oxe gal, mingle it with a reaſonable good quantity of Aloes, and annoint your hawkes féet therewith twice or thrice a day, foure or fiue dayes, and it ſhall doe her pleaſure, and preſerue her frō this euill. If that doe her not good, then by Maſter Caſſians aduice, take Swines dung, and putting it on a Tyle, ſet it to the fire or in an ouen, bake it till ye may force it into powder. Which done, waſh your Hawkes féet with the pureſt & ſtrongeſt vineger that ye can find, afterward beſtow her féet in the ſame pouder, doing ſo twice or thrice a day for 14. or 15. daies till ſhe be throughly recured.
            
            
               The manner of the taking vp of Hawkes veynes when an humor droppeth downe too faſt on their feet.
               WHen ye intend to ſtoppe the veines that féede ill humors in your hawkes feet, let her be handſomely caſt then away with her pendant feathers. After that, force her leg a little with your finger, and you ſhall ſée a good prety bigge

veyne vnder the knee. Hauing found the veyne, take a néedle and raiſe vp the ſkin a little, and make an iſſue at your diſcretion: but take good heed that ye touch not the veyne. That done, take the Clee of a Bittor, or of ſome other bird whatſoeuer, wherewith doe lift vp the veine, and draw your ſilke thréed vnder the veine vpon the Clée, and knit it on the ſide towards the leg to the knéeward for if yée cut it towards the thigh aboue the knot, ye ſpoyle your hawke. Doe no more to her but let it bleede as much as it will, remembring the next morning to anoint it with oyle or Capons greace. And bée ye ſure that the taking vp of veynes is good and néedfull. For afterwarde the humors powre not downe vpon their legges and féet. I thought good to ſet ye downe this manner of taking vp of veines, becauſe I haue vſed it my ſelfe, and recoue
                     •
                  ed many hawkes thereby. For when a Hawke hath the veines of eyther thigh once taken vp, the diſeaſe can no more returne for want of the wonted ſupply of moiſt humors, and crude matter that flowed vnto the place.
            
            
               The manner of ſcowring and vſing your Hawkes when they are to be caſt into the mew.
               WHen the time is come to caſt Hawes in the mew, it is requiſite and needfull to ſcowre them, & to make them cleane. For diuers times we ſée, that foule féeding of Hawkes in luring and fléeing time, engendreth the Filanders and other diſeaſes in them, whereof they periſh for want of care and cure in due time. Wherefore Maſter Michelin ſayth, that when ye entend to caſt your Hawk unto the mew, ye muſt make thrée pittes of the bignes of a beane, of the foreſaid mixture of Lard, Marow, Sugar, and Saffron, which you may giur her thrée mornings together, not feeding her in two howres after, but ſuffering her to gleame. Then giue her

ſome good fleſh and reaſonable gorge, ſetting her all the while at the fire, or in the ſunne. And for other three mornings, after that, you muſt giue her the mountenance of a beane of Aloes C
                        •
                     ostrine when ſhe hath caſt, keeping her likewiſe by the fire, or in the Sunne, and ſhe will caſt the Aloes with groſſe ſlime and filthy ſtuffe. Likewiſe Aloes being giuen towards night enwrapped in her caſting, is very good againſt the Filā
                  ders. This done and performed, as I haue told you, yée may caſt her into the mew.
               M. Amè Caſſian ſayth, that for the ſame purpoſe ye muſt conuey the quantity of halfe a hazell nut of Ierapigra into a hennes gut, knit feit at both ends, and force it into your Falcons throat, holding her on the fiſt by the fire or in the Sunne, till ſhee haue ſcowred, and ſo kéepe her empty and voyde till noone, at what time ſhée muſt be allowed of ſome good hote meate a reaſonable gorge: the next morrow féede her well, and after thoſe two dayes caſt her into the mew without any moe ceremonies or circumſtance.
               
                  Artelowch aduiſeth you, that the mewing of a Hawke naturally with young Rattes, Mice, Dogges fleſh, Pigeons, Rabbets, and other holeſome fowles, is farre better than to vſe any arte in the matter, or ſuch ſuperſtitious practiſes, as you may perhaps reade ſome, and heare of many. Truely I am of his opinion, and ſo doe perſwade you, that will mewe your hawkes in good order: for haſt in that caſe maketh waſt, as in all other things.
               The beſt thing that you may doe, when you meane to caſt her into the mew, is firſt to ſcowre her well after that maner that I haue ſhewed you in this booke, to cope her well and to ſet her vp in fleſh before you caſt her into the mew to diſcharge her of all diſeaſe as neare as yon can, to rid her of mites & life being once in the mew, to ſet her water ſometimes, to feed her with liquid and laxatiue meats now and than, and to omitte none of thoſe inſtructions which I haue collected for you out of the Italian Falconers: for they are very good obſeruations,

ſpecially for ſoare Hawkes and Niaſſes.
               But in the French man Artelo
                        •
                     ch, I finde one neceſſarie note for a Haggart, which is this.
               The Haggart (ſaith he) is not to be caſt looſe into the mew, but to be mewed on the fiſt, for otherwiſe ſhée would become too coy and ſtrange, and if ſhée fall to bating and beating her ſelfe for heat, then muſt you hoode her vp, or beſpowt her with cold water, the next way to make her leaue bating. Thus muſt you continue her on the fiſt till ſhée beginne to ſhed her feathers, then ſhall it be good to ſet her downe, and tie her to a ſtone or perch as you doe the reſt. And after ſhe hath mewed, and comes to flée, then if you let her ſtand on a blocke or billet caſed and rolled with cloth, you ſhall doe very well.
               Goſhawkes, Tiercels and Sparowhawks muſt be mewed as Falcons, ſaue that they will not be borne on the fiſt, but be at liberty in the mew, and very cleanely ſerued.
               Before you draw your hawke out of the mew fiftéene or twenty dayes, you muſt begin to bate her of her diet, the ſooner and better to enſeam her, by reſtraint of her full féeding, which ſhe had before, for otherwiſe there would follow ſurfet and repleation, than which there is no more dangerous euill.
               It is no ſlender part of ſkill ſo to vſe a Hawke in the mew as ſhée may be quit of all miſhaps that befall her in the mewe, if ſhe be not well attended and regarded, during the time ſhe is in the mew.
            
            
               The manner how to deale ſo with a Hawke in the mew, as ſhe may avoide the miſchances of the mew which ſundry times doe happen, as wel diſeaſes as other harms.
               IT happeneth diuers times that when Hawkes are in the mew, ſome doe mew well and ſome ill, ſo as ſome of

their owne nature, and ſome by miſhap doe fail to be diſeaſed, or otherwiſe breake their feathers, and caſt them not all the yeare long. As touching this matter, Maſter Mallopin in his booke of the Prince ſaith, that when your Hawke meweth not well and kindly, goe in May to a ſlaughter houſe where Sheepe are killed, and take the kernels that are vnder theyr eares right againſt the end of the iaw-bone, of the bigneſſe of an Almond. Chop ten or twelue of thoſe kernels verie ſmall and giue them to your hawke with her meate, finding the meanes by ſome way or other that ſhe may receyue them and put them ouer. And when ſhe once begins to caſt her feathers giue her no more of them.
            
            
               Another way.
               WHen ye mean to further the mewing of your Hawk, take of the Snailes that haue ſhels, ſtampe them ſhels and all, ſtraining them through a cloth, and with the oyle that comes thereof waſh her meate two or thrée times. Alſo take of the ſnayles that lie in running ſtreames, giue your hawke of them in the morning: for that will both ſcowre her and nouriſh her greatly, and ſetteth her vp, & maketh her to mew apace. Maſter Michelin in his booke of the King of Cipres, ſaith thus: Cut an Adder in two parts and ſéeth him in water, and with that water and wheate together féede your Pullets, Pigeons, Turtles, and other birds which you intend to allow your hawkes that are ſlacke to mew, and ſoone after they ſhall mew their feathers apace.
               M. Caſſian ſaith, that when a Falcon will not mew, yée muſt take of Backs, otherwiſe called Reremice, and drie them ſo at the fire or in an Ouen, as yee may make them into powder which you muſt beſtow vpon your Hawkes meate. Alſo take little ſucking whelpes, and féede your hawke with the fleſh of them ſtéeped in the milke or renet which you ſhall finde in the mawes of them: afterward ſhred the maw it ſelfe

in ſmall peeces, and force her to take it, and ſhée ſhall mew very well and timely. Likewiſe all maner of liue birdes make a Hawke to mew well, for it is their naturall féeding, and therfore beſt for them.
               
                  Martin ſayeth, that to mew your Hawke well, ye muſt ſet water by her once or twice a weeke, and alſo roſt Frogges in the fire, making them into powder, and beſtowing it vpon her meate. Likewiſe ſmall fiſhes chopped, and giuen with her meate, do further a Hawkes mewing very much. Thus doe the French Authors write, I leaue them to your experience that liſt to follow the French faſhion.
            
            
               The maner of dyetting and keeping Hawkes in the mewe.
               WHen ye intend to caſt your Hawke into the mew, yée muſt ſée the mew very clean, then furniſh your hawk with all her implements, ſetting her two or thrée times in the Sun, taking good héede that her furniture of her legges bée not ſo ſtreight and vneaſie, as ſhe be driuen to be euer tearing at it. Alſo you muſt caſt her into the mew high, luſty, and in good plight, well ſcowred, and fed with good hote fleſh. Againe, yée muſt now and then giue her ſmall fiſhes, ſpecially to Goſhawkes, Sparowhawkes, & all other round winged hawks, becauſe thoſe fiſhes be (as my Author tearmeth them) laxatiue, and good to ſcowre, ſetting them water twice or thrice a wéek. For now & then they will bowze, by meanes whereof they diſcharge their bodies of humors, and alſo their bathing in it, maketh them the better penned and the firmer. Young Rattes, Mice, and Swallowes are very good féeding for a Hawke, for they 
                     •
                  ée nouriſhing meates, and will kéepe the Hawke in good plight. Therefore let your Hawke be mewed in a place that is cleane, handſome, and well kept, for ſhe will reioyce and delight greatly in it. Thus haue ye the manner of mewing your hawke after the opinion of the French.
            
            
               
               The manner of drawing Hawkes out of the Mew.
               WHen ye draw your hawkes out of the mew, yée had neede to take héede that they bée not too greaſie: for ſometimes when they bée ſo, and ſet vpon the fiſt vnhooded, they ſo take on and heate themſelues with bating, that they break their greace within them, putting themſelues in great danger of death. Wherfore my counſel is, that all mewed hawks ſhould be well attended and fed with waſht meat, fourtéene or fiftéene dayes before they bee drawne out of the mew to bréede reſolution of glitte and groſſe matter which is in their panels, whereof they ſhall ſcowre the moſt part by doing as is aforeſaid, and ſo ſhall ye quit them of all danger.
               
                  Mallopin ſpeaking hereof in his booke of the Prince, ſaith, that if a hawke bée huge and greaſie, when ſhe is new drawn, a man muſt not beare her vnhooded. For yée may well vnderſtand, that if ſhée feele the ſunne, the aire, or the wind; ſhe lightly falleth to bating and ſtirring, by meanes whereof ſhée heateth her ſelfe inordinately, and ſo runs in danger of death, & ſpoyle by taking cold vpon it. Whereupon the Petty falconers and Nouices which know not what it meaneth, ſay that the hawke periſheth by meane of her me wing and thorough default. And therefore when a Hawke is to be drawne out of the mew, ſhée muſt be well attended and lookt to, that hernie at be waſht, and regard had that ſhée bée not ouergorged. And if happily ſhée looſe her appetite, and liſt to féede, take Aloes Cicotrine, and the iuyce of Barberies, and fores her to receyue it in the gut of a hen. Which done, hold her vpon your fiſt vntill ſhe haue ſcowred, kéeping her empty till noone: At which time giue her ſome hote meat or bird, and the next day giue her of a hen, ſetting her water to hath: & aſſure your ſelfe that this medicine is good againſt all wormes and Filanders that may bréed in the body of a Hawke.
               
                  Mallopin ſayth, that whē ye draw a hawke out of the mew,

yée muſt waſh her meat, féeding her therewith by little & little, and allow her ſuch fleſh as is laxatiue, that ſhe may haue the leſſe ioy to kéepe it long or ſtand vpon it, and to the end ſhée bée not proud or ouerhaught of her drawing out of the mew. And there withall ſhée muſt be dayly plyed and borne on the fiſt. Within few dayes after ſhe is thus drawne, ye muſt ſcowre her and enſeame her with the foreſaid medicine of Lard, Sugar, Mace and Saffron with a very little Aloes, for if yee confect it with too much Aloes, yee ſhall bring her 
                     •
                  ouer low. Therefore giue her of it euery day a pyll for thrée dayes together: & thereupon ſet her in the ſunne or by the fire, kéeping her empty two or thrée howres after, then giue her a reaſonable gorge of a pullet, or of mutton.
               M. Caſſian ſayth, that ſome Falconers after they haue enſeamed their hawkes in maner aforeſaid thrée or four days before they intend to flée, doe giue them a pyll of the bignes of a beane made in maner following. They vſe to take a little Larde with the powder of pepper and aſhes ſiſted and ſerced, of each a like much, and a little fine ſalt, and a quantity of Aloes Cicotrine in powder. They mingle them all well and throughly together, and make thereof a bal, and conuey it into the hawks beak, ſo as they enforce her to take it down, if ſhe will not otherwiſe. Which done, they hold her hooded by ye fire or in ye ſun, making hir to kéep the pill as long as they can, & afterward do let her caſt it at her pleaſure. By this meane yée ſhall ſée yt ſhée will g
                     •••
                   and ſlegmatick humors wherby her panell and vowells will be diſcharged of much glit, and ſhe become ſound and chearefull, and ready to flée her prey. And an howre or twain after this, they féed her with a liue thickē: for yée muſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   the pyll which ſhee hath receyued hath diſtempered h
                     ••
                   very much. Neuertheleſſe I muſt giue you warning that you muſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo deale wt a poor & low Hawke, as yée would wiſh a hawke that is high and in pride. In doing after this maner your Hawke ſhall bée luſty, & enioy her all the year after. For hardly ſhal that hawk do her part in fléeing that yeare which is not well ſcowred, & carfully enſeamed.
            
            
               
               When Aloes is to bee giuen to Hawkes that are fleeing.
               MAny are of opinion that when Hawkes are fléeing, they muſt haue Aloes Cicotrine giuen them from moneth to moneth, conueying the quantity of a beane thereof into their meat, or into a Hennes ſkinne, to take away the bitterneſſe thereof, that they may kéepe it as long as may be before they caſt it, then ſetting them all the while by a fire, or in the Sun, till they haue caſt the ſlimy and groſſe humors with the Aloes. And if yee mind to kéepe your Hawke from the wormes and the Filanders, giue her the mountenance of a peaze of Aloes euery eight dayes in her caſting. Againe, ye muſt remember that whenſoeuer you perceiue your hawke waxe any thing cold, to giue her fiue or ſix cloues of maces, and they will ſcowre her head of all watry humors: moreouer, being giuen at euening in a little cotton as yée giue the Aloes, they be very good and auaileable againſt all maner of Filanders.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that hath her talons broken.
               A Hawke doth ſomtimes breake a talon by ſome miſchāce and often by the rudeneſſe and churliſhnes of the Falconer in vnſeazing her roughly from her prey, inſomuch that her talon tarrieth behind in the thing that ſhée ſeazed on, and ſomtimes is quite broken or ſliued from the fleſh, by reaſon wherof ſhée is in danger of ſpoyle, or at leaſt wiſe of lozing her talon. When a Hawkes talon is ſo ſliued off, as there remaineth nothing but the tender part that was within it: make a little prety lether gloue of the bigneſſe of her ſtretcher or clea, and fil it with Capons greaſe and dr
                     •
                  w it on, tying it handſomely to her leg with two prety ſtrings, renuing it euery other day till the point of her ſtretcher be well hardned againe.
               And if a Hawke happen to haue but a péece of her talon

broken off, ſo as ſome part of it remayneth ſtill behind, let it be annointed with the fatte of a ſnake, and it will grow againe as the others. And if the Hawke be hurt by violence, ſo as the talon is becom looſe from the fleſh, and fals to bléeding: then firſt of all caſt the powder of Sanguis Draconis vppon it, and it will ſtanch the bloud out of hand: and if it ſwell or rancle after it, then dreſſe it and anoint it with Capons greace or hony of Roſes till it be throughly recured.
               In theſe hurts of hawkes talons, Martine giueth this coū
                  ſell following. Make little matches of paper, and ſere therewith the ſtretcher that hath loſt his talon, and bind the cindre of the ſame paper with a little hony to it, and let it ſo reſt nine dayes together. And if the talon be quite bereft, put on the foreſaid gloue with Capons greace, till the pownce be grown againe, and let the Hawke reſt till ſhée be throughly ſound. And if the Hawkes foot or leg chance to ranckle and grow to further inconuenience, confect the vnguent of Capons greaſe, Oyle of Roſes, Oyle of Violets. Turpentine, powder of Frankinſence, and Maſtick, and annoint the ſwelling therwith, and let her reſt till ſhée bée throughly recured.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that layes an Egge in the mew, or out of the Mew.
               SOmetimes Hawkes are with egge in the mew, and efte withour the mew, whereby they fall ſicke, and are in great daunger if there be not remedy had for it: which thing you ſhall eaſily perceyue by them in May & Aprill, at which times they are wont to be with egge. To remedy this inconueniēce, let the Hawkes meate bee waſhed in the vrine of a man-child of ſixe or ſeuen yeares old, eight or nine dayes together, and that will kéepe her from laying. But if the egges bée already full faſhioned within her, then to breake and diſpatch them, yée muſt (as Maſter Martin ſayeth) giue her the yolks

of a couple of egges réere roſted with butter, twice or thrice a wéeke: and that muſt bée done during the moneths of May and Aprill. For beſides that, it will breake and waſt away the egs within a hawke, it is good alſo to ſet them vp when they be low in ſtate, howbeit you muſt remember that whenſoeuer yée miniſter this medicine, yee muſt giue them fleſh withall, for it is of great nouriſhment.
               Againe, Mallopin ſayth, that to breake egges in a Hawke, yée muſt take of the liquor that bléedeth or oozeth out of vynes in March when they be cut, and with that liquor waſh your Hawkes meat nine or ten dayes, and the egges will conſume and waſte away by that means, how great ſoeuer they be.
            
            
               The manner of taking Hawkes in the Eyree.
               FIrſt you muſt beware that you take them not before they are ſomewhat waxen: for if yée doe ſo, and bring them into a cold and moiſt place, they will haue a diſeaſe in the backe, ſo as they ſhall not bée able to ſtand on their féet, and moreouer they ſhall bée in danger of vtter ſpoyle. Therefore they muſt not be taken till they be ſomewhat ſtrong, and can ſtand well on their féet. And you muſt ſet them vppon ſome pearch or bayle of wood, that they may by that meanes the better kéepe their feathers vnbroken, and eſchue the dragging of their traines vpon the ground, for ſo ſhall they bée the better ſunned. Michelin ſayth further, that to kéepe Eyeſſe hawks from that inconuenience, ſpecially when they be taken ouer little, they muſt be kept in a drie and cleane place, & yée muſt ſtrew euery where vnder them the hearbe that in (French is called Yeble) which hath a ſeede like Elder. This hearbe is of nature hote, and good againſt the gowte, and the diſeaſe of the reines which might befall them: Wherefore if ye will kéepe hawkes well that are new taken from out of the neſt, if yée take them in the morning, yée muſt let them ſtand empty till noon: and if

yée take them in the euening, yée muſt not féede them till the next morrow. And when yée féed them, giue them tender fleſh, and after that, let them not ſtand empty any more too long for hindering their feathers, and tainting them.
            
            
               Of Hawkes that haue lice, mites or other vermine.
               IF yée will know whether your hawkes haue lice or mites ſet her in the warme Sunne out of the wind, and by and by yée ſhall eaſily perceyue it: for they will crall out vpon her feathers and ſwarme there. For remedy hereof, take a quantity of Orpiment beaten into very fine powder, and hauing mingled it with halfe as much powder of Pepper, let your Hawke bée caſt handſomly that ſhée breake not her feathers then powder firſt the one wing, and ſo the other gently, and finally, all the whole carkaſſe of her: after which, ſet her vpon your fiſte againe, beſpowt her, and ſquirt a little Water on her with your mouth, and ſet her by a fire, or in the Sunne til ſhe be throughly wethered. Afterward when yée intend to féed her, waſh her beake to take away the ſauor of the Orpiment, and beware that your Hawke be not poore, when you intend to vſe Orpiment. Hauing thus done, you ſhall ſée that al the mites and lice will diſcouer themſelues vpon ker feathers and die, either the Orpiment alone, or the Pepper alone are as good as both of them together, to ſpoyle the mites. But here is the oddes, the Pepper maketh the mites to ſhew themſelues, and then the Orpiment murdreth them. When ye vſe the Pepper alone, put thereto a thirde part leſſe of Aſhes, to abate the force of the Pepper, and ſo ſhall your Hawke bée rid of thoſe vermine. And aſſure your ſelfe that no hawke which hath the mites (be ſhe neuer ſo good) is able to do her duty and play her part by reaſon of the annoyance which ſhée féeleth in her feathers by them. And if yée would ridde her of the mites without waſhing her, then my Authour bids you take a very olde

Mauis or blacke bird, & hauing taken out all the greaſe that yée can find in her, anoint your Hawkes feet, and the pearch whereon yée ſet her therewith, for all the vermine will repaire down to it: & therfore ſhift her out of her place twice or thrice in the night, that ſhée may bée no more troubled therewith.
               
                  Addition.[But your beſt medicine of al, is to waſh her in a warme bath made with water, blacke Sope, Staueſacre, pepper and Orpiment, hauing care to keepe it out of her mouth, eyes and nares.
            
            
               Of the Hawke that holdeth not her wings vp ſo well as ſhe ſhould do, but lolleth them.
               IF a Hawke that is newly taken be ſet ſtraightwayes vpon a pearch or vpon the fiſt of one that hath no ſkill to vſe her, ſhée ouerheates herſelfe with bating, and afterward catcheth ſuch cold vpon it, as ſhe cannot recouer or truſſe her winges cloſe to her again, nor bée able to flée well. Mallopin ſaith, that to remedie this miſchiefe, you muſt take of the beſt vinegar yt is to bée gotten, & with your mouth ſpirt it vpon, and betwixt her feathe as till ſhe be throughly wet, taking good héede that none of it come in her nares, and afterward ſet her by the fire or in the Sun, ſeruing her ſo two or thrée dayes together. And if ſhée recouer do nothing elſe to her, but if ſhée recouer not, let her bath, eyther of pleaſure or of force, and ſhée will truſſe vp her wings to her by meane of ſtriuing with herſelfe. Then let her be ſet very warme by a fire or in the Sunne: for if ſhee ſhould chill vpon it, ſhée woulb become worſe than before.
            
            
               Of the Crampgout.
               
                  MArtin ſayth yée ſhall diſcerne the Crampgowt by your Hawkes holding of her one foot vpon the other, and by her often knibbing and iobbing of her foot with her beake. For remedie whereof yée muſt eaſt her handſomely & let her bloud on the veine that is betwéene the foot and the legge, and afterward annoint the veyne with Capons greaſe, or with oyle of Roſes.
            
            
               
               To keepe a Hawke from all maner of Gowtes, the French mans opinion is this.
               BY Martins aduiſe, if yée doubt that your hawke ſhal haue the Gowt, you muſt feare her and cauterize her, as hereafter followeth. Take a ſmall yron with a round button at the end as big as a peaze, heate it red hote, and feare her therewith, firſt aboue the eyes, then vpon the toppe of her head, and thirdly vpon the bals of her feet. And this violent kind of dealing with her, is the next and aſſuredſt way to do good in ſuch deſperate diſeaſes, if any help bée to bée had. But my Italian Author Sforzine giueth ouer a Hawke that is troubled with the Gowt, and thinketh there is ſmall credite to be gotten by the cure, becauſe of the impoſſibility.
            
            
               For the biting of a venomous beaſt or worme.
               IF your hawke be bitten or ſtung of a venomous beaſt, or worme, make her to receiue a little Triacle, and powder of Pepper, and afterward feed her with hote meate two dayes: and beware that ſhée touch no water for twenty dayes after. Or elſe burne a Frogge and beat her into powder, and put thereof vpon Cats fleſh, and yiue it your Hawke.
               Theſe are ſtrange remedies and rare, and of the French deuiſe. Giue your iudgement of them, and by triall you ſhall know what they will doe. I find them in my Author, and therefore doe ſet them down, and not for any experience I haue had of them.
            
            
               For the wound or biting of any beaſt.
               IF your hawke be hurt by any miſchance, and the mouth of the wound very ſmall, rippe it larger, and ſcowre it with white wine, laying thereon a playſter of white Frankinſence and Maſticke, and annoini it round about with butter, oyle of Roſes, or oyle Oliue.
            
            
               
               A Treatiſe and briefe diſcourſe of the cure of Spaniels when they be any way ouer-heat: deuiſed & written by M. Franceſco Sforzino Vicentino the Italian Gentleman Falconer.
               
               HOw neceſſary a thing a Spaniell is to Falconrie, & for thoſe that vſe that paſtime, keeping hawks for their pleaſure and recreation, I déem no man doubteth as wel to ſpring and retriue a fowle being flowen to the marke, as alſo diuers

other wayes to aſſiſt and ayde Falcons and Goſhawkes. Wherefore, ſéeing that hitherto in my collection I haue ſpoken altogether of Hawkes both for the riuer and field, and in my conceite haue left few néeefull poynts for a good Falconer vntoucht or treated of: now I ſhall not doe amiſſe, nor wander ouer wide from my purpoſe, if I ſay ſomewhat of Spaniels, without the which a Falconer, (ſpecially vſing to flée the field) cannot be without mayme of his paſtime, and impayre of his gallant glée. And againe, for that they are ſubiect to many diſeaſes and plagues, (as wée commonly tearme them) for dogges, and longer than they are without infection wée may expect from them no pleaſure, aſſiſtance or recreation: I will onely in this treatiſe deſcribe you their harmes with cures due to the ſame. Among all which I place the Mangie firſt, as the capitall enemy to the quiet and beauty of a braue Spaniell, wherewith they poore dogges are oftentimes greatly plagued, both to the infection of their fellowes, and the no ſlender griefe of theyr maſters.
               The way to cure and diſcharge a Spaniell of the mangie, is to annoint him eyther at the fire, or in the Sunne,The cure for the Mangie.
thrice euery other day with an vnguent made of Barrow, flicke one pound, common oyle thrée ounces, Brimſtone well brayed foure ounces, ſalt well beaten and brooſed, aſhes well ſifted and fierced, of eyther two ounces, boyling al theſe in a Kettle or Potte of Earth, mingling them well together till the barrow flicke bée incorporate and well compounded with the reſt. With this Vnguent thus made and confected, annoint and beſmeare all the body of your Spaniell, and euery other part of him, ſhifting his litter and kennell often, the oftner the better. And laſtly, hauing thus done, waſh him ouer and ouer with good ſtrong lye, and it will mortifie and kill the Mangie.
               But if perhaps (as commonly it falleth out) the Spaniel looſe her heare, though it procéedeth not of the force of this

vnguent and ſtrong medicine, yet it ſhal be very good to bathe your Spanell, ſhredding his haire in this order, with the water of Lupines, or Hoppes, and to annoynt him with ſtale Barrowes flicke.
               This medicine, ouer and beſides that, it cureth and quitteth the Mangie it alſo maketh the Spanells skin beautifull and fayre to looke to, and killes the flies, the dogs diſquieters and enemies, to his eaſe.
               But when this foreſayd remedy is not of force ſufficient to rydde the Mangie, but that it ſpreddes and getteth greater power and dominion ouer your Spanell: then doth it behooue you to douiſe a farre ſtronger medïcine, which is, to take of ſtrong Vinegar two quarters, or as much as will ſuffice, common Oyle ſix ounces,Another remedy more ſtrong. Brimſtone thrée ounces, ſut of a chimny or pot, a quantitie of ſix ounces, brayed ſalt and ſerced, two handfulls: boyle all theſe aforeſayd in the Vinegar, vſing the former order of anoynting your Spanell in the Sommertime.
               If neither of theſe remedies aforeſayd will ſerue the turne, then for a laſt refuge, you muſt be driuen to practiſe with a far ſtronger, than eyther of both. But in any wiſe, this medicine muſt not be miniſtred in the cold of winter, for it will then put the Spanell in great hazard of death.
               
                  A very strong medicine for the mangie.Take quicke Siluer, as great a quantity as ſhall ſuffice, and mortifie it with ſtale Barrowes flicke, or Larde, as if I ſhould ſet you downe this proportion: Of Quicke Siluer two ounces, Barrowes greaſe ten ounces, mingle them well together, vntill they be incorporated: with this vnguent annoynt your Spanell in the ſunne, tying him afterwards for the ſpace of an houre in the Sun, to the end the vnguent may ſincke in, and pierce the déeper. Then waſh him twice with blacke Sope, and obſeruing this order of annoynting him euery other day twice or thrice, aſſuredly you ſhall ryd him of all Mangineſſe, whatſoeuer it be.
               But I muſt tell you this by the way, that this vnguent

of Quicke Siluer will cauſe her haire to fall away. Wherefore it ſhall bée requiſite euery third or fourth day to annoynt him with ſtale Bacon greaſe, for that will preſently make his haire to grow and come againe.
               If a Spaniell bée not very much infected with the mangy' then is it an eaſie matter to cure it in this ſort.A way to cure the mangie without any vnguent.
               
               To make a kind of bread with wheaten branne, and the rootes, leaues and fruit, or flowers of the hearbe which wee call Agrimonie, beating it wel in a morter, and making it into a paſt or dow baking it in an ouen, and ſo made to giue your Spaniels of the ſaid bread as much as they liſt to eate, and none other bread at all for a time. With foure or fiue of theſe loaues of bread, made in maner as I tell you, haue I cured my Spaniels of the mangie, and ſome other of my friends.
               Though euery body for the moſt part doe know theſe common hearbes, yet neuertheleſſe I will follow mine Author, & ſet it downe with the ſame deſcription as he doth.
               
                  Agrimonie is an hearbe that growes in meadowes & fields, neare vnto ſome roote of a trée, and vpon the mouth of ſawe pittes, and other olde vncleane and vnoccupied places. The leaues of it doe ſpread vpon the ground, they are a ſhaftment in length, iagged on each ſide, like vnto the leafe of Hemp, diuided into fiue or more parts and branches, indented round about. It brings forth one or two blackiſh ſtalkes, vppon which there are certaine boughes ſtanding one diſtant from another, on which there are yellow flowers, and thoſe flowers being through ripe, doe yéeld certaine round berries, as bigge as a Peaze or Fetch which will cleaue and hang to a mans garments if he once touch them. This deſcription doth my Italian Author make of the hearbe Agrimonie, wherof hée would haue this bread made to cure the mangie Spaniel. I leaue it ouer to thy vſe and diſcretion till thou néede it. [But when all theſe medicines ſhall fayle, or to be ſure not to fayle in your cure, take onely a pint of ſtrong wine Vinegar,Addition. & mixe therewith a good quantity of gun-powder well bruiſed, and therewith annoint the dog al ouer, and you ſhal ſpare all other experiments.]
            
            
               
               Of divers accidents that happen to dogges, and firſt of that ill which is called For
                     •
                  ica.
               EVery man doth know that there is a kinde of vile diſeaſe that lights vpon Spaniels eares, which doth greatlie vexe them in the Summer time eſpecially with the flies, and the ſcratting and tearing themſelues with their owne féet. We tearme it in Engliſh, a kinde of Mangie, but but both the Latimſt and the Italian tearme it Formica. The French man hee calleth it Fourmye
                        •
                     , which in troth is in Engliſh nothing elſe but an Ante or Piſmire, applyed héere in this place to a dogges diſeaſe for ſome likelyhood and property betwixt the Piſmire and the miſchiefe, which is accuſtomed to exéepe and goe further and further with his infection, to the great annoyance of the poore Spaniell, euen as the Piſmire is euer buſie trauayling to and fro, and neuer vnoccupied.
               
                  The Cure.The way to ridde this vile diſeaſe and miſchiefe, is to beſtow vppon the infected place a medicine made of Gumme Drag aganthe foure ounces infuſed in the ſtrongeſt Vineger that may bée gotten by the ſpace of eight dayes: and afterwardes bruiſed on a Marble ſtone, as Painters do their colours, adding vnto it Roch Allom and Galles beaten to powder, of eyther two ounces. Vſing theſe thinges as I haue ſhewed you, you may make a powder of maruaylous force: for this purpoſe, laying it vppon the Member where the Mangie lies. This no queſtion will kill the Formica.
               
               
                  Of the ſwelling in the Spaniels throat.Sometimes there befals this miſchiefe vpon poore Spaniels. There droppeth downe an humor from their braines, by meane of which their throates and neckes do ſwell vnreaſonably. For remedy of this, I will aduiſe you to take nothing more than to annoint all the place without with Oyle of Camomill, then waſhing and embroching the Dogges

throat round about the griefe with vinegar not ouerſtrong, and with Salte. If you doe this you ſhall recouer your Spaniell, and driue away this diſtillation of ill humors, that fal out of the Spaniels head, cauſing the great ſwelling in the throat.
            
            
               Of a kind of wormes breeding in the hurts and mangie parts of a Spaniell.
               SOmetimes when a Spaniel hath taken a hurt or wound, there doe engender in the wound certaine wormes that do hinder the cure of the hurt, cauſing it to continue at one ſtay, or to grdw worſe and worſe. Wherefore it ſhall bée very neceſſary to endeauour to kill them which you ſhall doe aſſuredly if you conuey into the wound nothing but the gumme of Iuie called in Latine (Gumma Hederae) kéeping it there for the ſpace of one day or two, waſhing the woond with Wine,The cure. and after that annointing it with Bacon greaſe, Oyle of earthworms, and Rew.
               Moreouer, a iuyce made of the gréene pylles, and rinds of Walnuts, or the powder of dryed Lupynes is very good. Likewiſe powder of wild Cucumbers is excellent to kill thoſe wormes: and not that alone, but it will play the part of a Corroſiue fretting away the dead fleſh, and encreaſing the good.
               But when the wormes grow within the body of a Spaniel,Of wormes within the body. The Cure. they muſt bée killed in this manner with an inwarde receit.
               Cauſe your Spaniell eyther by loue or force to eate when hée is faſting, the yolke of an Egge with two ſcruples of good Saffron beaten into powder & confected with the ſaide Egge,When a ſpaniel is bitten by a Foxe or mad dogge. kéeping him after it from meat till night.
               When a Spaniel is hurt as long as he can come to licke the wound with his tongue hee néedes no other remedie. His

tongue is his ſurgeon. But when he cannot poſſiblie licke it, then ſuch wounds as bee not venomous, you may reſolue with the powder of Matreſilua dryed in an ouen, or in the Sunne. And if it bée the bite of a Foxe, it ſhall ſuffice to annoynt it with oyle, wherein earth wormes and Rue haue béen boyled together.
               But if it were bitten by a mad dogge, it ſhall bée beſt preſently to thruſt through the ſkin of his head, and pol with a hote yron iuſt betwixt the eares, ſo as the fire may touch both ſides of the hole made: And after that with your hand to placke vp the ſkin of the dogges ſhoulders and flankes backwards, thruſting it through with the hote yron in like maner.
               The giuing of this vent to the wound will greatly pleaſure the Spaniel, and is a ready way to cure him.
               Beſides the application of this cauterie and fire, there is one other approued remedy, and that is, to cauſe your Spaniel to lappe twice or thrice of the broth of Germander, and eate the Germander it ſelfe boyled. I néed not to deſcribe the hearbe it is ſo well knowne: but my Author ſets down his proportion & flowre. It beares a iagged leafe, and hath a purple or blew flowre, and in ſhape it is like a little oke.
               This herbe Germander ſodden and confected with ſalt and oyle,To helpe a Spaniel that hath loſt his ſenſe of ſmelling. eyther ſimply bruiſed together, or made into a paſte, and giuen vnto a Spaniell, will doe him very much good in the cure of the bite of a mad dog.
               Now and then Spaniels by meane of too much reſt and greaſe, and ſome other accident beſides, doe looſe theyr ſenſe of ſmelling, ſo as they cannot ſpring or retriue a fowle after their accuſtomed maner. In this caſe it ſhall bée very good to ſcowre a Spaniel in this maner.The Cure.
               
               Take Agaricke two drammes, Sal gemma one ſcruple, beate theſe into powder and incorporate them with Oximel, making a pill as bigge as a nut, conuey the pill into butter, and ſo giue it the Spaniell eyther by loue or force, as he may

ſwallowe it. This will bring him to a quicke ſent and ſence againe, as I haue oftentimes approoued.
            
            
               To cut off the tip of a Spanels tayle or ſterne.
               IT is very neceſſary to cut off a little of the Spanels tayle, when it is a whelpe for ſundry occaſions: for in ſo doing, you ſhall deliuer him, and be a meane that no kind of worme or other miſchiefe ſhall greatly offend that part of your Spanell: Which, if it be not cut a little at the very point and toppe, is ſubiect to many euils and inconueniences, and will be a cauſe that the dog will not dare to preſſe ouerhaſtily into the couert after his game. Beſides the benefite of it, the Dog becomes more beautifull by cutting the toppe of his ſterne: for then will it buſh out very gallantly, as experience will teach you.
               It ſhall be good when Spanell whelpes are one moneth old or ſomewhat more, to worme them vnder the tong:To worme a Spanell. for there haue they a ſtring very like to a worme, which muſt be pluckt away by ſome deuiſe or other. This is the order of it: If it be a whelpe of a moneth old, they take him and open his flew and tawes with a mans hand: but if it be a bigger Spanell, then do they conuay a round ſticke into his mouth, to kéepe it wide open: which done, they plucke out the Dogges tong, and with a ſharpe knife of purpoſe for it, they ſlyt the tong all alongſt where the worme lyes, on both ſides, and ſo very artificially with the point of the knife, they rayſe vp the worme the better to pull it away. But in this caſe there muſt be care vſed, that the worme be not cut aſunder, but had cleane away, without leauing any part of it behind.
               Some men do vſe (in the taking away of this worme in a Spanels tong) a néedle or ſuch like inſtrument with a double twiſted thréed hanging to it, two ſhaftments in length, thruſting the néedle quite vnderneath ye worme iuſt in ye middle of it, drawing the néedle ſo farre vntill the double twiſted thréed be leuell with the middle of the worme, then drawing it hard with the hand, they pull it out (but by drawing the threed

artificially, many times the worme breakes in two péeces, and then it is a verie harde matter to come by that parte that is ſlipt and left behind. Wherefore in mine opinion, the firſt is the better way to diſpatche him cleane. For when this worme is once quite drawne out, the Spanell will become farre the fairer, and waxe the fatter. Many times the want of worming doth kéepe a Spanell poore, and out of fleſh, ſo as he can not proue. And (as ancient writers affirme) the worming doth diſcharge the Spanell of madneſſe and frenſie (which I can hardly credite or beléeue: the infection and biting of an other madde Dogge being ſo venemous, as it is able to worke great effecte in the Dogge that is bitten.)
               Thus much I thought good to write of Spanels, and their diſeaſes and cures, for that they are ſuperintendants, and neceſſarie ſeruants, both for the Hawke and the Falconer, without whome, the ſport would bee but colde, and the toyle farre more than it is to the man. Wherefore it ſhall not be amiſſe for a good Falconer, alwayes to bréede and kéepe of the beſt kinde of Spanels that he may come by, and ſo to reſpect them, as they heate not at any time: Or if they doe by miſfortune or neglygence of your lackey boye; then to regard their cure, which may be done in manner as I haue héere ſet downe: And withall to vſe due correction to the boy. For a good Spanell is a great iewel: and a good Spanell maketh a good Hawke, and a curſt maiſter, a carefull footeman. Farewell. (∵)
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The Epilogue vnto the Reader.
            
            
               LO Reader here, the end of this my booke,
               Though not the end of my good will and loue,
               Beſtowe thy paines hereon a while to looke,
               As I imployed my head for thy behooue:
               It ſhall ſuffice if thou do not reprooue
               This ſlender worke, compilde for thy delight,
               Whoſe friendly looke my labour ſhall requite.
            
            
               I count my toyle and trauaile but a game,
               I deeme the dayes not long or ſpent amiſſe,
               If ſo I may vnto thy fancie frame
               This booke of mine which all of Hawking is,
               Than which there can be found no better bliſſe
               In my conceit to ſuch as loue the glee,
               And force the fields where braueſt pleaſures be.
            
            
               I muſt confeſſe, my Hammers haue but hewde
               That royall Rocke, which others found of yore,
               I do but tread the path which others ſhewde
               Vnto their friends, to make their skill the more:
               I but tranſlate a garment made before:
               Which if I do with gallant ſhape to view,
               I deeme as much as if I made a new.
            
            
               
               For hard it is to ſtalke in others ſteppes.
               He thinkes himſelfe a thrall that marcheth ſo:
               He iumpes in ioy that at his pleaſure leapes,
               And is not forſt in others feet to goe:
               Nothing more leefe than liberty you know,
               Which no Tranſlatour hath I vndertake,
               Vnleſſe that he his Authours ſence forſake.
            
            
               Which vaunt I dare, I ſeldome here haue done,
               
                  Zforcino knowes, and can controll me then,
               Italian borne, whoſe booke I over-runne,
               And Giorgies eke compilde with learned pen,
               Aſſuredly theſe two were skilfull men,
               And wiſtfull well what Hawkes and hawking ment,
               And all things elſe that further this intent.
            
            
               To Tardiffe eke the Frenchman I appeale,
               To Malopyn, and Mychelyn, cunning wightes,
               Let Artelow
                        •
                     he be witneſſe how I deale,
               In field affaires, or elſe in river flights,
               And Caſsyan eke who well of hawking wrytes:
               All theſe I wiſh as Iudges in the caſe
               Where I corrupt or alter any place.
            
            
               Some men perhaps will wonder that I wrote
               Of ſlately hawkes, and byrdes of rare delight,
               And blazde it out but in ſo baſe a note,
               As ſcarce will pleaſe the gallant Courtiers ſight,
               Who weyes no gold that is not burniſht bright:
               His curious eare but hardly will digeſt,
               Sweet Muſickes ſound, that is not of the beſt.
            
            
               
               For mine excuſe and for my ſimple pen,
               To anſwere thus, I feare I ſhall be faine,
               Sith charge of Hawkes committed is to men,
               That Nobles ſerve for yearely hyre, and gaine,
               (Who are not fine but homely mates and plaine)
               My purpoſe was, to ſet them downe the trade,
               To man their Hawks, and how they might be made.
            
            
               For Peeres (I know, and you muſt needs agree)
               Regard no more but onely to behold
               The fleeing Hawkes, their ioy is but to ſee
               The haughty Haggard worth her weight in gold,
               To ſlay the fowle at brooke with courage bolde,
               With Hawkes they never deale in other ſort,
               Their ſervants feed, and they enioy the ſport.
            
            
               Which if be ſo, the lowe and playneſt ſtile
               Doth beſt agree the Falconers mind to fit,
               To carpe it fine with thoſe that haue no guile,
               A ieaſt it were and ſigne of ſlender wit,
               The writers ought the readers vaine to hitte.
               This was the cauſe I wrote my booke ſo plaine,
               I told it earſt, I tell it now againe.
            
            
               The modeſt mind I know, will reſt content,
               With this excuſe, and brooke mine anſwere well,
               Of other ſome perhaps I ſhall be ſhent.
               Whoſe ſullen breaſts with ſecret envie ſwell,
               Who pleaſeth all, deſerues to beare the bell.
               But if the Courtier fancy this my booke,
               I ſcorne the proud diſdainfull Momus looke.
            
            
               
               Falconers farewell, at pleaſure doe pervſe
               Theſe leaves and lines, each picture and each page.
               Readers adue, I have no farther newes,
               I can but wiſh you ancient Neſtors age,
               Vnto whoſe doomes my writings here I gage:
               To cure your Hawkes or make your cunning more,
               If ought be here, I clappe my hands therefore.
               My Muſe, and I, haue done the beſt we can,
               To learne you how your Hawkes to lewre & man.
               
                  George Turbervile.
               
            
            
               Liuor, edax rerum, tu
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in vidioſa vetuſtas,
               Omnia destruitis.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   