
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A DEMONSTRATION OF
the trueth of that Discipline which
Christe hath prescribed in his worde for the
gouernement of his Church, in all times
and places, vntill the ende of the worlde.
            ¶Wherein are gathered into a plaine
forme of reasoning, the proofes thereof; out of
the scriptures, the euidence of it by the
light of reason rightly ruled, and the testimonies
that haue beene giuen therevnto, by the course
of the Churche certaine hundreths of yeares after
the Apostles time; and the generall consent
of the Churches rightly reformed in
these latter times: according as they
are alleaged and maintained, in
those seuerall bookes that
haue bin written concerning
the
same.
            MATTH. 21. 38.
            The husbandmen said among themselues, this is the heire; come
let vs kill him, and let vs take his inheritaunce.
            LVKE. 19. 27.
            Those mine enemies which would not that I shoulde raigne ouer,
them, bring hither, and slea them before me.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ TO THE SVPPOSED GOuernours
of the Church of England,
the Archbyshops, lord Byshops, Archdeacons
and the rest of
that order.
            MAnie and most euident haue
our declarations bin concerning
the truth of that gouerment,
which Christ hath prescribed
in his word for the ruling of
the Church; which we haue manifested
vnto you, both by our writinges
& speches, as occasion hath bin offered:
neuer hath any one of you taken
in hand to saye any thing against
it, but it hath made his eyes to dazzle,
as the clearest sun-shining; wherby
he hath beene driuen to wander
hyther and thyther, groping for euasions,
and yet coulde not escape, but
hath fallen into infinite most monstrous
absurdities, and blasphemous
assertions, (as by their writinges yet
extant it may appeare) so forcible is
the trueth, to amaze the gainesayers
thereof, and so pregnant is falsehood
to beget and bring forth thousands
of absurdities, and euery one worse

then other. And will you still continue
in your damnable, and most deuellish
course? Haue you solde your
selues vnto Sathan, to fight for him
vntill you be dampned in Hell with
him? Haue you morgaged the saluation
of your soules & bodies, for the
present fruition of your pompe and
plesure, is it because you see not what
you should do? It may be so, for many
are so blinde, that they grope euen
at noone day; but me thinkes it
can hardly be so, vnlesse you be they
that haue eyes and see not, for the
cause hath bene (by the blessing of
God) so managed, that many ploughmen,
artificers, and children do see it,
and know it, & are able by the worde
of God to iustifie it, and condemne
you to bee aduersaries vnto the gospell
in resisting it. But you think that
gouernment not so needfull, & your
fault but small (if it be any) in continuing
your course begon. The necessitie
of the thing is many wayes apparant,
both in that it hath so plentiful
warrant from Gods owne worde, (as

the course of this booke doeth euidently
declare,) and also in that the
gospell can take no roote, nor haue
any free passage, for want of it: and
the greatnes of your fault appeareth
by this, that in so doing, you are the
cause, of all the ignorance, Atheisme,
schismes, treasons, poperie and vngodlines,
that is to be founde in this
land, which we challenge to prooue
to your faces, if we may indifferently
be heard, and whereof in the meane
while we will giue you a taste: for the
first it is cleere, that you are the causers
of that damnable ignoraunce,
wherein the people are so generally
wrapped, for that you haue from time
to time stopped the streams of knowledge,
in those places where the Lord
in mercie bestowed the same, and in
stead of able and painefull ministers,
haue pestered the Churche, eyther
with presumptuous proude persons,
that are esteemed learned and take
no paines to bring the people vnto
the knowledge of Iesus Christe, or
(which is the greatest nomber) such

ignorant asses, and filthy swine, as are
not worthy to liue in a well ordered
common-wealth: and that you are
the cause of all atheisme, it is plaine,
for one may (as in deede many doe)
professe it, and you saye nothing to
him for it. If the most filthy liuer will
fawne vpon you, and bribe your seruants,
you will not onely fauor him,
but assiste him against any godly minister
or other: but if any that feare
God, refuse to come vnder the leaste
of your popish ceremonies, he shalbe
molested, till his pursse be empty, or
else by your tyrannous dealing, hee
haue made shipwrack of a good conscience.
And are not you the cause of
all schismes, that make a hotch-pot
of true religion and poperye, and so
giue some an occasion to fal into this
course, and others into that? And it
is as cleare, that you are so farre the
cause of all treasons, as without you
they had not bin: for if euery Church
had had hir gouernement according
to Christs institution; our yong gentlemen,
and studentes, had not bene

(for want of teaching and carefull ouersight)
made a prey vnto the seducers;
and consequently to those practises,
which haue broght the bodies
of so manie vnto Tyborne, and their
soules into hell; and who but you be
the cause of poperye, whilest you vse
them so well, let them doe what they
list, yea, and keepe them in office and
authoritie vnder you, yea (whiche
more is) giue them such offices as
none that is not popish can execute:
I speake not of the ignorance which
by your means raigneth euery wher,
which (as they confes) is the mother
of their deuotion, and you are the
wretched fathers of that filthye mother,
whereby you muste needes bee
grandfathers (at the least) to al kinde
of popery. And who can (without blushing)
denie you to be the cause of al
vngodlines, seeing your gouernment
is that which giueth leaue to a man
to be any thing,Omnia cum siceant, non lice
                     •
                   esse bonum. sauing a sound Christian.
For certainly it is more free in
these dayes, to be a papist, anabaptist,
of the family of loue, yea anye moste

wicked one whatsoeuer, then that
which we should be, and I could liue
these twentie years, any such in England
(yea in a Byshopps house it may
be) and neuer be much molested for
it; so true is that which you are charged
with, in a Dialogue lately come
forth against you, and since burned
by you, that you care for nothinge
but the maintenaunce of your dignities,
be it to the damnation of your
owne soules, and infinit millions mo:
Enter therefore nowe at the last, into
the serious consideration of these
things: remember that one day, you
must be presented before the tribunall
seat of Iesus Christ, to be arraigned
for all the soules that haue gone
to hell (seeing you will needes be the
rulers of the Church) since the gospel
first appeared in this land, then shall
you not bee excused with this; the
Queene and Councell wil haue it so:
nor with that; our state cannot beare
it. For it shalbe sayde vnto you, why
do you not infourme them better of
my will, why taught you them not to

worship with trembling and feare, &
to kisse the sonne least he bee angry;
why did you not tell them, that all
states must be ruled by my worde, &
not my word by them and their pollicies.
When these things shalbe laid
to your charge, your consciences shal
aunswere; that if you had done so,
you should haue lost your dignityes,
whiche you loued and sought for especially:
then shall you wishe, that
the mountains would fall vpon you,
and the hills couer you from the presence
of the lambe, and from the presence
of him that sitteth vppon the
throne. And I am perswaded, that
you are in league with hell, and haue
made a couenaunt with death; yea,
you doe perswade your selues, that
there is no God, neyther shall there
be any such day of account; or it were
vnpossible, that you should giue your
eyes anye sleepe, or take anye rest in
your bedds, vntill you had vnto the
Lord by repentance, and the Church
by confession vnburdned your souls
of these hellishe wayes, wherein you

haue so long walked Repent, repent,
be not ashamed to amend, though others
haue founde you out the way,
iudge your selues whyle you haue
time, least you be made fyrebrandes
of hell beyond all time. Let our challenges
that wee haue made in the
name of the Lord, be hearkened vnto;
Let vs bee disputed with before
indifferent iudges, let the holy word
of God bee the touch-stone to trye
our di
                  ••
               ntations by, and then shall it
easily appeare, who hath the Lord on
his side, and who not. The trueth wil
preuaile in spite of your teeth, and al
other aduersaries vnto it, (for God
disdaineth to be crossed, by dust and
ashes;) Therefore be not obstinate so
long, as vntill you be found fighters
with God; but preuent his wrath, lest
it breake foorth against you like fyre
that none can quench, because of the
wickednes of your inuentions. Venture
your byshopprickes vpon a disputation,
and wee will venture our
liues, take the challenge if you dare:
if the truth be on your side, you may

hereby, be restored to your dignities,
and be no more troubled by vs: but
if the trueth be against you, what shal
it profit you to win the whole world,
and afterward loose your own souls.
If you refuse still our offer, then must
you needes be guiltie eyther of this,
that you know your cause will not abide
the tryal, or of this, that you wil
take no pains to confute vs that keep
such a sturre in the Church: do not
think that because you haue humane
authority on your side, therfore you
are safe, for he whose authoritie is on
our side, is the greatest, to whose
voice all the deuils in hell shall stoup;
much more the sillie arme of sinfull
fleshe. We haue sought to aduaunce
this cause of God, by humble suit to
the parliamente, by supplication to
your Conuocation house, by writing
in defence of it, and by challenging
to dispute for it, seeing none of these
means vsed by vs haue preuailed; If
it come in by that meanes, which wil
make all your heartes to ake, blame
your selues; for it must preuail, maugre

the mallice of all that stande against
it, or such a iudgement must ouertake
this lande, as shall cause the
cares that heare thereof to tingle, &
make vs be a by-word to all that pas
by vs. The Lord open your eyes, that
you may see the confusions whereof
you are the cause, and giue you true
repentance, or confounde you in all
your purposes, that bee against him
and the regiment of his sonne Iesus
Christ. The same Lord, for the loue he
beareth to his poore people; open
the eyes of her Maiestie, and the Honorable
Councellers, that they may
see your godlesse practises, and in pitie
to Gods people, rid vs from you,
and turne awaye his iudgementes,
which the reiecting of his holy yoke
hath deserued, not punnishing them
that mourne for the desolation of
Sion, with those that spoile and
make hauock of the Lords
inheritaunce.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            INfinite and vnspeakeable (Christian
Reader) are the miseries frō
whiche Iesus Christe our Sauiour
hath freed vs, and the benefites
and blessings, wherewith in this life
he beginneth, and for euer will continue
to adorne vs. The consideration
whereof (if our 
                  ••
               thankfulnes vnto
his Maiesty, were any way proporcionable,
to that which we endeuour
vnto towards men) shoulde make vs
continually to deuise, & all the daies
of our life to studie howe wee might
shew our selues (at least in some sort)
carefull to glorifie his blessed name,
aboue all thinges that we desire, by
how muche as his loue towardes vs,
excelleth whatsoeuer can else (according
to our wish) befall vnto vs: but
if we do with equall ballance (on the
other side) looke into the course of
mans life, howe well this dutie is performed;
we shal see, that men declare
themselues rather bent to spit in his
face, and to defie him, then any way
to honour him as their head and Soueraigne:

for (to saye nothing of the
prophane life, and godlesse couersation,
wherewith the generall number,
that professeth Iesus Christ, is wholy
defiled) wee see that many nations,
people and languages are very willing
to receiue Iesus Christe as their
priest to sacrifice for their sinnes, but
that he should become their king, to
prescribe lawes vnto them, whereby
they may bee ruled, is of all other
things the most vnsauory, yea (if it be
offered) the most grieuous tydinges,
and vnreasonable request: wherein,
albeit manye nations that haue renounced
that whore of Rome, are
heynously sinnefull against his glorious
maiestie: yet is there none in the
whole worlde so far out of square as
Englande, in reteyning that popishe
hierarchie, firste coyned in the midst
of the mistery of iniquitie, and that
filthie sinck of the Canon law, which
was inuented and patched together,
for the confirming and increasing of
the kingdome of Antichrist: Wherein
as great indignitie is offered vnto

Iesus Christ, in cōmitting his Church
vnto the gouernement of the same,
as can be, by meane vnderlings vnto
a king; in committing his beloued
spouse vnto the direction of the mistresse
of the Stewes, and enforcing
hir to liue after the orders of a brothelhouse.
For the reformatiō wherof,
while some haue written, and others
according to their callinges,
carefully stoode, howe heynously it
hath beene taken, howe hardly they
haue bene vsed, and what shamefull
reproches haue beene offered (euen
vnto the course of the Gospell) for
spyte that hath beene borne vnto reformation,
almost by all estates and
degrees, lamentable experience hath
taught many of vs: but our posterity
shall knowe it more particulerly, and
the Church thoroughout the world
shall discerne and iudge of it more euidently,
when their bodies are rotten
in the dust, & their soules (if they
repent not) in eternall and intollerable
torments; who haue reiected a request
so holy, profitable and reasonable;

yea, and handled the intreaters
for the same so cruelly, vnchristianly,
and vnlawfully: but they would
gladly perswade themselues (if their
conscience would let them) that they
haue onely executed iustice vpon vs
as malefactours, and they perswade
men that we desire a thing, not warranted
by the worde, not heard of in
the Church of God, vntill within this
few years, nor tollerable in any christian
common-weal whatsoeuer: The
whiche monstrous slaunders, albeit
they haue bene manye wayes, and by
many men of most worthie gifts detected,
and made knowne in those seuerall
bookes that haue bene published
concerning the same: yet haue
I thought it necessarie (in another
course) to write also of it. The course
of my enterprise, is first in respect of
the fauorers of the desired reformation;
secondly of the aduersaries of
the same, the fauourers of it, are also
of two sorts; ministers of the word, &
priuate persons, & both I hope, may
haue profit by it. Concerning the former,

when these wofull troubles that
were renewed vpon vs (by that wretched
subscription, that was euery
where vrged) did begin to increase, I
thought it meete to betake my selfe
vnto that which I had read, or might
any way by studie finde out, concerning
the cause, and collected all into
a briefe sum, and referred euery thing
vnto some head; whiche beeing euer
present with me, might furnish me to
answere in the defence of the trueth,
though it were of a sodden, by which
(thorow the blessing of God) I found
such profite in my seuerall troubles,
that I thought it a course not altogether
vnprofitable for others also,
and vpon that occasion betooke my
selfe vnto a more serious meditation
about the matter, and communicating
the thing with diuers very worthy
men; I found encouragement &
hartening on, generally by all whom
I made acquainted therwith: so that
I trust (the iudgments, yea and wishes
also of others, so iumping with mine)
many ministers that loue the cause,

and haue not so thorowly studied it
as were meet they should, may reape
some profit therby. Now concerning
priuate men that loue the cause, som
haue great affaires in hand, and haue
no leasure to read the seuerall books
of this argumente: some when they
read, are not of sufficient capacity to
conceiue the force of a reason, or to
make vse of it, to enform themselues
in the grounded knowledge of the
cause thereby: some (which is the generall
falt of our religious gentlemē)
will take no paines to read, some are
poore and not able to buie the books
which might let them see the cause,
al these (I hope) may finde helpe in
some measure hereby. Nowe concerning
the aduersaries vnto the cause,
they are of two sortes also, they that
know it, and they that are ignoraunt
of it: the former, if they write anye
thing against it, are contented to deal
in so rouing a course as may rather arise
vnto great volumes, then soundly
to saye anye thing againste the cause:
Wherein D. Whitgifte, but especially

D. Bridges, haue giuen vs an euident
example: and these with others of
their iudgment (though non in these
latter dayes, haue written more vnlearnedly
then they, of any argument
of diuinity whatsoeuer) are cōtented
to make the world belieue (if mē will
be so wilfully seduced) that our arguments
be no arguments, that they be
grounded vpon false foundations, &
that we are not able to conclude our
cause in any forme of reasoning. The
course that is here taken (I trust) shall
shew that they are liars: the other sort
of aduersaries be they that be meerly
ignorant of any thing, either for it or
against it; and perswading themselues
that the sway and shew of the worlde
must needs cary the truth with it, do
(like blind bayardes) boldly venture
to say any thing against it, and think
they do wel. Now of all these sorts of
people, I haue to request some thing;
I hope I shall obtaine my request (at
the least) at the hands of some of thē.
The first sort of fauorers (which be the
ministers) I intreat, that as they tender

the glory of God, and honour of
the cause which they stand in; so they
would diligently imploy themselues
in this, that they may be founde able
to defend the same by sounde and euident
grounds out of the worde, &
so muche the rather, for that the aduersaries
doe greatly triumph, when
they meete with one that professeth
the cause, and is not able to defende
it, and confute the gainsayers of it.
The secoud sort of fauourers, be the
priuate persons that loue the cause,
whom I beseech to be carefull (as of
all other pointes of religion) of this,
that they growe in the knowledge of
the word of God, whereby they may
be able, vpon their owne knowledge
to defend the truth, and not giue the
enemie any occasion to think or say,
that they be of that minde, because
such and suche ministers, whom they
do affect, do thinke so. Now concerning
the former sort of aduersaries,
to wit, they that know it, I pray them
to looke into their owne hearts, and
they shal finde they mislike it; eyther

because it correcteth their excessiue
pompe and maintenaunce, or requireth
more trauaile in their ministery,
then they are willing to vndergo, or
at the least, controlleth that dissolutnes
of behauior, wherin they willingly
wallow: and if it would please god
to bring them to a serious meditation
of this, that it is the will of the
mighty God (before whō they must
be called to giue an account) whiche
they doe resist, they would (I doubt
not) more carefully looke about thē.
And lastly for them that being ignorant
of the cause, speake euill of that
they know not: let them (if they will
bee admonished) vouchsafe to reade
this little book, and wey the reasons
with an vpright iudgment, which shal
cause thē (at the least) to suspend their
sharpe censures, which so vsually appeare
in their ordinary communication:
& concerning vs al, let vs know
(for one day we shalbe sure to feel it)
that the controuersie is not about
goats woolle (as the prouerbe sayth)
neither light & trifling maters, which

may safely be folowed or reiected (as
in deed the enemies of this cause do
confidently affirme) but about no les
matter thē this, whether Iesus Christ
shalbe king or no; For if none is said
to be a king, but he that ruleth by the
scepter of his lawes, then the turning
out of these orders which christ hath
prescribed in his word, for the ruling
of the Church, is to giue him the tytle,
and denye him the authority belonging
to the same, and so (in trueth)
to make him an Idol, making him to
cary a shew of that which he is not, &
(with the crucifiers of him) to put a
reede in his hand, in stead of his yron
rod; and crowning him with thorns,
in stead of the crown of greatest glory;
which is the cause that so many
Atheists spit in his face, and so many
godles persons, do make but a iest of
him: but when he commeth to shew
him-selfe in his glorious maiestie; it
shalbe said vnto all these sorts of aduersaries:
Those mine enemies whiche
would not that I should raigue ouer them,
bring hither, and slea them before me.
               
Luk. 19. 27. The which fearefull sentence,
that we may auoide, let euerye
one of vs (as may stand with our seuerall
callings) carefully endeuor, to aduaunce
this kingdom here, which (among
other assurances giuen vs from
the Lord shalbe a testimonie vnto vs,
that we shall haue part in that glory,
which shalbe reuealed herafter. Now
concerning the order of this booke;
to direct thee (good reader) vnto thy
further instructiō, in the points therof.
Thou hast in euery chapter, diuers
proofs out of the holy word of God,
which must be the things wherewith
thou mayest safely informe thy conscience:
then shalt thou finde (also
arguments drawn from reson rightly
ruled by the same word: and lastly,
(because our aduersaries charge vs,
that we desire a thing not known vnto
the olde writers, nor agreed vpon
among the newe) thou hast here the
witnes of them both in so plentifull
and vniforme wise, as may plainly declare,
that al godly learned men of al
times, haue giuen testimony vnto the

trueth of it. The most of the thinges
that are here expressed, I acknowledg
to be gathered out of the books that
haue bene published, and are extant
(purposely) concerning this argumēt;
as may appeare in the seueral points,
wherein thou art sent vnto thē. Now,
lest either thou shouldst be deceiued
with a diuers impression, or think me
to missealleadge the authors, I am to
shew thee what books I haue followed.
The 1. book of T. C. twise printed,
I folow the latter; of Ecclesiast. discip.
I folow the latine, printed 1574. and
the last booke of D. Whitgift, which
containeth all the former in it. The
rest (as I take it) haue bene but once
printed, and therefore cary no doubt
in them. If thou bee satisfied herewith,
giue God the glory: and promote
the cause by prayer, and all other
good meanes that thy calling
may affoord: and pray for vs, that we
may neuer shrinke, nor be ouerthrowen
by the strength of them that
fight against it.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            A Table of Discipline, the particular heades whereof, are handled
in the seuerall chapters, according to the number wherevvith
they are noted: as follovveth.
            
               The Discipline of the Church is, the order that GOD hath prescribed in his worde, for the ruling of the same: cap. 1 
               The offices & officers of whiche, are to bee considered in
                     General, the calling,
                           wherevnto to wit, to
                                 A certaine office, Chap. 2.
                                 Execute his office faythfully, Chap. 3.
                              
                           
                           how it muste be by

                                 Election whiche must

                                       be done by

                                             The people, chap. 4.
                                             Examination, chap. 5.
                                          
                                       
                                       Consent (onely) to a man fit for the place, Chap. 6.
                                    
                                 
                                 ordination

                                       By whom it must be: by the eldership. Chap. 7.
                                       The maner howe, by

                                             publike prayer with the people, chap. 8.
                                             laying on of hands, cap. 9.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Particular, the officers and offices,

                           Simple by themselues,

                                 Byshops

                                       Pastours, chap. 10.
                                       Doctours, chap 11.
                                    
                                 
                                 Deacons or Church seruants,

                                       Ouerse
                                             •••
                                          , chap. 1
                                             •
                                          .
                                       Distributers, chap. 13.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           compound the Synode Ecclesiasticall,

                                 What

                                       Be the parties: Pastours, Doctours, and Elders, Chap. 14.
                                       Is the authoritie thereof, chap. 15.
                                    
                                 
                                 wherein it consisteth: in

                                       placing and displacing; chap. 16.
                                       Censures by

                                             Word, chap. 17.
                                             deed

                                                   Suspention, cap. 1
                                                         •
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   Excommunication Chap. 19.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            A DEMONSTRATION
of Discipline
         
            CHAP. 1.
            
               The diffinition of Discipline, contayneth this
proposition holden by vs.
            
            THe worde of God describ
                  •
               th perfectly
vnto vs, that forme of gouerning the
Church which is Iawfull, and the officers
that are to execute the same; from
the which no Christian Church ought
to swarue. Admonition in the praeface: Ecclesiasticall
Discip. fol. 5. T. C. first booke, page 26.
Counterpoyson page 8. Discourse of gouernement,
page 1. &c.
            
               The Assertion of the BB. and their adherents.
            
            THe worde of God describeth not any exacte
forme of Discipline, neyther are the offices
and officers, namely, and particularly expressed
in the Scriptures, but in some points left to
the discretion and libertie of the Churche.
VVhitgift in praeface, and page. 14. aunswere to
the Abstract page 33.
            The proofe of the former is the disproofe of
the latter, which is thus declared.
            1. These thinges write I vnto thee,1. Tim. 3. 14. 15. &c. out
of whiche place I reason thus. That end which
Paule respected in writing vnto Timothie, doth
the holy ghost direct al ministers vnto for euer;
for it must be kept. 1. Tim. 6. 14. But he wrote to
directe him in the establishing and building of

the Church. Therefore that word must direct
ministers for euer: and consequently they neither
may add to, nor take from it, but gouerne
it onely by the rules that be there prescribed.
            2 Euery house ought to be ruled by the orders
of the skilfull, wise, and careful householder
onely: But the Church is the house of God,
and God is such a householder: Therefore the
Church ought to be ruled by the orders of God
onely, which are no where to be had, but in his
worde.
            3 That which teacheth euery good way, teacheth
also how the Church must be gouerned:
But the word of God teacheth euery good way:Prouerb. 2. 9.
pro. 2. 9. therefore it teacheth how the Church
must be gouerned.
            4 We cannot glorifie God, but by obedience
to his word; in all that we doe, we must glorifie
God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. Therefore in all that we doe,1 Cor. 10. 31.
there must be obedience to the word; and consequently
in gouerning his Church.
            5 If meat and drinke be not sanctified vnto
vs,1. Tim. 4. 5. but by the word & prayer, then much lesse is
any thing holy which is done in the gouernement
of the Church besides the word: But the
former is true by the testimonie of the Apostle
1. Tim. 4. 5: therfore the latter must be true also.
            6 All lawfull things are of fayth. Rom. 14 23.Rom. 14. 23.
All lawfull things that are of fayth, haue a warrant
from the word, for the word is the foundation
of fayth; therefore all things lawfull, haue
their warrant from the word: and consequently
euery lawfull action in the gouernement of
the Church.
            
               
7 Eyther hath God left a prescript forme of
gouernement for the Church, vnder the newe
testament: or he is lesse careful for it now, then
he was vnder the lawe; for his care is in guyding
it: But he is as careful now for his church
as he was then: Therefore hath hee left a prescript
forme to gouerne it.
            8 He that was as faythfull as Moses,Heb. 3. 2. left as
clear instruction, both for the buylding of faith,
and gouernment of the Churche, as Moses did:
But Christ was as faythfull in Gods house. Heb.
3. 2: therefore he lefte as cleare instruction for
them both as Moses; but Moses gaue direction
euen for euery particular, as appeareth in the
buylding of the Tabernacle, and order of the
priesthood. Therefore hath Christe also giuen
particuler direction for the gouernment of the
Church.
            9 If the word of God haue described sufficient
ministers and ministeries, for the buylding
of the Church, and keeping it in good order,
then is our assertion true: But it hath set downe
sufficient for doctrine,Rom 12. 5. 6. 7. 1. Cor. 1
                     •
                  . 28. Ephes. 4. 11. &c. See Countery. page 11. exhortation, ouerseeing,
distributing, and ordering of euery particular
Churche or generall Synode: Therefore is our
assertion true.
            10 That gouernement which the Apostles
taught and planted, is expressed in the word of
God: But the Apostles taught and planted, pastours
and teachers for instruction, elders for
ouersight, and deacons to distribute, and that
vniformely in euery Churche, as appeareth by
their writinges and practises: Therefore a certaine
forme of gouernement is expressed in the

worde.
            11 Euery lawfull office & action in the building
of the Churche,Matth. 21. 25. 26 is from heauen. Matth. 21.
25. 26. Euery thing that is (in the ordinarie building)
from heuen, is reueled in the word: Therfore
euerye lawfull office and action is reuealed
in the worde.
            12 If God continued (in regarde of the substance)
the Church administration, as wel as the
things to be administred, then is the forme of
Discipline described in the word. But the former
is true, as appeareth by the particulars; for
priests, pastours; for teaching Leuites, or doctors
of the law, Teachers; for rulers of the Synagogue,
Elders; for Leuiticall lookers to the
treasurie, Deacons; for the Saned
                  •
               rim, the Eldershipp:
therefore the forme of gouernment
is prescribed in the word.
            13 Euery wise king that is careful for his subiects,
setteth downe Lawes for the gouernment
of the same, and will haue them tyed to no other:
But Christ is such a king vnto his church:
Therefore hath he prescribed Lawes vnto his
Church, which none therein can alter or disobey;
and consequently, the certaine forme of
gouernment of the Church is described in the
worde.
            14 That which the ministers must teach the
people to obserue, is set downe in the worde of
god, for they may teach nothing but that which
is there,Matth. 28 20: Matth. 28. 20: But they are to teache,
them to obserue, and be obedient vnto, the particular
forme of the Churche gouernement:
Therfore the particular forme is set downe in

the word.
            15 Euery gouernment consisteth in the gouernours,
matter wherabout they are to be imployed,
and maner of doing it: But in the word
are described all these particulars, as it is shewed
in the 9. reason: Therfore the word prescribeth
a prescript forme of gouernment.
            16 The Christian religion shall finde,Cyprian in sermone de baptismo Christi. that
out of this Scripture, rules of all doctrine haue
sprong, and that from hence doeth spring, and
hyther doth returne, whatsoeuer, the Ecclesiasticall
Discipline doth containe.
            17 We may not giue our selues the libertie
to bring in anye thing that other men bring of
their will;Cyprian de prescrip
                     ••
                  duer
                     •
                  us ha
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  
                we haue the Apostles for authours,
whiche themselues brought nothing of their
owne will, but the Discipline which they receiued
of Christe, they deliuered saythfully to the
people.
            18 It is adulterous,Cyprian lib 1. Epist. 8. it is sacriledgious, whatsoeuer
is ordayned by humane furie, that the
diuine disposition should be violated.
            Therefore if Timothie was written vnto,The Conclusion
that he might be directed by the worde, in disposing
of the Churches; if the Lawes of God
onely being the housholder, must be followed
in the Churche, his House; if the word of God
teache vs in euerye good way, whereof the gouernement
of the Church is one; if God must
be glorified in the ruling of his Church, which
cannot be, but by obedience to his word; if nothing
be lawfull, but that which i
                  •
                of fayth, warranted
by the word; if God haue shewed himselfe
as carefull for his Church vnder the Gospell,

as vnder the law; if Christ was as faythfull
to giue direction as Moses; if in the worde be
described sufficient ministers & ministeries, to
buylde vp the Churche; if that gouernement,
which the Apostles taught and practized, be in
the worde; if euery lawfull office and action in
an ordinarie building, be from heauen, and reuealed
thence by the worde; if God continued
the same forme (in respect of the substance) in
the time of the Gospel, that was vnder the law;
if euery wise carefull king, doe set downe lawes
for the direction of his subiectes; if the Apostles
haue taught vs to obey that which Christ
commanded; if both the gouernours, matter of
gouernment, & maner of doing it, be set downe
in the worde; if all that pertayneth to Ecclesiasticall
Discipline, spring from the scriptures; if
wee may bring nothing into the Discipline of
the Church, but that which the Apostles haue
deliuered vs; lastly, if that be adulterous & sacriligious,
that is not according to the worde:
th
                  •
               n it must needes followe, that God doth describe
perfectly vnto vs out of his worde, that
forme of gouernment which is lawfull, and the
officers that are to execute the same: from the
which it is not lawful for any Christian Church
to swarue. And contrariwise, that is a most vntrue
assertion to saye, that the officers and offices
are not particularly expressed, but left to
the discretion of the Church. The reasons that
they alleadge against this, are in effect none, &
their obiections to these reasons, not worthy to
be mentioned.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 2.
            EVery officer in the Church, must be placed
in some calling warraunted by the
worde of God, and some congregation
must haue neede of such a one, before
he be called to any function. Wherein
are these propositions.
            1 No calling is lawfull in the Churche,The first proposition. but
that whiche is directly warraunted out of the
word, vnto him that executeth it.
            The BB. and their adherentes thinke otherwise,
as their practize in ordeyning Archbysh.
L. Byshops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chauncellors,
officialls, &c. doth plainly declare.
            2 The name and office of an Archb.The second proposition. is contrary
to the word of God.
            3 No man may be ordeined vnto any office
in the Church, vntill there be such a place void
as he is fit for: T. C. 1. booke, page 61.
            They thinke otherwise, as their making of so
many ministers at once proueth, and as is holden,
VVhitgist page 222.
            1 The first is prooued thus:Reason for the first proposition Iohn. 1. 23. 25. If Iohn was constrayned
to prooue his ministerie out of the
Scriptures when the Priests accused him; then
is no calling lawfull, that hath not his warrant
in the word, for if any be priuiledged, the extraordinarye
ministers (whereof he was one) are
specially excepted: But he prooued his ministery
by the word, as appeareth by his aunswere
vnto them, in the 23. verse. Therfore no calling
is lawfull in the Church, that hath not his warrant
in the word.
            2 The callings vnder the Gospell must haue

as good warrant as they had vnder the law, because
the light of the Gospell is (at the least) as
cleare as that of the law: But there was neuer
any lawfull calling vnder the lawe (excepting
those that were by miraculous manner confirmed
from heauen) whiche had not his directe
warrant out of the worde. Therefore no calling
is lawfull in the Churche, whiche is not directly
warranted in the word.
            3 If Corath Dathan and Abiram (though
they were Leuites) were punished for that theyNumb. 16.
had no warrant for that which they presumed
to take in hande, then is euerye lawfull calling,
both in generall warranted out of the worde, &
particularly layde vppon the parties from the
Lorde: But the former is true, as the historie
teacheth vs: Therefore must the latter needes
be true also.
            4 That which giueth comfort vnto a man in
the time of his troubles, must haue a warraunt
out of Gods worde: But euerye lawfull calling
giueth comfort vnto a man in the time of his
troubles: Therefore euery lawfull calling hath
a warrant out of Gods word.
            5 That which helpeth Gods people forward
in godlines, must haue a warraunt out of Gods
word: for God hath promised a blessing to his
owne ordinance onely: But euery lawfull calling
in the Churche, helpeth Gods people forward
in godlines: Therefore euerie lawfull calling
hath a warrant out of Gods word.
            Therefore if Iohn did prooue his calling out
of the Scriptures;The conclusion if euerye calling vnder the
lawe, was warraunted out of the Scriptures; if

Corath, &c. were punnished for enterprising
that which they had no warrant for, out of the
Scriptures; if comfort in troubles commeth
onely from the Scriptures; and lastly, if euery
helpe to godlines is warraunted in the Scriptures;
then, &c.
            They confesse all these reasons to be true,
but do denie that the Archbish. L. B. &c. be distinct
ministers from others. VVhigift page
303. which we holde T. C. 1. booke page 438 &
prooue it thus.
            1 Those thinges that haue diuers efficient
causes, are diuers: Our BB. and the ministers of
the worde haue diuers efficient causes, for the
one is the ordinance of God, the other the constitution
of humane pollicie, as themselues doe
confesse: Therefore they are distinct ministers
from others.
            2 A diuers forme maketh diuers things: the
minister
                  •
                of the word, and the L. Byshops haue
diuers formes: for their ordination (euen in
the Church of England) is diuers, seeing one L.
B. may ordaine a minister: But there must bee
three to ordaine one of them: Therefore they
are distinct ministers.
            3 Members of one diuision are distincte one
from another: the L. BB. and ordinarie ministers
bee members of one diuision: for vsually
the ministers be diuided into the rulers, & them
that are to be ruled: therefore they are distinct
ministers.
            4 The things that haue diuers effects, are diuers
in them-selues one from another: the L.
BB. and other ministers haue diuers effects; for

the one effecteth rule and gouernement, the other
subiection and obedience: Therfore they
are diuers and distinct ministers.
            5 They that be imploied about diuers things
are diuers one from another: The L. Bb. and
the ordinary ministers, be imployed about diuers
things, for the one is exercised in generall
viewe of many congregations, and the other in
the particular direction of one: Therfore they
be distinct ministers.
            6 That which is perpetuall, and that which
may be taken away by men, are distinct one frō
another: The office of the minister is perpetuall,
Ephes. 4. 13. and the Bb. may be taken away
as themselues do confesse: Therefore they are
diuers, and distinct ministers.
            Therefore if the ministers of the worde,The Conclusion and
L. Bb. proceed from diuers causes; if they haue
their being by diuers formes; if they be members
of one diuision, which (in nature) cannot
be one; if they produce diuers effectes; if they
be exercized about diuers subiectes: lastly, if
the one be perpetuall, and the other but for a
time, then must it needes followe, that they are
diuers & distinct ministers one from another.
The name of an Archb. and also the office that he executeth,
               The 2. proposition & reasons for the proofe of it.
               is contrary to the vvord of God.
            
            First,That the name of archb. may be giuen no man. the reasons that prooue it vnlawfull to
giue the name vnto any man in the Churche,
are these.
            1 No man may haue the name giuen him,1. Peter. 5. 4. Hebr. 13. 20. Actes 3. 15. 5. 31. Hebr. 12. 2.
which is proper to our Sauiour Iesus Christe:
But the name of Archb. is proper vnto our Sauiour
Iesus Christe, as appeareth in the places

quoted: Therfore no man may haue the name
of Archb. giuen vnto him.
            2 If the name Pope be therefore odious, because
of that Antichrist, who is intituled therwith,
then must also the name of Archb. when
it is ascribed vnto any mortal man; forsomuch
as it is the title of a speciall member of that
kingdom of Antichrist: But the former is true
euen by their owne confession. VVhitgift page
300. Therefore must the latter be true also.
            But they obiect diuers things against this,Obiections for the name of Archb. and answers therevnto
for the proouing of the name Archb. to bee
lawfully giuen vnto some men, which together
with their answers do briefly follow.
            1 Obiection Clemens aloweth of those names,Whitgift page 318.
as Polydor reporteth, lib. 4. cap. 12.
            
               Ansvvere Polydor is but the reporter, and M.
Iewell hath prooued euidently against Harding
that Clemens is countefeite, and worthy of no
credite.
            2 Obiection Erasmus sayth that Titus was an
Archbishop.
            
               Ansvvere He spake as the times were wherein
he liued: but that prooueth not that he helde
him one in deed, no more then our naming of
the Archb. of Canterburye, when we speake of
him, prooueth that we like and allow his authoritie.
            3 Obiection Anacletus sayth that Iames was
the first Archb. of Ierusalem.
            
               Ansvvere He is forged (as our aunswers to the
papists haue shewed) but a witnes of better credit
calleth him onely a bishop, Euseb. lib. 2. cap.
23. and Simon bishop after him, lib. 3. cap. 22. &

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
Iraeneus saith lib. 4. cap. 63. that the Apostles ordayned
bishops euery where, making no mention
of Archb.
            4 Obiection The Councell of Nice Canon 6.
mentioneth a Metropolitan bishop.
            
               Ansvvere That prooueth nothing, for it was
onely as much as to say, the Bish. of the chiefe
Citie.
            Secondly the reasons that prooue the office
of the Archb.That the office of Archb. is vnlawfull. vnlawfull be these.
            1 Euery ministery that is lawful, must be of
God: The office of the Archb. is not of God,
for that he is not described in the worde, and
themselues confesse that he is of humane pollicie:
Therefore the office of the Archb. is vnlawfull.
            2 That ministery whose original is vnknown,
hath no warrant from Gods worde, and consequently
is vnlawfull: The original of the Arch.
is vnknowne as they confesse; VVhitgift page
351. Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            3 That office which is needles in the church
is also vnlawful to be exercised in the same: The
office of the Archb. is needlesse, for the ministery
is perfect without it, as the Apostle prooueth,
Ephes. 4. 13. Therefore the office of an
Archb. is vnlawfull.
            4 If all the giftes needful for the perfecting
of the Church, be appropriated vnto other ministeries,
then is his ministery vnlawful: But al
the needful gifts, are appropriated vnto pastors
doctors, elders & deacons, whereof he is none▪
Therefore his office is vnlawful.
            5 That office is vnlawful, which none may

lawfully giue: But none may lawfully bestowe
the office of an Archb. because none can giue
any newe giftes to adorne him withall: Therefore
his office is vnlawfull.
            This reason being vsed of all sounde diuines
against the pope, is of the same valewe against
the Archb.
            6 If the office of an Archb. be lawfull, then it
is eyther in respect of his excellencie aboue other
men, or the place whereof he is aboue other
places: But neyther of these haue euer
bene, neyther hereafter can be: Therefore that
office is vnlawfull.
            Therefore if the office of the Archb.The conclusion be not
of God; if the original of it be vnknown; if in
the Church it be needlesse; if all the gifts that
God hath bestowed vppon his ministery be appropriated
vnto those Church officers, whereof
he is none; if none may lawfully bestow such
an office vpon any; if it can neyther bee incident
vnto any one man for his excellencie, nor
his place for preheminence: then must it needs
follow, that his office is vnlawfull.
            Caluin in his Institut. booke 4. cap. 11. sect. 7.
alleadgeth diuers reasons to this purpose, and
Beza in his booke of diuorcements, stretcheth
the same to all the inferiour officers vnder him
saying: Officials, proctors, promotours, and all
that swinish filth, now of long time hath wasted
the Churche. So doth Peter Martyr vppon the
Rom. 13. speaking against ciuill Iurisdiction in
Byshops, doth by the same reasons condemne
it in their substitutes.
            But this being the corner stone of their building,

they labour to support it with many props
the most special whereof are these.
            1 Obiection Cyprian sayth, lib. 1. Epist. 3. ad
Cornelium,
               Obiections for the office of the Archb: and answers thervnto. Neyther haue haeresies and schismes
risen of anye other occasion, then of that, that
the prieste of God is not obeyed, neyther one
priest for the time, and one iudge for the time
in the stead of Christ thought vpon, to whome
if the whole brotherhood woulde be obedient
according to Gods teaching, no man woulde
mooue any thing against the College of priests
            
               Ansvvere This place is alleaged for the pope
and the answere that M. Iewel and others make
to it, serueth our turne: onely let this be noted,
that Cyprian speaketh of the people at Rome,
that had receiued another bishop (besides Cornelius)
who was an haeretike; for all the course
of his writings, condemneth this superioritie.
It is expounded by M. Iewel, booke 1. sect. 4. diuision
5. of euery bishop: and so is it by M. Nowell
against Dorman, booke 1. page 25. and also
by M. Foxe, tom. 1. fol. 93. See T. C. in his 1. reply
page 98. &c.
            2 Obiection The authority of the Archb. preserueth
vnitie.
            
               Ansvvere Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 9. sayth that vnitie
is reserued by the agreement of bishopps,
that is of ministers, one with another.
            3 Obiection It compoundeth controuersies,
that els would growe to many heades without
any special remedie.
            
               Ansvvere Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 13. sayth that
the plentifull body and company of Elders, are
(as it were) the glewe of mutual concord, that

if any of our companye be authour of haeresie,
the rest should helpe.
            4 Obiection 
               
                  〈◊〉
                Ierome vpon Tit. 1. sayth
that in the beginning a bishop and priest (meaning
a teaching Elder) were all one: but when
men began to say, I am of Paule, I am of Apollo,
&c. It was decreed that one shoulde be chosen
to beare rule ouer the rest.
            
               Ansvvere From the beginning it was not so:
the sayinge of Tertull. Contra Prax. is fitt for
this: that is true whatsoeuer is firste, and that
is false whatsoeuer is latter: and Ierome sayth
in the place alleaged, that this authority is by
custome and not by any institution of God; if
it had bene the best way to take away diuisions,
the Apostles (in whose times the controuersies
did arise) would haue taken the same order.
            5 Obiection Caluine sayth that the Apostles
had one among them to gouerne the rest.
            
               Ansvvere That was not in superioritie, but
for order to propound the matters, gather the
voyces and such like; which is meete to be in
euery wel ordered meeting: but his authority
is no more ouer the rest, thē the speaker in the
Parliament hath ouer the other knightes and
Burgesses.
            6 Obiection Paule was superior to Timothy
and Titus.
            
               Ansvvere Paule and they had diuers offices,
whereof the Apostles office was the chiefe, the
like is to be sayd of Timothie and Titus, hauing
superiority ouer the other ministers, for that
they were Euangelists, a degree aboue ordinarie
ministers.
            
               
Therefore if the place alleaged out of Cyprian,The conclusion
make nothing for Archb. if vnity be not preserued
by him, but by the Byshoppes among
themselues; if his authoritie make nothing to
the taking away of controuersies; if it be meerly
inuented by man, and not from the beginning;
if it be by custome, and not by any ordinance
of God; if neyther one Apostle ouer the
rest, nor any of them ouer the Euangelists, nor
of the Euangelistes ouer the pastours and teachers,
wil serue to prooue their authority: then
must it needs follow, that it is vtterly vnlawful.
            Non man may be ordayned vnto any office in
the Church,The 3. proposition and reasons for it. vntill there be such a place voyde
as he is fit for, T. C. booke 1. page 61. VVhitgist,
page 222.
            1 As was the 12. place for Matthias, so is a
certaine Church, to euery Church officer: But
Matthias was not ordained vnto the place of
an Apostle,Act. 1. 20 vntill Iudas by hanging himself, had
made it voyde, Act. 1. 20. Therefore may none
be ordained vnto any office in the Church, before
the place where he may be imployed, be
destitute of such a one.
            2 As the Apostles did in planting of the
Churches, so must it bee done in the buyldinge
thereof for euer: But they ordayned neyther
pastour, teacher, elder or deacon, but to some
certaine Church that had neede therof: Therfore
may none bee ordayned vnto any office,
vntill a place be voyd that hath need of him.
            3 Those thinges that bee of one beginning,
continuance and ending, cannot be one, before
or after another: But a minister, and the execution

of his ministery in a lawfull standing be
so; for they be relatiues, & haue reference one
vnto the other: Therfore a minister ought not
be ordained before there be a ministery whervnto
he is to be allotted.
            4 If non ought to be called to be a shepherd,
that hath no flocke of sheepe to keepe: neither
any watchman, that is not allotted to som place
to watch: then may none be ordayned to any
office, before there be a place void for him: for
ministers are in this sence tearmed shepheards
and watchmen: But the former is true, as euery
simple man can easily perceiue: Therefore
the latter is true also.
            5 To do contrary to the precepts and practize
of the Apostles is vnlawfull: But to ordain
any officer, without a certain place wherin
he may be imployed, is contrary to the precepts
and practize of the Apostles, as it appeareth,
Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 23. Therefore to ordayne any
officer of the Churche, without a certayne
place wherevnto he is to be allotted, is vnlawfull.
            6 It was ordayned that no Elder,Councel Calc
                     •
                  
                  don cap. 6. art. 15. Deacon, or
any other Ecclesiastical officer, shoulde bee ordayned
a Apolelymenos, that is loosely, or let at
randone (but as afterward is expounded) specially
in a Church of citie or towne.
            7 The ordination that is made without a title,Concil. Vrbanum test▪ Gratuum dist. 70.
let it be void: and in what Churche one is
intituled, let him there remaine.
            8 He complaineth that ministers were ordayned,Ierom ad Nepolita
                     •
                  
               
being chosen by no Churche, and so
went here and there, hauing no certaine place.
            
               
9 That action, which neuer is read to be practized,
but by idolators is vnlawfull: To haue
wandring officers, is onely found to be in idolaters,
as appeareth Iudg. 17. 8. Therefore it is
vnlawfull.
            Therefore,The Conclusion if the Apostles ordayned not
Mathias, vntill the place was voide; if in planting
of Churches, they euer alotted officers
to their proper places; if minister and ministery
be of one beginning, continuance and ending;
if it be with a minister, and his ministery,
as with a shepheard and his flocke, that he cannot
be the one, but in respect of hauing the other;
if it be vnlawfull to transgresse the precepts
and practize of the Apostles; if no minister
in the Church, be ordained at randone; if
the ordination that is without a title be voyde;
if Ierome complayned of it, as a great faulte in
his time; if no example be founde of it, but in
Idolaters: then must it needs follow, that to ordayne
any Church officer, vntill there be such
a place voyd as he is fit for, is vtterly vnlawfull:
& so the Bb. making of many ministers at once,
and licencing of wandring preachers, is contrary
to the word of God.
            They will haue some thing to saye for euery
action they doe,An obiection. be it neuer so shamefull: that
which they alleage for this, is, that Paule and
Barnabas did wander.
            The Apostles office (and so the Euangelistes
as assistants vnto them) was to prech the word,The answere.
and plant Churches in euery part of the world:
but the order that they left, is a president for vs,
which is that euery Church haue their proper

officers, and that there be no other elsewhere
to be found.
         
         
            CHAP. 3.
            EVery Church-officer,Our assertion. ought to execute
the office committed vnto him, with all
faythfull diligence, and consequently be
continually resident vppon his charge,
T. C. booke 1. page 65.
            They deny not the proposition,Their assertion. but the consequent
that is inferred vpon it, as appeareth
by their writinges, VVhitgist page 246. and by
their dayly practize in giuing di
                  •
               pensations for
many benefices. The reasons we alleadge to
prooue the necessitie of perpetuall residence,
and the vnlawfulnes of nonresidence be these
that follow.
            1 A shepheard hath a flocke to the ende to
feed it continually: The minister is a shepherd,
and his charge a flocke: Therefore he ought
to feede it continually, and consequently to be
perpetually resident, for how can he feed them
from whom he is absent.
            2 Where God doth place anye man, there
his continuall trauaile is needfull, for God is
most wise in disposing euery thing: But God
placeth euery right minister ouer that people,
which is his charge: Therefore his continuall
trauaile is needfull there, and consequently he
may not discontinue.
            3 Flockes that are in danger, are (by carefull
shepeards) watched night and day, Luk. 2. 8.
Euery congregation is a flocke in daunger, for
the enemie goeth about like a roaring lyon, 1.
Pet. 5. 8. and soweth tares whilest men sleepe.

Math. 13. 25. Therefore euery congregation is
to bee watched night and day by the minister
therof, and consenquently he may not be nonresident.
            4 If his dutie to them requireth so muche
trauayle, as may continually set him on wor
                  ••
               ,
then may he not be nonresident: But it is euident
(that it doth so) to all them that eyther
know by the worde of God, what studie, prayer,
doctrine, exhortation, &c. be required of him,
or maketh anye conscience of giuing account
for the souls committed to their charge: Therfore
may not they be nonresident.
            5 If the minister cannot apply himself fruitfully,
to the capacitie of his people, vnlesse hee
haue particular knowledge of their disposition,
and capacitie, then is it not lawfull for him to
be nonresident: for by continuall residence among
them, he may knowe them and not else:
But the former is true, as the small knowledge
that the people get by generall teaching, doth
euidently declare: Therfore it is not lawful for
him to be nonresident.
            6 If the ministers of the Gospell, be as narrowly
tyed to their charges, as the priests vnder
the law, then may they not be nonresident: For
they were alwayes readie in the Temple, to answere
the doubts, 1. Sam. 1. 9: But it is clear that
they are, because men are now as hardly trayned
vnto godlines, and the enemie is as wrathfull
as he was then: Therefore they may not
be nonresident.
            7 If the minister must be an example to his
people; then must he be daily present with thē,

that they may beholde him: But the former is
true, 1. Tim. 4. 12. Therfore is the latter true also.
            8 He whom the sheepe are to follow in and
out, and must knowe by the voyce, ought to bee
continually among them: A good minister of
the worde is such a one, Iohn. 10. 4. Therefore
he must be resident among them.
            9 None can be alwayes readie to feede his
flocke, that is absent from it: Euerye minister
must be alwayes readie to feede his flocke, because
it dependeth vpon him. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Therefore
euery minister is to bee resident with his
flocke.
            10 Hee that must take heede to his flocke,
watch ouer it, and feed it, must be resident continually
with it: Euery minister must do so, Act.
20. 28. Therefore, &c.
            11 If Satan be the cause of nonresidence, thē
is it vtterly vnlawfull: But Satan is the cause of
it, 1. thes. 2. 17. 18. Therfore it is vtterly vnlawful.
            12 That which abridgeth the loue of God
to his people, and comfort to the minister, that
same is vnlawfull: But not to be resident doth
both: Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            13 That which hindreth the louing familiarity
that shoulde be betwixt the minister and
his people, that same is vnlawfull: But nonresidence
doth so, for it maketh them strange one
to another, and argueth small loue in him towards
them: Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            14 To be absent from them that haue interest
in vs, and continuall need of vs is vnlawful,
which we can see to be true in our seruants, &c:
But the congregation hath an interest in the

minister, and continuall neede of him: Therefore
it is vnlawfull for him to bee absent from
them.
            15 If the priests might not dwell farre from
the temple, then may not ministers be nonresident:
But the former is true, as appeareth by
this; that they had houses buylded close to the
Temple. 1. Chron. 28. 13. Therefore the latter is
true also, seeing the residence of the one is as
needfull as the other, as appeareth in the sixt
reason.
            16 Let no Clarke be placed in two charges,Concil Nice canon 15.
for it is filthie merchaundize, and no man can
serue two masters, and euerye one must tary in
that place wherevnto he is called.
            17 Damas
                  •
               us compareth them that set ouer
their charges to others,Concil. tom. 2. to harlots that put out
their children, that they may giue themselues
to lust the sooner.
            18 It was ordayned that none,Theoderet lib. 1. cap. 19. eyther B. or
Elder, should go from citie to citie.
            Therefore,The conclusion if a minister haue the charge of a
flocke committed vnto him, to the end to feed
it; if God place men, to the end to haue them
there imploied; if flocks in daunger haue need
of continuall watche; if the ministers dutie to
his flocke requireth all that trauayle that he
can performe; if he cannot be fruitfully profitable
vnto them, without continuall residence;
if his residence be as strictly required as theirs
vnder the law; if he cannot be a patterne vnto
them without he be resident; if they cannot
follow him, nor know him if he be absent; if he
cannot be alwayes readie to feed his flock, vnlesse

he bee there; if hee cannot take heede to
them, feede them, and watche ouer them,
without his presence; if Satan be the authour
of nonresidencie; if his absence abridge Gods
loue to them, and comfort from himselfe; if absence
be an hinderance to the louing familiaritie
that shoulde be betwixt him and them; if
they haue interest in him, and continuall neede
of him; if he may no more bee absent, then the
priests dwell from the Temple; if the Councel
of Nice did vpon good grounds forbid it; if absence
be like to the practize of an harlot; if it
be not lawfull to go from place to place; then
is nonresidence vnlawfull, & the practize therof
contrary to the word of God.
            The bellie (for which nonresidencie is defended
and practized) hath no eares, therefore
it is that they heare not the euident
sounds; yet haue they very little to saye for
it, so grosse is the error thereof; so much as
hath any shewe of reason, is here set downe
and answered.
            1 Obiection Two parrishes may bee vnited,
why then may not one haue charge of them
both before, when they be two.
            
               Ansvvere Because one shepheard may keep
one flocke though it bee great, but hee cannot
keepe two, being verye little, and going in diuers
pastures; againe, one man may haue so
many flockes as he can lead in and out euerye
Sabboth, to the exercises of religion, which is
verye plaine that he cannot doe, to more then
one congregation.
            2 Obiection Parishes were deuided by men,

as especially by Denis the Monk, Pope of Rome
            
               Ansvvere That is vntrue, for the Apostles deuided
the Church into congregations, and placed
elders ouer euery one of them, as the whol
course of the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles
prooueth: and VVhitgift confesseth page 250.
Therefore these mistes, notwithstanding nonresidencie,
must needes be vnlawfull: and certainely
those that haue any sparkle of conscience,
feare of God, or loue to their flockes, will
neuer defend it, much lesse enter into the practize
of it.
         
         
            CHAP. 4.
            IT belongeth to the Church,Our affertion. to make choise
of those officers which Christ would haue
placed in the same: T. C. 2. booke 1. part
page 193. Ecclesiast. Discip. fol. 40. & VVhitgift
confesseth it page 164.
            They deny this, as their denying of al the arguments
that bee brought for it doth prooue,
VVhitgift page 154. 166. &c. and their practize
of allowing patrons, and also being such themselues
doth euidently declare.
            If the former bee prooued true, then the
latter must returne to Antichriste, which is
thus declared.
            1 That which was the continuall and constant
practize of the Church in the time of the
Apostles,Act. 1. 2
                     •
                  . that same is to be followed for euer,
which appeareth by this, that the ordinaunces
giuen from God by Paule, 1. Tim. 6. 14. are enioyned
to be kept vntill Christ come to iudgement:
But it was the constant, and the continuall
practize of the Churches, them to haue a

stroke in the choyse of their owne ecclesiastical
officers, Act. 1. and 6. where the Apostles presented
two, to the peoples liking: wherof God was
to be prayed vnto, to make one an Apostle. Act
6. 3. where the Church is willed to choose their
Deacons, and Act. 14. 25. where they gaue their
consent in the choosing of their elders, by the
stretching forth of their handes: Therefore it
belongeth to the Church to choose their owne
Church officers.
            2 If the people had an interest in the liking
of their teaching Leuites,Numb 8. 
                     •
                  . (which were of the
tribe of Aaron) then much more must the people
now, for there was greater likelihood, that
they were sent of God, then any of the commō
sort of men: But the former is true, as appereth
by the manner of the setting of them a side vnto
that office in the lawe: Therefore must the
latter needs be true also.
            3 That which pertayneth vnto all, ought to
be approoued of all the congregation: But euery
ministery in the Church, pertayneth to all
the congregation: Therefore, authority to approoue
of them, pertayneth to all the congregation.
            4 That election which is most effectuall to
bring the people to obedience, is of all other
the best, and to abridge it, is vnlawfull: But election
by common consent, is most effectuall
to bring the people to obedience, when they
shall see him teache or rule, whom they themselues
haue chosen: Therefore election by the
Church is the best, and all other kindes of elections
vnlawfull.
            
               
5 That election which procureth greatest
reuerence of the people to their teachers and
rulers is meetest, and all others vnlawfull: But
for the people to cōsent in the election of their
gouernours, procureth greatest reuerence, in
their hearts towards them: Therefore election
by the people is the best, and all others bee
vnlawfull.
            
               Testimonies of the ancient vvriters.
               6 The minister should be chosen (the people
being present) in the eyes of all, and should
be by the common iudgement,Cyprian booke 1. Epist. 3. and testimonie
approoued worthy and fit: &c. Therefore this
is the lawfull vocation by the worde of God,
where those which are chosen, be appoynted by
the consent and approbation of the people. For
which also, he bringeth diuers authorities out
of the Scriptures.
               7. That is truely and certainly a diuine election
of a Byshop,Ambrose Epist: 82. which is made by the whole
Church.
               8 Let the people haue authority to choose
their Clarkes and ministers.Ierome ad Ruffinum.
               
               9 They runne (speaking of the life of the
Clarkes) to Byshops suffragans certaine times
of the yeare,Ad Nepotianum and bringing some sum of money,
they are anoynted and ordayned,This is right our English fashion. being chosen
of none, and afterward the Byshop without any
lawfull election, is chosen in huggermuger of
the canons, or prebendaries onely, without the
knowledge of the people.
               10 In the Oration of the death of his Father,Nazianzen.
approoueth the election by the people, at
large, and confuteth them that would hinder it
               
                  
11 When he appoynted Eradius to succeed
him,Augustine. sayth, it was the approoued right and custome,
that the whole Churche shoulde eyther
choose or consent vnto their Bishop.
               12 Anthimius choosing a Bishopp without
the peoples consent,Basil. Epist. 58. filled all Armenia with sedition.
               13 Why did Peter communicate the election
with the disciples?Chrisost. in act. 1 lest the matter should
haue turned to a braule, and haue fallen to a
contention.
            
            
               Testimonies of gennerall Councells.
               14 It is meete that you should haue power,Concil. Nicen
                        •
                      teste Theo
                        •
                     doret.
both to choose, and to giue their names that
are worthy to be among the cleargie, and to do
all things absolutely according to the lawes &
decrees of the Church, and if it happen any to
dye in the Church, then those which were last
taken, are to be promoted, to the honor of him
that is dead, if they be worthy, and if the people
choose them.
               15 Let the people choose,The same Contest. hist tripart lib. 2. and the Byshopp
approoue, and seale vp the election with them.
               16 In an Epistle to Damas
                     •
                  us, Ambrose &c.
sayth, we haue ordayned Nectarius Bishopp of
Constantinople, &c.Concil. constantest. tripart. hist. lib. 9. cap. 14. the whole citie decreeing
the same; and Flauianus was appoynted Bishop
of Antioch, the whole citie appoynting him.
               17 When he hath bin examined in all these
and found fully instructed,Concil. Carthag can. 1. then let him be ordayned
Bishop, by the common consent of the
Clarkes and lay people.
               18 Let not him be counted a prieste in the
Church,Conci. Toletantest. dist. 5
                        •
                     . whom the cleargie, and people of that

citie where he is, do not choose.
               19 If any Bishop after the death of his predecessor,Concil: Gabil. canon 10.
be chosen of any, but of the Bishops of
the same prouince, and of the cleargie and citizens▪
let another be chosen: and if it be otherwise,
let the ordination be void and of none effecte.
            
            
               Testimonies out of the Emperors lavves.
               20 Following the doctrine of the holy Apostles,Iustinian in cod
&c. we ordayne, that as oft as it shall fall
out, that the ministers place shalbe voyde in any
citie, that voyces be giuen of the inhabiters
of that citie, that hee (of three whiche for their
right fayth, holines of life, and other things, are
most approoued) be chosen to the Bishopprick
which is most meete of them.
               21 Being not ignoraunt of the holy canons:Carolus Magnus di
                        •
                     t. 63 sacro rum canonum.
that the holy Churche should vse her honour
the more freely, we assent vnto the ecclesiasticall
order, that the Bishops be chosen, by the election
of the cleargie and people.
               22 He decreed,Lodouicus Caroli silius. that he should be Bishop of
Rome, whome all the people of Rome shoulde
consent to choose.
               23 Lodouicke the second,Platina in vita Andriam secundi. commaunded by
his letters, the Romanes to choose their owne
Bishopp, not looking for other mens voyces,
which (being straungers) coulde not so well tell
what was done in the common-wealth, where
they were strangers, and that it appertayned to
the citizens.
               24 Let the people (sayth Otho the Emperor)
choose and I will approoue it.Idem in vita Leonis octaui.
               
            
            
               The testimonies of the nevve vvriters.
               
                  
25 The newe writers, as Muscu
                     •
                  us, in his
Common places, in the title of Magistrats: Bullinger
vpon 1. Tim. 4. Calume Institut. booke 4.
chap. 3. sect. 15. Harmon. confes. Heluet. cap. 18.
& many others are on our side in this behalfe.
               26 If there bee none that write against it,
but the papists, and no arguments vsed against
it, but those which be borrowed out of the popish
writers: then doth it belong to the Church
to choose their owne Church officers: But the
former is true, as all that doe read them, that
write of this argument do knowe▪ and as is manifest,
by comparing Pighius, Hosius, &c. with
VVhitgift: Therefore the latter is true also.
               Therefore seeing the interest of the Church
in choosing of their Church officers,The Conclusion T. C. 2. booke 
                        •
                     . part. page 212. is grounded
vpon the word of God, both in commaundement,
and continuall practize, both in the
olde and newe Testament; seeing it is warranted
by the light of common reason; seeing it is
commended vnto vs, by the manifold practize
of all ancient times, so long as any sinceritie remayned,
not onely in the time of persecution,
but also of peace; seeing it hath beene confirmed
by so many generall Councels and ratified
by the decrees of so many Emperors; seing
it hath such a cloude of witnesses, both of ancient
and latter times, of the best approoued writers;
seeing none doe set themselues against it,
but the papistes, or they that invade it onely
with the same weapons that are fetched out of
the popes Armory: it must needs follow, that it
belongeth vnto the Churche to choose their
Churche officers: and that the taking away of

this freedom, abridgeth the libertie that Christ
hath endowed his Churche withall, and bringeth
her into great bondage, as Musculus truely
affirmeth.
            
            
               Their obiections against those things are these
               1 Obiection They were then vnder the crosse,
few in number, and therfore it was easily knowen
who were fit.
               
                  Ansvvere The Gospell was dispersed thorow
out all Asia, Affrica, and much of Europe, and
they could lesse keepe together, or meete, and
therefore that maketh rather for vs.
               2 Obiection Wee haue many hypocrites, to
whome it were daungerous to committ suche
waightie actions.
               
                  Ansvvere It is true, that we haue many: but
it is a principle in hypocrisie, to be forwardst in
such publike actions, that they may get fame
thereby.
               3 Obiection They had knowledge to doe it,
but our people be ignorante
                     •
                  .
               
                  Ansvvere We should also finde our people to
haue knowledge, if they had teaching: but howsoeuer
they choose, they cannot haue worse
then ordinarily are chosen by the 
                     •
                  ishops and
patrons.
               4 Obiection The Church was not then established.
               
                  Ansvvere That is vntrue, for though it wanted
the helpe of Magistrates, yet the Apostles
coulde and did better establish without them,
then we can with the helpe of them: but if this
order might be altered, it had bene fitter then,
for nowe the magistracie may compounde tho

differences of the Elders, which help then they
lacked.
               5 Obiection Drunkards, papists, &c. wil choose
them that bee like themselues, and we knowe
the best disposed be alwayes the fewest.
               
                  Ansvvere Such are not of the Churche, but
without, 1. Cor. 5. 12. and therefore are not to
meddle in anye holy action: but if the people
shoulde choose an vnmeete man, the eldershippe
that gouerneth the action, is to reforme
them: besides this, if Gods order had hir
place, the schooles of the prophets would send
them none, (for the ministers especially) to
make choyse of, but meet men, that whomsoeuer
they tooke, he should be found sufficient.
               6 Obiection Paule commandeth 1. Tim. 5. 22
to lay his handes on no man rashly: therefore
one did it.
               
                  Ansvvere Hee teacheth what to doe for his
part, and though others would be rashe, yet he
should not ioyne with them in it, as appeareth
in the latter ende of that same verse, for that is
ascribed vnto him, which also belonged vnto others,
because he was the director: Caluin and
Musculus expound the place so.
               7 Obiection The Councell of Laodicea, decreed
that the people should not elect.
               
                  Ansvvere That is, as Caluine taketh it vpon
Acts 16. they might not elect alone, without the
direction of some graue & good minister, which
should be the manner in the elections, that (according
to Gods word) we desire.
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. 5.
            NOne is to be admitted vnto any publike
office in the Church vntill he be
thorowly examined by the eldership,
both concerning his state of Christianitie,
& abilitie to that place where
to he is to be called, T. C. 1. book: page 38. Disci.
Ecclesiast fol. 46: They thinke one may do it,
as appeareth by the book of ordering, &c. VVhitgist
page 134. & 135. and their slight passing it ouer,
thorow the Archdeacons hands.
            
               The former is prooued, and the latter disprooued thus.
            
            1 Those that are to ordayne, must haue particular
knowledge of the parties to bee ordayned,
(or else they breake the rule prescribed
them, 1. Tim. 5. 22) which cannot be without examination:
But the Eldership is to ordayneeuerye
Churche officer, as shall appeare in the
Chap. of Ordination: Therefore it belongeth
to the Eldership to examine, &c.
            2 The matter of greatest importance in the
gouernement of the Churche, must be done by
the most able gouernours of the same: The approouing
or disproouing of Churche officers, is
the matter of greatest importance, because the
consequence of ruling well is the best, or ill the
worst: and the Eldership is the Senate of most
able gouernours in the Church, as shall appear
in the Chap. of Eldership: Therefore the Eldership
is to examine, &c.
            3 The way whereby a mans insufficiencie is
best espyed, and his abilitie discerned, is the fittest
to examine them that are to be admitted:
But by the eldership (consisting of diuers) his insufficiencie

is best espyed, and his abilitie best
discerned, for the common prouerbe telleth vs
that many eyes do see more then one: Therefore
it belongeth to the Eldership, &c.
            4 They are to examine Church officers, that
are least subiect to be blinded with partiallitie:
But the Eldership is least subiect to partiallitie,
both for that they be many, who are not so easily
ouer ruled by affection or fauour, as one, as
also (and that especially) for that it being the
Lords owne ordinance (as shall appeare) we are
to perswade our selues, that his spirit shal guyde
them: Therefore it belongeth to the Eldership,
&c.
            5 The way that was vsed in the Apostles time
in examining, is of vs to be folowed, vnles some
reason out of the word to perswade the conscience,
can be alleadged to the contrary, which
none haue euer yet done: But many vsed in the
Apostles time to examine, as appereth in chosing
out one to be in the place of Iudas, Act. 1.
22. 23. and fit men for Deacons, Act. 6, 5. wherof
the gouernours especially were some, for that
they were to ordayn vpon knowledge, as is said
in the first reason: Therefore it belongeth to
the Eldership. &c.
            6 They whose testimony the people may
best credit, are to examine them that are to be
admitted: But the people may best credite the
iudgement of a company of able and sufficient
men, which the Eldershipp rightly established
must needes be: Therefore it belongeth to the
Eldership. &c.
            7 Examination belongeth vnto them which

may most perswade the people of his sufficiency,
& so procure gretest reuerence vnto him in
his place: But the examination by the Eldership
is such: Therefore it belongeth to the Eldership,
&c.
            Therefore if they that are to ordain, must examine:The Conclusion
if it be a matter of grerest waight in the
gouernment of the Churche, & they the most
able to dispatch it; if by them his sufficiency or
insufficiency be best found out; if they be hardliest
carried away with affection or parciallitie;
if the examination was suche in the Apostles
time; if the people may (in reason) giue most
credit to the examination that is by such; if that
kinde of examination perswade the people best
of his sufficiencie, and procure him greatest reuerence
in his place: then must it needs folow,
that it pertaineth to the Eldership to examine
those that are to bee admitted to any office in
the Church.
            There is nothing obiected against this,
that hath any shew of reason in it, and therfore
it were needles to set any thing downe.
         
         
            CHAP. 6.
            BEfore consent be giuen to any man vnto any
calling in the Churche, it must appeare
(by sufficient tryall, and due examination)
that he is quallified with those giftes, that the
worde of God requireth in one of that place,
Discipl. Ecclesiast fol. 44. T. C. 2. booke: 1. part
page 368. and in many other places.
            They gainsay this in two points: first in mainteining
their reading ministery: secondly, in gouerning
the Church, by their commissaries and

officialls: which both shalbe ouerthrown, if we
prooue these two propositions following, to be
true by the worde of God.
            No man ought to bee receiued vnto the ministery,The 1. Proposition.
but such as be able to teache the trueth
and conuince the gainsayers.
            The Churche ought not to be gouerned by
commissaries officialls and chauncellors.The 2. proposition.
            
            1 He that may be receiued into the ministery,The 1. proposition is thus prooued.
must be able to teach the people, whatsoeuer
Christe hath commaunded. Matth. 28. 20.
Onely he that is able to teache the trueth, and
conuince the gainsayers, can teach the people
whatsoeuer Christ hath commanded: Therefore
none must be receiued into the ministery,
but such as be able to teach, &c.
            2 That which is to be done conditionally,
may not be done, if that condition be not kept:
Men are to be receiued into the ministery conditionally,
that is, if they bee vnrepro
                  ••
               eable,
Tit. 1. 5. 6. Therefore if they be not such as bee
there discribed, they may not be receiued: and
consequently, none may be receiued, but such
as be able to teach. &c.
            3 That which cannot be done without the
manifest brech of Gods commandement, may
not be done at all: To receiue any that be not
able to teach, is a manifest breach of Gods cō
               maundement.
1. Tim. 3. 1. Tit. 1. 9. Therefore no
man ought to be receiued into the ministerye,
that is not able to teach, &c.
            4 They whome the Lorde refuseth to be his
ministers, may not be receiued into the ministery:
for the ministery being the Lords haruest,

we may admit none to labour therein, but onely
such, as he hath giuen liking of, by the rules
of his worde: The Lorde refuseth to be his ministers,
all those that cannot teach: Hosea 4. 6.
Therefore such as are not able to teache, may
not be receiued, and consequently none may
be receiued, but those that be able to teach, &c.
            5 He that may be admitted into the ministery,
must be able to deuide the word of God aright,
2. Tim. 2. 15. Onely he that is able to teach
and conuince the gainesayers, can deuide the
worde of God aright: Therefore none may be
admitted into the ministery, but he that is able
to teach, &c.
            6 He that may bee admitted into the ministery,
must haue a treasury, furnished with olde
thinges and newe, and must be able to bring it
forth as occasion shal serue: Matth. 13. 52. Onely
hee that is able to teache, &c. is such a one:
Therefore onely he may be admitted, &c.
            7 He that can espy the enemy, and giue warning
aforehand how to resist him, may be receiued
into the ministery, Ezek. 33. 7. None can espy
the enemie, and giue warning aforehande
howe to resist him, but he that is able to teach:
&c. Therefore none may be admitted into the
ministery, but he that is able to teach, &c.
            8 He that leadeth himselfe, and his people
into hel, may not be admitted into the ministery:
He that is not able to teache and conuince
the gainsayer, leadeth himselfe and his people
into hell. Matth. 15. 14. Therefore he that is not
able to teache, &c. may not be admitted into
the ministery.
            
               
9 Hee that preacheth not, but holdeth his
peace,August. lib depa
                     ••
                  . murdereth.
            10 Hee that preacheth not,Gregor. 1. epist. 33 is not sent, and
so he begetteth no fayth in man.
            11 In that S. Paule requireth that a byshop
should be wise,Ierome ad Oecumenium. he barreth those, that vnder the
name of simplicitye, excuse the follye of ministers.
            12 We condemne all vnmeet ministers,Confes. Helues. not
endued with gifts necessary for a shepherd that
should seed his flocke.
            Therfore, if a minister must teache vnto his
people all that Christe hath commaunded; if
none may be made ministers, but conditionally,
if they be quallified with gifts meete for the
same; if vnpreaching ministers cannot be made
without the manifest breach of the commaundement
of God; if they may not bee made ministers,
whom the Lord refuseth to haue; if euery
minister must haue a treasurie well furnished,
and be able to bring forth of it when need
requireth; if euery minister must haue skill to
see the enemie, and to giue warning aforehand
how to resist him; if vnlearned ministers draw
their people to hell after them; if he that preacheth
not, be a murtherer; if he be not sent, &
so doe no good: if he be barred from the ministery:
lastly, if he be condemned, as not to be in
such a place: then must it needes followe, that
none may be receiued into the ministery, but
such as be able to teach the trueth, and to conuince
the gainsayer.
            Many are the arguments that be alleaged to
this purpose, and many moe may be alleadged,

(for the whole course of the scriptures tende
therevnto) the testimony of all sorts of writers,
is very plentifull for this purpose: yea of the very
Canon law, (as the authour of the Abstracte
hath learnedly prooued) and yet doe not our
prelates rest in the same, but haue sett themselues
(though in a silly maner) against it, in this
sort that followeth.
            1 Obiection There must bee reading in the
Church, therefore a reading ministery, VVhitgift
page 252.
            
               Ansvvere By that reason we must haue an officer
for euery particular action, for there must
be breaking of bread in the Church, and powring
of water; but it followeth not, that therefore
there must bee one, whose office must bee
onely to breake bread, or to powre water.
            2 Obiection It is better to haue readers then
none, for preachers cannot be had for euerye
congregation.
            
               Ansvvere It is not better, for if they had non,
they would seek for him that they should haue;
whereas nowe, they that haue a reader onely,
thinke themselues in case good inough: but if
there be such want of prechers, why are so many
of the most diligent and able ones turned
out.
            3 Obiection It is impossible to haue prechers
euery where, and suche as can be had, must bee
taken.
            
               Ansvvere Sometimes you say all is well: and
is it now impossible that our state shoulde obey
the Lordes ordinance; this is the greatest disgrace
to it that can be: and yet i
                  •
                followeth not,

for no necessitie may warrant vs, to violate the
decrees of the highest.
            4 Obiection It were vncharitablenes to turne
them out that be bare readers, for so they, their
wiues and children might beg.
            
               Ansvvere This is to sell mens souls for morsels
of bread: shall we rather feare the begging
of 3. or 4. then the damnation of 1000. but they
may bee otherwayes prouided for; they neede
not beg, many of them may returne to their occupations
againe.
            So that al these obiections notwithstanding,
the conclusion remaineth sure, which is grounded
vpon so many certaine and vnmooueable
foundations.
            
               The Churche ought not to be gouerned by Commissaries,
and officialls, and Chauncellors.
               The 
                     •
                  . propo
                     ••
                  
                  tion is thus prooued.
            
            1 They which are no Elders of the Church,
haue nothing to do in the gouernement of the
same, 1. Tim 5. 17. These chauncellors, commissaries
& officialls, are no Elders in the Church;
whether we expound Elder for a minister, and
him also, that is assistant vnto the minister in ouerseeing
the Churche, or for a minister onely
as they do: for none of them be ministers, and
if they be, they doe not rule in this respect, that
they are ministers: Therefore the Churche
ought not to be gouerned by them.
            2 They that must gouerne the Churche of
God, must haue a warraunt for their so doing,
from Iesus Christ the head of the Church: But
Chauncellors, &c. haue no warraunt so to doe,
from Iesus Christe the heade of the Churche:
Therefore the Church ought not to be gouerned

by them.
            3 Those whose names offices and practize,
be deriued from Antichrist, may haue nothing
to do in the gouernement of the Churche: for
who will suffer his wife to be gouerned by the
Master of a brothelhouse: But the names, offices,
and practize of Chauncellors, officialls and
commissaries be such, which is playne by this,
that they haue their grounde in that filthie
dunghill the cannon law: Therefore they may
haue nothing to do in the gouernement of the
Church.
            4 They that being iuferiours, doe proudly
tyrannize ouer their superiours, ought not to
rule the Church of God, for it is meet it should
be ruled by modest, humble and orderly men:
But such are they (for being inferiors to the ministers
of the word, as our aduersaries doe confesse,
and is plaine also by the cannon lawe
they crow ouer thē as if they wer their slaues:)
and if they doe not so, they can doe nothing:
Therefore they ought not to rule the Churche
of God.
            5 They that liue by the faultes of men, are
not fit to rule the Church of God: for they wi
                  ••
               
rather increase offences (that their gayne may
increase) then orderly lessen them, as experience
(also) prooueth: But suche are all Chauncellors,
commissaries and officials: Therefore
they ought not to rule the Church of God.
            Therefore, if chauncellors, commissaries &
officialls be no Elders of the Churche; if they
haue no warraunt from Iesus Christe, the head
of the Church; if their names, offices and practize,

be deriued from Antichrist; if their office
compel them (being inferiors) to tyrannize
ouer their superiours; if they liue onely by the
faults and offences of men: then it must needs
followe, that the Churche of God ought not to
be gouerned by them.
         
         
            CHAP. 7.
            EVery officer of the Church must be ordayned
by the laying on of the handes
of the Eldershipp, T. C. 2. booke, 1. part
page 274. Discip. Ecclesiast. fol. 53.
            They say it ought to be done by the
bishopp alone, VVhitgift page 196. their dayly
practize doth likewise shew it.
            The former is prooued, and the latter disprooued
by these reasons following.
            1 As Church officers were ordayned in the
Apostles time, so must they be continually, for
they did lay the plot, according wherevnto the
Churche must be built vnto the ende: but they
were ordayned in the Apostles time by the laying
on of the hands of the Eldership, Act. 6. 6. &
13. 3. Therefore the Churche officers must be
ordayned by laying on of the handes of the Eldership.
            2 Churche officers must bee ordayned by
them that haue warrant from the worde, to assure
the parties ordayned, that they are called
of God: Onely the Eldership hath suche a warrant,
1. Tim. 4. 14. Therefore they ought to bee
ordayned by the Eldership.
            3 Many of the sentences alleadged before,
out of Councells, Emperors, lawes, histories, &
sound writers both olde and newe, for election

not to be by one, but by diuers; speake also of
ordination, and so are forcible to this purpose.
            4 Euagrius came to the office of a Bishopp
vnlawfully,Theo
                     •
                  oret booke 5. cap. 23 because onely Paulmus ordayned
him, contrary to the tenure of many Cannons,
which prouide, that they should not be ordayned,
but by all the Bishops of the prouince, or (at
the least) by three.
            5 When a Bishop is to be ordayned, &c. one
bishop shal pronounce the blessing,4. Concil. Carthag. cap. 23. and the rest
of the bishops with the Elders present, shall all
lay on their hands.
            6 When a bishopp was to be ordayned,Cyprian lib. 1 
                     •
                  pist. 4. the
bishops adioyning did ordayne him.The Conclusion.
            
            Therefore if Church officers were ordained
in the Apostles time, not by one, but by the Eldershipp,
consisting of many; if they be to ordayne,
that haue warrant out of the worde, to
assure the parties ordayned, that they are called
of God; if ordination by one bishop be vnlawfull
and contrary to many canons of Councells;
if the bishops and Elders were to laye on
their hands: lastly, if the bishops adioyning were
to ordayne; then must it needes followe, that
Church officers are not to be ordained by one
man, but by the laying on of the handes of the
Eldership.
            But they fight hard against this, because it
striketh at a maine pillar of their kingdome,
their chiefe grounds be these.
            1 Obiection Paule and Barnabas ordayned
Elders, where is no mention of any Eldership.
            
               Ansvvere They are said to ordaine, because
they being the chiefe procured it; so is Ioshua,

5. 3. saide to circumcise, which was the Leuites
office, so say we, the Queene hath made a lawe,
and yet not she alone maketh any.
            2 Obiection Though it were so then, yet is it
not so required nowe, no more then the communitie
in the Apostles time.
            
               Ansvvere There was no more communitie
then (for they that thinke otherwise, are in that
point Anabaptists) then is to be required now,
so that instance maketh for vs.
            3 Obiection Examples are no general rules
to be followed.
            
               Ansvvere Examples not contrarying anye
rule, or reason of the Scripture, be to be followed,
as if they were commaundementes, so that
notwithstanding any thing aledged to the contrary,
it remaineth vpon the former groundes
most stedfast, that it belongeth to the Eldership
to ordaine those Churche officers that are to
be imployed in the publike seruice of God.
         
         
            CHAP. 8.
            THe ordaining of Churche officers must
be done with humble prayer of the Eldership,
and the congregation, Discipl.
Ecclesiast. fol 50.
            Their vnreuerent beginning & proceedding
therewith in a corner, is contrary to
this: which is condemned by the proofe of our
assertion by these reasons.
            1 We are to behaue our selues in these actions,
as they by whom we haue direction to doe
them, haue set vs an example: But the Apostles
and Elders, when they ordayned Church officers,
did alwayes commende the action to God

by prayer, together with those congregations,
ouer which they placed them, Act. 6. 6. & 14. 23.
Therefore the ordeyning of Churche officers
must be done by humble prayer of the Eldership,
and congregation.
            2 The greater the action is that is in hand,
the more carefull must they be that haue it in
hand, to humble themselues by prayer, for the
Lords assistance therein: But the ordeyning of
Churche officers, is an action of most weightie
importance: Therefore they that haue it in
hand (which be the Eldershipp to ordayne him,
& congregation to receiue him) ought to humble
themselues in earnest prayer before hand.
            3 They that shall haue part in the comfort
or discomfort of the action, are to ioyne together
in prayer vnto God for the better euent,
and against the worse: But the Eldershipp and
people, shall both haue part in the euent of the
action: Therefore they are to ioyne together
in humble prayer before hand, &c.
         
         
            CHAP. 9.
            CHurche officers must be ordayned by
laying on of hands; in this they agree
with vs, concerning the ceremonie it
selfe, albeit neyther in the parties by
whome, nor on whome it must be conferred.
The profit of this ceremonie appeareth
in the reasons following.
            1 That which stirreth vp euerye partie, to
pray with more feruencie, is profitable to be vsed:
But such is this ceremonie, for it affecteth
the ordeyners, when they feele him for whom
they pray; and the ordeyned when he feeleth

a calling and charge from God (as it were) sensiblie
comming vpon him, and the congregation,
when they see him seperated from the rest,
by whome they shall reape muche comfort or
griefe: Therefore the vse of it is very profitable.
            2 That which helpeth forward the party ordained
in his care, to walke with a good conscience
in his calling, is profitable to be vsed: Such
is the imposition of hands, for both it declareth
vnto him, that he is separated of God for that
purpose, & also giueth him hope, that his hand
who allotted him therevnto, will alwayes assist
him in the course of that calling: Therefore
it is of a profitable vse.
            3 That which worketh a more acknowledgment
of Gods ordinance in the heartes of the
people, is profitable to be vsed: Such is the laying
on of handes, for it declareth vnto them,
that the Lorde hath placed him in that calling
ouer them: Therefore it is profitable to bee
vsed.
            Therefore seeing the ceremonie of layinge
on handes is forcible,The conclusio
                     •
                  
                to increase the feruencie
of euery partie, when they pray; seeing it assureth
the calling to the partie ordayned, and giueth
him an argument of good hope, for the
blessing of God vppon him in the course of
the same; and seeing it procureth a more perswasion
in the people, that he is allotted vnto
them from the Lord himselfe; it is euident that
it is not a vaine and idle ceremonie (as manie
do imagine) but of good and profitable vse, in al
ordinations.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 10.
            THe Lord hath ordayned that there should
be one byshop or pastor (at the least) president
ouer euery congregation, who are
of equall authoritie in their seuerall charges, &
in the generall gouernement of the Churche,
T. C. 1. booke, page 22. & 2. booke, 1. part, page
515.
            They maintaine contrary vnto this, these
two.
            1 That one may haue two or mo chardges,
and be absent from them, as their dispensations
and practize do prooue.
            2 That one minister may haue a soueraigntie
and Lordshipp ouer his fellowe ministers,
which both being disprooued, the former assertion
will remaine still sure.
            1 One man may not haue mo charges then
he is able in any measure to discharge:Reasons against the 1. proposition. No man
is able in anye measure, to discharge the dutie
that is belonging vnto mo flocks then one, seeing
he cannot preach vnto them, both in season
and out of season: Therefore no man may
haue mo charges then one.
            2 That which maketh an open entrance to
the enemie to spoile, cannot be lawfull: for one
to haue mo charges then one, maketh open entrance
for the enemie to spoyle, for the wolffe
watcheth to deuoure, whilest the shepheard is
absent: Therfore no man may haue mo charges
then one.
            3 That whiche hath neither precepte, nor
president for it, eyther in Gods worde, or anye
approoued writer, but onely from Antichriste,

is vnlawfull: But such is the hauing of mo charges
then one: Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            4 That which declareth a minister to bee
more desirous of the fleece, then to profite the
flocke, that same is vnlawfull: But such is the
hauing of mo charges then one, for were it not
for the gaine, they would thinke one a burden
as heauie as they could beare: Therefore it is
vnlawfull.
            5 All the reasons that bee alleadged in the
third chapter, against nonresidence, are forcible
to this purpose, for if he may not be nonresident,
he may not haue mo charges, vnlesse he
be willing to be quartered, that euery chardge
may haue a piece of him.
            He reckoneth them among theeues,Hooper vpon 8. command. & their
action to be the euery, condemned by that commandement.
            Therefore,The conclusion if one man cannot in any tollerable
measure discharge mo charges then one; if
to haue mo maketh an open entrance to the enemie
to spoyle; if it haue neyther precept, nor
president for it, but onely in the kingdome of
Antichrist; if it declare the practize to be more
desirous of the fleece, then to feede the flocke;
if all the reasons that condemne nonresidency
be against it; lastly if it be playne the euery:
then must it needes followe, that one may not
haue two, or mo charges.
            Their obiections (such as they be) are set
downe in the 3. chapter, and the answers vnto
them.The second proposition that they holde, and reasons against it.
            
            
               The second proposition that they hold is thus.
               One minister may haue a soueraigne authoritie,

and Lordshipp ouer his fellowe ministers:
which is thus disprooued.
               1 They that haue their commission indifferently
giuen them, without difference betweene
one and another, are of equall authoritie,
and may not be one ouer another: But such
is the commission of all Gods ministers indifferently,
as appeareth, Matth. 28. 19. 20. Therfore
they are of equall authoritie, and may not haue
any dominion one ouer another.
               2 That which Christe hath directly forbidden,
that may not in any case be allowed, but is
euer vnlawfull: But Christe hath directly forbidden,
that one minister should haue dominion
ouer another. Matth. 20. 25. Luk. 22. 25. Therfore
one minister may not haue superiority or
dominion ouer another.
               3 They that may not bee Lordes ouer the
people of God, may much lesse be Lordes ouer
the ministers, for the ministers be (in respect of
the ministery) aboue the people: But a minister
may not be Lordly ouer Gods people (as is
testified by him on whome they woulde father
the greatest lordlines) 1. Pet. 5. 3. Therefore one
minister may not be Lord, or haue superiority
ouer another.
               4 It is ordayned,Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 3. & is equall and right, that
euery mans cause be heard, where the fault was
committed: and it is meete to handle the matter
there, where they may haue both the accusers,
and witnesses of the fault; which sheweth
that euery minister had autoritie ouer his own
flocke, and no other to meddle.
               5 Bishopps, wheresoeuer they be in all the

world, are equall to our bishops,Luther aduersus papat a Satana fundat. or parrishe ministers
and preachers; of none it can be sayde
one is Lorde, another is seruaunt: whatsoeuer
belongeth to the Churche, belongeth equally
to all, sauing that some are of better giftes then
others, howbeit such gifts cause no inequallitie
or Lordship in the Church.
               6 In the Apostoilke Churche,Muscul. loc. com de minist. verbi the ministers
of the word, were none aboue another, & were
subiect to no head or president, &c.
               7 The honor of a bishopp,The same vpon 2. Thes. 
                        •
                     . 2. being taken from
the rest of the ministers, and giuen to one, was
the first step to papacie.
               8 Christ did most seuerely forbid vnto the
Apostles and their successors,Confes. Heluet. cap. 17. primacie and dominion.
               9 Equall power and function is giuen to all
ministers of the Church,The same cap. 18. and that from the beginning,
no one preferred himselfe before another,
sauing onely that for order, some one did
call them together, propounded the matters
that were to be consulted off, and gathered the
voyces.
               Therefore,The conclusion if all ministers haue their cōmission
indifferently giuen vnto them; if Christe
haue forbidden, that one minister should haue
dominion ouer another; if no minister may exercise
dominion ouer Gods people; if authoritie
to handle controuersies, belonged to euery
seuerall congregation; if a bishopp and parrish
minister be all one; if in the Apostles time,
no minister was aboue another; if the superioritie
of one aboue another, was the first step to
the papacie; lastly, if they haue equall power

and function from the beginning: then must it
needs followe, that no minister may haue superioritie,
or exercise dominion ouer another.
               Their obiections herevnto (so many as are
worthy any answere) be these.
               1 Obiection Christ Matth. 20. 25. forbiddeth
onely ambition, and not dominion, as Musculus
expoundeth it.
               
                  Ansvvere Musculus his iudgment appeareth
in the 6. & 7. reasons, the place is expounded against
superioritie by Caluin, Bullinger, Zwinglius,
Gualter, Hemingius, &c. But let it bee so
expounded: that dominion is ambition, because
it causeth a man to aspire aboue his fellowe ministers.
               2 Obiection The Greeke word signifieth rule
with oppression, which is the thing that is forbidden.
               
                  Ansvvere That is not so, for Luk. 22. 25. vseth
the single verbe Keurieuem, which signifieth simplie
to rule: the sonnes of Zebedeus desired
not to oppresse but to rule, which desire he reprooued.
               3 Obiection Christ sayth not, no man shalbe
so, but he that will be so, desiring it.
               
                  Ansvvere But Luke saith, let the greatest be
as your seruant, and therefore that is but a silly
shifte.
               So that their assertions beeinge ouerthrown,
and their obiections answered,A bishop should be in euery congregation. it remayneth,
that we prooue yet more directly,
that the Lorde hath ordayned, that there
should be a bishop resident ouer euery congregation;
which is thus prooued:
               
                  
1 If a bishop and minister be all one, then
must there be a bishop in euery congregation,
for euery man will confesse that euery congregation
ought to haue a minister: But a bishopp
and a minister is all one, as appeareth by this
that S. Paule discribeth not one quallity for the
bishop, but it is also the quallitie of euery good
minister; and also in that hee describeth no other
minister but the bishop: Therefore there
ought to be a bishop in euery congregation.
               2 S. Paules bishopps and his deacons, were
appoynted to one place, as appeareth both in
the description of them, and the practize of the
Apostles: But the deacons were in euery congregation,
which appeareth Phil. 1. 1. Actes. 6. 
                     •
                  .
that office being needfull euery where; and in
that it continued so, longer then the office of
bishops, Athanasius Apol. 2. Ierome Contra Luciferianos.
&c. Therefore there ought to be a byshop
in euery congregation.
               3 That which Paule enioyned to Titus, is
also to be practized alwaies in the like case: But
he commanded him to ordaine Elders in euery
citie, Tit. 1. 5. which are expounded in the
next verse to be bishops: Therfore there must
be a bishop in euery congregation.
               4 Euery Church should haue her Communion
table,Ignatius ad Philadelp. and euery Church her bishop.
               5 Where there was found any worthy to be
a bishopp,Epiphan. lib. 3. tom. 1. haeres. 75. there a bishopp was appointed, and
where there was not to furnish both bishop and
preaching elder (he meaneth the doctor) there
the Apostles made a bishop, and left the elder.
               6 If a bishop run into a slaunder,2 Concil. Carthag tom. 1. cap. 10. and manye

bishops cannot suddenly be gathered; his cause
shalbe heard of twelue bishops, &c.
               7 If an elder be accused,3. Concil. tom. 1 cap. 8. he may call sixe bishops
from the places hard by.
               8 Stories make mention of bishops of little
townes, asEuseb. lib. 5. cap. 16. Solicus bish, of the village Cuman:
Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 4.Mares, bishop of a small towne called Solicha:
Socrat. 4. 26.Gregory bishop of a smal citie, called Nazianzum:
Quest. 16. dist. 50.The bishop of a Castle.
               9 A minister, that is to say, a bishopp, and (a
little after) the Apostle doth plainly teach,Ierome ad Euagrium. that
a minister and a bishop is all one, and (vpon Titus)
a bishopp and a minister are the same: and
(ad Occanum) with the ancient fathers, bishopps
and Elders were all one.
               10 D. Barnes (in his sixt article) sayth,Acts and Monuments. fol. 116. I will
neuer beleeue, neyther can I euer beleeue, that
one man may by the law of God, be a bishop of
two or three cities, yea of a whole countrie, for
that it is contrary to the doctrin of S. Paul, who
writing to Titus, commandeth that he shoulde
ordayne a bishop in euery towne.
               11 It is pitie to see howe farre the office of a
bishop is degenerated from the originall in the
Scripture;Hooper vpon 8. command. page 90. it was not so in the beginning, when
bishops were at the best, as the Epistle to Titus
testifieth, that willeth him, to ordaine in euery
citie, &c. They know the primitiue Church had
no such bishops as we haue, vntill the time of
Siluester the first.
               Therefore,The Conclusion if a bishopp and a minister be all
one; if bishops were to be where Deacons are,
who were in euery congregation; if Paule enioyned
Titus to ordayne bishops in euery city;

and if euery church had her bishop a long time
after the Apostles, as appeareth by the testimonies
of Councels, Histories and learned writers,
both olde and newe: then must it needes
follow, that there ought to be a bishop in euery
congregation.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 11.
            FOr the further reuealing of the trueth,
God hath ordayned, that there shoulde
be in the Churche Doctors, whose office
is to be employed in teaching of doctrin,
and is an office different from that of the
Pastour.
            The latter part of this proposition, is the
thing which especially they doe deny, which is
thus prooued to be true.
            1 Those whiche the Apostle (in speaking of
distinct officers) doe distinguish one from another,
are seuerall & distinct one from another:
But the Apostle distinguishe the Pastoure and
teacher, one from another, Rom 12. 7. 8. and Ephes.
4. 11. euen as hee distinguisheth man and
woman. Gal. 3. 28. See the Greek of them both:
Therefore the office of pastour and Doctor are
distinct one from another.
            2 As are the gifts that adorne offices, so are
the officers themselues, for the execution of
the office, consisteth in the employing of the
gifts: But the gifts of the pastour and Doctor
are diuers, as appeareth 1. Cor. 12. 8. and by experience,
for some hath an excellent gift in doctrine,
and not in application, and others excel
in application and exhortation, that are verye
meane, in deliuering of doctrine: Therefore

the office of a pastor & teacher, are distinct one
from another.
            3 Those that are to take a diuers course in
teaching are diuers, and different in their functions,
for els why should they be enioyned to
take a diuers course: But the pastor is to take
one course, & the Doctor another, for the one
is to direct himselfe principally to exhort, and
the other to attend vpon doctrine: Rom. 12. 7. 8.
Therefore the office of pastour and Doctor, be
distinct offices the one from the other.
            4 The Ecclesiastical stories (especially speaking
of the Church of Alexandria) doe vsually
make a difference betwixt the bishopp and the
Doctor.
            5 Cathedrall Churches haue yet som shew
thereof left in them, who (besides the bishopp)
haue also one that readeth a Lecture in diuinitie,
            6 If the distinguishing of them, make more
for the buylding of the Churche, then the vniting
of them; then are they to be distinguished,
and not made all one: But the former is true, as
appeareth by this, that hardly is a people broght
to a sounde knowledge of godlines, by him
that instructeth in doctrine continually, & as
hardly are wee stirred vp to a zealous care of
our duetie, though we be exhorted continually;
which both shoulde bee with lesse continuance,
if one man were to performe all: Therefore
they are to be esteemed distinct offices, &
not parts of one office, which one is to perform.
            Therfore,The conclusion if the Apostle Paul distinguisheth
them one from another; if God do vsually bebestow

doctrine and exhortation vpon seuerall
persons, wherein eche is found to excell, and to
be no bodie in the other; if the pastor be commanded
to take one course in teaching, and the
Doctor another; if Ecclesiasticall stories doe
vsually distinguish them; if Cathedrall Churches
haue yet some steps left of the distinction;
if to distinguish them, maketh more to the building
of the Churche, then to vnite them: then
must it needs follow, that the office of pastour,
and Doctour be distinct, and different the one
from the other.
         
         
            CHAP. 12.
            EVery congregation ought to haue Elders
to see into the maners of the people,
and to be assistaunt vnto the ministers,
in the gouernment Ecclesiastical.
T. C. book 1. pag. 174. Disc. fol. 120. which
they denie, VVhitgift p. 627. & their practize in
keeping them out of the Church: but it is prooued
to be true, by these reasons following.
            1 That which the Apostles established in euery
congregation, ought still to continue, seeing
the Churche must bee ruled by the same
lawes that it was ruled by then, and needeth as
great furtherance now, as it did then: But the
Apostles established Elders in euery congregation,
Act 14 23. which cannot be vnderstood of
preaching Elders onely; considering that the
scarcitie of them was suche, as Paule was constrayned
to sende Timothie and Titus to great
cities, which he could hardly spare, as he often
testifieth: Therefore there ought to be suche
Elders, as are onely to assiste in gouerrment in

euery congregation.
            2 Those which God hath ordayned to help
forward the building of the Churche, ought to
be in euerye congregation, vnlesse it may appeare
that some congregation needeth not so
much helpe as Christe hath appoynted: But
Christ hath ordayned Elders in the Churche,
for the helping forwarde of the building of the
Churche. 1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore suche Elders
ought to be in euery congregation.
            3 That which being wanting, the bodie can
not be entire, that same must be in euery congregation:
But the Elders cannot be wanting,
and the Church be an entire bodie, Rom. 12. 8.
which euery congregation should be, Rom. 12. 4
Therefore there ought to be such Elders in euery
congregation.
            4 If the word of God doe describe such Elders
in the Church, then ought they to be in euery
congregation, which is cleare by this, that
euery congregation hath need of them, as well
as any: and that euery congregation must haue
all the other officers of the Churche: and that
euery congregation is of equall dignitie in the
bodie of Christ: But the worde of God describeth
vnto vs such Elders. 1. Tim. 5. 17. Therfore
they ought to be in euery congregation.
            5 There is no Church that can stand without
hir Eldership or councell.Ignat. ad Trall.
            
            6 It be longeth onely to the bishopp to baptize,Tertul. de Baptist.
and the Elder and Deacon may not do it,
but vpon the bishops licence.
            7 Neither Elder nor deacon haue right,Ierome contra Lucif. but
vpon the bishops commandement (so much as)

to baptize.
            8 Elders fell away thorow the ambition of
the teachers.Ambros. vpon 1 Tim. 5.
            
            9 Valerius the bishopp did contrary to the
custome of the Apostolicall Churches,Possidonins in vita Augustini in appoynting
Augustine to preache, being but an
Elder.
            10 After that Arrius was conuicted of haeresie,Socrat. libr. 5. cap. 22.
it was decreed that elders should no more
preach.
            11 The number of the Elders of euerye
Churche,Bucer de regno Christi book 1. ought to be encreased, according to
the multitude of the people.
            12 Speaking of the Elders that were to assist
the minister,P. Martyr vpon Rom. 12. he lamenteth that it is so fallen
out of the church, that the name doth scarse
remaine.
            13 Certain of the people were ioyned with
the pastor,The same vpon 1. Cor. 12. in the gouernment of the Churche,
because the pastor was not able to doe all himselfe.
            14 There were elders 
                  〈◊〉
                did assist the minister,Caluin Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8.
in the gouernment of 
                  〈◊〉
                Church. &c.
            15 VVhitgift confesseth, that in the primitiue
Church, they had in euery Church certain
Seniors, pag. 638. Let it then appeare out of the
word, to satisfie the conscience how it may bee
left out.
            16 If the platforme set downe to Timothie
and Titus be for all Churches, then must Elders
be in all; for these Elders are there described:
But it is a platforme for all Churches,
and that to the ende of the world, 1. Tim. 6. 14.
Therefore they ought to be in euerye congregation.
            
               
17 That which is contained in euery ministers
commission to teache & practize, must be
in euery congregation: but the ordination &
practize of that office, is in euery ministers cō
               mission,
Matth. 28. 20. or els they ordayned Elders
without warrant from Christ, which none
dare affirme: Therefore there must be Elders
in euery congregation.
            18 Wheresoeuer a bishoppe must be, there
must also the Elders bee, whiche appeareth by
this, that where the one is described, there is
the other also: But a bishopp must be in euery
congregation, as I haue prooued sufficiently
in the 10. Chap. Therefore there ought to be elders
in euery congregation.
            19 If the Apostles laboured for vniformitie
in the least things, and established in all Churches
one order, then must there be Elders in euery
congregation, for they were in some, as al
men do confesse: But the former is true, as not
onely the view of their practize declareth, but
also the Apostles expresse words; Thus I teach
in all Churches: Therefore the latter is true
also, that in euery congregation there must be
such Elders.
            Therfore,The Conclusion if the Apostles established Elders
in euery congregation; if Christe hath esteemed
their helpe needfull to further the buylding
of his Church; if without them a congregation
cannot be entire; if the worde of God
say that they ought to be in the Churche; if it
was continued so long after the Apostles time:
and be approoued by the testimonie of manie

very learned, both olde and newe writers, and
confessed by the greatest aduersary vnto them;
if they be within the compasse of euerye ministers
commission; if they are to be, wheresoeuer
a bishopp must be; if the Apostles established
vniformitie, euen in the meanest thinges;
then must it needs followe, that there ought to
be such Elders in euery congregation, as are to
assiste the minister in the gouernement of the
same.
            They confesse it was so in the Apostles
time, but seeme to say somewhat that it cannot
be vnder a christian magistrate thus:
1 Obiection God hath giuen the soueraigne authoritie
ouer his Church to the Christian magistrate,
which these Elders would abridge.
            
               Ansvver No more then the eldership abridged
the soueraigntie of Dauid ouer Israell, for his
gouernment is temporall, and theirs spirituall.
            2 Obiection Gualter vpon the 1. Cor. 5. denieth
it to be needfull vnder a christian magistrate.
            
               Ansvvere Gualter denieth excommunication
vnder a christian magistrate, he is as partial
in this argument as VVhitgift.
            
            3 Obiection The prince hath the authority that
the Elders had.
            
               Ansvvere That is no truer, then to saye the
prince hath authoritie to preach the word, &c.
for these be thinges, that his high authoritie
must see done, but he may doe none of them
himselfe.Reasons proouing Elders as necessary vnder a christian magistrate, as in the Apostles time.
            
            But there be many reasons which may bee
alleadged, to prooue that they are (at the least)
as necessary vnder a Christian magistrate in

these dayes, as they were in the time of the Apostles,
as namely these:
            1 The lesse able that ministers are to direct
their people in the wayes of godlines, the more
neede they haue of the assistaunce that God
hath allowed them in his word: But ministers
are now lesse able (especially vnder Christian
magistrats, when men are ouertaken with ease
and peace, which quench good things) thē they
were in the time of the Apostles: Therefore
there is as great (if not greater) need of Elders
now, then was in the time of the Apostles.
            2 If christian magistrates be to maintayne
the order that Christ hath set down for the gouernement
of his Churche, then must there be
Elders in it vnder a Christian magistrate, for
Elders are approoued of Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 8. But
Christian magistrates are to mayntaine the order
that Christe hath set downe for the ruling
of his Church, Isai. 49. 23. Therefore there must
be Elders in the Church, vnder a christian magistrate.
            3 If the rule of Christe cannot be perpetually
obserued, tell the Church, vnlesse there be
Elders; then must there be such vnder a christian
magistrate: But the former is true, for by
the Churche is there ment the Senate of ministers
and Elders, as shall be prooued in the
chapter of Excommunication: Therfore there
must be Elders vnder a Christian magistrate.
            4 If the whole gouernement of the Churche
described in the Epistles to Timothie & Titus,
be to bee obserued vntill the ende, then must
there bee Elders vnder Christian magistrates,

for they are contayned in those Epistles: But
the former is true. 1. Tim. 6. 14. Therefore there
must be Elders vnder a christian magistrate.
            5 Where sinners are more outragious, and
the best most subiect to wax cold, there is greatest
neede of all the helpes that God hath ordayned
to punish sinne, and to cherish well doing:
But so it is vnder a christian magistrate, especially
in the peace of the Church, as VVhitgift
confesseth, page 643. Therefore there is (at
the least) as great neede of Elders (seeing they
are helpers appointed of God) vnder a Christian
magistrate, as at any other time.
            Therfore if ministers be lesse able now,The Conclusion then
in the Apostles time; if Christian magistrates
must maintaine the order prescribed by Christ;
if els the rule of Christ, (tel the church) cannot
be still obserued; if the whole gouernment described
by S. Paule, must be kept for euer; lastly
if there be, (at the least) as great neede of all
the helpes that can be, as euer there was: then
must it needs follow, that Elders are as necessary
in the Churche vnder a christian magistrate,
as in the time of persecution.
         
         
            CHAP. 13.
            THere ought to be in euery congregation
certaine Deacons, endued with
those quallities, whiche the worde of
God describeth; whose office is onely
in receiuinge the liberallitie of the
Saints, and distributing it vnto the needie, T. C.
1. booke, page 190. Discip. Eccles. fol. 119.
            This assertion hath two braunches,The 1. proposition. whiche

both are gaine saide by our aduersaries, the first
whereof is this. The office of the Deacon, consisteth
onely in receiuing and dist
                  •
               ibuting vnto
the poore, the liberallitie of the saints, which
they denie, VVhitgift page 582. The booke of
ordering, &c. that maketh it a degree of the ministery:
but the proposition being prooued true,
maketh their opinion and practize appeare
false, which is thus:
            1 That wherein Steuen and the rest were
imployed, is the office of a Deacon: for the first
institution of them by the Apostles, is in that
example: But they were onely to attend vpon
the prouision for the poore: Act. 6. 4. &c Therefore
the office of the Deacon, is only to attend
vpon the distributing vnto the poore, from the
liberallitie of the saints.
            2 That which the Apostle maketh an ordinarye
and distincte office from others in the
Churche, must be attended vpon by them that
are in the same office, and not be mingled with
any other: But the Apostle Rom. 12. 8. maketh
distributing in simplicitie, such an office as it is
expounded by M. Caluin, Beza, Bucer, Martyr.
&c. Therefore the Deacons office must be attended
vppon, and consequently, it consisteth
onely in distributing, &c.
            3 That which the Apostles founde themselues
insufficient for, that can no man now discharge
in any tollerable measure, for they were
more adorned with gifts then any be now: But
they found themselues insufficient for the ministery
of the worde, and distributing vnto the
poore also, Act. 6. 2. Therefore no man can in any

tollerable measure, discharge the office of a
minister and Deacon also, & consequently, the
Deacon is to attend vpon distributing onely.
            4 If the ministeries of the worde be perfect,
without the Deacon, then may he not meddle
in the same, for how may one lawfully labor, in
that wherein there is no need of him: But such
is the ministery of the word, where the seuerall
ministers thereof are named, Ephes. 4. 11. wherin
the Deacon is not contayned, as VVhitgifte
confesseth, page 308. & 309. Therefore the Deacon
may not meddle with the ministery of the
word, and consequently must be imployed onely
in distributing, &c.
            5 If there bee no quallitie required in the
perfect description of the deacon, which is proper
to the ministery of the word, then is not he
to medle with the same: But the former is true,
as appeareth, 1. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore the latter is
true also, and consequently, he must attend only
vpon distributing, &c.
            6 If it belong to the deacons office, to meddle
with the ministery of the worde and Sacramentes,
then is it greater, then that of the pastor,
for that the doing of both, requireth greater
giftes then the one: But it is not a greater,
but inferiour office to the pastor, as appeareth
by all those places wherein they are described,
that the Deacon is described after the bishopp:
Therfore his office is not to meddle with both,
and consequently he must attende vpon distributing
&c.
            7 Deacons are ministers of tables,6 Concil. Constant. cap. 16. and not
of holy things.
            
               
8 In the ministers sicknes,
                  
                     •
                  . Concil. vasens. Can. 4. the Deacons shal
read the Homilies of the Fathers.
            9 The Deacons haue need of great wisdom,Chrisost. vpon Act. 6.
although the preaching of the worde bee not
cōmitted vnto them: & further, it is absurd that
they should do both the office of preaching, &
caring for the poore, considering that they be
not able to do both thorowly.
            10 Although (the goodes of the Church increasing)
there were besides the Deacons, subdeacons,Bulli
                     •
                  g. decad 5 serm. 2.
and Archdeacons, yet the Deacons
remained still in their charge for the poor, and
were not as yet mingled with the bishopps or
priestes, and with the order of them whiche
taught.
            11 The office of Deaconship,Bueer de reg. Christ. 14. was religiously
kept in the Churche, vntill it was driuen out
by Antichrist.
            12 This office muste of necessitie be restored
as it is described.The same de reg. &c. and vpon Ephes. 4. Act. 6. if England (for hee
speaketh it in the behalfe of our Churche) will
receiue the Discipline of Christ.
            13 Speaking of these Deacons, lamenteth
that this order,P. Mart. rom. 12. is so fallen out of the Churche
that the name doth scarce remaine.
            14 Describing the Deacons of the Apostles
time,Caluin Insti. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 9. sayth, that we after their example, ought
to haue the like.
            15 The office of distributing the goodes of
the church,Beza Confes. cap. 5. sect. 23. is an ordinarie function in a church
lawfully constituted; the which, sect. 30. he calleth
the Deaconship.
            Therefore if Steuen and the rest were imployed,The conclusion
onely in distributing the goodes of the

Church; if the Apostle maketh the Deacons
office, an ordinary & distinct office frō al others
in the Churche; if the Apostles were not sufficient
for the ministery of the worde, and distributing;
if the ministeries of the worde be perfect
without the deacon; if in the description of
the Deacon, no quallitie bee required, that is
proper to a minister of the word; if to deale in
both would make the Deacon a greater officer
then the pastor; if the Councels, auncient writers,
and the sounde writers of latter times,
do declare that the Deacons were to be wholy
imployed in the distributing of the goods of the
Church; then must it needs follow, that his office
is not to meddle with anye part of the ministery
of the worde and sacraments, but to attend
onely vpon the distributing of the liberallitie
of the Churche, vnto them that stande in
need thereof.
            Their obiections herevnto, be these two
that follow.
            1 Obiection Phillip one of the seuen deacons
did preache, Actes 8. 8. therefore Deacons may
preach the word.
            
               Ansvvere Phillip was a deacon of the church
at Ierusalem, while they abode together, but
now he was not any more so, but an Euangelist,
as he is euer tearmed after, by vertue of which
office he did preach.
            2 Obiection Steuen, beeing a Deacon, preached,
Act. 7. 2.
            
               Ansvver He preached not; for all that is there,
was but his Apologie at the seat of iudgement,
which euery man in the like case may doe, and

which many of the martyrs haue done.
            So that the former proposition beeing true,
vpon the groundes alleadged, notwithstanding
these obiections, we are to proceede to the second,
which is this.
            There ought to be such Deacons (as are described
in the former proposition) in euery congregation,The 
                     •
                  . proposition.
which is thus prooued.
            1 That office which euerye congregation
hath need of, ought to be in euery congregation:
But euery congregation hath need of the
Deacons office, whiche appeareth by this, that
they haue poore to prouide for, (or els they
must regarde the necessitie of others) and the
liberallitie of others to distribute: Therefore
Deacons ought to be in euery congregation.
            2 That which is indefinitely appointed for
the good of the Church, belongeth vnto euery
congregatton, as well as to any one: But suche
is the appointment of the Deacons. 1. Tim. 3. 8.
Therfore there must be deacons in euery congregation.
            3 Euery Church ought to haue their office
of Deaconship.Ignat. ad Philadelph.
            
            4 All the reasons (or the most of them) that
are alleadged chap. 10. for a bishopp in euerye
congregation, and chap. 12. for Elders in euery
congregation; are forcible here vnto.
            Therefore,The Conclusion if there be the like neede of Deacons
in one congregation, that is in another; if
they be appointed indefinitely for the good of
the Church; if euery Church must haue their
office of Deaconship; and lastly, if there be like
resons to prooue thē belong to euery Church,

that be for bishopps and Elders: then must it
needes follow, that there ought to be Deacons
in euery congregation.
         
         
            CHAP. 14.
            THere ought to be in euerye congregation,
an eldership, consisting of a pastor
or pastors, doctor (if there be any) & elders,
whose authoritie Christ hath ordayned
to be perpetual in his church,
to gouerne the same onely by the rules of Gods
word: T. C. 1. booke, page 175. Discip. Ecclesiast.
123. which containeth these 3. perticular propositions,
defended by vs, and gaine said by the BB.
and their adherents.
            1 The Eldership ought to be in euery congregation.
            2 The office of the Eldership is perpetuall.
            3 The Church must be gouerned, onely by the rules
of Gods vvorde.
            The first is denyed by them,The prose of the 1. propositio
                     •
                  . 
               VVhitgift page
627. and by their practize, in tying the gouernment
of many Churches to the BB. sea, it is thus
prooued.
            1 Whatsoeuer Christe hath ordayned, as a
meanes, to keepe men in obedience to the gospell,
that same must be in euery congregation,
for particuler men are in particuler congregations:
But Christ hath ordayned the Eldership
for that ende, as appeareth, Matth. 18. 15. &c.
where Chrisost. expoundeth: Tell the Churche:
that is sayth he, the gouernors of the Churche:
Therefore the Eldershipp ought to be in euery
Church.
            2 Where all sortes of Elders ought to bee,

there must be also the ioyning of their offices
in one, for the good of that congregation ouer
which they are placed: But all sorts of Elders
ought to be in euery congregation, as is prooued
in the 10. chap. for bishopps, the 12. for Elders,
&c. Therefore there must be an Eldership
in euery congregation.
            3 If no perticular congregation haue greater
priuiledges giuen there vnto by the word of
God then others haue, then must there eyther
be no Eldership at all (which is false, in that Elders
are prooued to be by the worde of God in
the Church) or els it must be in euery congregation:
But euery congregation is of like priuiledge,
which appeareth by this, that it is a perfect
bodie of it selfe: Therefore there must be
an Eldership in euery congregation.
            4 The same warrant that is in the worde of
God, for to haue an Eldership in one place, is a
warrant for it in all; for the word of God tyeth
it, not to Churches in cities, but indefinitely to
the church: But there is warraunt for it out of
the worde to be some where, as appeareth by
this, that the Apostles are sayd to establish it, &
make mention of it: Therefore it must be in
euery congregation.
            Therefore, if the Eldershipp be ordayned by
Christ,The conclusion as a meanes to keepe men in obedience
vnto the Gospell; if all sorts of Elders must be
in euery Church; if euery congregation be of
equall priuiledges; lastly if there bee the lyke
warraunt for it in euery Church, that is in any:
then must it needs followe, that there ought to
be an Eldership in euery congregation.
            
               
Whatsoeuer is obiected against this, that hath
any shewe in it, is aunswered in the 12. chap. of
Elders.
            The office of the Eldershipp is ordayned by
Christ to be perpetuall,The 2. proposition. and ordinarie for the
gouernment of his church, T. C. 1. book 177 denied
by them, VVhitgift 1. and by their practize
in keeping it out: but the trueth of it appeareth
by these reasons that do follow.
            1 If the causes why Christe woulde haue an
Eldershipp in his Churche be perpetuall, then
must also the thing it selfe be perpetuall:See the answer
                     •
                   to D. Bridges page 132. But
the causes are perpetuall, which be to gouerne
the Church by the rules of his worde, and that
ecclesiastically: Therefore the Eldership is perpetuall.
            2 If Christ be the author of the Eldership, &
left it by the Apostles to bee established in the
Church, then it is perpetuall; for his commission
giuen to the Apostles, is to be obserued vnto
the end of the world: But Christ is the author
of it, as appereth both by his giuing of the
gifts for the perticular members thereof, & the
whole bodye of it; as also in that the Apostles
did establish it in the Church, who went not frō
their commission, 1. cor. 11. 12. Therfore the Eldership
is perpetuall.
            3 Whatsoeuer is the commaundement of
God, once deliuered by him, is neuer repealed
againe, and to be acknowledged of euery spirituall
man; that same is to bee receiued by the
Churche of God to be perpetuall: But such is
the gouernment of the Church by pastors, doctors
and Elders, and so of the whole Eldership,

as appeareth in that they are all mentioned
in the writinges of S. Paule, which are so esteemed:
1. cor. 14. 37. Therefore the gouernment
of the Church by an Eldership is perpetuall.
            4 That whose seuerall parts is perpetuall, &
which hath perpetuall gifts giuen, for the furnishing
thereof for euer; that same must needs
be perpetuall: But the seuerall parts of the Eldership,
as pastour, doctour and Elders, be perpetuall,
as is proued in the 10. & 12. chap. Therfore
the Eldership is perpetuall.
            5 Whatsoeuer is grounded vpon the generall
commaundements, and rules of the scriptures,
that same is perpetuall: But the gouerning
of the Church by the Eldership, is such, as
hath partly bene prooued in election and ordination,
and execution of the seuerall Churche
offices, which is the greatest part of gouernement,
and shall further appeare, in the censures
of the Church hereafter: Therfore the gouernment
of the Church by the Eldership, is perpetuall.
            6 Whatsoeuer manner of gouernment hath
sufficient power, and that from God, to begin,
continue, and strengthen, both the gouernors
of the Church in their callings, and the people
in the course of obedience vnto Christe; that
same gouernment is to be perpetual: But such
is the gouernment by the Eldershipp, as appeareth
by this, that the Apostles vsed no other:
Therefore the Eldership is to be perpetuall.
            7 That gouernment which the 12. Apostles,
and Paule, before they consulted together, did
vniformly agree in, that same must needs be of

God, and consequently perpetuall, vnlesse
the repealing of it doe appeare: but suche is
the gouernement by the Eldership, (for all the
aduersaries therevnto, confesse that it was in
the Apostles time:) Therefore it is perpetuall.
            8 Whatsoeuer hath the same grounds, that
the preaching of the word and ministration of
the sacramentes haue, the same is perpetuall:
But such is the gouernment of the Eldershipp,
for it is grounded vpon the commaundements
of Christ, and practize of the Apostles: Therefore
it is perpetuall.
            9 That which hath the like groundes to bee
perpetuall, that the Apostles, prophets, and Euangelists,
had to be for a time, the same is perpetuall:
But suche is the gouernement of the
Church by an Eldershipp, which appeareth by
this, that they are therefore ceased, because
their gifts of imediate calling, &c. be gone, and
the gifts of these, ioyntly and seuerally doe remaine:
Therefore it is perpetuall.
            10 Whatsoeuer is the perpetuall and ordinary
remedie to cure diseases of the Church, &
strengthen the health of the same, that same is
perpetuall: But suche is the gouernement
by the eldershipp, as appeareth by the necessitie,
and profite of the seuerall offices thereof,
and of this, that we are still to obserue in causes
of extremities: Tell the Church, Matth. 18. 17.
Therefore it is perpetuall.
            11 That gouernement whiche was in the
Church appoynted of God vnder the Law, and
continued (in respect of the substance) by christ
and his Apostles, and bettered (in respect of the

accedents) by them, that same is perpetuall: But
such is the gouernment by the Eldership, as appeareth
in the 12. reason of the 1. chap: Therefore
it is perpetuall.
            12 If there be any reason why this gouernment
should be alterable (being once set in the
Church by Christ) it is eyther in respect of the
extraordinary offices ceased, or the addition of
the magistrate: But not of the former, because
the Churche hath neuer had any neede of extraordinary
giftes, but God hath giuen them, &
so will hee euer: nor of the latter, for that the
magistrates office is to defende the buylding of
the Church by that order which Christe hath
set downe, and not to alter any thing therein:
Therefore it is perpetuall.
            13 Eyther this gouernement is the best and
perpetuall, or els there is none, and so Christe
should be thought to haue left his Church with
out a gouernement, which is disprooued in the
7. & 8. reasons in the 1. chap. for this was once
established by Christ, and so was no other: But
some gouernment must needes be the best and
and perpetuall: Therefore this is perpetuall.
            14 No man may iustly forbidd (speaking of
the church gouernment) to returne to the old
constitution of the churche of God,Confess. Heluet. Tigur. Bern. Geneua, Polonia, Hungaria, Scotland, cap. 18. and to receiue
it before the custome of men.
            15 Experience teacheth this order (speaking
of the church gouernment) was not for on
age,Caluin Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8. but necessary to all ages.
            16 Though the common wealth change hir
gouernement,P. Martyr vpon Rom. 3. yet the church must keepe hirs
still.
            
               
17 Lamenteth, that some were found among
thē that are esteemed forwardest,Bucer de reg. Christ. 15. which would
not haue the same discipline vsed now a dayes,
that was in the Apostles times, obiecting the
difference of times and men.
            18 The Apostles haue written these lawes,M. Whitaker against Duraeus.
(speaking of Discipline) not for a daye, or for
the firste age, but to endure for all times to
come; and therefore haue 
                  •
               atified them with a
most earnest obtestation: 1. Tim. 6. 14. that these
commandements should be kept vntill the day
of the Lord.
            Therefore,The Conclusion▪
                if the causes of once or dayning
an Eldership, be perpetuall; if Christ be the author
of it, and left it in the Church by the Apostles;
if it be Gods commandement, not yet repealed;
if the parts of it, and gifts for it be perpetuall;
if it bee grounded vppon the generall
commandements and rules of the scriptures; if
it haue sufficient power from God, to begin,
continue and confirme a church; if it was agreed
vpon by the 12. Apostles, & Paule before
they met together; if it haue the same grounds
with the preaching of the worde; if it haue as
good grounds to be perpetuall as the Apostles,
&c. to be for a time; if it be the perpetuall remedie
against all the diseases of the Church; if
it was vnder the law, and inriched by Christe &
his Apostles vnder the Gospell; if it be neyther
alterable in respecte of the extraordinarie offices
ceased, nor the magistrate added to the
Churche; if it be the onely gouernement, that
challengeth authoritie from God; if no man
may iustly forbidd it; if it be necessarye for all

times; if the common wealth may chaunge hir
gouernment, but not the Church; if the difference
of times and men be nothing against it;
lastly, if the rules that the Apostles gaue for it,
be confirmed with a charge, to bee kept vntill
the comming of Christ: then must it needs follow,
that the gouernment of the Church by an
Eldership, ought to be perpetuall.
            They obiecte that many inconueniences
would follow vpon this gouernement,Obiections against the perpetuitie of the Eldership, & answers to the same. which
are seuerally to be answered.
            1 Obiection By this euery parrish shal follow
their Seniors, and then there will be so many
Elderships, so many diuers fashions, seeing one
may not meddle with another.
            
               Ansvvere The gouernement desired is vniforme
for euerye Churche, and admitteth no
change, no not in outward ceremonies, without
a synode of the choyce men of seuerall Elderships.
            2 Obiection If they being al mean men, chuse
an Earle, he may not refuse, but be at their beck
and commandement.
            
               Ansvvere No man that is chosen is compelled
to an office against his will, but he that despiseth
to consult with others in Gods matters,
because they bee poore, reprocheth God that
made them, Pro. 17. 5.
            3 Obiection It ouerburdeneth the parrish, to
prouide for the norishment of so many church
officers.
            
               Ansvvere It is not necessary that they should
prouide for any moe of them, sauing those that
are exercised in the ministery of the worde, vnvnlesse

any of the rest may need the liberallity
of the Church.
            4 Obiection It bringeth in a newe popedome
and tyrannie into the Church.
            
               Ansvvere It is blasphemie to tearme the gouernment
of Christe so, because we refuse the
tyranny of the pope, shall we therfore doe what
we list, and not yeelde obedience to the scepter
of Christ.
            5 Obiection It is a kind of Donatisme to challenge
such authoritie ouer princes.
            
               Ansvvere And it is flattery to suffer princes
to doe what they liste; this is the obiection of
Gualter, who is a professed enemy to discipline
            6 Obiection It taketh away princes authoritie
in causes Ecclesiasticall.
            
               Ansvvere No more then it did from Dauid
in his time, nor so much as the Bb. do nowe, for
the prince requireth but this, to see the church
well ordered, which the Eldership aloweth and
craueth.
            7 Obiection It transformeth the state of the
common wealth, into a meere popularitie, and
will alter the gouernment thereof.
            
               Ansvvere It neither transformeth nor altereth
any thing in it, for let it be shewed what damage
would come by this discipline to any magistracie,
from the princes throne, to the office
of the headborow.
            8 Obiection It wil breed contention and partiallity
in iudgement.
            
               Ansvvere Where can be greater contention
then the Bb. maintaine for their kingdome, or
greater partiallitie then in them, to their kinsfolkes,

seruants, Sycophants, &c.
            9 Obiection It wil be contemned, and so good
order neglected.
            
               Aunsvvere None euer deserued more contempt,
then the BB. and their officers doe, for all
their pompe: but God whose ordinaunce it is,
will procure sufficient awe vnto it; marke how
these obiections stand together, in the 4. it was
tyrannie, and here it is too contemptible, these
be contrary.
            10 Obiection All alterations be dangerous.
            
               Ansvvere Neuer (where we change from the
obedience of Antichriste, to the seruice of the
liuing God) was it euer dangerous to amende
things amisse, by that course which is described
of God: if it were, let the perticular of it appear,
this might wel haue bin Steuen Gardiners reason
for popery, in the time of king H. the eight.
            The Church must be gouerned onely by the
rules of Gods word, this is in effect,The 3. proposition. the proposition
of the first chap. wherevnto all those reasons
there alleadged may be referred; there is
aduouched generally, the certayne grounds of
the whole discipline, against the imagined libertie
left to the Church: here is affirmed the
perticular direction of the Churche gouernement,
by the authoritie of the Eldershipp, to
proceed according to the rules of Gods reuealed
will, and not by that cursed and monstrous
cannon law, which is made manifest vnto vs by
these reasons.
            1 All gouernours are to execute their authoritie,
by the same warrant from which they
haue it: But the gouernours of the Church of

God, haue their warrant to be gouernours only
from the word, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore they
must gouerne the Church onely by the word.
            2 The Churche is to be gouerned by that
which the ministers may teach vnto the same,
for they are taught to the ende that they may
obey, and so be gouerned by the same: But the
ministers may teach nothing but the worde of
God, 1. Cor. 11. 23. Therefore the Church is to
be gouerned onely by the word of God.
            3 That which maketh the Churche obedient
vnto Christ, must be the direction whereby
it is to be gouerned: Onely the worde of God
maketh the church obedient vnto christ: Therfore
it is to be gouerned by the rules of Gods
worde.
            4 Euery kingdome or houshold, must be gouerned
onely by the lawes of the king, or orders
of the housholder: The Churche is the
kingdome and house of God, and his worde is
the onely law that he hath giuen for the same:
Therefore it must bee gouerned onely by the
worde of God.
            5 That which was ordayned to destroy the
Churche of God, cannot be a good rule to gouerne
the same by: But such is the cannon law,
for it was ordained to strengthen the kingdom
of Antichrist: Abstract. Therefore it cannot be
a good rule to direct the church by, and consequently,
it must be gouerned by the worde, for
no other rule is offered vnto vs, but the one of
these twaine.
            6 That which was inuented by the dragon,
that persecuteth the woman and her childe,

that same cānot be good for the church, which
is that woman: But such is the cannon law, for
it was inuented by Antichriste, which is that
dragon: Therefore it cannot bee good for the
ruling of the church, and consequently, &c.
            7 That which strengtheneth the power of
darknes & ignorance, cannot be good to guide
them, that must walke in light and knowledge:
But the cannon lawe strengtheneth the power
of darknes and ignorance, for it increaseth popery,
as appeareth by this, that there is scarce
an officer towardes it, in these dayes of knowledge,
but he is a papist: Therfore it cannot be
good to guide the church of God.
            8 That which destroieth the church of God
cannot be good to rule the same: But the cannon
law destroieth it, for it crosseth euery faithfull
minister in the discharge of his dutie, and
euery good christian, walking in the wayes of
godlines, and nippeth in the head euery good
action, as experience teacheth vs: Therefore it
cannot be a good rule to gouerne the churche
by.
            9 That which hath bred moe trayterous papists
in England, then the Seminaries at Rome
and Rhemes, that same cannot be good to gouerne
the church of God: But such is the cannon
lawe, for it hath kept cut discipline, nourished
ignorance, and fostered superstition & popery,
in all estates of people, that neuer came
at those Seminaries: Therefore it cannot be a
good rule to gouerne the church of God by.
            10 That which nourisheth the hope of Antichriste
to returne hither againe, cannot bee

good to direct in the gouerment of the church:
But such is the cannon lawe, for it keepeth the
cages for those vncleane byrds; as Archb. and
L. BB. seas, arches, cathedral churches, &c: therfore
it cannot be a good rule for the direction
of the Church.
            11 That which all the Churches haue cast
off, as vnfit for the gouernment of the Church,
cannot be good for the same: But all the churches,
that haue forsaken the pope (yea they that
haue not receiued the discipline of Christ wholy)
haue cast of the cannon lawe: Therefore it
cannot be good for the same.
            12 Yea, we our selues mislike it, as appereth
by a statute made vnder Ed. 6.
            Therefore,The Conclusion if gouernours are to rule by the
same authoritie whereby they are gouernours;
if the Church must be gouerned, by that which
the ministers may teache; if the worde of God
onely, make the Church obedient vnto Christ;
if euery kingdome must be ruled by the lawes
of their king; and if the cannon lawe be ordained
to destroy the Churche; if it was inuented
to persecute the churche; if it strengthen the
power of darkenesse and ignoraunce, if it kill
the Churche of God; if it breede moe traiterous
papistes, then the Seminaries at Rome
and Rhemes; if it nowrishe the hope of Antichrists
returne: lastly if all the Churches that
haue forsaken the pope, haue cast it of also; yea
if we our selues do mislike it: then must it needs
follow, that the Church ought to be gouerned,
onely by that golden rule of Gods word, & not
by that leaden lump of the cannon law.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 15.
            THe office of the Church gouernment,
is meere Ecclesiasticall, and therefore
the gouernors of the church may not
meddle, but onely in church-matters,
as for example, vocation, and abeycation,
deciding of controuersies, in doctrine and
manners, so far as appertayneth to consience,
and the church censures, T. C. booke 1. pag 206
Discipl. Eccle. 126. but they thinke that church-gouernours,
may also meddle in ciuill causes:
VVhitgifte page 749: & their practize, that take
vpon them to be Councellors of state, to iudge
ciuilly, as punishe with imprisonment, &c. But
this is disprooued, and so the former prooued
by these reasons.
            1 That which our sauiour Christ refused, because
it belonged not vnto him, ruling & teaching
the church, that same is not lawfull for any
Ecclesiast. person to do: But christ refused to
deuide the inheritance, Luke. 12. 14. onely because
he came to buylde a spirituall kingdome,
for otherwise he being God, had authoritye ouer
all thinges: Therefore it is not lawfull for
Ecclesiasticall persons to bee iudges of ciuill
causes.
            2 That which was forbidden the Apostles,
is vnlawfull for euery Ecclesiasticall officer, for
they were the chiefe vnder christ, and had (after
a sort) all offices in themselues, vntil they could
plant them in others: But such dominion was
forbidden them, as the kinges of the nations, &
other ciuill magistrates haue, Luk. 22. 28. which
is, to rule ciuilly: Therefore they may not exercise

any ciuill authority.
            3 If necessary dueties are to be lefte, rather
then our duties to the Churche shoulde not be
thorowly discharged, then may not a churche
officer deale in ciuill iurisdiction, which is lesse
necessary vnto him: But the former is true, as
appeareth by the words of Christ, to him that
woulde haue buried his father, Luke. 6. 59. 60.
Therefore they may not exercise any ciuil authority.
            4 If he that hath an office must attend vpon
it, then may he not meddle in another, for hee
cannot attend them both at once: But the former
is true, Rom. 12. 7. Therfore may no church
officer, meddle with temporall iurisdiction.
            5 As the Souldiour is in his warfare, so are
church officers, in the ruling of Gods church:
But the Soldior entangleth not himselfe in the
things of this life, because they are of another
nature to his warfare; which place Cyprian
alleadgeth againste a minister, that became
an executour to his friendes will: Therefore
church-officers may not meddle with ciuill offices,
because they are of another nature, then
his calling.
            6 Those thinges that in themselues are of
contrary quallitie, cannot concurre in one subiect:
But the gouernments of the church and
common wealth be such, not onely in this, that
they are the next speciall members of one generall,
but also, in that the one is spirituall, and
the other temporall, the one respecteth the
soule, and the other the bodie. Therefore they
cannot bee in one man together, and consequently,

&c.
            7 If the gouernment of the churche, both
in euery particular mans office, and in the generall
Eldership, be a matter of great waight, &
the ability of man, very small in euery good action,
then may not a church-officer meddle in
another calling, whereby he is made lesse able
to discharge his dutie: But the former is true,
as all men may see, that looke into the worde of
God, what is required of such men, and knowe
by the same worde, the manifolde infirmities &
vntowardnes of man: Therfore the latter must
needs be true also.
            8 If the Apostles (who were the most able of
all others) found themselues vnfitt for two offices,
which were both Ecclesiasticall; then is the
best church-gouernour vnfit for two, which be
of more difference one from another, as be the
gouernment of the church and commonwelth:
But the former is true, as appeareth, Actes 6. 2.
Therefore the latter must needs be true also.
            9 That which we iustly reprooue in the papists,
must needs (if we do like) be founde more
vnlawfull and intollerable in our selues: But we
iustly reprooue the papists, for hauing in their
hands both the swordes, that is, the Ecclesiasticall
and ciuill iurisdiction: Therefore it is more
intollerable, being found in any of vs.
            10 If it be lawfull for an ecclesiasticall person,
to exercise the office of the ciuill magistrate,
then (on the contrary) it is lawfull for the
ciuill magistrate, to exercise the offices of Ecclesiasticall
persons, for there is as good reason
for the one, as the other: But the latter is vnlawfull;

for who would like of any L. Mayor, to
step into the pulpit and preach, &c. Therefore
the first is vnlawfull also.
            11 They may not intangle themselues with
worldly offices, but attende vpon their Ecclesiasticall
affaires.Canon. Apost. cap. 80.
            
            12 None of the Clarkes or cleargie,Concil. Calced. cap. 3. & 7. shall
receiue any charge of those whiche are vnder
age, the cause of that decree, is there said to be,
for that there were certain ministers, that were
stuards to noble men; and in the 7. cannon, that
none of them shoulde receiue any secular honors.
            13 The BB. shall onely attende vnto prayer,4. Concil. Carth. cap. 20.
reading and preaching.
            14 He bringeth diuers reasons to prooue,Caluin Institut. lib. 4 cap. 11. sect. 9.
that BB. may neither vsurpe, nor take (being offered
vnto them) any ciuill office.
            15 He sheweth how the offices are to be distinguished,Beza. confess. cap. 5. sect. 32. & 42.
and in what sort it is sayde, that the
fathers delt in the things of this life, and howe
the corporal punishments by the Apostles were
perticular and extraordinary.
            16 When both the offices meet in one man,P. Martyr. vpon 
                     •
                  om. 13.
the one hindereth the other, so that he that exerciseth
the one, cannot minister the other.
            17 There is no man so wise and holy,Bucer vpon. Matth. 5. which
is able to exercize both the ciuill, and Ecclesiasticall
power, and therefore he that will exercize
the one, must leaue the other.
            Therefore, if Christ refused to iudge in temporall
causes,The Conclusion because it belonged not to his office;
if ciuill dominion was forbidden the Apostles;
if necessary duties are rather to be lefte

vndone, then our diligence in the matters of
the Churche shoulde bee lessened; if hee that
hath an office, must attende vppon it; if wee
may not be intangled with any hinderance; if
the ciuill & Ecclesiasticall functions, be of contrary
natures; if euery office in the Church, be
more then any one can perfectly discharge; if
the Apostles found themselues vnfit for two offices
of like nature; if we iustly reprooue the papists
for their two swordes; if a magistrate may
not preach; if they may not meddle with worldly
offices, nor be tutors to Orphans, but attend
only vnto the ministery of the word,  if they
may neither vsurpe, nor take (being offered) any
ciuill-office; if they be to be distinguished to seuerall
persons, or els one hindereth the other;
lastly, if none be able to execute both, then must
it needs follow, that Ecclesiasticall officers may
not beare ciuill offices: and consequently the
office of the Church-gouernment, is meere ecclesiasticall.
            
               Their obiections hereunto be these.
               1 Obiection It countenanceth and maintayneth
religion,Obiections for ciuill offices in ecclesiasticall persons. to haue ciuill authoritie.
               
                  Ansvvere It is (in deed) the papists reason for
their two swordes, which M. Caluin confuteth:
Institut, booke 4. cap. 11. sect. 9.
               2 Obiection It is good to punishe vice by corporall
punishment, that Gods word may be the
better obeyed.
               
                  Ansvvere It is good to preach Gods word to
men, that they may obey their prince for conscience
sake; may the magistrate therefore
preach? wee may not doe euerye thing that is

good, but onely that which is agreeable to our
callings.
               3 Obiection Eli and Samuel, were both priests
and Iudges.
               
                  Ansvvere They were extraordinary (for God
separated those two offices in Moses, and gaue
the one vnto Aaron) and so was Eliahs killing
of the false prophets, and Christes whipping of
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.
               4 Obiection Peter killed Ananias, therefore

                     •
                  B. may haue prisons.
               
                  Ansvvere It was by his worde onely, and not
by anye ciuill punishment, if they can doe the
like, Peters example will serue their turnes, if
not, then must it be (with the former) extraordinarie.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 16.
            THe placing and displacing of Church-officers,
appertaineth vnto the Eldership. This
is prooued in the 7. chap. and their obiections
are there aunswered for the first part, which is
the placing: but the latter part is to be cleared
by some mo reasons, because the BB. do displace
the best ministers at their plesure, which is proued
to be a most wicked action, by these resons.
            1 Those that are called vnto the ministery
by the Lord from heauen, and outwardly by the
meanes of men, so long as they are blameles in
doctrine and conuersation, 1. Tim. 3. 10. cannot
be displaced, without hainous wikednes against
the manifest will of God: But suche are the ministers
that the BB. do daily displace, as they cō
               fesse
themselues, when (euen) in their sermons
they iustifie their doctrine, in saying that they

differ onely in outward rites; and as their greatest
enemies will saye, when they are asked of
such mens liues: Therefore they cannot be displaced
without great wickednes.
            2 Those that are carefull to discharge the
dutie of Gods ministers, both in teaching, and
giuing example to their flockes, cannot be displaced
without great impietie: Such are these
ministers, that are daily displaced, as appeareth
by this, that they preache more diligently then
any other, and that they followe not the course
of the worlde, in adding liuing vnto liuing, but
many of them (being as worthy for their giftes,
as the worthiest) liue poorely, rather then they
will want the comfort of a good conscience:
Therefore they cannot be put to silence without
great sinne.
            3 To depriue Gods people of their spirituall
comfort, is a grieuous and horrible wickednes:
To put such to silence as are before mentioned
is to depriue Gods people of their spirituall cō
               fort:
which if any man will denie, all the godly
where such a one dwelleth, shall tell him hee
lyeth: Therefore to displace such ministers, is a
haynous and horrible wickednes.
            4 That which giueth occasion to the weake
to stumble and fall away from the Gospell, is a
haynous and horrible sinne: But such is the displacing
of those ministers, as appeareth by this,
that many doubt whether that which he hath
taught be true, whom the professors of the gospell
do displace, and by this, that many who had
made good beginnings, by the discontinuance
of their teachers, doe fall away: Therefore to

displace those ministers, is a haynous and horrible
sinne.
            5 Those whose labours God doth blesse, can
not be displaced without fighting against God,
and consequently great impietie: But such are
these ministers that the BB. doe dayly displace,
as all that loue the Gospell in euery countrye
can witnes: Therfore to displace them is great
impiety.
            6 That action which giueth the common enemy
iust cause to reioyce, and hope to get the
victory, is a haynous and horrible offence: But
such is the displacing of those ministers, as appeareth
in euery country, where such ministers
are displaced, and such enemies do dwell: Therfore
to displace such, is a haynous and horrible
offence.
            7 That action that causeth the doers therof
to be esteemed enemies to the gospell, must
needes be a haynous sinne: But such is the putting
of those ministers to silence, for it maketh
the people that haue any loue to religion, think
that they are not of God in so doing, for say they
he that loueth Christ cannot crosse the course
of the Gospel as these men doe: Therefore the
displacing of them is a haynous sinne.
            8 That which letteth in more wickednes at
once, then the diligent preaching of the worde
could driue out in diuers yeeres, must needs be
a haynous sinne: but suche is the displacing of
these ministers: for, prophaning of the Saboth,
and all disorder, commeth into a congregation
the same day that such a minister, that hath
long labored against it is displaced, as experience

in suche places prooueth: Therefore to
displace such ministers is a haynous sinne.
            9 That which interrupteth the course of the
Gospell, without warraunt eyther from Gods
word, or the lawes of the land, is a haynous and
horrible sinne: Such is the displacing of those
ministers, as is proued in al the writings on our
side; & lastly, in the answere to D. Bridges: therfore
to displace such ministers, is a haynous &
horrible sinne.
            Therefore if the ministers that bee vsually
displaced,The Conclusion be called of God; if they discharge the
dutie of good ministers, both in doctrine and
life; if the displacing of them, bee to depriue
Gods people of their spiritual comfort; if it giue
occasion to some to doubt of the Gospel, and to
fall away; if God giue a blessing vnto their labours;
if the displacing of them giue the enemy
matter to reioyce, and hope to ouercome; if it
cause the displacers to be esteemed enemies to
the Gospell; if it let in more wickednesse in one
day, then preaching can throwe out in many
yeeres; if it interrupt the course of the gospell,
without warrant eyther from the word of God,
or lawes of the land; then must it needs follow,
that the displacing of those ministers is a most
haynous, and horrible sinne against the Lord.
         
         
            CHAP. 17.
            THe Eldership is to admonishe euery one,
by whome offence appeareth vnto them
to grow in the Church: There is no question
between vs, about admonition it selfe; but
this they deny, that the execution of any discipline

(and therefore of this poynt) belongeth
vnto the Eldership; which point is prooued in
the seuerall chapters going before: so that I
need not saye any thing of this, sauing with (a
reason or twayne) to shewe the necessitie and
benefit of it in the Church of God.
            1 That whiche priuate men offended, are
commaunded to seeke vnto for the redresse of
the offender, is a necessarie, & an ordinary way
for the amendment of them that doe offend in
the Church of God: But such is the admonition
of those that are in authoritie, and cary the
name of the Church, Matth. 18. 15. see chap. 14.
and the 1. proposition of the same: Therefore
admonition in such cases by the Eldership, is a
necessary and ordinary way, for their amendment
that do offend.
            2 That which is more auaylable to bring the
offender to repentance, then priuate admonition,
eyther by one, or moe, that same is verye
profitable & necessarie in the Church of God:
But such is the publike admonition by the gouernours
of the Church, as appeareth by this,
that Christe maketh it a remedy, when the other
two will not preuaile, Mat. 18. 15. Therfore
it is very profitable and necessary in the church
of God.
            3 That which maketh men more afraide to
offend, then any admonition that priuate men
can giue, is profitable & necessary in the church
of God: But such is the Eldership, before whom
men know they shalbe brought if they doe not
amend: Therefore it is very profitable and necessary
in the Church of God.
            
               
4 That which hath a greater promise to do
good, then priuate admonition, is very necessary
in the Church of God: But such is the admonition
that is giuen by the Eldership, because it
preuayleth when the former doth not: Therefore
it is profitable in the Church of God.
            5 That without which, all duties of charity
cannot be exercised towards sinners, is needful
to be in the Church of God: But without admonition
by the Eldershipp, all duties of charitie
cannot be exercised towards sinners: Therfore
it is needfull to be in the Church of God.
            6 That which woulde bridle the outragious
sinnes of some, and keepe in the derision and
mockery, that priuate admonitions do receiue,
is needful to be in the Church of God: But this
would admonition by the Eldershipp doe; for if
men knewe that they should answere vnto the
Churche for their ill demeanour, to them that
rebuke them for sinning; they woulde refraine
(at least for feare) from such kinde of outrage:
Therefore it is needful to be in the Churche of
God.
            Therefore seeing publike admonition before
the Eldership is to be sought,The Conclusion by those that are
offended, and cannot be satisfied; seeing it is
more auayleable then priuate admonition; seeing
it maketh men more afraid to offend; seing
it hath a greater promise; seeing without it all
duties of charity, cannot be exercized towards
the sinner; lastly seeing it would bridle the outragious
sinnes of many; Therfore it must needs
followe, that it is very profitable, and necessary
to be in the Church of God.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 18.
            THose that be not reclaimed from their
faultes by admonition, are by the Eldership
to be suspended frō the Lords
supper, or being officers of the church,
from the execution of their office, vntil
they do eyther giue good testimony of their
amendment, or iust cause to be further proceeded
against. Neyther is there any controuersie
betwixt them and vs, about this poynt; sauing
that (as in the former) they will denie it to appertaine
to the Eldership, which is prooued before.
I will therefore (for their vnderstanding
that desire direction in the trueth) firste, shewe
that it is a course that hath warrant in the scriptures;
secondly, that it is of very profitable vse
in the Church of God: the first is thus proued.
            1 Whatsoeuer is enioyned,Suspention warranted by the word, being vpon such grounds as the worde setteth downe. as a duetie to be
done by euery christian, if he leaue it vndone,
he is to be compelled by the gouernours of the
Church to doe it, Luke. 14. 17. 23. But if a mans
brother haue any thing against him, & he make
no conscience to leaue his gifte there, & be first
reconciled, Matth. 5. 24. he is to be compelled to
do it: Therefore separation from the Lordes
supper, is warranted by the word.
            2 If that commandement of Christe, Matth.
7. 6. giue not that which is holy vnto doggs, can
neyther be properly vnderstood of them, that
were neuer of the Churche, nor them that be
excommunicated; then is it a warraunt for such
separation of the vnworthy, and consequently,
that separation is warranted in the word: But
the former is true, as appeareth by this, that

the meanest of the Iewes did knowe, that holy
things belonged to neyther of them, and so the
commandement had beene needlesse: Therefore
suspention is warranted by the word.
            3 If there be sinners that are not to be excō
               municated,
and yet it were offensiue to giue thē
the Lords supper, then is this course warranted
by the word, for els should Christ haue left his
Church destitute of direction, in common and
vsuall difficulties, which is prooued in the first
chap. to be otherwise: But such sinners there are
as the notorious sinner repenting; men mainly
suspected of notorious transgressions, &c. Therfore
suspention hath his warrant in the worde.
            4 The course that God prescribed in the
shadow, for corporal purifyings, must in the body
(in respect of the substaunce) be obserued in
the spirituall clensing of euery member of the
Church: But many were separated from the
publike sacrifices for a season, by reason of their
corporall vncleanes, who, yet were not worthy
to be excommunicated: Therefore must also
some be kept from the Lordes supper for a season,
who yet appeare not so haynously to haue
sinned, as to deserue excommunication.
            5 The church cannot without great offence,
suffer one that hath fallen into some open sin,
or that is vehemently suspected, to haue haynously
offended, continue in the administration
of any publike function: But the Churche
cannot iustly displace suche a man at the first,
making shew of repentaunce, or standing vpon
his purgation: Therefore he must be separated
for a time.
            
               
6 That which was commaunded vnder the
law to be done to the priest, that was vncleane
in body, or suspected to be a leaper; that same
must much more vnder the Gospell, be done
vnto the minister, or other Church officer, that
hath sinned, or is suspected to haue committed
a great sinne: But such a priest was to be separated
from offring of sacrifices for a certaine
time: Therefore much more must the like be
done to a Church officer in the like case.
            Therefore,The Conclusion if the Churche bee to compell a
priuate man to doe his duetie; if, giue not holy
things to doggs, be vnderstood of them within
the church; if there be sinners that cannot with
out offence be admitted to the Lords supper, &
yet deserue not excommunication; if for corporall
vncleannes vnder the law, they were to
abstaine a certaine time; and if the Church can
not without great offence, suffer him that hath
committed an open sinne (though he repent)
or that is vehemently suspected of a notorious
sinne, continue in the execution of his office,
vntil the congregation be satisfied; Lastly, if the
priest that was vncleane, or suspected of leprosie,
might not offer sacrifices: then is it plaine,
that both the separation of some men from the
Lords supper, and other from the execution of
their publik function for a time; is a thing warranted
by the word of God.
            The latter part,The vse o
                     •
                   suspention profitable in the Church. which is that this kind of
suspention hath a profitable vse in the church
of God, is thus prooued.
            1 That whiche keepeth the godly in more
carefull obedience, and keepeth in the hypocrites,

that they breake not out, is very profitable
for the Church of God: But such is the vse
of the separation from the Lordes supper, and
from executing publike function in the church:
Therefore it is profitable in the church of God.
            2 That which remooueth (euen) the appearance
of offence, from the Churche of God, is
very profitable for the same: But such is the separation:
Therefore it is profitable for the
Church of God.
            3 That which declareth vnto the world, that
the Church of God is carefull to practize that
which it professeth, is very profitable: But such
is this separation, for it sheweth that they cannot
away with vngodly life; no, not among thē
               selues:
Therefore it is profitable for the church
of God.
            4 That which giueth occasion to the church,
to be exercised in the actions of religion, with
more sound comfort, is profitable for the same:

                  •
               ut such is this separation, for euery one shall
see thereby, the vnworthy (for whose sakes, God
might be angrie with them all, Iosh. 7. 11.) weeded
from among them: Therefore it is profitable
for the Church of God.
            5 That whiche is a speciall meanes to procure
the Lord (in mercie) to continue his word
vnto his Church, is profitable for the same: such
is this seperation; for it is a notable meanes
to keepe men in obedience to that which they
professe: Therfore it is profitable for the churh
of God.
            Therefore,The Conclusion if separation of the knowne, or
suspected sinner, from the Lords supper, & such

a church officer from the execution of his publike
function, doe keepe men in obedience that
be godly, and restrayneth hypocrites from outrage;
if it remooue the very appearance of euil;
if it let the world see, that the Churche laboureth
to practize that which it doth professe; if
it make euerye member of the Churche to be
exercized in the actions of religion, with greater
comfort; lastly, if it be a special mean to procure
the Lord in mercie, to continue his word;
then must it needs follow, that it is of very profitable
vse vnto the Church of God.
         
         
            CHAP. 19.
            WHen neyther admonition, nor suspention
will serue to reclaym the offender, but that
it doth appeare, that he abydeth in impenitencie,
and is incorrigible, the Eldership, after mature
deliberation, and commending of the party
vnto the prayers of the Churche (hee yet remaining
obstinate) is to proceed to excommunication:
which containeth these propositions
in question betwixt vs and the BB.
            1 It may not be done, but vpon great and vvayghtie
occasion.
            2 It may not be done by any one man, but by the Eldership,
the vvhole Church consenting therevnto.
            The former is holden by vs, T. C. 1. book, pag
183. Discipl. Eccles. 130. and denied by them in
their practize, that send it out (many times) for
not paying of sixe pence. But our assertion is
thus prooued, and their godlesse practize disprooued.
            1 That which Christ hath ordayned for theThe proofe of the 1. proposition.
               
last remedie against sinne, and onely to be vsed
when neyther admonition, reprehension, nor
separation from the externall communion of
the saynts for a time will serue; that same is not
to be vsed, but vpon great extremitie: But such
is excommunication, as appeareth, Math. 18. 15.
Therefore it may not be vsed, but vppon most
wayghtie occasion, that is in the case (onely) of
extremitie, when no other meanes will serue
the turne.
            2 That whiche cutteth a man of from the
Church of God, and giueth him ouer vnto Satan,
as one in a desperate case, that same may
not be vsed but in greatest extremitie: But such
is excommunication, being vsed according as
God hath left it vnto his Churche, 1. Cor. 5. 5.
Therefore it may not bee vsed, but in greatest
extremitie.
            3 That which a man will doe in the cutting
off, of his hand or his foote, that same must the
Church doe, in excommunication; for it is the
cutting off, of a member: But a man will trie all
other wayes, and will neuer cut of his hande or
his foote, vntill he see it incurable, and ready to
infect the other parts of his bodie: Therefore
excommunication may not be vsed, but in case
of greatest extremitie.
            4 That which is contrary to naturall affection,
and worketh that whiche a louing heart
doth tremble to thinke of; that same may not
be done but in greatest extremitie: But such is
the excommunication, for it depriueth the
party excommunicated of our loue, and throweth
him into the most wretched case, that can

befall vnto man in this life: Therefore it may
not be done, but in cases of greatest extremity.
            Therefore if excommunication be ordained
of Christe,The Conclusion as a remedie, onely when all other
helpes will not serue; if it cut the partie from
Gods Churche, and giue him ouer vnto Satan;
if it must be proceeded vnto, as a man doth to
the cutting off of his hand or foote; lastly, if it be
a worke contrary vnto the naturall affection of
man, & effecteth that which a louing hart doth
tremble to think vpon: then must it needs follow,
that it is to be proceeded vnto, only in the
cases of greatest extremitie, & after that all other
meanes haue bene vsed, and do appeare
not to preuaile.
            The latter poynt (which is, that excommunication
may not be done by one man,The proofe of the 2. proposiion. but by the
Eldership, the whole Church consenting therevnto)
is holden by vs, T. C. booke 1. page 183.
Discipl. Ecclesiast: 130. &c. and denyed by them,
VVhitgift, page 662. and their continuall practise;
But our assertion is thus proued▪ and their
opinion and practize, founde to be 
                  •
               rroneous
and vngodly.
            1 That which Christ commanded to be done
by the Church, may not be done by one man,
vnles you take my L. Grace for the Churche, as
VVhitgifte doth, page, 662. which needeth no
confutation: But Christe commanded that excommunication
should be done by the church,
Matth. 18. 15. Therefore it may not be done by
one man.
            2 That which Paule enioyned the Churche,
when they were met together, to doe, may not

be done by one man: But he commanded them
to excommunicate the incestuous person, whē
they were met together, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Therefore
it may not be done by one man.
            3 That which hath need of greatest aduice,
and greatest authority, may not be done by one
man: But such is the matter of excommunication,
being the denouncing of that against a
man, which he will most hardly beleeue, & being
the wayghtiest poynt of discipline: Therefore
it may not be done by one man.
            4 Those must excommunicate, that are to
deale in the other partes of discipline, as shall
appear in the resons following, and (as I think)
no man will denie: But the other partes of discipline
are exercized not by one, but by the
Church, as hath bene prooued: Therefore not
one, but the Church is to excommunicate.
            5 As it was ministred among the Iewes, so
must it be in the Church for euer; which appeareth
by this, that it is translated vnto vs from
them (as the Greeke word Synedrion, being by a
corrupt imitation, called Sanedrim, by the Rabbins,
doth import) and had nothing ceremoniall
in it: But it was executed among them by
the Church, and not any one, Iohn 9. 22. Therefore
the Church is to excommunicate, and not
one man.
            6 Sayth,Cyprian lib. 3. epist. 10. he would neuer do any thing in his
charge, without the counsell of his Elders, and
consent of the people.
            7 The elders,Epist. 14. & other church-officers, ha
                  •
               e
as wel power to obsolue, as the byshop.
            
               
8 For so much as absolution belongeth vnto
all,Epist. 19. I alone dare not do it.
            9 If there be any that haue committed such
a fault,Tertul. Apol cap. 39. that he is to be put away from the partaking
of the prayers of the Church, &c. There
do be are rule, certayne of the most approoued
auncients or elders of the Church, which haue
obtayned this honour, not by money, but by
good report.
            10 It helpeth much to make the party more
ashamed,August. lib. 3. cont. epist pe
                     •
                  
                  men. that he be excommunicated by the
whole Church: also in his bookes of Bapti
                  •
               me,
against the Donatists often.
            11 The Elders haue interest in other censures
of the Church,Ierom ad Demetriad. Epist. 1. and the Church it selfe in
excommunication.
            12 S. Paule accuseth the Corinthians,Bucer de regn
                     •
                   Bhristi lib. 1. cap. 9. for
that the whole Church had not excommunicated
the incestuous person.
            13 The Elders had the gouernement in excommunication.P. Martyr in 1. Cor. 5.
            
            14 It is very dangerous to permit so weightie
a matter to one man,The same vpon the same place. and therefore that tyrannie
may be auoyded, and this censure executed
with greater fruite and grauitie, the order
that the Apostle there vseth, is still to bee
obserued.
            15 Hee sheweth that it pertayneth not to
one man, that it is a wicked fact that one should
take the authoritie to himselfe,Caluin Institut. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 6. that is common
to others; that it openeth a way to tyrannie; taketh
from the Church their right, and abrogateth
the Ecclesiasticall senate, ordayned by Iesus
Christ.
            
               
16 The byshops,Chap. 12. sect. 6. when they excommunicated
of themselues alone, did it ambitiously, contrary
to the decrees of godly cannons: See Bucer
against Groppet, and vpon Ephes. 4. De animi
Cura, also Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
            17 It is plentifully forbidden (euen) by that
filthie puddle,See Abstract page 165. the cannon law, and therefore it
must needs be a haynous sinne, when it findeth
fault with it.
            Therefore if excommunication be to be executed
(by the commaundement of Christe) of
the Churche;The Conclusion if S. Paule enioyned it vnto the
Church; if it haue need of greatest aduice and
authoritie; if it belong to them that may execute
the other partes of Discipline; if it was so
executed among the Iewes; if to absolue, be as
well in the Elders power, as the Byshops; if Cyprian
durst not do it alone; if it was the action
(in Tertulians time) of the most approoued Elders;
if to be by the whole Churche, helpeth
much to make the partie more ashamed; if the
whole Churche haue interest in it; if the whole
Church at Corinth was reprooued, for not doing
it; if it be too weighty a matter for one man;
if the executing of it by one, ouerturneth the
order appoynted by Christ; bringeth in tyrannie;
maintayneth ambition; and lastly, be forbidden
by the cannon law it selfe. Then must it
needes followe, that it belongeth not vnto one
man to excommunicate, but vnto the Eldershipp,
and that with the consent of the whole
Church.
            Their obiections herevnto in defence of
their owne practize be these.
            
               
1 Obiection The right of excommunication,
was in S. Paule and not in the rest.
            
               Ansvvere He gaue onely direction in that, as
in all other matters, whiche hee wrote of vnto
them, but if they had not throwne out the incestuous
person, he had remayned still vnexcommunicated,
for all that which S. Paule had
sayd vnto them.
            2 Obiection Christ gaue Peter and euery Apostle
power to binde, and lose in earth and in
heauen, which interpreters expound by Matth.
18. 15.
            
               Ansvvere That power was of denouncinge
Gods iudgements, or pronouncing his mercie
in preaching, and not of this action: they are
expounded one by another, because of the ratifying
of them both in heauen alike.
            3 Obiection Paule did excommunicate Hymeneus
and Philetus.
            
               Ansvvere That is, beeing moderator of the
action, he pronounced it, not that he did it alone;
The same answere, is to be made vnto the
fathers, as Ambrose, &c. who are said to excommunicate.
            Therefore vpon these grounds of Scriptures,The Conclusion of the whole booke.
Fathers, Councels, Emperours, Lawes, Histories,
newe writers, and cleare light of reason. I
conclude, thatChap. 1. Christ hath prescribed vnto vs
an exacte, and perfect platforme of gouerning
his church at all times, and in all places; which
is this,Chap. 10. & 11 that there ought to be no ministers of
the the word, but pastors and teachers, whiche
are to beChap. 4. called by the people, andChap. 7. ordained
by the Eldership, are ofChap. 10. equall authoritie in

their seuerall congregations, musteChap. 10. with all
faythfull diligence imploye themselues, in the
ministery of the worde and sacramentes,Chap. 12. that
there are to be in euery congregation certaine
elders, whose office is to ouersee the behauiour
of the people, and assist their pastour, in the gouernment
of the church;Chap. 13. also Deacons, who
are to be imployed onely in receiuing, and bestowing
the liberallity and goods of the church
to the reliefe of the poore, and other necessary
vses:Chap. 14 Lastly, that there must be in euery congregation
an eldershipp of pastour, teacher (if
they can haue any) and elders, who are in common,
to see that the church be well gouerned,
not onely in maintayning the profession and
practize of the worde in generall,Chap. 17. but also in
admonishing, reprehending, orChap. 18. seperating frō
the Lords supper, them that walke offensiuely,
andChap. 19. lastly in excommunicating them, that by
no other meanes can be reclaimed. So that all
and euery gouernement, contrary or besides
this, whether in part or in whol, swarueth
from that order, which Christ hath
set downe in his word, and
therefore is vnlawfull.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ERRATA.
            Page 1. line 21. for 14. read 84. p. 4. l. 16. for Sa
                  •
               edori
                  •
               
read Sanedrim, p. 9. l. 11. for 43. read 43 8. l. 20 for ministerie,
read ministers, p. 15. l. 3. blot out also, p. 17. in the margent,
for Nepolitan read Nepotian, pag. 22. l. 16. for Damascus
read Damasus and so pag. 27. l. 24. pa. 23. l. 18. for
the, these, p. 25. l. 2 for & 6. read 26. p. 27. margent, for Nicene
Nicen, for Theordoret Theodoret, & for dis. 50. dis.
51. p. 30. l. 21. blot out d. pa. 32, l. 16. for 12. read 22 p. 47. l.
24. for practise, read practisers, p. 49. the marg. l. 7. blot out
8. p. 52. l. 6. for Solicus read Soticus, in the marg. for dist.
50. read dist. 80. pa. 53. l. 18. for do, doth & 20. after (Apostles)
add doth. pa. 60. l. 17 for approued read appointed.
pag. 80. line 6. red abdication. p. 81. l. 8. for Luk 6. read 9.
         
      
   