
      
         
            
            THE COMBATE
betwixt CHRIST and
the Deuill.
            
               Foure Sermons vpon the temptations
of Christ in the wildernes by Sathan,
wherein are to be sene the subtile sleightes that the
tempter vseth agaynst the children of
               
God, and the meanes that God hath appointed
to resiste him, sanctified to our vse
in the example of our Sauiour
IESVS CHRIST.
            By Iohn Vdall Preacher of the word of
God, at Kyngston vpon Thames.
            
               IAMES. 1. 2. 3. 4.
¶My Brethren, count it exceeding ioye, when ye fall into
diuers temptations: knowing that the triall of your faith,
bringeth forth pacience: & let pacience haue her perfect
work, that ye may be perfect and entier, lacking nothing.
            AT LONDON.
Printed by Robert Walde-graue, for
Thomas Man, and William Brome.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
honorable HENRY Earle of Huntyngdon
Lord Hastings. &c. Of the most Noble
Order of the Garter Knight, and Lord President
of the Counsell established in the Northpartes
1. V. VVisheth increase of all
spirituall graces, and true honor
in this world, and that endlesse
glory that lasteth
for euer.
            
               WHEN I consider with my selfe
(right honorable) that inestimable
crowne of immortall glorie
which it hath pleased God the father,
in his sonne Iesus Christ, to layMath. 25 34. vp in
store for those, whom (of his mercyEphes. 1. 4. 5. and free
fauour) he elected vnto him selfe before the
foundations of the vvorld: and with all those
Actes. 14. 22. many tribulations and afflictions, by which
his heauenly vvisedome hath appointed them
to enter into the same: I see (as in a glasse) before
myne eyes, the cause that moued our Sauiour
Christ to say, thatMath. 7. 14. straite is the way,
vvhich leadeth to life and fevv, there by that



finde it, and the blessed Apostle Paule to set
downe:Rom. 7. 23. there is a law in my members, rebelling
against the law of my minde and leading
me captiue vnto the lawe of sinne: for as the
glorious maiestie, of that heauenly ioy doth rauish
the minde of euery man, to wishe that hee
might be partaker of the same, so (on the other
side) the consideration of afflictions and present
calamities, that all2. Tim. 3 12. those who will liue godly
in Christ Iesus shall suffer, doth not onely terrifie
many, from taking in hand the profession of
Religion: but greatlyRom. 7. 24. vexeth and greeueth
(euen) the deare children of God:Iob. 2. 3. &c. and maketh
such a cōtradictiō, betwixt the flesh & the spirite,
that they seeme in such wise to be distracted,
as though they were deuided into two
parts. The one striuing with mayne and might,
to go, toward hell: the other labouring, by all the
force that it is able, to goe towardes God. But
those that euer meane to take that course
which (alone) leadeth to the kingdome of heauen,
must not onelyIohn. 5. 39. seeke out of the word of
God to know, what he would haue them to do,
and carefully to put the same, in practise: but
also, they must make theirLuke. 14. 26. &c. accompt to haue
infinite, and continuall Crosses (euen) for the
same: so that vnlesse, they be thus resolued, that



in respect of Iesus Christ, theyPhil. 3. 8. accompt all
things vile (and therfore for the professing, and
bearing witnes vnto his truth, are contented to
abide, all extremities, that Satan, the world, or
their owne flesh, can rayse vp against thē) it is
vnpossible that euer they shouldMath. 24 13. continue
vnto the ende that they might be saued. For
God in his wisedome, hath sene it most meete,
that they who shall reigne with his sonne Iesus
Christ, shall also be conformed vnto the similitude
of hisRom. 8. 17. sufferinges, toMath. 20 22. drinke of the cup
that he did drinke of, and to be Baptised with
his Baptisme. Now Satā (who is a sworne enemy
to mankinde, and seeketh as a1. Pet. 5. 8. roaring Lion
whom hee may deuour) taketh occasion by
this decree of God to driue man into all extremities
inward and outward: to the end that he
may winne him vnto himselfe, in leauing the
course of godlynesse, and giuing himselfe ouer
to commit all iniquities, and that with greedinesse:
and so much the rather because hee findeth
our corrupt nature, conuenient matter to
worke vpon, which in itGene. 6. 5. selfe is altogether euill:
so that (excepting onely those whō it pleaseth
God of his mere mercy (in Iesus Christ) to
regenerate, by theIohn. 15. 3. knowledge of his word and
Ephes. 1. 13. working of his holy spirite) all the posteritie



of Adam, is vtterly seduced by Satan to be instrumentes
of enlarging his kingdome, and encreasing
their owne condemnation. And those
whom the Lord hath reclaymed from the seruice
of sinne, vnto the obedience of his Gospell
haue euer bene, and to the end of the world shalbe,
so tempted of Sathā, so hōted at, abhorred,
and abused of the world, and so enticed by their
owne flesh to retire vnto the league, and amitie
of the world agayne: that they seeme to be of1. Cor. 15. 19.
all men most miserable: but this is their onely
comfort, and (in deede) the ioye that passeth all
the pleasures of the world, that their trouble is
but for aPsal. 30. 5. tyme: God will release them, andReuel. 7. 17.
wipe all teares from their eyes: that as theyRom. 8. 17.
are afflicted with Christ, so shall they be glorified
and reigne with him: that the Lord maketh
aPsal. 116. 15. glorious accompt (euen) of the death
of his Saintes and reserueth their teares inPsal. 56. 8.
a bottle, yea hee accompteth all the troubles of
his childrē to be hisActes. 9. 4. 5. owne, because (in deede)
they suffer for his sake: but they shall not lacke
their reward: yea such a reward as is, ten thousand
times exceedyng the measure of their sorrow:
for theRom. 8. 18. troubles of this life are not worthy
to be compared to the glory, that shalbe reueled.
But yet we haue great neede to be comforted,



and stayed, least we should beHeb. 12. 3. wearied,
and faynt in our myndes, for so much as no
correction for the tyme, is ioyous, but tedyous
sharpe and greeuous: able to make vs fall
downe vnder the burthen of the same, vnlesse
it please the Lord, to teach vs how, and to giue
vs might to support and susteyne it: which is
no where els learned neither any other meanes
giuen, then onely thePsal. 119. worde of God, whiche
the Lord hath giuen vnto vs, for that purpose.
Now, for so much as an experience, both of
the subtiltie of our enemie in our afflictions,
and also of the meanes how to beate him backe,
is to be seene in those temptations of our Sauiour
Christ in the wildernesse, because I hauing
in my ordinary course Preached vppon the
same, and diuers who receiued present comfort
thereby (beyng desirous to haue the continuall
vse of the doctrine deliuered out of
them) desiring me, to pen the same: I condiscended
vnto their desire and (as neare as I
could remember) haue set them downe as they
were spoken: sauyng (onely) that in some particular
applications I haue had regarde (in
writtyng) vnto those to whose handes they
may come: as (in speaking) I respect myne
Auditorie. And I am bolde to make choyse



of your honor to whō I may dedicate the same,
partly for that I might shewe some token of
thankefulnesse vnto the same, for your fauour
towardes me, and especially for that I am perswaded
the doctrine, therein conteyned wilbe
acceptable vnto you. The Lord of heauen
and earth (from whom all true honour commeth)
increase the same vnto your duety
more and more: for the aduauncement
of his glory in this world,
and the eternall comfort of
your owne soule in the
worlde of come.
Amen.
            
               Your honors most humble
to commaunde in the Lord.
IOHN VDALL.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            THe particular braunches of the
whole matter (as you see in this
Table) are in number twentie and
two, looke what figures you finde
any poynte marked with all in this
place, and the same shall you finde
in the Margent of the booke, where
the same matter begynneth to bee
handled.
         
         
            
            ¶A Methode of the whole matter in this Booke.
            
               The temptatiōs of Christ 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     Generall

                           Occasiō
                              
                                 Circumstaunces

                                       Tyme, beyng Baptised. 1.
                                       Place the wildernesse. 2.
                                    
                                 
                                 Causes

                                       Good: Gods holy spirite. 3.
                                       Euill: Sathan the tempter. 4.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           Thyng

                                 Partie: Christ Iesus. 5.
                                 Matter: tempted. 6.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Particular

                           Preparation. 7
                           Actiō three folde assayled
in respect
of his

                                 Person.

                                       Occasion. 8.
                                       Thing.

                                             Maner. 9. Matter.

                                                   Assault with

                                                         Distrust in God. 10. Vse of ill Meanes. 11
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   Resistaunce. 12.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Mynd in respect
of
his

                                       Estate

                                             Assault

                                                   Circumstaunces.

                                                         VVhē. 13
                                                         where. 14
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   VVhat

                                                         Thyng. 15.
                                                         Reason. 16.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             Resistaunce. 17.
                                          
                                       
                                       Ornament of it.

                                             Assault

                                                   VVhere. 18.
                                                   VVhat

                                                         Shewed. 19 Promised.
20.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             Resistaunce in

                                                   Generall. 21.
                                                   Particular. 22.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  Math. 4. 1. 2. 3. &c.
                  1. Then was Iesus led aside, of the spirite
into the wildernesse to bee tempted of the
Deuill.
                  2. And when he had fasted fourty dayes. &c.
               
            
            
               WE heard the last day (beloued
in our Sauiour Christ) how
it pleased God (when the fulnesse
of tyme was come) that
his sonne our redeemer should
begyn to make himselfe knowne vnto the
world, to declare the same, not onely by the
testimonie of Iohn (who refused to Baptise
him) but also by the holy Ghost, discendyng
on him in visible maner, & the voyce
of God from heauen, pronouncyng him to
be his beloued sonne in whom alone he is
well pleased. Now it remayneth that we
proceede vnto the entraunce of Christ into
the execution of his office, in the publicke
reuelyng of himselfe vnto the world
to bee that Messiah so long locked for, by
whom saluation is purchased to all beleeuers
whether they be Jewes or Gentiles.



In whiche is conteined,For the viewe of the particular braunches see the Table. first his tryall, secōdly
his departure, into Galile: his tryall
conteyning those seuerall braunches that
are expressed in the Table, whereof we are
to speake as they lye in order.
            
               (Then) In this word is contayned the
first circumstaunce, whiche is the tyme,
when hee was tempted: to witt, when hee
was Baptised & began to enter the course
of working the worke of our redemption:
whereby we learne, that whē we are baptised,
for somuch as in the same, weGal. 3. 27. put
on the profession of Jesus Christ, and receiue
his cognisaunce, thereby vowing our
selues to bee his souldiours, we must bee
sure of this, that Sathan wilbe our professed
foe, to be pricking at vs, either to terrifie
or allure vs frō vnder the banner of our
Captaine Christ Jesus, and therefore we
must learne (so often as we thinke of our
Baptisme or see the same Sacrament administred
vnto others) to remember what
place we are called vnto,The continuall vse of Baptisme. and what a strōg
enemy we are to encounter with all, that
we may be more watchfull & warye, that
his slie subtilties do not deceiue vs, nor his
roaringes deuoure vs. A meditation most



needefull to be thought vpon. For we see
that many are contented to receiue the
presse money of Jesus Christ, and to giue
their names to be inroled into his booke,
who yet after all that, do flee vnto Sathās
campe, and fight with might and mayne agaynst
him and his kingdome. For (if we
shal trye the truth hereof by the proofe and
euent) how many are foūde whose myndes
are infected with false and erronious opinions?The markes of reuolters from Baptisme.
whose liues swarme with vngodly
and wicked practises, and though they thus
goe on from sinne to sinne, yet Sathan wil
perswade them, that they bee Christians,
for that their names are registred in the
number of the Baptised: but if Christ be
no other way truely obeyed then by wholesome
doctrine and holy conuersation, and
Sathans kingdome, no otherwise erected,
then by false opinion and dissolute behauiour:
let vs assure our selues, that vnlesse
we doe labour, by all good meanes to furnish
our hartes with the knowledge of holy
doctrine, and to adorne our liues with
godly behauiour: say what we will & pretend
what we list we are reuolters frō the
obedience that we professe vnto Christ by



our Baptisme, and instrumentes for Sathan,
whereby he strengtheneth his kingdome
to our owne destruction.The condition of the godly in this life. Agayne it
teacheth vs the state of Gods childrē here
in this world to be in continuall battayle:
For so long as we be vnder the protection
of Christ Jesus, Sathā is our sworne foe,
by whom we shalbe sure to haue all y• iniuries
that hee can procure vs, either by his
owne person, our owne flesh, or his instrumentes,
the worldlinges that knowe not
God: which is a lesson needefull to be learned:
for some (who (in deede) measure Religiō
by their owne fancies) thinke it an easie
thyng to be a Christian, and therefore
accompt euery man and woman to be one:
Agayne, some would gladly be Christiās,
so that the applause of the world might also
goe with them. Whereupon it commeth
that the one neuer vnderstādeth what Religion
meaneth and so proceedeth sleepely
to destruction, the other not hauyng cast
his accomptes before, seeth those difficulties
therein, that he was not aware of, and
forsaketh all, both religion and profession
of the same: the example of our Sauiour
Christ doth very notably meete with thē


               
both, with the first, in shewyng what a
mightie foe, we shal haue in Religion, and
therfore it cannot be an easie thyng: with
the second that the difficulties wilbe many,VVith what minde we must take in hand the profession of Religiō.
and therfore to aduise our selues before
we make any profession of Christ, least we
be driuen, thereby with shame to renounce
that whiche heretofore we haue seemed to
loue, and so afterLuke. 14. 28. 9. 62. cur settyng hand to the
ploughe, and looking backe be vnfit for the
kingdome of God. The world is full of
such people, whose estate is most fearefull,
and therfore let vs beware. Moreouer we
see that Christ, assoone as euer hee begynneth
(as it were to poynte the finger) towardes
that publicke office, whereunto he
was allotted of God the Father, is forthwith
assayled, shewing vnto vs,Trouble accompanieth euery good action. that whensoeur
it pleaseth God to moue vs to take
in hand any good action, the enemy wilbe
sure to Crosse it withall the stumblyng
blockes, that he is able to lay in the way.
The which we see verified by experiēce in
the booke of God, ye trouble of Moyses did
begyn,Actes. 7, 23. Whē it came in his hart to visite
his brethren,1. Sam. 17. 34. 
               Dauid liued quietly vntill
the Lord vsed meanes to bring him to



               Saules campe, that he might set vpon and
ouercome Goliah, and afterward his troubles
were endlesse.Actes. 9. 23. 
               Paule was not contradicted,
but liued in great credit among
the Jewes, vntill the Lord made him a
Preacher of the Gospell, thē was he neuer
free from slaunderous accusations, violences
and all kinde of iniuries, the reason
whereof is, for that Sathan beyng ielous
ouer his owne kingdome, and fearyng the
ouerthrow thereof, when he seeth any raysed
vp to fight agaynst it, doth most basely
bestirre himselfe for the suppressing of the
same. Therefore (as euery one that will
do any good thyng that may be acceptable
vnto God, comfortable to his conscience,
and profitable to his brethren) must learne
to haue an inuincible & indefatigable stomacke,
for that he shalbe sure to haue many
a counterbuffet and foyle, if Sathan cā
procure it: so in the depth of all his extremities,
and in the middest of tribulations,
he may gather an argument vnto himselfe
of singular cōfort, that if he do that which
is warranted by the word of God, and taketh
it in hād with the testimony of a good
consciēce, he may assure himselfe (for most



sure it is) the more troubles that he endureth,
the more is he in the fauour of God, &
doth him y• more seruice, agaynst the enemies
of his glory, the world and the deuill,
and surely as this is a most profitable doctrine
to be learned, so is it most necessarie
for all Goos people in these dayes, but
most especially for those Ministers of the
word of God that doe with good consciēce,
rebuke the world of sinne, and playnly vrge
the necessitie of walkyng in the narrowe
path, agaynst whom the world is so mad,
(partely for that iniquitie aboundeth among
men, and especially for that through
lacke of discipline in the Churche, euery
man is let alone to doe what hee list) that
a man would thinke hell were broken vp,
and all the hellhoundes there were transposed
unto the shape of men, so horrible, so
false, so slaunderous, and so bitter be their
wordes and deedes (when they cā) agaynst
those sylie ones. But this is our stay,Psal. 2. 4, the
Lord that is in heauen doth laughe them
to scorne, and this is to vs an argument of
great comfort, that the more they rage, the
more are we assured that God is on our
side.
            
               
               (Into the wildernesse) the place where
he was tryed commeth now to be considered,
whiche was the vninhabited wildernesse,
where were no creatures, but wilde
beastes (asMarke. 1. 13. 
               Mark recordeth) amōg which
he liued for that tyme: wherunto the world
may welbe compared, because of the troublesomnesse,
intricate wayes, and daunger
thereof. Our Sauiour was led by the spirite
thyther: First that hee might come
thence,Cause of his beyng in the wildernesse. as a newman, fit to take in hand so
wayghtie an enterprise, whiche also was
prefiguredExod. 34. 28. by Moyses his beyng fourtie
dayes in the mountayne,1. Kings. 19. 8. and Elias in
the caue of Horeb. For the absence euen of
those with whō we haue bene most cōuersaunt,
maketh thē appeare vnto vs in more
reuerent accōpte: Secondly it was that he
might bee the more subiect to temptation
(for Sathan alwayes getteth more aduā
               tage
against man when he is solitary, then
when hee is with company) and also lesse
hyndred by the world or any thyng or person
therein, to conquire and get the victory
of this enemy.
            
               (Led by the spirite) that is, he was conducted
by the guidyng of Gods holy spirite,



accordyng as God the Father in his
wisedome had appointed. Whereby ariseth
vnto vs this doctrine very needefull to
be learned, and very comfortable to be remembred,
that (notwithstandyng Sathan
1. Pet. 5. 8 roareth night & day, and seeketh by him
selfe and his instrumentes, continually to
vexe and trouble vs,Luke. 22. 31 ayming at our destruction
yet) all things are so determined and
directed by Gods mightie power and prouidence,
that no vexation of body or spirit,
can befal vs, without his will and appointment,
whereof we haue a notable example
in the seruaunt of GodIob 1. 12. 
               Iob. whose estate,
albeit Sathan did greatly enuie, yet vntill
the Lorde gaue power into the enemyes
hand agaynst him,Sathan can not touche vs vntill God giue him leaue. he could neither touche
his goodes, his children, nor his person.
The which if we doe learne aright, it will
minister vnto vs manifold comfort and instruction.
For first it is vnto vs a notable
shield agaynst dispayre & distrust that naturally
groweth in vs, when we are in tribulations,
to feare, that our former estate
is irrecouerable, or that the fauour of God
is cleane remoued from vs. For if we doe
consider with our selues that God is the



authour of the afflictiōs of his people,A comforte in all afflictions. and
that they are not vexed without his appointement,
and moreouer that it is his vsuall
dealyng with his seruauntes, it must
needes teach vs not to despise the correction
of the Lord,Heb. 12. 5. neither faynt when we
are rebuked, for so much as he loueth them,
that hee correcteth, and scourgeth euery
sonne that he receiueth. Agayne it will
teach vs to take heede that we use no vnlawfull
meanes to eschew the same: for
when we consider, that God, who (knoweth
better then wee what is needefull for
vs) hath imposed the same vpon vs,A lesson to be practised in afflictiōs. it must
needes make vs very well contented with
his gracious appointment: neuer seekyng
to wynd our selues from vnder his handes
by those meanes that be vnlawfull, but patiently
to abide his leasure for the remouing
thereof: at whose good pleasure wee
shalbe sure to be deliuered, or elles it shall
come to passe that the Lordes correction
(whiche he in loue inflicted vpon vs) shall
by our misdemeanour bee turned into the
markes of his wrath and anger:Note this well. for that
wee haue played the partes of vnbridled
coltes, striuyng to cast of the Lordes burthen,



and to wynde our selues (as much as
in vs lyeth) out of his gouernement & protection:
Moreouer, it will teach vs most
carefully to vse all good & lawfull meanes
for the preuentyng of daunger imminent,
or the remouyng of troubles present, in
both whiche many doe greatly offend: for
some are so secure and carelesse, that by
their owne negligente they procure to thē
selues many a woe,Two extremities to be auoyded in respect of afflictions. for that they haue not
prouidently foresene the euill approching,
others beyng already fallen into extremitie
are not so vigilant in watchyng of all
opportunitie of redresse, in takyng the occasions
by those good meanes, which their
wise trauaile (by the blessing of God vpon
it) might haue procured vnto them, against
both which this doctrine doth teache vs a
lesson to bee noted, that seyng afflictions
come from God (and are not els good) who
onely knoweth on whom, when and how
they shalbe imposed, if we desire to haue no
trouble but whiche bringeth the fauour of
God with it, we must so prouidently forecast,
and vse all good meanes so carefully,
that we neuer be (through our owne negligence)
the cause of our owne trouble.
            
               
               (Of the Deuill) that is, it was decreed
of God the Father, and brought to passe
by the guidaunce of Gods spirite, that Iesus
Christ (the Sonne of God) should bee
tempted of the common enemy to God and
man (the Deuill.)The name deuill describeth the nature of our spirituall soe. The name wherewith he
is here termed, doth signifie in the originall
tongue, whiche the holy Ghost vseth,
a false accuser or a carpyng disgracer, that
seeketh by all subtill cauilles to disgrace
the truth & those that vphold it: by whiche
name is notably paynted out vnto vs, the
nature of our spirituall aduersarie, to be a
false accuser, and cauillyng wrāgler, which
we may see by him put in practise continually.
Gen. 3. 5. He falsely accused God, to cnuye
the good estate of man, and therefore forbad
him the tree of knowledge of good and
euill.Iob. 1. 9. 10. 11. Hee falsely accused Iob to serue
God, not with singlenesse of hart, in duetie
and with an vpright consciēce, but because
God had blessed him: and therefore adueuched
playnely and impudently, that if God
would but touche him, Iob would curse
him to his face: whiche,The qualities of the deuill are in the wicked. nature we may see
also in his children that are marked with
his stampe: For if you talke with them of



those that doe vnfaynedly feare God: they
will either falsely accuse them not to bee
the persons they make shew for, (or the notes
of godlynesse appearyng in them most
euident) yet they will so lessen, extenuate,
and clip the glorye of their holy conuersation,
that they wilbe sure that (asmuch as
in thē lyeth) they shalbe disgraced. But (to
returne) the tempter beyng thus described
to be so cunning and so subtle, we may first
see what great care and diligent paynefulnesse
must bee in the course of our whole
life, that not alone in the matter of godlynesse,
but also in the maner, we walke very
vprightly.VVhat the subtilties of Sathan must teach vs. For if our archeenimy or his
members can but catch the least defect in
the simplest circumstaunce of any of our
actions, they thinke it matter inough to
cauill vpon, and sufficiēt occasion to speake
agaynst vs and our whole profession: Secondly
we may behold the qualitie and affection
of Sathan in the temptations of
man, and thereby how it differreth from
the mynde of God in the same: For Gods
intent is to trye his to fine them the more,
that they may be (as the purest gold) most
glorious instrumentes for his prayse: but



the purpose of Sathan is, to darken,Howe God and Sathan doe both work in one action & yet it is good in God euill in Sathan. extinguish,
& vtterly ouerthrow, all good things
in man, and (at length) mā himselfe to endlesse
perdition, and so the selfe same action
appeareth good in God, but euill in Sathan.
            
               (Iesus was led.) The sonne of the eternall
God, equall with the Father and one
with him, man like vnto vs in all thynges
(Heb. 4. 15. yet without sinne) was assayled of that
spirituall aduersarie the deuill. This may
seeme very straunge that hee in whose nature
was no corruption, (and therefore no
matter for Sathan to worke vppon) should
be tempted: but we are first to cōsider that
he was very man,How Christ could bee tēpted being without natural corruption. in whom all naturall affectiōs
(which of themselues are not euill)
rested: whiche before they were corrupted,
were capable of temptations, as we see in
Adam and Heua, who were createdGen. 1. 3. exceedyng
good, and yet sinned not, vntill
they yelded to Sathans suggestions, in
whiche pure estate Christ Iesus is man.
Secondly he tooke vppon him out nature,
to the end that in the same he might ouercome,
(in which we are conquered of Sathan,
when he is encountered onely by our



owne power) so that it is not onely no
straunge thyng, that he was tempted, but
a thing most needefull for our benefite and
comfortable for our consciences.The causes why Christ was tēpted. The causes
that moued him thereunto bee further
to be considered, which are in number many:
first, that he might (euen in temptation)
wynne that, which our first parentes lost,
in whiche respect, the Apostle Paule maketh
an Antythesis betwixt Adam
               Rom. 5. 14. and
Christ, because the one did recouer that
whiche the other had lost, whiche is not in
matter onely, but euen in maner also. Secondly,
that we might see and know, what
a professed enemy Sathā is vnto mankind,
that durst presume to assayle (euen) the
sonne of God, when hee was in the forme
of man. Thyrdly that he might ouercome
in the fleshe, to the end that we commyng
into the like combate, and fighting against
the same aduersarie, may learne not to
quayle or languishe, but valiauntly to set
vpō him, certaynly hoping that as our head
ouerthrew him in the flesh, so will he giue
power to vs (his weake members) to doe
the same. Fourthly, that we may know,
that temptations, tryals, and extremities



whatsoeuer, can be fall vnto man, are not
signes of Gods displeasure (as the worlde
imagineth) for somuch as the sonne of God
was partaker of them. Fiftly that in his
owne person hee might shewe the manner
how the aduersarie is to bee resisted, that
we (who are his members) and therefore
are to walke as he hath set himselfe for an
example, might learne to follow him in
the same. Sixtly that he hauyng experience
of temptations might haue the more
Heb. 4. 15. compassion towardes vs and therfore be
more ready and willyng at all assayes to
helpe vs.
            
               (To bee tempted) we see the partie that
was tempted, whiche temptation is first
set downe in generall, that hee was tempted
(as Luke sayth) for the space of fourtie
dayes, for (although the particular, & most
especial tryall is set downe afterward, and
hee is sayd to bee there fourtie dayes) we
must not imagine that he was idle, but in
that he was led thyther to be tempted, it
must needes be, that he was in the whole
course of that tyme assayled by the enemy.
            Before we come to the particular temptations,
let vs consider briefly what is to



be founde in the Scripture, of temptatiōs,
so farre as may cōcerne our present instruction.The nature of the word tempted in the Hebrew and Greeke tounges.
And first for the word (whiche in our
common speache is seldome spoken of but
in euill part) it is vsed in the Scriptures
both in the Hebrew and Greeke tongue in
more generall signification, to trye, and the
same word is most commonly vsed in both
the languages,God tempteth. whether mention be made
of good or euill tryalles, and is of it selfe
(not restrayned to parties or circumstaunces)
indifferently to be taken.
            The parties that the Scriptures tell
vs, doe tempt or trye, be God, Sathan, and
man: God is sayd to tryGene. 22 1. 
               Abraham
               Iob. 7. 18 23. 10. 
               Iob
and the Israelites: Also Pharaoh Nabuchadnezar.
&c. When the Lord tryeth his
seruauntes,God tempteth his two wayes. it is either with good successe
after sharpe estate, or with extremitie after
happy successe, which is to the end that
their faythfulnesse may appeare, and in all
these thynges, they (settyng God before
their eyes,The mynde of the godly in triall. the chief goodnesse of man and
preferryng his obedience before their own
pleasures) doe cary an euen hand, acknowledgyng
euery condition to come of God.
The wicked on the other side, if the Lord



try them with extremitie, they burst out
into blasphemie asExod. 5. 3 
               Pharaoh: or impatiencie
as2. Sam. 17. 23. 
               Achitophell: or els giue them
selues to all vnlawfull meanes of escape,
as1. Sam. 28. 7. 
               Saule, if with good successe in worldly
blessinges, they abuse them, some to Epycurisme,
asLuke. 16. 19. 
               Diues, some to pride asDan. 4. 27.
               Nebuchadnezar: some to reuenge:2. Sam. 14. 30. as
Absolon: some to forget God, as theHose. 13. 6. 
               Israelites,
so that by this may wee notably
examine our selues, how we stand affected
towardes the Lord, for it is most certayne,
that we are within the compasse of one of
these sortes of people,Sathan tēpted. Sathā tryed,Iob. 1. 26. 
               Iob,
               Luke. 22 31. 
               Peter
               1. Kings 22. 21 
               Achab. &c. For he sifteth both
the godly & wicked, the godly by the sight
of Gods word & power of his spirite do resist
him: the wicked take vp all the baytes
layd for them and obey him: and therefore
are not so properly sayd to be tryed. As for
example, when hee assayleth man to the
breach of any of the commaundementes of
God and the practising of any sinne, the
childe of God seyng that it is contrary to
Gods word, (and therfore must needes be
of the Deuil) striueth by all good meanes,
to ouercome and to stand sure to the course



of true godlynesse. Contrarywise the wicked
is caryed away with the present delight
of sinne, and coueteth the same with
greedynesse. By this also we haue occasion
to examine our selues in what estate we
stand. The Scriptures tell vs also, that
man doth trye: and that is two wayes, either
he tryeth God,Man tempteth God and man. or he tryeth man: hee
tryeth GOD, when by continuaunce in
sinne, and presumyng vpon Gods mercies,
he proueth his patience,Exod. 14. so did the Israelites
often: such he, they among vs, that
when they heare that God is mercyfull &
ready to forgiue doe vpon the same gather
to them selues immunitie to sinne. But
the Scripture speaketh most fearefully, of
such, thatRom. 3. 8. their damnation is iust, that
they wereIude. 4. foreordayned to that condemnation:
that they abusing GodsRom. 2. patiēce
which should lead them to repentaunce, do
heape vp vnto them selues wrath agaynst
the day of wrath, he tryeth man, when hee
doth any thing wherewith to moue his patience,
or to greeue him: many such there
be, who are driuen of Sathā into such impudencie
and obstinacie, that they wil not
onely goe on vnto all sinne, in the whole



course of their life: but they will the rather
sinne, if they thinke it will greeue
him that is wont to reproue them, cleane
forgetting that themselues, beyng the offenders,
the vengeaunce of God shall fall
(not on the hearer, reprouing it according
to hisLeuit. 19. 17. duetie) but on the doer of that
whereby God is offended: This place is
of Christ Iesus his temptyng by Sathā,
and therefore is properly to be vnderstoode
of those temptations,Ephes 5. 11. wherewith the godly
are assayled of Sathan their sworne enemie,Heb. 10. 24. Three causes moue Sathan to tempt the godly.
the causes that moue him thereunto,
bee first in respect of God:1. In respect of God. secondly of the
godly thirdly of himselfe.2. In respect of the godly. Of God, for that
hee in iustice hath inflicted the payne of eternall
woe vppon him for his rebellion,3. In respect of himselfe.
(whiche he knoweth to be irreuocable and
his former estate past recouerie) and therfore
he laboureth (as he thincketh) to be reuenged
of God in assayling his people: in
vexing him in his seruauntes: and seeking
to lessen his kingdome by seducing of those
whom it hath pleased God of his mercy to
make worthy that calling. He doth it also
in respect of man, whose estate he doth enuie,
for that it is better then his owne, and



therefore hee laboureth by all extremities
that he can deuise to vexe him in the same,
to make it lesse ioyous vnto him, and to
bring him, (if it were possible) to thincke
his condition odious in his owne eyes: hee
doth it moreouer in regard of himself, who
knowyng that hee is finally to be damned,
and that he is the kyng of hell, and Prince
of perdition, laboureth by all meanes to
bring (if it could be) the very elect into the
compasse of the same, for the enlargyng of
his kingdome: beyng desirous to haue all
others partakers with him in that endlesse
torment whereunto he is finally adiudged.
The course that he taketh in these temptations,
is not forthwith to set before the
eyes of the godly, the thing that he aymeth
at, (for hee knoweth that in soule they are
brought to abhorre it) but first he will sleyly
suggest into their myndes, the cogitations
and motions of his intent, whiche if
they rest vpon, and doe not forthwith beate
them backe, he will goe a step further, to
witt, to bring them to consent thereunto:
which once being gotten, there remayneth
nothing (for the partie is wonne vnto him)
but to put ye same in execution, the meanes



whereof shall quickely bee prompted into
him: so that the slightes of the enemy being
so subtle, if euer wee thinke to auoyde
thē we must haue these two thinges,Two things required to resist Sathā. wisedome
to discerne him, and power to resiste
him. This wisedome is not humaine, neither
by nature, arte nor experience, but the
true knowledge of Gods worde, whereby
to be able to discerne thePhil. 1. 10 things that differ,
without which we runne headlong into
our enemies handes and (such is our naturall
blindnesse) chose to hearken to his
motions and like well of them, because he
can turne him selfe into2. Cor. 11. 14. an Aungell of
light, and make vertue to seeme vglie and
vice beautifull vnto man, vnto this wisedome
and true knowledge is also power to
resist him requisite to be adioyned, for to no
purpose were it, if we could neuer so cunningly
deciphar the subtilties of Sathan
and discerne them at the first, vnlesse we
be also able to resiste him, (for els haue we
but gotten this, that where other men goe
headlong into destruction and know not of
it, we should wittingly & willingly do the
same) this power is no way to be sought or
founde within our selues, or in any thing



that we can do, but onely of the Lord, who
as he is able, so is hee willing to helpe all
those that seeke to him: for so hee sayth,
Math. 11. 28. come vnto me all ye that trauaile and
are heauie burthened and I will ease you,
Math. 
                     •
                  . 7. aske and you shall haue, seeke and ye
shall finde, nowe this commyng vnto
him is by Fayth, and repentaunce, carefully
vsing those meanes that hee hath
prescribed in his word, and this must not
onely be, but it must also be without delay,
resisting the beginning. For Sathan is
farre more easely driuen backe in the first
beginning,Sathā must be resisted at the first. then afterward when he hath
got more hold, for as by his continuaunce
he groweth great in man, so doth he dayly
lessen mans power to resist, and therfore it
is no putting of from day to day, as is the
maner of the wicked that know not God.
            The thinges wherein he tempteth,The thinges whiche he doth tempt and the reasons that he vseth. be
diswading from euery good thing, and perswading
to the contrary: he diswadeth frō
goodnesse, by shewing the impossibilitie,
the trouble and small necessitie of it: as for
example when thou goest about to seeke to
know Iesus Christ out of his word for thy
owne comfort, hee will tell thee,How he dissuadeth frō Religion. that the



Scriptures are exceeding long, merueilous
hard to be vnderstood, and thou hast
such and such businesse to employ thy selfe
about, that it is vnpossible that euer thou
shouldest attayne vnto it: Also, that the
troubles which do accōpany such a course
be innumerable and intollerable, as these,
the world will note thee to be a puritane,
and so thou shalt be come odious vnto thy
frendes, who heretofore haue loued thee:
persecutions haue euer bene styrred vp agaynst
such persons, so that whereas thou
now dwellest safe & hast the world at will,
thou shalt be in hazard of losses, disquietnesse
and great vexation, whereas heretofore
thou hast taken thy pleasure in euery
thyng, now must thou leaue them, thou
must lay aside thy pompe and brauerie, thy
dayntenesse and delightes, so that thou
hadst better bee out of the worlde then to
liue so austerely, besides this hee will tell
thee, that it is a thyng, not so needefull, for
the depth of knowledge belongeth to Diuines
and great learned mē
               
                  •
               it is sufficient
for thee to know a litle, beyng a priuate
man
                  •
                and to bee so strict in thy life as to
follow Gods word in all pointes, is but



curiositie, & to much scrupulousnes, for mā
is not saued by his workes, but by Gods
mercy, and if thou shouldest doe thus, they
would thinke, that thou art singular & contemnest
all others in respect of thy selfe, so
doth he deale in seducing from euery good
thing he will make thee thinke thou shalt
neuer attayne vnto it, it were a turmoyle
vnto thee to practise it, & it is a thyng not
so needefull,The remedies agaynst it. yu shalt do wel inough without
it. But the child of God is to learne, that
if it be a thing that God hath cōmaunded, a
thing whereby god may gayne glory & his
Church benefite, & thine own soule cōfort,
yu must be of an inuincible courage, neuer
dispayre at the troubles, but cōmit the successe
to him that commaundeth: & to know
that it is a thing that is most needefull, or
els God was vnwise to enioyne it to thee:
Agayne, he perswadeth to euill by so many
cōtrary reasons, propounding, the profite, &
pleasure, & remouyng the payne & terrour.How hee perswadeth vnto sinne
He will tell thee the necessitie of it, how yu
canst not be without it in this world, how
beneficiall & delightfull it is vnto thee, &
how easie to be attained. As for exāple, whē
he would haue thee of no Religion, but a



playne Atheist and tymeseruer, he will tell
thee, that the worldes estate is ticklishe &
vncertaine, subiect to chaunge and alteration,
so that if thou shouldest stand stiffly to
one Religion, thou shouldest be in daunger
of great trouble, therfore vse thy selfe so, in
the tyme of this Religion, that when a cō
               trary
doth come, thou mayest be ready also
to professe that, the necessitie and pleasure
of it is great, for so shalt thou bee sure to
haue all thy possessions to thy selfe, and thy
posteritie, thou shalt liue quietly without
any feare of alteration. And for the course
it selfe it is very easely to be attayned: for
if thou doe onely in a litle outward appearaunce,
satisfie the worldes request it is
sufficient. But all this while hee stealeth
out of thy mynde, the vew of Gods seuere
vengeaunce agaynst carelesse caytiffes, his
horrible punishement to them that areReuel. 3. 15.
neither hote nor cold, to them thatLuke. 12. 9. deny
him before men: and this or the like cause
Sathā taketh in perswadyng to any sinne.The remedy agaynst it.
But the true Christian for the auoyding of
these sleightes, must remember that there
is but one God, and therefore no Religion
can please him but one, that he created and



I redeemed man to serue him,Luke. 1. 74. and therfore
he may not make a small accompt of it:Math. 10 25.
his soule is more precious then his body,
and therefore it must principally bee prouided
for: the Lordes protection is ouer his
people, and therfore they needePsal 56. 4 not feare
what man can doe vnto them:Rom. 8. 28. all things
fall out of the best for the that feare God, &
therfore come death, or life, losse of goodes
or whatsoeuer els,The godhest are tēpted most. it shall be good for me:
the parties that feele these temptations
most, bee the holyest and the godlyest persons,
as we see by Dauid, Paule, and Iesus
Christ in this place. For the further that a
man is gone from his allegeaunce, the sorer
foe he is vnto him, and endeuoureth the
more earnestly to reclayme him agayne:
but the other, that are not yet regenerated,
he possesseth wholly in peace, and they obey
him without resistaunce. For (beyng blind
for lacke of knowledge, and sencelesse of
sinne) they are led blindfold by him & willingly
into destruction,It is a thing not euill but good to bee tempted. and therfore to bee
tempted, is not as man thinketh a detestable,
but a comfortable thyng, and therefore
theIames. 1. 2. Apostle Iames exhorteth vs to
accompt it an exceedyng ioy, when we fall



into diuers temptations. Most ignorauntly
then do they wish that seyng godly ones
in afflictions of mynde, say (as is the maner
of many) they would not for all the
world be in that case, al one as if the should
say they would not for all the world be out
of the clutches of the Deuill, nor bee the
souldiour of Christ Iesus, to dyd him battaile.
This temptation in the godly is effectuall
diuers wayes: First it aduaunceth
greatly the glory of GOD:The effect of the tēptations of the godly. for when so
straunge and subtle an enemy, so greatly
experienced in deceite, shalbe vanquished
by so meane an instrument as a mā, weake
& subiect to so many infirmities, the power
of GOD appeareth most mighty,1. Gods glorie. and his
might most gloriously performed in2. Cor. 12 9.
weakenesse.2. Sathans ouerthrow. Agayne it giueth notable ouerthrow
to the enemy, and disappointeth
him of his purposes: for beyng resisted he
Iames. 4. 7. flyeth away. Lastly it is beneficiall to
the partie tempted two wayes: First it assureth
his soule of the loue of God the Father
to him,3 The benefite of the partie tēpted two wayes. whose presence he hath experience
of, in the beating backe of so puissaunt
an aduersary: Secondly it confirmeth the
myndes of the brethren to be fully perswaded,



that God doth loue him (and therfore
to haue all holy communion with him) because
they see that Sathan (whose power
& sleightes they are not ignoraūt of) hath so
notable an ouerthrowe in so weake an instrument.
         
         
            ¶The second Sermon.
            
               
                  Verse. 2. 3. 4.
                  2. And when hee had fasted fourtie dayes,
and fourtie nightes, hee was afterwarde
hungry.
                  3. Then came to him the tempter, and sayd,
If thou be the sonne of God, commaunde
that these stones be made bread.
                  4. But he aunswering, sayd, It is written, mā
shall not liue by bread onely, but by euery
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ANd when he had. Now come
we to the consideration of the
particular tryall (which I so
call in respect, that it is expressed



to vs in more particular manner)
before whiche is to be considered, his preparatiō
thereunto contained in the wordes
followyng.
            (When hee had fasted fourtie dayes and
fourtie nightes) that is when he had bene in
the wildernesse among the wilde beastes,
and tasted no manner of foode for the space
of fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes, in all
which tyme, hee was not hungry, neither
had any desire of corporall nourishment, for
it is sayd, that hee was afterward hungry.
The Papistes (who Apishly doe counterfeteHowe the Papists reason for their Lentō Fast.
euery thing in the Scriptures, especially
those that do no way appertaine vnto
them) would grounde vpon this place their
Lenton Fast, and that (forsoth) they reason:
Is not all that is writtē, set downe for our
learnyng? is not euery action of Christ our
instruction? doth hee not byd vs learne of
him? and that we must take vp our Crosse
and follow him: all whiche (so long as they
speake generally) is true: and (being rightly
applyed) is also in particular true: but it
doth not follow that therfore euery action
that Christ Iesus did, it is to be imitated
of vs. For the Euangelistes do commende



vnto vs,Three sorts of actions done by Christ of whiche the last onely is to bee followed. three sortes of actions done by our
Sauiour Christ Iesus: the first are the actions
that were to bee done for the accomplishment
of the worke of our redemption,
to wit, to be begotten without the helpe of
man, to be borne of a Uirgin, to satisfie the
wrath of God on the Crosse for the redēption
of man: to rise agayne the thyrd day:
to ascend to the right hand of god the Father
and there to make intercession for mā
vnto god. Which no man will say, that we
must follow. The second sort are his miracles,
whiche hee wrought in the world, as
turnyng water into wine, walking vppon
the Seas, causing the surgyng waues to
cease with his word, healing (in a moment)
the sicke, clensing the leapers, raysing the
dead: in the nūber whereof is this fasting,
all whiche were done, not that we should
striue to do the like, which neuer mā could
do sauing those to whō (in wonderfull maner)
he gaue the gift of doyng miracles, as
the Apostles in the primatiue Churche, for
the further confirmyng of their doctrine among
the gētiles, but partly to shew most
euidently, that he is very god and therfore
the true M
                  ••
               sias: and partely for the more



assuraunce and confirmation (as theIohn. 20. 31. Euāgelist
Iohn sayth) of our fayth: The third
sorte of actions bee, his obedience to god
his father: his humilitie in submitting him
selfe (euen to the least) to do them good: his
patience in all extremities: and his loue (euen)
to his enemies: which we are not onely
to labour to follow in some measure, but
(which more is) to propounde vnto our selues
his perfection therein, and neuer to cō
               tent
our selues with any scantlyng, but alwayes
to striue to bee more and more conformed
thereunto by imitatyng of him:
But let vs a litle consider how aptly their
actiō is proportionably vnto their paterne,Christes fasting & the Papistes differ in fiue pointes.
Christ in that whole space eate nothyng at
all, they will onely refrayne from certaine
meates of their owne shoulyng out, and in
all others gordge themselues in most delicate
maner: Christ did it but once and neuer
after, they must do it euery yeare once:
Christ did it, led by the spirite, they do it of
their owne head, without the direction of
gods spirite, for they haue no warrant for it
in the word, & the spirite goeth not without
the company of the word: Christ (onely did
it) & forbad no particular meates, they allow



certaine meates & forbid the rest, & so
1. Tim. 4. 2. 3. Augustine Epist. 86. to Castulanus. why Christ fasted fourtie dayes & 40. nightes. teache the doctrine of Deuils: Lastly,
Christ prescribed no set tyme of abstinēce,
nor the Apostles after him, neither knew
the primatiue Church any for 400. yeares
after they prescribe a determinate tyme
(by an inuiolable law vnder ye great eurse)
as that of the Meedes and Persians whiche
may not be altered. But let them goe, and
let vs come to the right vse of this action,
whiche is, first in fulfillyng that which the
like (ofErod. 34 25. 
               Moyses deliueryng the law and
1. Kyng. 19. 8. 
               Eliah restoring the law) did prefigure:
to shewe that it is he who is the end of the
law, and the fulfiller of the same, to the turnyng
away of the curse, which through the
breach thereof was due vnto all mankind:
Secondly, it is to shew that great and extraordinarie
actiōs are not to be enterprised
lightly or rashly, but with great & singular
preparation, which beyng not obserued
among vs. the Lord doth iustly punish our
headynes, with ill successe (as is especially
to be sene in ye course of the Magistracie &
Ministry of this whole land) the Lord lay
it not to their charge whose fault it is.
            
               (He was afterward hungry) that is for the



space of the 40. dayes he was not hungry.
But when they were ended he was: which
declareth playnly that it was an exceeding
miracle, and therefore not of vs to be followed:A proofe that Christ was very man.
we learne by this, first, that Christ
Iesus though he was the eternall sonne of
the euerlastyng God, yet he was also true
and very man: for els could he not be subiect
vnto hunger, which is the proper passion
of the flesh and bloud: Agayne hee beyng
hungry was in the wildernesse,Extremitie no cause of dispayre. & had
no present meanes to releiue him, to teach
vs, for our cōfort, that we beyng in the like
distresse, yet are we not to dispaire of gods
prouidence, neither to condemne our selues
as out of the fauour of god: for somuch
as it was, the condition of the sonne of god
himselfe. But (which is the speciall drift
of this place) Sathan came then vnto him
to tempt him in speciall maner,Sathan can espye his fittest opportunitie and take it. to shew vs
the cunnyng of this Foxe, that doth then
assayle the sonne of God in the matter of
foode) as we shall see anone) when he is hū
               gry,
for he can watch his times, when most
opportunitie serueth, and when or where
man is weakest and most like to bee most
easely ouerthrowne. Whiche we may see



obserued by the holy ghost in the Scriptures
to be his wonted maner: He set not vppon
Eue while the Lord was placyng her
with her husband, nor while Adam
               Gene. 3. 2 was
with her, but when she was alone most destitute
of succour: neither did hee begyn
with Adam when he ment the ouerthrow
of mankynde, but with the womā the weaker
vessell: he laboured not with Dauid (to
entice him to adultry) before he was king,
beyng set an worke (by the malice of his
foes) with continuall trouble, nor after he
was kyng either in his warres with his
foraine aduersaries, or in his house beyng
compassed with his seruaunts & subiectes,
but when he wasSam. 22. 2. walkyng (alone) on
the roofe of his palace: hee sought not to
fift Peter while he was in the company of
Christ Iesus and his Disciples (whose presence
and comfort might haue supported
him) but when hee was among a company
of rakehels the highLuke. 22. 55. Priestes seruyng
men by the fire side. The Scripture is full
of such examples, and all is to this end, to
teach vs diligently to stand vpō our garde
and to watch our owne wayes very warely,
for when we seeme in our owne eyes in



most happy estate, then are we most easely
deceiued, so simple we be in spiritual matters
and so subtil our enemy is to take vs
at the aduauntage.
            
               (Then the tempter came vnto him) the maner
of the speciall temptation followeth,
whiche may seeme to bee either in visible
presence,The tēpter came not vnto Christ in visible maner, but in motion. (as some haue taken this place)
or in sounde of voyce vnto the outwarde
eares: but if we do compare his commyng
with the maner of his proceedyng, and cō
               sider
of Christes temptatiōs accordyng to
the right end thereof, we shall playnly perceiue,
that this commyng of the tempter
vnto hin, is onely in motion, for where it
is sayd in the wordes following hereafter,
that hee shewed him all the kyngdomes of
the world in a moment, if his temptyng of
him were in corporall maner, it were vnpossible.
For though Christ be God (and
therfore infinite) yet is hee in body finite,
and was in his corporalleyes able (onely)
to see so farre as another man, whiche is
not the thousand part of the world, & therfore
it must be in motion that he did shew
them vnto him, & so consequently he came
vnto him not in bodely manner, but by offeryng



vnto him such cogitations: Agayne
Christ Iesus taking vpon him our estate,
not onely to redeeme vs, but also to bee an
example vnto vs, how can his temptatiōs
be our comforte when we are tempted, if
they were of diuers kyndes. For it is euident,
that the temptations of Gods children
be inward by cogitations, and therefore
the holy Ghost in the Epistle to the
Hebrewes, sayth notably, thatHeb. 4. 15. hee was
tempted in all thynges like vnto vs, this
onely excepted that his temptations were
(in him without sinne) so that it serueth to
our great comforte, that whensoeuer Sathan
doth any way seeke to draw vs away
from the fayth and loue of our God, or cō
               forte
of our soules, be his thoughtes neuer
so secret and slye, yet it is no straūge thyng
(though it be straunge to vs) for somuch as
he attempted the same, or the like (euen) agaynst
our head.
            
               (If thou be) now come we to the first assault
which hath in it (beyng rightly considered)
two braunches, first he laboureth to
bryng him to deubte whether hee bee the
sonne of God or no: secondly to cause him
vse vnlawfull meanes for the satisfying of



his hunger: (If thou be the sonne of God) as
if he should say, thou takest thy selfe to bee
the sonne of God, & in deede such a voyce
was heard in the ayre, whē thou wast baptised,
which to be so, is iustly to be doubted.
For the sonne of God is the heyre of all, to
him must all Angels giue obedience, and
all creatures doe seruice & be at his becke:
how can it then bee that thou shouldest be
he, and yet be in such extremitie, not onely
to lacke the host of heauen to shew thy maiestie,
but euen to want the necessary foode
that should refresh thy body: it is vnpossible
that the Lord of heauen & earth should
suffer his owne sonne, whom he loueth to
come to such extremitie. This is a marueilous
sore temptation, which not onely befell
to Christ the head, but euen is incident
also vnto his members. If we looke into
the booke of Iob and all those speaches that
his three frendes (Eliphaz Bildad, and Sophar)
vttered concernyng the power, wisedome
and iustice of God, we shall see that
they doe tend onely to this, that Iob beyng
in such extremitie could not bee in the fauour
of God so highly as he professed, neither
could it be, if his so glorious professiō


               
(in the tyme of his peace) had bene sincere
& single, that euer hee should fall into such
miserie. This motion commeth too often,
& sticketh to neare (not the ribbes) but the
hart of the dearest child of God. For if we
consider the present estate of our soules,
how weake and faynt our fayth is,Sathan would perswade the godly to be out of the fauour of God, because they are in trouble of 1 mynde. yea and
how it is (to our owne feeling) often tymes
vtterly gone, our sinnes which we professe
to be buried in obliuion with the Lord, and
vtterly to be rased out in the bloudsheding
of Christ Iesus, doe yet notwithstandyng
(often) so assayle vs, lye so heauie vpon vs,
and are so vitter vnto vs, as if the very
paynes of hell had already seased and taken
possession of vs. In which case, (the holyest
doe best know, how often) the motion
of doubting cōmeth into our myndes, saying
vnto vs, if God the father loued me, I
should see his countenaunce: if Christ Iesus
were my head, I should tast of his graces:
if my sinnes were forgiuen me, they
would not so presse and oppresse me: how
can it be that the seuere countenaunce of
God should bee turned to them, whom hee
loueth. Agayne for the estate of our bodies:2 Of body.
notwithstandyng that the righteous are



theMath. 5. 5. heyres of heauen and earth, for that
they beRom. 8. 17. fellow heyres with Christ Jesus
their head, yet how many are their miseries
here, in2. Cor. 11 25, 10. 29. pouertie, in sickenesse, in
trauaile in turmoyle, in slaunder and reproch,
in troubles for the profession of the
truth: in troubles about the matters of
this life: in troubles with their wiues, and
wiues with their husbandes: with their
children and seruaunts, hated of them that
know them, and thē that neuer saw them,
yea euen of their dearest & nearest frendes
after the flesh. Then commeth in this motion,
can I perswade my selfe to bee in the
fauour of GOD, beyng beset with such a
world of trouble, and cōpassed about with
so great a sea of molestations?The exāple of Christ is comforte to the afflicted whether in soule or in body. agaynst all
these and such like, our Sauiour Christes
example doth minister vnto vs most singular
comforte: for concernyng the grief of
soule, for sinne, was euer any man more or
somuch loaden as he was when (hauing not
his owne but our sinnes layd vpon him) he
suffered the very tormentes of hell, in such
wise that he burst out into these speaches
of most bitter agony,Math. 27 46. my God my God
why hast thou forsaken me? agayne for the



troubles of the body, doth any thyng befall
vnto thee that hee felt not? thou lackest
foode, he wasMath. 4. 2. hungry & had nothyng, to
eate: yu hast no possessiō, neither any worldly
stay to take to, hee hadLuke. 11. 58. not where to
hyde his head: thy frīdes become thy foes,
his ownePsal. 55. 13. seruaunt and scholer betrayed
him, thy owne kinsfolkes like not of thee,
and hee had such good entertainement of
his, that he saythMath. 13 57. that a Prophet is not
without honour, saue in his owne countrey
& among his owne kindred: the world hateth
thee without a cause, so it didPsal. 35. 
                     •
                  
                him,
beyng without sinne: they reward thee euil
for good, heLuke. 19. 41. 23. 21. went ouer Jerusalem,
and would haue gathered them as the hen
gathereth her chickins, and they cryedActes. 2. 36.
Crucifie him, Crucifie him: Thou wisheth
& workest their wealth & they abuse thee,
he wrought their saluation, and they nayled
him to the Crosse, so that his example
in all our extremities is our stay and comfort,
that whatsoeuer befall vnto vs (although
it seeme straunge vnto vs, for that
we haue not bene experienced in it, and
for that it is vnpleasaunt vnto fleshe and
bloude) not onely hee himselfe hath broken



the Ise, and gone through the same to
geue vs an example: but euen it hath bene
the continual course that God hath set his
dearest & best beloued seruauntes to wade
through from tyme to tyme.
            
               (Commaunde that these stones bee made
bread) this is the second braunche of this
temptation,The speach of Sathan vnto the Sonne of God. which Sathan subtilly inferreth
vpon the other, either in particular beyng
confessed, or in generall being denyed:
for the particular he reasoneth thus: If it
be so that thou wilt not bee brought from
that by no meanes, but that thou wilt
needes hold it for an vndoubted truth, that
thou art the very sonne of God, then know
this, that euery thyng is at thy commaūdemēt
and wilbe obedient at thy word, therfore
(that thou mayest be prouided for now
in thy extremitie, and not languishe for
want of foode) seyng that here is no ordinary
way of prouision, commaunde these
stones that they leaue their naturall hardnesse,
and become conuenient nourishment
for thine hungry body: a conclusion in reason
very plausible, for God may doe what
hee will and who may finde fault with it?
for there is no law, to the law giuer, but he



that made it may dispence with it, and he
that is aboue it, is exempted frō it. If you
marke it well,Sathan vnder pretēce of Christian libertie perswadeth to sinne. the whole drift of Sathā is,
to shew Christ what great libertie he hath,
and to perswade him to vse it: whiche is a
temptation that the godly are much haunted
withall, for when Sathan cannot perswade
them by all the extremities that are
incident vnto them both in soule and body,
that they are out of the fauour of God, thē
commeth he with a counterbuffet shewyng
them the largenesse of their libertie, & how
many thynges are lawfull for him that is
not vnder the law but vnder grace. Which
is a very sore temptation and preuayleth
with many in very many thynges that are
euidently forbidden in the worde of God,
especially, carelessenes and worldlynesse
which we are to be very warie of, for it is
a great step towardes that fearefull estate
of those thatIude. 4. turne the grace of God into
wantonnesse, and those that thinke they
may sinne,Rom. 3. 8. because they are not vnder
the law, but vnder grace. Whose damnation
the holy Ghost pronounceth to be iust,
and who were before ordained to condemnation.
But it behoueth the true Christiā


               
euer to stand vpon this terme: that though
he be freed from sinne, yet is he carefully to
striue agaynst sinne, though he be brought
into the glorious libertie of the sonnes of
God, yet is it not that hee should any way
serue sinne, but being freed from the stynge
and guilt of sinne, and the curse of the law,
mightRom. 6. 13. giue ouer his members to serue
the liuyng GodLuke. 1. 74. in all righteousnesse &
true holynes all the dayes of his life: Now
for the generall hee reasoneth thus:Sathan tēpteth to distrust Gods prouidence. surely
thou canst not be the sonne of God, for els
would he prouide for thee: & therefore thou
must euen make shift for thy selfe, by some
meanes as thou canst, for surely God forgetteth
to bee carefull for thee, in that he
offereth not present meanes of helpe. And
this is also a sore temptation, & such a one
as hath ouertaken the deare children of
God. ForGen
                     •
                  . 12 13. 
               Abraham not seeyng lawfull
meanes to auoyde the crueltie of the
Aegiptians, did vse vnlawfull, by teachyng
his wife to lye: Sara
               16. 2. in laughyng after
the promised seede gaue her mayde to her
husband: Lot
               19. 8. (to protect the straūgers)
offerred his daughters to be abused of the
Sodomites, theExod. 1. 19. midwiues of Egypt to



saue the children, lyed to the kyng, Rahab
               Iosu. 2. 4. to saue the spyes, lyed to them of Jericho,
the Scripture is full (but the world is
more full) of such examples: for many that
would loath an euill entent, doth Sathan
ouertake in this to make them to bryng a
good thyng to passe by vnlawfull meanes,How he preuaileth with them that would be rich.
or to doe euill vnder the pretence and shew
of goodnesse: the man that thirsteth after
gayne, and desireth to be rich, committeth
many a wicked fact in ye course of his trade,
as in facyng, lyeing, swearyng, exacting,
inhansing, deceiuyng, and what not? and all
vnder pretence of this, we must liue we
must vtter our wares, we must follow our
trade,How he preuaileth with thē that are in extremitie. we must prouide for our familie.
The man that is in any extremitie, in body,
in goods or credite, will easely striue by
all lawfull vnlawfull meanes, to wynde
himselfe out, as for exāple, if thou be poore,
the deuill will tell thee thou must steale,
for thou must liue: if thou buy an euill bargayne,
and be like to haue great losse (thou
must coulour the matter and post it ouer
into an other mans necke, for thou must
not willingly be vndone) if thou wouldest
perswade an other in a thing which he wil



hardly beleeue, thou mayest curse & sweare
(for els he will not beleeue thee) but all
this while in what estate are they? euen in
the same that Sathan would haue persuaded
Christ Jesus that hee was in, namely
to bee forsaken of God, to bee left to their
owne prouision, then which there cannot
be a more haynous sinne against the Lord:
we must learne then (if we will profite by
this doctrine) not onely (in most carefull
wise) to goe about that which is good, but
also to attempt it by godly and lawfull
meanes, least while Sathan ouertake vs
not in the matter, he goe behinde vs in the
maner.
            
               (But Iesus sayd vnto him it is written. &c.)
The aunswere of Christ Jesus vnto this
subtill cauill of Sathā is,The aunswere of Christ vnto Sathan. thus much in effect:
I know that the ordinarie way which
God my heauenly father hath appointed to
nourishe his children withall, is bread (by
which the Scripture meaneth all kinde of
but yet he is not tyed vnto y• course foode)
alwayes, his prouidēce is larger, then that
it should fayle, where ordinarie meanes are
wanting, and therfore though I see not in
the course of nature any present foode for



my repast, yet his protection is not so
straite laced that hee is not able any other
wayes to prouide for me, vnlesse I do that
whiche is vnlawfull to be done, especially
at thy commaundement: and for the assuraunce
of this which I speake agaynst thy
cauilling lye, I haue the expresse word of
God on my side to ouerthrow thee: so that
this beyng (in brief) the summe and substaunce
of the aunswere of our Sauiour
Christ, doth minister vnto vs diuers doctrines
for our instruction.VVe must fight against Sathan with the word of God. First we learne
with what weapons we must fight agaynst
Sathan, our spirituall enemy, for Christ
who is our captaine, of vs is to be followed
encountering with Sathā his sworne enimy,
doth lift vp agaynst him this weapon:
(it is writtē
               ) that is beateth him back with
the word of God, whiche is therfore called
Ephes. 6. 17. the sworde of the spirite for that it isHeb. 4. 12.
sharper then a two edged sworde, cuttyng
downe all imaginations whatsoeuer are
reared vp agaynst the truth: & fayth which
is ingendred in the hart of man is called
theEphes. 6. 16. shield to quench all the firie dartes
of the wicked, beyng of force by reason of
that righteousnesse of Christ Jesus (wherewith



it is lined) to discry and driue away
all the temptations of Sathan,VVhat a horrible fin it is, to take the preachyng of Gods word from men. bee they
throwne against it neuer so cūningly, those
then that doe depriue men of this heauenly
and onely defence for their soules, from
the handes of Sathan, whether they hee
Papistes denying the vse of the Scriptures
to ignoraunt people, or carnall Gospellers
which thinke preaching not so needefull,
so that seruice (as they call it) be read
distinctly, and therefore vpon euery thyng
wherewith they are discontēted, will seeke
to muste or vtterly displace (euen) him that
hath all the giftes (in notable measure) required
by S. Paule out of the Lordes byneyard,
that he should not dresse it. Let thē
pretend what they can, and alledge what
siggeleaues it please them wherewith to
hide their shame, they are guiltie of the destruction
of so many soules as by them
might haue bene instructed, and shalbe arayned,
and (without repentaūce) conuicted
of highe treason agaynst Jesus Christ, in
the day of Judgement, and shalbe founde
guiltie of sinne so much more haynous thē
that of Iudas, by how much the betraying
of thousandes of soules into the handes of



Sathan, to eternall death, is greater then
the deliuering of the body of one innocent
man, to the temporall death of the body.
Besides these (for so much as the bloud of
the sheepe though it shalbeEzek. 33. 8. required at ye
hand of the shepheard, yet the sheepe shall
dye in his own sinnes) they also that either
for couetousnesse will not helpe forwarde:
or for worldlinesse will not attende vnto: or
for negligence frequent not,The despisers of the preachyng of the Gospell bee wilfull murtherers. or by blindnesse
esteeme not, the continuall and ordinarie
preaching of the gospel (though they
thinke it a thyng not so needefull and therfore
come not vnto it, vntill they haue nothing
els to do) for so much as (els) they lye
open for Sathan to wounde thē at his pleasure,
they shall also be conuicted in the day
of reckoning, for guilty, of wilfull murthering
their owne soules.A comparison. For if we say, (and
that truely) that he who will venture with
charge of money alone, to trauaile ouer
places suspected for robberie, without his
weapōs, is worthy to be robbed, for that he
runneth into the handes of his enemie:
much rather shall he bee so esteemed of almightie
God a caster of himselfe willingly
into the handes of the deuill, that trauailyng



by y• theeuish places of this world (I
meane the roaring of Sathan) regardeth
not to haue this sword of Gods word girt
to his side, nor to be fenced with the sheilde
of fayth, but goyng on in the course of flesh
& bloud, runneth willingly where Sathan
will haue him, and seeth it not, for that he
is blindMath. 22 29. not knowyng the Scriptures
for his direction defence and comfort. If
the truth of this were surely settled into
our soules that we were persuaded it were
so, we should haue a more lust and longing,
for the knowledge of Gods word, then yet
euer we had, & (euen) spare some tyme from
our necessarie affaires of this world, (much
more from our vanities and fleshly pleasures)
for the publicke hearing and priuate
reading of that word by whiche we shalbe
Iohn. 14. 48. iudged in the end. Agayne, Christ Jesus
beyng God, hauing the whole world at
his cōmaundement, might haue beate him
backe by the power of his might, and neuer
haue spoken worde to him: But we are to
note that as he came into the world, to be
our redeemer, so did hee likewise, to set vs
an example cōtinually in such cases as befell
vnto him, to be followed. For whiche



cause hee taketh not himselfe to his power
as he is God:Sathā is not resisted as we thynke good, but as Christ hath giuen vs an example. But to the word prescribed
vnto mā, to teach vs, that if we will buckle
with Sathan in deede, and if euer we will
truely persuade our selues of hope of victorie,
we must learne to resist him, not as we
in our own foolish wisedome thinke meet,
but accordyng as our head (whereunto we
must be conformed) Christ Jesus hath geuen
vs an example in his owne person: A
lesson very needefull to bee put in practise,
which very fewe haue yet learned. For if
you came to him that sinneth and (accordyng
to yourLeuit. 19. 17. duetie) reprouing him, and
persuading him to amendement,Ephe. 5. 11. doe wish
hym to beware of the subtiltie of Sathan,Heb. 10. 24.
and take heede that hee carie him not
headlong into perdition: tushe (sayth he) I
defie the deuill and all his workes, I trust
he shal neuer haue power ouer me: I trow,
I am not so simple, but I know, what is
what,How the wicked thinke of the enemy of their soules. and in the meane while hee maketh
no conscience of any sinne: cares not for the
knowledge of the word of God: but rather
mocketh and molesteth them that do & all
this while hee persuadeth himselfe that the
deuill can neuer come neare him: when



(poore soule) he is euen running headlong
to destruction and seeth it not.How Sathā deceiueth the wicked. But Sathā
will geue the leaue (nay he wil teach thee)
to defie him: to spit at the namyng of him:
and to rayle agaynst him: & make thee beleeue
it is sufficient, and yet will haue thee
take the way that goeth directly vnto hell:
if we (then) will learne to be wise, we must
haue Gods word in our hartes to light vs:
in our mouthes to speake for vs: and in our
conuersation, to rule vs and then we shalbe
sure to stand fast. The place of Scripture
which Christ here vseth, is written in the
eight Chapter of the booke ofDeut. 8. 3. Deuteronomie:
where the holy Ghost (by the mouth
of Moyses) exhorting the people of Israell
to obediēce vnto Gods commaundements,
sheweth how the Lord did in most wonderfull
maner, trye, and prouide for them in
the wildernesse, not geuyng them an ordinarie
meanes to get their meate withall,
but in miraculous wise fed them with
Manna from heauen: to shew that it is not
bread onely that man liueth by: but by euery
word of God: that is euery decree and
determination, that God in his wisedome
seeth meete to put in execution, for so much



as hee can both makeLuke. 12. 15: aboundaunce, of
meates to bee vnprofitable for the preseruations
of mans life: and also preserue mā
in all extremities, when foode is wantyng
& not to be had Which doth teach vs first, y•
God is not tyed to outwarde meanes.God is not tyed to meanes, but can worke his will with out them as well as with them. VVe may neuer vse vnlawfull meanes. But
at his good pleasure both can & will feede
man, as well with bread, as without it, and
prouide for man when all helpe of the creature
fayleth: which is a sure staffe to leane
vnto, in the tyme of extremitie & distresse.
Agayne that we take heede, that to the auoydyng
of any inconuenience, we neuer
vse any vnlawfull wayes, or commit any
sinne agaynst God, for our own benefite, or
ease: both which we see most notably practised
by thoseDan. 3. 16 17. 18. three faythfull seruaunts
of God, condemned by Nabuchadnezar to
bee burned in the firie fornace, saying O
Nabuchadnezar,
               An example neuer to bee forgotten. we are not carefull to aū
               swere
thee in this matter, behold our God
whom we serue, is able to deliuer vs from
the hote firie fornace, and hee will deliuer
vs out of thy hand O kyng: but if not: be it
knowne vnto thee (O kyng) that we will
not serue thy Gods, nor worship the goldē
Image thou hast set vp: where we see (for



our example) 1. how they confesse the power
of God. 2. beleeue to haue the benefite of
it in their distresse, 3. determine to suffer
any extremitie rather then to sinne against
God. O that such fayth, such zeale, such
feare, and obedience were in vs: then should
Gods power shine among vs more wonderfully
in preseruyng his & shewyng him
selfe their God, thē it doth. We learne further
by this place, that as God is not tyed
to meanes,VVithout Gods blessing no meane▪ can do vs good. but can helpe without it when
he list, & will when it is meete for his glory
and the comfort of his: so also hee is not
tyed vnto meanes to geue it a blessing, for
we see many that haue outward helpes at
will, and yet the blessing of God, not being
vpon them, they are vnprofitable vnto
them. Which doctrine (for our instruction)
hath a double vse: first in particular concernyng
foode (whiche is especially here
mentioned) that for so much as God hath
geuen man leaue to vse all his creatures,
and to feede of them (yet with prayer,Tim. 4. 5 VVith what affection we must receiue our ordinarie foode. &
thankesgeuyng) that we neuer presume to
lay handes vpon the same to apply them to
our bodies in the nourishment thereof, but
first we call vpō the name of God, that his



blessing may bee vppon the same, that hee
would sanctifie them vnto vs, and vs vnto
him selfe in such maner, that they may bee
of force (by his power geuen vnto them) to
nourish our bodies: knowyng that howsoeuer
the vse of them be common, and therefore
seeme vnto carnall men to haue power
in them selues to giue nourishment: yet
we know by fayth grounded on Gods own
word, that he that made bread, not onely cā
but also hath threatned that hee will, for
the disobediēce of man,Leuit. 2
                     •
                   26. Ezek. 4. 16. 5
                     •
                   16. Hag. 1. 6. breake the staffe
of bread, that is take away his blessing frō
it, that it beyng eaten shall not feede nor
nourish vs. Which lesson I would to God
that the prophane and Godlesse people of
the world could once learne: who groueling
vpon the grounde like hogges, and neuer
lifting vp their myndes to God the authour
of all those blessinges that they plentifully
inioye, do fall to their foode like the
horse to his prouender,How the wicked come to & goe from their mea
                     •
                  
                and beyng satisfied,
depart away like the beast of the field with
out vnderstādyng: and as for him, by whose
meates they are satisfied, hee neuer comes
into their remembraunce, vnlesse it bee by
tearyng him in peeces to blaspheme his



most holy name. But if they did know, that
euen while they sit eatyng and drinckyng,
the hād of GodDan. 5. 4. writteth vpon the wall,
determinyng their destruction, if they
knew how GOD made theNum: 1 20. quayles (a
daintie foode) to come out at the nostrells
of the Israelites in most loathsome sorte: or
if they considered that GOD might iustly
choke them with euery morsell that entreth
into their mouthes, they would bee
more carefull to learne the lesson taught
by the holy Ghost, thati. Cor. 10 31. whatsoeuer we
doe, whether we eate or drinke or what els
soeuer, that all must be done to the glory &
prayse of God, who is to be blessed for euer
and euer. It is also a lesson to vs in generall,
concernyng all the rest of Gods creatures:
that for as much as a man may bee
great, and cursed of God, as was Pharaoh:
rich and goe to hell with Diues: that wee
doe not build our selues strong vpon them,
thinkyng if we haue them, who may controll
vs? and so doe what we list (as we see
it is the maner of men that know not god)
but contrarywise,The right vse of worldly blessings. saying with our selues,
if god meane to send a famine vpon me, all
the corne in my garner shall not saue me:



if plague and pestilence, my walled houses
cannot preserue me from it: if fire & sword,
my riches will not helpe me: and therefore
that we pray continually vnto god, that he
will so blesse his owne riches bestowed vpon
vs, & so guide vs in the vse of the same,
that he by vs and them, may bee glorified,
and not they turned as faggots to increase
the fire of his wrathfull indignation agaynst
vs.
         
         
            ¶The thyrd Sermon.
            
               
                  Verse. 5. 6. 7.
                  5. Then the Deuill tooke him vp into the
holy Citie, and set him on a pinacle of the
Temple.
                  6. And sayd vnto him. If thou be the sonne
of God, cast thy selfe downe: for it is written,
that hee will giue his Angels charge
ouer thee, and with their handes they shall
lift thee vp, least at any tyme tho
                        •
                     
shouldest dash thy foote agaynst a stone
                  7. Iesus said vnto him, It is written agay
                        •
                     
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God
               
            
            
               
               
               
                  THen the Deuill tooke him vp)
we haue sene the subtiltie of
Sathan, agaynst the sonne of
God in the first temptation,
and how hee in most notable manner hath
driuē him backe, and put him to the foyle:Sathan wil not cease when hee hath the repulse.
a mā would thinke that now Sathā should
see, that he is the sonne of God, and so neuer
attempt any more to assayle him, for
feare of an other repulse, but he playes the
part of an inuincible fighter, that hauyng
offered a blow to the head, & seyng it warded,
doth offer agayne, not at that place,
but at an other: hopyng if he cannot speede,
at one place, that yet he may hit in an other:
for Sathan offereth not agayne, with the
same temptation, but tryeth an other way
cleane contrary vnto the other, as we shall
see hereafter. The first thing that offereth
it selfe to our consideration is the tyme
when this second temptation was, namely
forthwith vpō the end of the other. Wherein
may seeme to arise a doubt: for seyng
that Luke telleth vs that this was the last,

                  〈◊〉
                
               Mathew (here) that it was presently

                  〈◊〉
                the first, they may seeme to be cō
               
                  •
               ra
               
                  ••
               ne
to the other. But we are to note



(for the solution of the doubt) that it is not
the purpose of the Euangelistes to be precise
in the obseruyng of y• tymes, but carefully
to set downe y• thing, and therfore did
euery one of them (as we see if we cōferre
thē together) set downe the things as they
came conueniently to hand. Now for so
much as this second tēptation is in a matter
cleane contrary vnto the former, & we
know (by the worde of God and our owne
experience) that it is the course of Sathan,
so to assayle: it may appeare that Mathew
hath rather set them downe accordyng to
the tyme wherein they were done, then
Luke. The thyng then that we are first to
insiste vppon in this place, is, the tyme of
this temptation (that is) when the first triall
was ended, then began the second to
be taken in hand. Whereby we are first to
learne this lesson, that when one storme or
trouble is past,VVe may not after one victorie agaynst Sathan looke for continuall quietnes. and the grief of one affliction
ended, we must not then looke to rest
vnmolested: which is worthy to be noted,
for we see that fleshe and bloud naturally,
persuadeth it selfe, that (one broyle beyng
once ouercome) we shalbe in quietnesse and
securitie afterwarde: but we may not bee



lulled in the cradle of securitie in such maner,
but learne, that for so much as our life
Iob. 7. 1. is a continuall warrefare: and man is5. 7.
borne to trauaile as the birde to flye: and
Sathā is a sworne enemy to our peace and
well fare: that we assure our selues so long
as we tarie in this body4. 19. of clay, we shalbe
sure that the end of one trouble must be
the begynning of an other,It is needful for vs in the end of one trouble, to looke for another. and surely the
due consideration of this bringeth greate
case vnto him that weyeth it a right. For
what is the cause that wee see so many in
triall and tribulation, either impatient, or
counting it vntollerable, vtterly to relent
but onely this, that they haue promised vnto
them selues peace and safetie, dreame
of an heauen vpō earth, and hoping to liue
as they would wish? who beyng disappointed
of their purpose, and falling into such
a sodden sorrow (which they neuer thought
vppon) doe most lamentably increase vnto
themselues their owne woe. If then we
will profite aright by this doctrine, wee
must rather looke for the worse, then the
best, and thē shall no estate too much moue
vs, but in euery condition (whether of prosperitie
or aduersitie) we shall set our hand



               Luk 9. 62 to the plough, not lookyng backe, and so
shalbe founde meete for the kyngdome of
God. Agayne it ministreth vnto vs a doctrine
of exceeding cōfort, for though troubles
come, one in the necke of an other, yet
is not our whole life one onely trouble,
without intermission. Wherein appeareth
the exceedyng loue of our good and gracious
God, who knowing our weakenesse, &
pitieng our estate, hath in his vnspeakable
wisedome, so tempered the afflictions of
his seruauntes, that yet in the midst of the
same, he geueth exceedyng comfort.Gods great loue appeareth in the maner of our afflictions. For he
knoweth well inough, that if our warrefar
should be one, & euer in like maner, without
intermission, or alteration, we should
fainte long before we come to the goale.
Therfore it hath pleased his gracious Maiestie,
to make them many and diuers, and
to make them short, that we might haue experience
of his presence, in our deliueraūce
and so be hartened on to encounter agayne
with the more valour,VVhy our troubles be many and short, and not ouer large in continuaunce. knowing that the
enemy being heretofore beaten backe, will
agayn be more easilie ouerthrowne, whē he
seeth y• victorer set vpon him a freshe: And
also haue dayly proofe of the present hand



of God to assiste vs agaynst that huge and
harmefull aduersarie.
            
               (He tooke him vp. &c.) Now it remaineth
that we consider the place where this was
done, to wit the holy Citie (meaning Hierusalē)
so called (not in respect that it was
a place of it selfe more holy then other places
(nay) it was thē a place of greatest corruption)
but for that it had the sacrifices, &
publicke seruice of God in it, and for that
there was wont to be great holynesse, whē
the Israelites truely feared God. We must
not take this place as though hee caried
him thether in deede, but (as I said before)
in motion, labouring to suggeste such persuasiōs
into his mynde: now in that the holy
ghost meaning Ierusalem, calleth it the
holy Citie, he doth (no doubt) geue vs there
by to vnderstand, what was the subtiltie of
Sathan herein, to weete, to assayle him wt
this temptation, in such a place, as might
seeme to bee most voyde of Sathans presence:
thereby labouring the more cūningly
to deceiue: Wherein we may learne a
lesson most needefull to be obserued, to wit
that Sathan (such is his subtiltie) when he
goeth about to seduce any (that maketh a



conscience of sinne,Sathan temteth not the godly vnder the name of sinne but of godlynes. & knoweth in any measure
how GOD is to be serued and hath a
care to put the same in practise) hee will
not attempt his purpose, in the name of sin,
but sleely vnder ye coulour of a good thing:
for we see here that he bringeth Christ Jesus
vnto Jerusalem, where he might seeme
to be most voyde of any molestatiō, & there
goeth about to moleste him, for (in deede)
he wilbe sure to be in thoseIob. 1. 6. Math. 13. 19. places, and
prying into those exercises, that of themselues
be most excellent. As for example, if
he can not persuade with thee, to leaue of,
or neuer enterprise the hearing of the word
of God (because thou knowest it must bee
heard) if hee can neither make thy profite
keepe thee at home, nor thy pleasures cause
thee to be imployed els where:VVhat course he (commōly) taketh in the matter of hearing the worde. yet will he
seeke to deceaue thee when thou commest
there: for either hee will labour to put into
thy mynde, the consideration of such a busines
that thou hast at home, or such a thyng
that thou hast left vndone: or to make thee
heauie and fall on sleepe: or els if hee can
not preuayle that way,Note this well. hee will put other
motions into thy minde (which of themselues
are very good and godly) to this ende



that he may steale thy hart from attending
vnto the doctrine in hād. And this is a marueilous
subtiltie: for who would thinke
that it were Sathan that putteth good cogitations
into a mans mynde. But it is
most certaine, that if he can preuayle no other
way, yet will hee haue thee imployed
in an other matter, lesse needefull for thee
at that instāt, to the end that he may make
thee sinne agaynst GOD, in not listening
vnto him when he speaketh vnto thee: and
that he may depriue thee of the benefite of
that doctrine then deliuered. I speake not
all this while of those, whose myndes hee
doth carie away, by the wandring of the
eye, by beholdyng this man and that man:
yea & often the disquietnesse of some, where
at thou art greatly greeued, doth hee also
vse as a meane to drawe thy hart from the
thyng in hand.VVhat hee doth to defraude thee of the benefit of praier. The same course he taketh
(euen) in the holy action of prayer, howe
hard a thyng is it, for a man to pray zealously,
feelingly, and attentiuely? either he
will make thee heauy, and therfore he will
say thou art vnfit to prayer, & so let it passe
for that tyme: or thou feelest not the remorse
of conscience for sinne, which heretofore



thou hast or which thou shouldest, &
therefore he will bid thee take heede thou
prayest not least yu offend god in thy prayer.
Or if by neither of these meanes hee can
dissuade thee from that holy exercise, yet
will he come stealing on thee to take away
thy hart from that which thou speakest, &
so make it vnprofitable vnto thee. So that
the true child of God doth know (for to the
rest these thinges are parables) how difficulte
and hard a thing it is to offer vnto
the Lord this sacrifice, in such maner, that
it may be a sweete smelling sauour in his
nostrels. And when I consider the horrible
estate, whereunto (euen in the eyes of mā)
Sathan hath brought the world, it maketh
me quayle for feare,The great abuse of prayer in these daies. and maruaile how the
Lord in his iustice can abide such prophaning
of his name, and abusing of his most
holy word, as is euery where to be founde.
For though we be gone from the Papistes
in this pointe, that we vse not an vnknowne
toung (yet in the most places) we differre
from them in nothing els. For we rest vppon
the worke wrought as they did, we
tosse it from poste▪ to piller as they did in
one word, if a number of prayers he sayd,



and a taske done, it is thought good prayer.
In y• meane while the hart of him yt prayeth
is alienated, his eyes wander hether &
thether: & (if neuer so little occasion to be
offered) his tongue shal also beimployed to
speake to him y• is next him, these be they
thatEccles. 4. 17. offer the sacrifice of fooles, but the
Lord wilbe surely reuenged of these and
such like dealinges: and of them also by
whose occasion so great abhominations be
committed. Let vs therfore (whiche is the
drift of my speach) carefully take heede (seing
Sathan is so subtil, that he wil labour
to make the best exercises vnprofitable vnto
vs, and cause vs (vnlesse we take good
heede) to sinne greeuously in them agaynst
the Lord) that we continually praye vnto
the Lord our god, that it would please him
to direct vs, by his holy spirite, that our aduersarie
deceiue vs not in the same. Let vs
learne neuer to enterprise any such action
rashly,VVith what minde we must come to pray. or soddenly (as commonly men doe)
but reuerentlie, & diligently consider with
our selues aforehand, what we goe about,
and craue the Lordes assistaunce therein.
It is not onely said that Christ was caried
into Jerusalem, but also that he was placed



on the pinacle of the temple, in a most
highe and eminent place aboue the rest of
the whole Citie, where Sathan thought
more commodiouslie to assayle him, and to
be more free vpon him: Teaching vnto vs
this doctrine,VVhy Sathā laboureth most to ouerthrowe them of highest estate. that he is most bitter against
those that are in highest estate, and condition,
and laboureth aboue all to seduce thē:
because he knoweth that, as the Cedar tree
is not cut downe, but in the fall thereof, all
the shrubes, and inferiour trees are crushed
with it so farre as it reacheth: euen so the
fall of the greatest, carieth many inferious
to fall with him: which Salomon well obserued,
whē he sayd of aPro. 29. 12. Prince that harkneth
vnto lyes, all his seruauntes are wicked,
and our Sauiour Christ that sayd, if
Math. 26. 31. the shepheard be smitten, all his sheepe
are dispersed. And therefore we see that
great men are brought often tymes into a
most monsterous course of life, because the
enemy hath laboured by thē to seduce many.
We see moreouer that the Ministers
of the word of God, because they bee standard
bearers in the host of Christ, are either,
ouerthrowne by Sathan into worldlinesse
and vayne glory (whiche experience



teacheth vs to be true) or so mightely hacked
at, by time seruers, and enemies to the
truth, with tossing vp and downe, slaūders,
vile reproches, & such like, that they seeme
euen to be the butte, for all mens venomed
arrowes to bee shot at, and (as the Apostle
sayth)
                  
                     •
                   Cor. 4. 10. the of scouringes of the world, &
a gasing stocke to men and angels, and all
because of this that the candleIohn. 3. 19. 20. whiche
they carie in their hand, is so deadly hated
of the enemy, that he will neuer cease, vntill
it be extinguished or greatly darkened.
If behoueth therefore all those,A lesson for maiestrates & ministers. whom the
Lord hath set a loft in the church to be teachers,
or the common weale to bee rulers,
to watch their own wayes in most carefull
maner: knowing, that if they do not greatly
aduaunce the glory of God (by the discharging
of their duetie in an vpright consciēce)
their lifting vp to heauen (in regard
of their excellent calling, in this worke)
shalbe a meanes to throwe them the lower
downe, into hell, & so to increase their condemnation,
for that they haue abused gods
great graces (geuen them to aduaunce his
glory) and turned them into meanes of disgracing
the same.
            
               
               (And sayd vnto him if thou be the sonne
of God, cast thy selfe downe headlong) as if hee
should haue sayd, if thou bee certaine that
thou art the very sonne of GOD,The speach of Sathan vnto Christ. of such
Maiestie and power: it is meete and conuenient,
that thou liue not here so obscurely,
in a corner, but that thou make it
knowne vnto the world, by some notable
and singular miracle, that they may haue
occasion, to geue thee that honour, which is
due to such a person: for which there is no
more fit way, then now that thou art here
aloft, vpon the toppe of the temple (whiche
is in this Citie where thy fathers name is
called vpon, and he dayly serued) to throw
thy selfe downe, from hence headlong vnto
the grounde: which when the men of Jerusalem
doe behold, they can not chuse but cō
               fesse
thee to be the onely, and very sonne of
the euerlasting God, and receiue thee with
a common applause, to be their Sauiour &
redeemer, and so aduaunce thee among thē
vnto great honour. This is in effect the
summe of this temptation. Whereby we
see an example of the wonderfull subtiltie
of Sathan, wherein we may note diuers
doctrines for our instruction. First



how that the enemy (repeatyng agayne the
former part of the first temptation, wherein
he hauing the foyle, doth yet vse it as an
occasion to set vpon the sonne of GOD a
fresh) doth playnely declare himselfe to be
of great skil and of an inuincible mynde, agaynst
him, whom hee laboureth to ouerthrow,
for if hee dealt thus with him, in
whom he founde no shadow of inclination,
nor weakenesse, in the maner of resistaūce,
much more will he at vs agayne, whō once
he is vāquished, who (howsoeuer it pleaseth
God to make vsRom. 8 37. more then conquerous
in him that hath loued vs) cā not chose but
see in vs much weakenesses: greate fainting
and infirmitie, in our afflictions: and
therfore we may seeme (to him) to geue iust
cause of hope that at length he shal captiue
vs vnto his desire. UUhereof we are to
marke this vse vnto our selues, that we neuer
rest vpon any thing that we cā do: neither
euer extenuate the power of Sathan
in our owne imaginations (which the holy
ghost hath described to be soEphes. 6 
                     •
                  2. great) but
in continuall view of his strength and subtiltie,
and contrariwise, our owne infirmitie
and blindnesse, alwayes to relye vppon



Iesus Christ our head,A lesson how to vse our selues in fighting against Sathā
                shrouding our selues
vnder the wings of his protection: settyng
him euer in the forefronte of the battaile▪
and then shall we bee sure, to get the
victorie. Agayne we may see in the maner
of this tēptation an other of Sathans iuglinges
most needefull to bee obserued: to
wit, how he assayleth not Christ Jesus wt
the same agayne, or any like to it, but with
a newe temptation cleane contrary to the
former,Sathan afte a repulse vseth (often a contrarye temptation to the former. saying that thou mayest be sure inough
from doubting, cast thy selfe downe,
that thou mayest see that yu are the sonne of
God to the end (as no doubt he imagined)
that Christ might no way suspect it to bee
the motion of euill, being so contrary vnto
the other: but rather a confident ioye vpon
the victory: wherewith (although hee could
not deceaue the sonne of God, yet) he preuaileth
marueilously with it, in the world:
for (if we shall view the thing in his particulars)
we see, y• seyng Sathā can not preuayle
in the world, to keepe it still drowned
in blinde ignoraunce, and superstitious
deuotion: but that the same is described
openly vnto men, to be detestable and
leadyng to finall destruction: now doth he



labour to bring men vnto Atheisme, and to
be iust of no Religion at all. Wherewith
how greatly he preuaileth (to the great dishonor
of God, & grief of all the godly) it is
most manifest: for to put on the name of
Religion is present with euery man, and
to put of the title of Poperie (because the
law doth so) but to come to the point (which
in deede is the marke of a true Christian)
so toPsal. 1. 1. 2. refuse the counsell of the vngodly:
so to shunne the waye of sinners: and so to
abhorre the seate of the scornefull: as with
all (for so the originall text is to be expoū
               ded
in that place) to meditate in the law of
God day and night, to make itPsal. 119. 105. a lāterne
to our feete, and a light vnto our pathes: to
lay downe all our wisedome, and our owne
wayes, at the feete of Jesus Christ: and to
be contented, both in Judgement, & in practise
of life, to let the lyne of the worde direct
vs. how sew such are there founde, and
how thinne be they sowne, throughout this
whole lād? and all because of this,The subtiltie of Sathā, in the matter of reformation. that Sathan
would persuade vs, that the further
we be from zeale: from godly life: frō feare
of offending God and his Church: the further
we be from Poperie, and therfore the



safer, as in this one example shall appeare:
when we doe, by the word of GOD iustly
cōdemne, the tyranny and butchery of that
Antechrist in captiuyng the consciences of
men, vnder his slauish subiection, and then
doe heare that the word of God hath prescribed
an order in his Church to bridle the
varulinesse, & amend the abuses that rest in
euery one, who is called a brother: if once
we desire to haue the same executed, that
offences may be taken away (oh say they) yt
were euen to become slaues vnto Poperie
agayne: and therfore that they neuer come
neare that, they wilbe sure to geue them
selues to all libertie and loosenesse: in the
meane while, they forget that Sathan
laboured to practise so with our Sauiour
Christ Iesus, to driue him too farre into ye
contrary extremitie. If he can not preuaile
with man to make him couetously minded,
to be alwayes pludding vpō worldly cares,
that all good things may be choked in him
(whereunto almost) euery man yeldeth: thē
will he at him with the contrary, to driue
him to carelessenesse, in respect of those
thinges which he is bounde to looke vnto.
In a word it is Sathans continuall practise,



neuer to let man rest in that golden
meane which Gods word prescribeth, but
euer to intise him to the one extremitie, or
the other: and therfore we haue great need
to pray vnto the Lord, to make vs wise harted,
that we may see the course commaunded,
and continually proceede in it. Moreouer,
in ye Sathan, would haue him throw
himselfe downe headlong, which is (as you
haue heard) contrary vnto the other: it is to
the ende that hee may make him vaynelie
presumptuous, vpō his owne power, which
is a tēptation greatly infecting the world,
for notwithstandyng that we be in our selues
most foolish, ignoraunt, and simple, yet
Sathan will steale all the sight of that out
of mans mynde, and persuade him of himselfe
very highly. Whereupon it commeth
that we see the whole worlde so caried away
in pride and presumption, that euery
man swelleth in his own conceite, seeking
to disgrace all other men in respect of him
selfe, and liketh of nothing bee it neuer so
good, holy▪ or wisely done or sayd, but that
which is forged in his owne imagination:
but wee must learne the lesson of the holy
Ghost set downe by the Apostle Paule, in



               Rom. 12. 10. geuing honor to preferre one & an other,
and not our selues, in our owne blind persuasion:
Sathan laboureth not onely in
this, to make Christ Jesus thinke too wel
of himselfe, but also vppon the same to vse
vnlawfull meanes, to make it knowne vnto
others, which is a braūch (if you marke
it wel) secret poyson, wherewith he greatly
venometh mankynde. For when once he
can bring man to thinke better of himselfe
then others doe, or (in deede) is cause why
he or they should: then will he ticle him wt 
vayne glory,The nature of vayne glory. yt is with an inordinate desire
of blazing his power & dignitie vnto men:
whereunto when he can finde no fit instrumentes,
for the execution of the same, in
such measure as hee would: rather then it
shalbe vnatchiued (such is his thirst after
prayse, & popular fame) he wilbe his owne
spokesman, and pleade his owne cause, as
we may see in the wordes & deedes of men:
words, when men are not ashamed to commende
of, and prayse themselues, shewyng
in boasting maner what they can doe, and
what great things they haue done (and often,
all starke lyes) thinkyng the matter
neuer sufficiently knowne vntill themselues



lay it open,The cause of gorgeous and disguised apparell. in deede when mē and womē
(as we see in their practise will adorne
(or rather disguise) them selues in such
straunge and monstrous maner, as we see
continually practised amongest vs: and all
commeth from a braunch of that that Sathan
would gladly suggest into the sonne
of God, to thinke it shall not otherwise bee
knowne how noble, how worshipfull, how
rich in liuynges, or great of byrth they are,
and they persuade themselues, that euery
man admireth their great estate thereby,
when (poore soules) they take the readyest
way, to be mocked and taūted of euery one
that seeth them: esteemyng them rather of
foolish, vayne, and wanton, then wise, sober,
or honest behauiour. This kinde of decette
is yet further to be ripped vp, for it is an
infection that stealeth euen vpon him that
is (otherwise) watchfull: for it is a marueilous
hard thyng (such is our corruption) euen
for the dearest children of God, to doe
any thyng that is good, or be in any good estate
or condition, but as Sathan would
haue had Christ to haue misdemeaned him
selfe because hee was the sonne of God: so
doth he exceedyngly labour, to make their



affections corrupt in the same manner. In
respect whereof, I pray God that we neuer
let passe from our remembraunce the
saying of that singular vessell of God S.
Paule, that sayth hee had the2. Cor. 12 7. messenger
of Sathan to buffet him (a pricke in his
flesh) least he should be exalted aboue measure,
through the aboundaunce of reuelations.
For of all sinnes,Man hardly doth any good thyng but hee is proud of it. I am persuaded that
the best and godliest cā most hardly auoyde
this, to doe any thing that is good, & not be
proude of it: but let vs pray vnto God, for
his grace, that our affections may be so reformed,
that we neuer ascribe any thyng
to our selues, that is his: and then shall we
neuer bee proude of that which is not our
owne. Marke yet an other pointe of Sathans
doinges▪ he carieth him vnto an high
place, aboue the rest of the buildyng, but it
is to the end, that he may throw him down
the lower, and with the greater fall: for he
meaneth neuer any thyng lesse then to benefite
any man, but his purpose is continually
to seeke by all meanes his destruction:
and yet will he set a goodly shewe vpon the
matter, as though he laboured for his wellfare,
to the ende he may the more easily deceaue:



whereby we may see, that as Sathan
is contrary vnto God: so is his doyng
most vnlike y• Lordes. For the Lord while
he intendeth the profice of a man,The cōtrarie course of God & Sathan towardes mā. doth hū
               ble
him, cast him downe, and make him
seeme base in his owne eyes, that hee may
aduaunce him, lift him vp and adorne him
with glory, and Sathan doth here cleane
contrary to wit, exalteth highly, to the end
he may throw downe the lower, and therfore
we are to take heede of those thynges
in this world, that either offer vnto vs present
pleasure, or feede our humor in pleasing
of our selues. And on the other side, not
despise the snubes and checkes that the
Lord doth often lay vpon his people, for so
much as (howsoeuer in present the former
may be more delightfull yet) the latter in
the ende (to him that hath the right vse of
it) is farre more profitable. Lastly (to conclude
this point, & so to proceede) the drift
of Sathan is to make him, beare him selfe
to bolde vppon this that hee is the sonne of
God. A practise wherewith he greatly preuaileth
in the world. For where as GOD
hath in his wisedome, set and appointed
the places of men to bee diuers: some in



great,The end of great callings one aboue another and how Sathan peruerteth them. and some in meaner conditiōs: to the
ende that by the greater his glorye might
more eminently appeare in those whom he
hath aduaunced: Sathan laboureth (and
mightely preuaileth to deface this glorious
ordinaunce of God, and to make it vnprofitable
vnto that ende whereunto it is
ordained, For he telleth Princes, & great
personages, that for so much as they bee in
so great and excellent estate all thyngs are
lawfull for them: their will may bee their
direction, and who may controll them?
whereby they promise vnto thēselues great
freedome to sinne: for that they are not to
be censured by man (the meaner man also
whom it pleaseth GOD to aduaunce, vnto
dignitie, and great estate in the worlde,
whereas he should reason thus: God hath in
his great mercy dealt thus graciously with
me, to preferre me, before many of myne equales
and betters (no doubt) it is to this
end, that I should in more notable manner
aduaūce his glory, and in greater measure
bee a staffe vnto those that feare the Lord,
and a shield to defēd them agaynst the wicked:
Sathan teacheth him to reason cleane
contrary: as thus. Now I am adaunced,



now am I inriched, now am I esteemed, I
haue all thynges that I can desire,How the wicked abuse their high calling. what
should now let me, why I may not geue
my selfe vnto my pleasures, to feede my
owne affections and be it right or wrong,
who shal say nay vnto it? or who dare finde
fault with it? I would to God that we had
not too manifest experience, of such reasoninges:
for where as great personages,
should bee glorious in great and raxe vertues,
for others to immitate, it falleth out
(oftētymes) that they be patternes of most
monstrous sins, vnto those that will learne
to follow them. Sathan findeth such fruite
towards the building vp of his kingdome,
by this course, that hee infecteth all sortes
of people by the same, so that not so much
as the simple countreyman (if that hee can
any way persuade himselfe, that superiour
persons haue any good likyng of him) but
will attempt whatsoeuer, shall any way
serue his owne turne: alwayes thinkyng
thus with himselfe: if I be crossed in it, I
haue a frend,The cause of all misdemenoure in the commō weale. a great man that will stand
by me, and suffer me, not to haue the foyle.
Frō this fountaine doth arise all the troubles,
and disorders that are euery where to



be sene: which (if you marke well) you shall
see, that it springeth from his brayne, that
beareth himselfe bolde of his frendes that
he can make, either in Court or in the coū
               trey.
And thus can Sathan cunningly deceaue
the world. But (if it pleased God to
put it in the harts of superiours on whō all
wicked men do relye) it behoueth them to
haue especiall care, whō they stād with, for
so much as they can not choose but be guiltie
of the sinnes committed, by them, and it
is now come to that passe, that a liuery
coate maketh a man lawlesse where soeuer
he dwelleth.
            
               (For it is written he shall geue his Angels
charge ouer thee. &c.) Now come we to the
reason that Sathā vseth,Sathan will proue his matter out of the scriptures. to the end that he
might with more probabilitie seeme to
vrge no vnlawfull thing: his reason is thus
much in effect. I persuade thee to nothyng,
that either, may be any way offensiue, vnto
GOD, or daungerous vnto thy person, for
that which is writtē in Gods owne word,
must needes please him well, & that which
he hath promised, can not be vnperformed:
and thou canst not bee ignoraunt that hee
hath cōmaunded his angels to take heede,



vnto those that are his, & so to protect thē,
agaynst all daungers that may seeme to be
incident vnto them, that they shall not so
much, as trippe or stumble at a stone, that
lyeth in their way, a speach in appearaūce,
merueilous glorious, but in truth (beyng
rightly scāned) most wicked and impious:
for marke, his intent is (as we haue heard)
to persuade Christ Jesus to sinne, and yet
for the proofe of the same, hee will needes
alledge the Scripture in which maner (before
we come to the text it selfe) there resteth
a double subtiltie, first he seyng himselfe
cōuicted by the Scripture, beginneth
now to fight with the same weapon: both
that hee may seeme to haue as much force
on his side to persuade with, as Christ had
in resistyng: and also, that he by taking that
weapon into his hād, might cause the sonne
of GOD to refuse it, and vse it no more agaynst
him: either of which if he could obtaine
hee would not greatly doubt of the
victorie. Which we are diligently to consider,
and obserue: for Sathā knowyng that
he is no way so wounded as with the word
of God, vseth many sleightes from tyme to
tyme, to depraue vs of the benefite of the



same.How Sathā laboureth to bereue vs of the benefite of the worde. For either he will labour to take it
vtterly away from vs (as he doth mightely,
by those miscreauntes the Papistes) or
if he can not get that, yet will he vse some
meanes or other, to make vs as good bee
without it as haue it, by settyng before our
eyes texte agaynst text, by shewyng vs the
diuers sences wherein it hath bene taken:
and all to this ende to make vs Academickes,
holding no certaintie of any parte
of it. And therfore we haue great neede (especially
in these dayes, wherein the Scriptures
are so many wayes abused & peruerted)
to craue the Lordes gracious fauour,
to open our eyes, and enlighten our vnderstanding,
that we may see thePsal. 11▪ 15. misteries
contained in his lawes: that we may with
the knowledge of the text (in letter) vnderstand
also the spiritual sence and meanyng
thereof, to the right reformation of our
iudgements, and conuersations, according
to the same. The secōd braunch of the subtiltie
of Sathan in alledging the text, is
that he may the more easilie deceaue: and
with the more coulour worke his purpose,
and not be descried. Wherein we see that
verified whiche the holy Ghost doth els



where warne vs of, namely, that hee can
turne2. Cor. 11 14. him selfe into an Angell of light:
that is set such a glorious face vppon the
matter, that he would seeme to lead a man
into the highest heauen, when (in deede) his
purpose is to throw him downe to y• lowest
hell. For would not a man thinke, that the
eternall worde of the euerliuyng God, being
geuen vnto the sonnes of men, to teach
vs to know God, and worship him aright,
and to shewe vs the way to endlesse felicitie,
should neuer be spoken, but to that end,
and therfore the very sillables of the same
to carie in them alwayes, great maiestie &
reuerence? which in deede) is the end wherfore
it is geuen vs) and yet behold how sathan
(as hee vseth it) would make it serue
his turne, to teache the way to perdition.
Wherein (though the sonne of God could
quickely espy his legierdumain yet) hee
greatly ouertaketh mankinde with it: especially
those,The daunger to professe religion and not labour for sound iudgement by knowledge. that haue a generall likyng to
Religion and yet are 
                  〈◊〉
               , in the
true sence, and meanyng of the text: we see
how Sathan c
                  ••
               ieth them from opinion to
opinion and euery thyng that seemeth to
haue any probable shewe of Scripture in



it, they take by and by as an vndoubted
truth. Wherein as (at the first) he abuseth
their simplicitie, and vnstaydnesse: so (at the
length) hee bringeth them to an obstinate
frowardnesse, that in respect of their owne
opinion, they will not sticke to condemne
those whom they know in their owne consciences,
to be the notable instrumentes of
God to set forth his glory. And therfore it
behoueth vs, to take heede that we truely
learne to discerne the spirites1. Ioh 4
                     •
                  
                whether
they be of God or no: lest we (suffering the
punishment of our owne carelessenesse) bee
caried about with eueryEphes. 4. 14. winde of doctrine,
by the deceite of men: but be so setled
vppon the rockeMat. 16 18. Christ Jesus through
the knowledge of the doctrine of the Prophetes
and Apostles) that the gates of hell
do neuer preuayle agaynst vs. Thus much
for Sathans sleight in the alledging of the
text. Now let vs see how he doth alledge
it. (He shall geue his Angels charge ouer thee
&c.) If you looke vpon the wordes of the
texte alledged, and conferre them with the
Psal. 9. 11. Psalme from whence he had them, you
shall see a notable peece of cunnyng. For
where as it is sayd here, that GOD will



geue his Angels charge ouer (those that
dwell vnder the shadow of the almightie)
to guide them in their wayes: hee leaueth
out this last word (their wayes) whiche (in
deede) is the very thyng that would haue
made him ouerthrow himselfe. And therfore
he passeth it ouer. For the meanyng of
the promise is, that God will protect them
that walke in his wayes which he hath prescribed
vnto them. Now there is none so
ignoraunt, but knoweth, that when a man
is vpon the toppe of a pinacle, his wayes to
come down, is not to throw himselfe headlong,
but, to come downe by y• stayres, that
be made for that purpose. UUhich Sathan
knowyng well inough, doth leaue it out,
that his dealyngs may not be discryed: this
lesson doth hee teach many a one to put in
practise, as for exāple, when he would persuade
a man to bee a Papist. He will tell
him that none can be saued, but whom the
Pope will, and to proue it he hath a text to
witte whatsoeuerMath. 16. 19. thou bindest on earth
shalbe bounde in heauen, and whatsoeuer
thou loosest in earth, shalbe loosed in heauen,
but he will neuer tell him that this is
restrained to the wordes of the commission



               Mat. 2
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 20. teaching them to obserue whatsoeuer I
haue commaunded you, els it is your owne
inuention. When hee would persuade one
to abyde still in his sinne, he will tell him
that God hath mercy euer in store, and to
proue it he hath a text, to wit, whensoeuer
the wicked returneth from his sinnes,Ezek 1
                     •
                   21. 22.
they shall no more be remembred, but hee
will neuer geue him leaue to learne that
the mercyRom. 
                     •
                   4. 5. of GOD leadeth to repentaunce
els thou heapest vp vnto thy selfe
wrath agaynst the day of vengeaunce: whē
he would haue thee to be superstitiously deuoute,
and so not to care for the doctrine of
the word, he hath a text1. Thes. 5. 17. pray continually,
but he will not tell thee that he whiche
refusethPro. 2
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 9. to heare the law, euē his prayers
are abhominable, and (in a worde) to
cause thee make no cōscience of any sinne,
hee will tell thee God is mercyfull, but hee
will neuer tell thee, God is iust, vntill the
latter end: then will he labour to cary thee
away, either in a sleepe securitie, or els (in
setting before thine eyes the multitude of
thy transgressions) to driue thee, to vtter
desperation. It is meete therefore that we
be wise, by the wisedome yt the holy ghost



teacheth vs in the word, least Sathan doe
vtterly deceaue vs, to our owne destructiō,
Behold yet an other tricke of this enemy:
he would cary Christ Jesus into that safe
tower of Gods prouidence and protection,
not to the end, that he may be safe, in deed,
but that he might make him abuse y• same
to his owne ouerthrow. If you looke into
the doynges of the world, you shall see that
this lesson is greatly learned,How Sathā teacheth man to sin vnder coulour of the scriptures. and of them
that take themselues to bee no small ones
vsually practised. For he offreth to ye view
of those that know not y• principles of Religion,
the consideration of Gods eternall
decree in the predestinatiō of his elect, before
the foundation of the world was layd,
not to this ende that hee would haue them
rest on it, as an vnremoueable rocke, and
haue the right vse of it, for the aduauncement
of Gods glory, in their carefull obedience
vnto his lawes, and commaundementes:
but rather, that he may make them
altogether carelesse of any thing that concerneth
God, or godlines: and so satisfie the
lustes of their owne flesh with greedynesse
in the whole course of their life. And therefore
he teacheth them to reason thus, Gods



decree is vnchaungeable, if I be elected I
cannot perish whatsoeuer I do, and if I be
reiected, do I neuer so well, I shall neuer
be saued: and therefore to what end should
I heare Sermons? pray? liue godly? or doe
any good thing els? Whereas the Lord in
his word teacheth a cleane contrary conclusion:
the decree of God being vnchaungeable,
is yet secret, and knowne by none
other meanes, but onely the fruites of it:
whiche is the holy ghost assuring the conscience,
and holy conuersation witnessing
thereunto, and therfore I must labour (for
the2. Pet. 1. 5 assuraunce of my saluation vnto my
self) to liue in al holynes & godlines: & whē
I finde it, still to indeuour more & more obedience
to the lawes of that most louyng
and gracious God, that had such care ouer
me, as to elect me, and ordaine me to saluation,
before he made me. But as Sathan
deceaueth the world in this pointe, so doth
he in many other: as the free iustification
onely by faith in Christ Jesus, doth hee set
before the eyes of mā, to make him neglect
good workes: and so in all other points of
true Religion.
            
               (Iesus sayd vnto him, it is written agayne,


               
               thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God) this is
the aunswere of our Sauiour Christ, vnto
the former assault,The answer of Christ vnto Sathan. which (being in wordes
very brief) containeth, in effect thus much.
Thou goest about to persuade me to doe
that which is not lawfull: & for thy purpose
thou seemest to alledge yt Scripture. But
know, thou this, that the place of yt Psalme
(if it were true as thou alledgest it) should
be contrary to an other text, where it is set
downe, as a generall decree, of all men to
bee followed for euer, that man must not
tempt God by doyng those thyngs that are
not warranted. In which aunswere (before
we come to consider the wordes of the law
alledged by Christ) we haue diuers lessons
to be learned for our instruction. First in
that hee (notwithstandyng that Sathan
had presumed to vse the sworde of Gods
word agaynst him) flyeth not to any other
weapon (as accompting that either abused
by the enemy, or vnable any way to serue
his turne) we learne that although the aduersaries
of the truth, do abuse the Scriptures,
and peruert them to their owne destruction:
and though wicked mē, will (for
the defence of sinne) and in mockyng maner)



take yt word of God in their mouthes,The wicked abusing the word of God, make it not the worse for the vse of the godly.
yet is this no cause either to make vs carelesse
in searching yt foode of our soules out
of the same: or to make it lesse of force to
beate back, all our spiritual enemies. But
rather to bee so much the more diligent, to
meditate in the same day and night, that
we may attayne vnto the true vnderstanding
of that (for our owne comfort) which
they snatching at, doe abuse to their eternall
confusion. A lesson very needefull to be
learned:How the wiked shake of the scriptures when they are aleaged against them. for we see that the deuil hath wonderfully
preuailed with all mē in yt world
(the true professours of Iesus Christ onely
excepted) for if you reason with a Papist
concerning any point of doctrine or an Atheist
for the conuincing of any sinne, and
for your warrant doe alledge the worde of
God: tush (say they) euery man wil alledge
Scripture for his defence, & so they thinke
that they haue notably aūswered the matter.
But we are to learne, by the example
of our Sauiour (in this place) that as the
dronkarde abusing drinke, is no cause why
I should refuse it, to quench my thirst: and
the gluttō gordgeing himself with meate,A comparison.
no cause why I should thinke meate thereby



abused, or the blessing of God lessened
in the same vnto me, for the satisfieng of
my hungry body: no more was the abuse of
Sathan in peruerting the Scriptures, any
cause to driue Christ from defendyng his
innocencie by the same: neither ought the
godlesse practises of the wicked (in prophaning
the Scriptures) be any cause, why I
should not make it still my direction toTim. 3. 16.
teach me true doctrine: to improue in my
selfe and others erroneous opinions: to informe
me in the way of godlinesse: to reproue
sinne and wickednesse: & toRom. 15. 4. comforte
me in all calamities and distresses,
Moreouer (if you marke the manner of
Christes replye) you shall see how netably
he pulleth away the visarde from Sathans
face, and maketh him appeare in his owne
kinde to be (as he is) an abuser of the scriptures,
to a wicked purpose. Which is to be
noted in this word (agayne) wherein, Christ
maketh a contradiction (not betwixt scripture
and scripture) but betwixt the sence
whereunto sathan would apply the text, &
other places of the word of GOD: as if he
should say, thou shewest thy selfe to be a deprauer,
in that thou wouldest haue a peece



of Gods worde, so taken, as that it must
needes cary with it, a manifest contrarietie,
to other places of scripture, and therefore
thou doest abuse the text. A notable
example, for our direction, when we deale
with any man, that would haue the worde
on his side:How to discerne the abuse of the text. to examine not onely the circū
               staunces
of the texte (as aboue) but also to
see how that place produced by him in that
his sence, accordeth with the rest of Gods
word and the course thereof, wherewith if
we finde it to consent, it is to be receaued,
if not (by the example of the sonne of God
in this place) it is otherwise to be expounded.
This doctrine (beyng rightly learned
and vsed) is many wayes profitable. For it
is first, a most excellēt way (when we reason
with others that being carnall, doe carnally
alledge the word) to reueale vnto thē
(if they bee not wilfully blinded) their errour,
and so to teach them to amend it. Besides
that it is an excellent rule for vs to
obserue in the reading (or by any meanes
searching) the true sence of yt word of God:
for oftentymes we shall meete with such
places, that either by reason of the figuratiue
speach, or the phrase of the Hebrew, or



               Greeke text, which vnto our English tongue
is often straunge) seeme to bee hard to bee
vnderstoode, or diuersly to be taken, or els
at the first sight is a Paradoxe, and straūge
opiniō, in the course of Religion: then will,
this lesson of our Sauiour Christ Jesus
stand vs in good stead: namely it wil teach
vs to conferre it, with other places of scripture,
and see how it may bee taken agreable
vnto them, & so expounded, according to
the proportion of fayth: And further it will
bee a notable shield vnto vs agaynst many
and infinite temptatiōs of Sathan, wherewith
he laboureth to seduce vs. For he (almost)
neuer commeth vnto the godly in
his owne name, but vnder coulour, and pretence
of Gods word. Now if we haue the
right vse of this lesson, it will teache vs to
wey his drift to examine his proofe, and
conferre it with the course of true Religion
and godlines, and then shall we see, that
howsoeuer the motion, that hee suggested
into our mynde, seemed to haue his foundation
from the Scriptures, yet was it no
better then an illusion of the deuill, to entise
vs to sinne. Moreouer in the manner of
his aunswere, hee geueth vs an other most



excellent ensample for our instruction, for
Sathan (in alledging the Scriptures) doth
not alwayes leaue out a peece of the sentence,
but sometymes he bringeth yt whole.
Now as we are taught in the former doctrine,
to examine the sence, wherin he doth
vse it: so (agayn) doth he teach vs, to examin
the end whereat he aymeth, which Christ
doth thus: Sathan alledging the promise
of protection, driueth at this, to make the
sonne of God sin agaynst his father: which
Christ layeth open by ioyning yt cōmandement,
with the promise and then he reasoneth
thus: My father neuer promised protection
vnto any that goe about to breake
his commaundementes: now that whiche
thou wouldest haue me to do, cānot be performed
without a direct breach of this law:
Thou shalt not tēpt the Lord thy God. A most
excellent pointe of Religion, for the Lord
in his promises and cōmaundementes, aymeth
at one thing, to witte, his obedience
and the comfort of his children, for if hee
say do this, yt conclusion is vnto a true christian,
yu therfore must obey him, or if he promise
protectiō, mercy, spirituall, or temporall
blessings, the conclusion is (still) therfore



thou must obey him, if thou depend vppon
him. So that this doctrine serueth to
most notable vse, in the direction of mans
whole life. It is true that God hath geuen
vnto vs those lawes whiche (by reason of
our naturall corruption) we are not able
to fulfill, and therefore the authour of our
saluation is onely, his mercy in his sonne
Jesus Christ: yet are we to know, that the
law of god is not thereby adnihillated, but
Rom. 3. 31. established, for the continuall course and
direction of mans whole life: and therefore
if we shall at any time, reason to our selues
thus: I am saued by the mercy of GOD,
therefore why should I be so strickt & precise
in my life? Let vs take heede, for in so
doyng we turneIude. 4. the grace of God into
wantonnesse: and if at any time this motiō
shall come into our mynde:There is no vse of the promise of God, being seperated from his commaundement. I may doe such
a thing, and I trust God will forgeue me,
or, to bee thus, and thus obedient, to Gods
word, and law, is a wearisome thing, God
knoweth that we are fleshe & bloud, will
beare with vs, let vs know, that it is the
very temptation of Sathā, that seperateth
the promise from the commaundemēt: and
would haue vs fall into sinne, and then let



vs set this lesson before our eyes, that our
Sauiour ioyned them both together, the
one to shew vs the law of God, and to geue
vs matter of true confidence in him: the other
to keepe vs in order, by continuall obedience
vnto his lawes, to the adornyng
of our profession by a godly life and cōuersation.
Now let vs consider, the text, that
our Sauiour Christ doth alledge which is
writtē in Deut.Deut. 6 16. Where Moyses (shewing
the wonderful loue of god to the Israelites)
persuadeth with them to take heede,
how they walke, & what they do, least they
tempt the Lord their God vnto anger:
what it is to tempt God, we haue heard
before, to wit, to try his power or his patience:
his power, when we, seeing hys
mightie protection ouer vs, set downe in
his word, doe take in hand some ventrous
thing, to see whether it be true or no: hys
patience, when we vnderstanding his seuere
vengeance pronounced in his word to
light vpon thē that goe on carelesly in iniquitie,
doe notwithstanding, little (or nothing
at all) regard the same:VVhat it is to tempt God and what not. but presuming
vpon his mercie and forgetting hys
iustice) do giue our selues ouer to yt lustes



of our owne fleshe: so that our Sauiour
Christ alleageth that place to proue, that
if hee should throwe himselfe downe headlong,
he should tempt God, in the first sort,
to wit in trying whether hee would preserue
him or no. The doctrine (therefore)
that we are to learne out of this place is
this: that we must not onely haue an eye
to this, that euery action which we take in
hand, and euery thing that we goe about,
be warranted by the word of God: but also
that the maner thereof, and the meanes for
the performance of the same, be suche as
God himselfe hath appointed, and not such
as we in our owne (foolishe wisedome) do
like well of: which lesson) (if it were rightly
learned and put in execution) would be
the cause of abridging many a mischief in
common weales: of healing many a breath
in Churches, and in letting many a shipwracke
of conscience that is euery day to
be seene:How God is tempted by Princes and magistrates. For if Princes and gouernours
of kingdomes and common weales, could
be contented, to lay downe all theyr honor
at thePsal. 2. 12. feete of the sonne of God: and
were persuaded that whatsoeuer they doe
that pleaseth not him, is the greatest dishonor



that euer can befall them in y• world
and the keeping of his commaunde 
                  •
               eutes
(in the ruling of theyr people) their sole
and onely true glorie. They woulde not so
much make their will to be theyr law.In Church gouernours. If
those that would be counted the builders
and maister workers in the erecting of the
spirituall temple of God, could be contented
not onely to propound vnto themselues
the building of the Churche of God, for
their matter, that they would bring topasse
but also (in the maner of the same) be contented
to let the holy Ghost be theyr counseller,
and to renounce theyr owne deuises,
and let goe theyr worldly dignities: wee
should not onely see the glorious beautie of
the former temple (I meane the growyng
of the gospell in the primatiue Churche)
moste flourishingly to shine, for that the
Lord woulde (according to hys promise)
blesse his own ordinance, and institution:
but also that kingdome of Antechrist, that
hath so long bene wind-shaken (and yet falleth
not
                  •
               ) quickely haue a most notable ouerthrowe.
If euery priuate person also,
that hath taken vpon him the profession of
the glorious gospell of Iesus Christ,In priuate persons. could



be contented (as wereRom. 6. 17. the Romaines) to
obey from the heart, the forme of doctrine,
wherunto he is deliuered (both for the furnishing
of his iudgement in knowledge,
and gouerning his life in practise) the name
of God should not be so euill spoken of: the
religion of God not so slaundered: nor the
common enemie haue so iust cause to reioice,
and say there, there, but in euery of
these conditions, men are so wedded vnto
theyr owne affections, and nature beareth
such sway (by the instigation of the deuill)
that either in the matter of theyr calling,
or (at the least in the maner) they must
haue a tricke of theyr own cunning: wherby
it commeth to passe (for asmuch as the
Lord cannot abide to part stakes with any
nor to giue his glory vnto any other)Isa. 42. 8. that
the iust iudgement of the eternall & mightie
God is vppon theyr labours, that they
see moste lamentable successe in the same:
and all for this, that they will presume,
to prescribe vnto him, what is to be done,
and to adde vnto his wisedome, whiche is
euery way most pure, and perfect: but wee
must learne (if we meane indeede, to profit
by the doctrine of our Sauiour Christ in



this place) not to tempt God in such sorte,
but that he be our director, and counseller
in euery thing that we take in hand, or els
neuer presume to attempt it.
         
         
            ¶The fourth Sermon.
            
               
                  Verse. 8. 9. 10. 11.
                  8. Agayne the Deuill tooke him vp vnto an
exceeding high mountayne and shewed
him all the kingdomes of the world, and
the glory of them,
                  9. And sayd to him, al these will I geue thee,
if thou wilt fall downe and worship me.
                  10. Then sayd Iesus vnto him. Auoyde Sathan:
for it is written, thou shalt worshipp
the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou
serue.
                  11. Then the Deuill left him: and beholde
the Aungels came, and ministred vnto
him.
               
            
            
               
               
                  VNto an exceeding high mountaine)
the last temptation
followeth to bee considered:
The firste thyng whereof is



the place whereunto hee brought Christ,
that hee might worke his feate vpon him,
whiche is a very high mountaine: not y• he
caried him thether, in bodely maner, but (as
they were before) offred vnto him such a cogitation.
Now in that Sathan (before hee
offer vnto Christ the consideration of the
thyng that he goeth about) doth first bryng
him to a place (as he thinketh) most conuenient
for his purpose, we may behold in an
other cuircumstaunce his cunnyng, and subtiltie,
for as at the first hee tooke the aduauntage
of the tyme: so here doth hee also
of the place: yea and that before hee
goeth aboute to practise the thyng. And
this we haue diligently to note (that we
may make good vse vnto our selues of it)
for if Sathan begyn his practises agaynst
the godly by bringing them into those places
that are fittest for his purpose we areVVeemust take heede where and with whom we frequent
carefully to take heede into what places
and companies we doe come, and so much
the rather in these dayes of sinne, whē godlinesse
is (almost euery where) barked at &
sinne and wickednesse aduaunced and extolled:
so that a man shall scarse come into
that company, but either he shall heare the



Gospell of Iesus Christ, and the professors
thereof euill spoken of, or the name of god
(in common talke) blasphemed and taken
in vayne, so that he is brought thereby into
this straight, that hee must eyther consent
by scilence, or sooth them vp in theyr
sinnes and wickednes (and then hath Sathan
that for which hee brought him thether)The inconuenience of euill company.
or els boldly (according to his duety)
reproue the offenders and thē (oftentimes)
the rage of the wicked is so incensed therby
that he rather increaseth his dishonouring
of god then (which were to be wished) taketh
any warning to amend, and then shall
the party that feareth god be greatly greeued,
to see it, and (as many consciences be
very tender) feare least he haue some way
bene the cause of that outrage: how muche
better (therefore) had it bene for such a one
to haue taken heede before hand, and not to
haue come there at al. Besides this inconuenience,
we see by experience, that manie
are (often) ouertaken with that sinne (by
frequenting wicked places and companie)
whiche they before abhorred, and if they
had known or feared that they should haue
bene brought to that estate, they woulde



haue preuented it:By ill places and companie man is (often brought to commit that sinne which before he abhorred. as for example, manie
one that in his conscience approueth the
trueth of religion, and is perswaded that
he ought to frequent the publike exercises
of the same, and doth determine at suche a
time to heare such a sermon: in the meane
while falleth into the societie of the wicked
and is among them that make no conscience
of any such matter, who keepe hym
worse imployed, vntill the time be past, so
that when he entreth into consideration of
the matter: he may iustly say with himself,
surely, this companie with whome I haue
bene, and this place where I was, haue
frustrated my determination in better
things. I speaks not al this while of drunkennes:
of whoredom: of gaming. and such
like: which (oftentimes) are committed cō
               trary
to the purpose of the partie: yea contrary
to his former affection and desire.
And therefore (if euer thou meanest,A needfull aduise to all that wil truly serue God vnfeynedly
to take that course which becōmeth
a true christian, and if thou wilt learne to
discerne the subtitlties of Satan, to shunne
them) beware of places of wickednes, and
vngodly companie: and learne to frequent
those places and that company where godlines,



is exercised, that when thou departest,
thou mayst go away bettered, and not
hindered thereby.
            
               (And shewed him all the kingdomes of the
world, and the glory of them) we see howe the
enemie wayted the opportunitie of the
place, and yet hee findeth not all thinges
fitly prepared to hys purpose, (for he hath
experience of Christes wisedome in discerning
his intentes) and therfore he doth
at the first onely shewe vnto Christ Iesus
the matter wherein hee meaneth to tempt
him: that is, he offereth vnto his consideration,
the greatnes, the maiestie, magnificence,Sathans sleightes agaynst the holyest.
and glory of the kingdomes of the
whole world: and so seemeth (for the time)
to goe no further: wherein we may see that
Satan dealing against one that hath geuē
him the foyle before, and therefore (he
is assured) liketh not of his practises
doth vse himselfe more subtilly, then hee
hath done: to teach vs, that the more, that
the Lorde reuealeth his will vnto vs, and
descrieth the sleightes of Satan, and the
more troubles that hee hathe assayled vs
withall, and we, thorow (Gods help) haue
ouercome, the more slyly will he assault vs,



to the ende that hee may more easily deceaue
vs. And therfore we are not to make
light of this enmitie, and so be carelesse
(as many be) but (the forewarder wee be
in the schoole of Christ) to walke the more
warely, and circumspectly: knowing that
our aduersarie watcheth vs moste deceiuably.
Agayn behold how Satan offereth the
bewtie of the thing, vnto his consideration
& so letteth him alone: leauing (as it were)
the obiect, and hys sences to work further.
a matter worthy to be noted, for if Christ
had bene (as all other men are) of a corrupt
nature, it had bene a forcible way for hym
to haue preuayled: which hee (knowing enough)
doth vse against mankinde, and doth
greatly ouertake them therwith:He first offereth the consideration of the thing to mans sences. for when
he would bring thee to commit any sinne,
he (knowing that thy nature is corrupt, &
inclinable to any thing, sauing that which
it should) doth offer the consideration of it
vnto thy sences, as for example when hee
would haue thee commit whoredome, hee
will vse one meane or other, to bring thee
to the sleight of the harlot & to behold her
bewtie, whereunto if thy lust once geue
consent, hee hath, what hee would haue



for the resistaunce whereof we must learne
that heMat. 5. 28 that looketh vpon a woman and
listeth after her in his hart committeth adultery,
and therefore must we continually
vse that notable prayer of Dauid.
               Psal. 119 37. Lord
turne away mine eyes that they behold not
vanitie. If hee would bring thee to fall into
dronkennesse, he will shewe to thy sight
the coulour of the drinke, wherewith if y•
once be delighted thē doth this follow, that
thou wilt persuade thy selfe it is pleasaunt
for thy tast. That we may also stay the beginnyng
herein, we must learne the counsell
that the holy Ghost geueth vs by the
mouth of the wise kyng Salomon
               Prou. 23 31. 32. looke
not then (sayth he) vppon the wine when it
is red, and when it sheweth his coulour
in the cup, or goeth downe pleasauntly: In
the end thereof it wilbe like a serpent and
hunt like a Cockatrise. To conclude, his
first offer is in any temptation, to laye the
thing (whiche of it selfe is lawfull) and thy
sences together,VVe must take heed of our affections (euen) in the thinges that be lawfull. wherewith if he can see
thee affected and moued, then will he proceede,
and therfore we haue great neede to
take heede that our affections and desires
doe not raunge abroad about the thinges



that belong not vnto them, neither be too
much delighted with the thinges that are
of God alledged to man for his necessitie
and delight: least Sathan get occasiō thereby
to enter in with vs so farre, that we shal
not bee able to resiste him. For though the
world persuadeth it selfe, that thoughtes
are free, and man may behold what he liste
& wish at his pleasure, yet we must learne
to tye vp our affections and keepe them in
more straitly, least they open the doore to
great and haynous offences. Let vs yet behold
a further slight of Sathā in this shew
of these thinges vnto Christ: namely that
he offereth them not simply as they are,Sathan in tempting stealeth out of mans mind all thinges that may let his purpose. but
(onely) in the brest of them, for he sheweth
the glory and honour of the world, but not
the inconueniences and crosses that accō
               pany
the same, & it is a deceauable slyght.
For when Sathā would make a mā vayne
glorious, if hee should together with the
prayse of men, shew also the small affection
that men that be wise beare vnto such persons:
if with the present pleasure of whoredome,
he should reckē vp the sicknesses and
punishmentes that follow: if with the delightfull
tast of straunge drinke he should



make mention of the sorrowes that ensue
the same: in short, if with the fleshly contētment
that sinne bringeth hee sheuld also
speake of the troubles that follow vpon it,
and what punishment such shall abyde at
the hands of almighty God, he might iustly
feare that he should preuaile but a litle.
And therfore when he goeth about to bring
man into any sinne, he leaueth out whatsoeuer
may seeme to make agaynst him, that
he may the more easily obtaine his purpose:
which we see him most notably to practise,
agaynst our Sauiour Christ in this place:
for goyng about to make him worshyp him
selfe in steade of the liuyng God (who onely
is to be worshipped) he would draw him
thereunto by the desire of the souerainetie
ouer kingdomes, the whiche (that it may
more forcibly moue the sonne of God) hee
propoūdeth in the most excellent condition
that it can be of, and neuer sheweth him of
the great charge of a kingdome: the ficle
estate of Princes, nor the greate accompt
that they shall make, when the Lord of heauen
and earth shall call them,Luk. 16. 2. to geue
an accompt of their stewardshippes. And wt
this course doth hee mightely blinde the



world, for we see that men are so rauished
with the glory, pleasure, and profite of this
present life that for the attayning of the
same they doe not onely swallow vp all the
worldly inconueniences that can bee fall
thē: but (which is more) make shipwracke
of conscience, & tread all Religion and godlynesse
vnder foote. How true this is in the
common weale, I referre it to euery mans
conscience: & whether it be in the Church
or no I pray you see the Judgemēt of him
that liued before me, and spake as hee saw,
whiche was indifferent.Reade B. Benthams sermons vppō the same text. 
               Sathan (sayth he)
hath taken many of our Ministers, and
caried them vppe to an exceedyng high
mountaine and shewed them all the spirituall
liuynges almost in the world. Byshoprickes,
Deaneryes, Prebendes, Personages
and Vicarages, and hath told
them: this is a wealthy Byshopricke, this
is a riche Deanery, this is a fat benefice,
they are all in my gift. I am the patrone
of them: fall downe therefore before me
and worshyp me, and if one will not content
you, I will giue you pluralities. Let
no man thinke these thinges to bee forged
or sucked out of myne own fingers,



for writers make mention, that the Deuill
in deede gaue the Byshopricke of
Rome once, and since that tyme it was
neuer good. And is he not so able nowe,
thinke you to giue a poore benefice, as
hee was then to giue the fattest Byshopricke
in the world? Let no mā be offended
with me for speaking that, which all
the world by experiēce seeth to be true.
For where these Alymsters shoulde bee
Preaches, they are tongue tyed: and that
commeth not without great temptatiō.
For thus he reasoneth with them: speak
no more of iustification, medle no more
with cōtrouersies: rubbe no man on the
sore: Let euery man liue as he list without
reprehension or admonitiō, and you
shall lacke no liuyng. Do you thinke that
Sathā hath not sworne many to silence:
I haue hea
                     ••
                   of diuers that at the beginning
haue ben very godly preachers, but
after they haue once ben choked vp with
many liuings, they haue had such a bone
their throates, as the Deuill would haue
it, that they would seldome open their
mouth to speake any more. This farre
of his wordes. But it behoueth those that



will learne (in deede) to shunne the estate
that Sathan would bring the sonne of god
in this temptatiō, to consider of the world,
and the thyngs that are therein, as they be
described by the holy Ghost in the word of
God, and wey the manifold snares that sathā
hath in the same, to seduce and deceaue
withall, to the ende that they may walke
vprightly in this vale of miserie, in y• true
feare and obedience of Jesus Christ. It is
added (by Luke) that this great glory of the
world was shewed vnto the sonne of God.
In the twinckling of an eye:
               Marke the wisedome of Sathan. UUhich doth further
set down vnto vs the forcible meanes
that Sathan vsed to obtaine his purpose,
for wee see that as pleasaunt thynges doe
greatly moue the mynd of man, and the rather,
when no bitternesse is mingled therwithall,
so most especially when they (beyng
many and glorious) doe come altogether,
and of a sodayne. All which circumstaūces
you see how wisely the enemy hath
packed together. The doctrine then that
we are to learne out of ye same is this: that
Sathan will pretermit nothyng (be it neuer
so litle) but he will take his aduaūtage
by it to do vs harme: to ye end that we may



learne not to be carelesse seyng he so bestirreth
himself: nor to be negligēt in learning
to discerne his sleightes & to auoyde them,
seyng he is so watchful to seeke our destruction,
agayne in that this is sayd to be in a
moment or the Twinckling of an eye, we
may further behold that which before was
shewed, namely, that the sayd temptations,
were not corporally, but by cogitation. For
we know that the mynde of man (in such
wonderfull maner hath GOD created it)
can at once conceiue and see those thynges
that are farre distant,The excellencie of the mind of man. and (as it were) lay
them together, and make one common obiect
vnto it selfe of all the world: thinkyng
sometymes of all at once, and sometimes of
one part, somtimes of an other, and such is
the wonderfull celeritie & quicknesse therof,
that it is now here, & forthwith at Jerusalem,
or in any of the vttermost partes
of the earth, which Sathan knowyng well
inough doth labour also to make this singular
and most excellent grace of God to
serue his turne,Sathan laboureth most to peruert the best graces of God. for the accomplishment of
imquitie, she wyng vnto vs, the exceedyng
malice of Sathan, that not onely vseth the
instrumētes of sinne and imquitie to serue



his purpose, but also vsurpeth (euen) vppon
the best and most excellent graces of God,
seeking to peruert them from ye right vse,
whereunto God hath allotted them: which
is a thing very needefull of vs to be noted,
for as it pleaseth God in his great loue to
mankinde, to bestow his graces both of the
mynde and body vpon man in most liberall
measure (as witte, wisedome, learnyng, riches,
honour, strength, beautie. &c.) so doth
Sathan labour (euen) to make all these
thyngs, not onely vnprofitable vnto vs, but
(whiche more is) as instrumentes of our
greater falling from GOD, and so of our
more greeuous Judgement. For hee will
teache a man to turne his wit vnto craftynesse:
his wisedome to iniurye others, his
learning to bolster peruerse opinions, his
riches to choake the good motions of the
spirite in him, his honour to the forgetfulnesse
of God, to honour him, his strength to
oppresse others, and beautie to pride, euen
as he would haue vsed that excellent part
of man (in the sonne of God) his mynde, to
be a meane to draw him from his obediēce
vnto God his father. And therfore we haue
great neede to take heede, that the graces



which God hath geuen vnto vs be not abused
by vs through the suggestion of Sathan,
to our greater hurt and Gods dishonour,
which we shall the better regarde, if
we set this alwayes before our eyes (and
endeuour it vnfainedly in the whole course
of our life) that all that we haue, or are any
way able to doe, may be employed in such
wise, as may best serue to the glory of god
the father, the buildyng of the kingdome
of Jesus Christ and the benefite of our brethren
with whom we doe liue.
            
               (All this will I giue thee if thou wilt fall
downe and worship me) all this while hathe
Satan done no more but onely made way
for his purpose: for hauing set him on an
exceeding high mountaine and shewed (as
it were) before his eyes the bewtie of all
kingdomes, hee commeth then to his purpose,
to wit, to offer them all vnto ye sonne
of God, so that he wil worship him, for (no
doubt) he thought that Christ must needs
be rauished with the desire of that glorious
sight, and therefore woulde be willing to
doe any thing, for the attayning thereof:
which is easily to be found in man, subiect
to corruption, but Christ was exempt frō


               
the same, and therefore Satan was deceiued
of his hope and disappointed of hys
purpose. But let vs consider his temptation:
how cunningly it is disposed and set
in order. Sathan doth not go simply to the
thing it selfe (as he did in the former) but
before he biddeth him worship him, he setteth
down the promise, to the end (that vnto
all the circumstances) he might ad this
as the life (if Christ would haue beleeued
him) that he wil bestow them all vpon him
but Christ saw his subtiltie, and therefore
resisted him, and hath prouided that the
same should be registred for our instruction.
And yet doth the deuill most mightelie
preuayle with the world herein: for he setteth
such a colour vppon sinne, by glorious
promises, and manifold pleasures and profite,
which come by the same that hee can
easily perswade (almost) any man to commit
anie sinne, for that appeareth by the
course that men take in this world,Euery man is sharpe sighted to sinne but dull to goodnesse. that he
hath alreadie wonne theyr heartes vnto
this perswasion, that he will giue them all
thinges. For if there be a practise whiche
is cleane forbidden in the worde of God,
you shall finde euen the meanest (in outward



appearaunce) very perfite in it, but
as for those courses that God hathe commaunded
(whereunto hee hath promised a
blessing, and which hee will haue done as
seruice vnto himself) if you aske them, they
know not what they meane: & if you speake
of them you had as good speake to a post: he
doth not onelie (in moste liberall maner)
promise to bestow all these vpō Christ: but
also, for a further assuraunce (as Luke recordeth)
auoucheth that they are deliuered
vnto him, and to whome soeuer he will bestow
them. And yet we know by the scriptures,
thatPsal. 24. 1 the earth is the Lordes, and
all that is therein.Dan. 2. 37. The Lorde God of
heauen giueth power, strength, and glory.
For thereRom. 13. 1. is no power but of god:Psal. 113 7. he lifteth
vp and throweth downe. TheDeut. 32 8. most
high deuideth to the nations theyr inheritaunce
and seperated the sonnes of Adam:
so that wee may behold the impudencie of
Sathan, and his lying presumption that
dare vindicate vnto himselfe that wherein
hee hathe no interest, where-withall (notwithstanding)
hee preuayleth muche in the
world: for they that do beleeue that these
things he the Lords, and are bestowed (as



blessings) vpon none,who beleeue God to rule the world & who not. but those that receiue
them at hys hands (which is by those lawfull
meanes that he hymselfe in hys worde
hath prescribed and warranted) are careful
that they neuer desire that whereunto the
Lord doth not offer good meanes: contrariwise
they that beleeue it not, but haue rather
taken out the lesson ye Sathan is the
giuer of them, do by all subtle and indirect
meanes seeke to attaine vnto theyr desire
holding this for a principle, that hee
that dissembleth not cannot liue: and this
for an other, that hee that dealeth iustly
shall dye a begger: hath not y• deuil (think
you) perswaded such persons that ye world
is hys, and hee hathe the bestowing of it at
hys pleasure? yes verely. And therefore they
make no conscience of right or wrong: they
neyther feare God nor man, but (so they
may haue theyr willes in pleasure, profite
or worldly estimation) they care for no further.
Contrariwise those that feare God
haue not onely learned to abhorre and detest
such dealinges in themselues, but also
in those monstrous Anachims that followe
such wicked wayes.An obiection. But here may seeme
to arise a doubt, howe this can be so, that



Sathan should haue so little interest in the
world, seing, our sauiour Christ doth inIoh. 31. & 14. 30.
diuers places cal him ye prince of this world
& s. Paule calleth1. Cor. 4. 4. him ye god of this world.
I aūswere y• these be two true sayings:Answere. sathā
hath nothing to do with the thinges of
this world, & sathā is the god of this world,
for it is euidēt that godGene. 1. & 31. made all things
both in heauen & earth, which were all exceedyng
good, & he doth continually so protect
& gouerne thē, yt theMat. 10 29. sparow falleth
not on y• groūd, wtout his will, so y• in generall
they are thus to be recōciled, whatsoeuer
is good in ye world that is god ye ruler &
disposer of: but whatsoeuer is euill yt sinne
doth sathā direct & gouerne. Then he hath
nothing to do with y• things of this world,
so farre as they be good, & vsed to the right
end: Which is to y• glory of him that made
them & the benefite of the possessor, but he
is prince of this world, first in respect of
the sin that is cōmitted in the same, for as
he was the first ye sinned, so was he y• cause
of the transgression of mankinde,Sathan in thre respects called the prince of this world. & therfore
is the continuall ringe leader of all vngodlynesse.
Secondly he is called the prince of
this worlde in respect of that he doth, and



not of that he may do, for he is an vsurper,
to wit through sinne captiueth and subdueth
man vnto his obedience and slauish subiection,
whereunto men doe so generallye
yeld, that he onely seemeth to be serued and
the Lord of heauen and earth thrust out at
the doores, and therefore is hee called the
prince of this world. Thirdly he is called
the god of this world for that they why (by
the iust Iudgement of god) are geuen ouer
Rom. 1 28. into a reprobate mynde, beyngEphes. 4. 18. blinded
in their vnderstanding, doe giue themselues
ouer not to obey the truth, but to2. Thes. 2 11.
beleue lyes, and obey Sathan in the whole
course of their life, yet all this his power
and souerainetie is ruled by the raynes of
Gods prouidence, that hee can doe nothyng,
without hisIob. 1. 12 leaue, no not so
much as enter intoMat. 8. 31 the swine, whiche is
vnto vs a great comfort and (indeede) the
staffe of all our affiaunce, for when we
see the malice of Sathan, the crueltie of
the wicked, and our owne wickednesse we
could haue nothing to resist, but onely this
that Gods prouidence, whom we feare and
in whom we repose our confidence, so directeth
all thynges that without his will



(whiche is in his sonne Iesus Christ louyng
towardes vs) nothing can be attempted
or performed.
            
               If thou wilt fall downe and worship me)
We see hys liberall offer and how bountifull
a hand he hath in that which is none of
his own, and yet notwithstanding doth hee
promise this vpon meere liberalitie without
respect of anie other matter, no, it was
nener hys meaning, for none shal be benefited
by hym but such as will doe hym homage:
so that we may note herein Sathan,
that mynde which he accused the seruaunt
of GodIob. 1. 9 
               Iob to be of: to wit that Iob dyd
not serue God for nothing: but because
God had enriched him therfore (onely) was
he godly and feared the Lord, and why did
he charge him with such a hainous crime?
for sooth because he was of the same disposition
himselfe.The wickedest man thinketh euery man as bad as himselfe. The doctrine (then) that
we learne out of the same is this: that as
we see Sathan to be minded, euen so (if
you looke into the course of this worlde)
shall we see hys instrumentes to be affected:
that is, to measure others by themselues,
and to (thinke though they be most
wicked, and most vilely desposed) that no



man is better: so that the deceitfull man
wil trust none, but thinketh that euery mā
will beceaue him. The lyer beleeueth not
an other of hys word, because hee himselfe
maketh no cōscience of lying, he that shunneth
y• offences that the world exclaymeth
against (onely) to stop mens mouthes, doth
think that no man doth more: in one word,
let a man be neuer of wickedly bent, yet
thinketh he no other men to be any better:
contrariwise, the man whose mind is truely
regenerated thinketh so basely of hymselfe
and by charitie (the fruit of his faith)
1. Cor. 13. 7. hopeth so wel of euery man, that (vnlesse
he know the contrary) he alwayes iudgeth
the 
                  〈◊〉
               . Againe you see how liberall he is
of promise, but he tieth it vnto a condition:
wherein you may perceiue howe contrarie
his affection is vnto the mind of the Lord:
it is true that God will be worshipped of
all that he dealeth mercifully withall, but
yet doth he freely bestow his mercy, without
any respect of our worshipping hym aforehand.
But Sathan wilbe worshipped
before he will performe his promise. So
that as the contrarie disposition of God &
Sathan appeare in this poynt, in like maner



(if you examine it well) shall you finde
them that are of God,VVich what minde the. godly are. liberall. and them that are
of their father the deuill to be, for the godly
hauing obteyned mercy at the handes of
God, are also enclined vnto pitie and mercie
being carefull to doe good (accordyng
to theyr power) not for gayne, but because
God hath bene fauourable vnto them, the
wicked (on the other side)VVhom the wicked doe like and whome not. being minded
as he is by whome they are guided, will
promise very bountifully, and giue as sugred
wordes and vse as glorious termes,
as though theyr tongues were made of
Butter: But all that euer they promise is
with an if for if, they gayne not by thee: or
if thou please not theyr humor, or if thou
crowch not vnto them: they will not onelie
not performe the least part of theyr large
promises, but thou shalt finde it in experience,
that they will be vnto thee (as Sathan
was euer after to Christ) thy greatest
enemies, and as much as in them lyeth) do
thee the greatest displeasure. Well, let vs
proceede the deuill worshipped: what doth
he desire when hee would haue Christ Jesus
to fall downe and worship him? surely
no lesse then that whiche was due vnto



God the father: for looke what it is that
God requireth of vs in his word, when hee
biddeth vs worship him, and all that doth
Sathan most impudently challenge vnto
him: But you will say vnto me, that Sathan
shewed himselfe herein a very foole,
for no man was euer found that would say
he would worship the deuill. Well, thus
can he cunningly teache thee to play with
termes and speeches, while he get dominion
ouer thee to make thee worship hym in
deed. For (if we shal truely measure things
by the lyne of trueth) we shall see that Sathan
is greatly obeyed in this poynt, for
what is it to worship God but to fear him,
and bring forth the fruites of the same
which is obedience? Nowe we cannot tell
one of vs when an other doth feare, but by
the fruites, which (Christ telleth vs) the
Mat. 7. 26. Tree is knowne, by the fruit by which
euery Tree is to be knowne, is obedience,
and by obedience, are we knowne whose
Rom. 6. 16. seruauntes we be (as S. Paule teacheth
vs) the obedience vnto God is godlines, in
the keeping of his commaundementes, the
obedience vnto Sathan is wickednes in
transgressing the lawes of God. Now let



vs come to the poynt: if there be moe found
that giue themselues ouer vnto sinne, in
neglecting of the worde of God, blaspheming
of his holie name, profaining of hys
Saboath, disobedience, whoredome,VVho they be that fall downe and worship the deuill. drunkennes,
vnlawfull gettyng & slaundering:
then that bee carefull to knowe GOD,
and striue against all impedimentes to reforme
theyr liues according to hys holy
word, it must needes follow that the greatest
number (how soeuer they pretend the
contrarie) doe obey Sathan in this poynt
to fall down and worship him: besides this
there is an other way to worship Sathan,
which many do walk in & that is thus. We
know that those which worshippe God do
propound vnto them selues his lawes to be
obeyed, and so make godlynesse their chiefest
studie: if then wee propound any other
thing for our chiefest marke, wee worship
Sathan. They therefore that make theyr
Phil. 3. 19 belly theyr God (as the scripture speaketh)
in giuyng themselues ouer to Epicurisme,
and voluptuousnesse of liuing, they
that are caried away with couetousnesse
(whichEphes. 5. 5 is Idolatry) & haue theyr greatest
care to heape vp riches together, they



that make the vanitie of worldly pompe
and honor their principal end: (vnto one of
which (almost) the whole world is admitted)
doe not serue God, but fall downe before
Sathan and worship him. This is notable,
for Sathan preuayleth in this poynt
yet further not onely in getting men into
his iurisdiction to fail downe and worship
him, but also in making men his substitutes
herein,Pettie Deuils. creating them pettie deuils
to challenge the same thinges vnto themselues,
from the handes of men whiche he
himselfe would haue had giuen him there
of the sonne of God: Which (in a word) is
thus put in execution, when soeuer any
man requireth obedience vnto hymselfe,
which cannot be done without the breach
of Gods commandementes, or commaundeth
anie thing which is to the hinderance
of the glory of God and staying of ye course
of godlines. For God hath set euery man
in his seuerall place, not for the breaking,
but the further obeying of his lawes, and
he neuer erected that calling whiche is
a stoppe vnto hys glory: For so much as
he madePro. 16. 4. all thinges to serue thereunto.
Now you see (I trust) in some measure,



what the Deuill would haue Christ doe,
and how farre hee proceedeth in practising
this in the world among men. I am sure
that you thinke by this tyme, yt this temptation
is not the subtilest, but the grosest
and most palpable impietie of all other, and
therefore Sathan may seeme to deale foolishly,
but we are thereby to note, that hee
doth not onely deale cunnyngly but also
most impudently. For we see in experience
how that hee (often) laboureth to persuade
men vnto most horrible facces, as to murther
their dearest and nearest frendes: Yea
oftentymes, to make away their owne selues,
and (alas) hee preuaileth many tymes
there withall. But yet (euen) by this may
we learne (if it please God to giue vs the
right vse of 
                  •
               t) great comfort, for first, whē
Sathan doth deale thus impudently, and
shamelessel
                  ••
                with vs, to suggest into our
myndes, most haynous, and horrible motions,
we are, as carefully to resist thē (least
they ouertake vs to our owne destruction)VVhat wee are to think when Sathā is most ferce
so comfortably to lift vp our hartes in hope
that God will in his good tyme cleare our
myndes of such cogitations, and also persuade
the same vnto others, in the like ease



euer hoping that the Lord will geue their
extremities a ioyful issue: Secondly, when
we see that our troubles doe not diminish,
but encrease (and in our eyes wee beyng
weakned) and Sathan seemeth to insult in
such boystrous maner as though he had almost
got the victory, euen in that case we
haue Christ Iesus for our exāple, who was
tempted at the last, most haynously, & therfore
we are to be so farre frō hanging down
our heads and dispayring at the view therof,
that we may conceaue good hope, that
our deliuerannce is so much the nearer; as
our foe is the fiercer and Gods presence is
most forcible and fauourable, where Sathans
enimitie is most hard and cruell.
            
               (Then sayd Iesus vnto him auoyde Sathan)
When Christ doth see the impudencie and
boldnesse of this tempter, that notwithstā
               ding
he was beaten backe twise before, yet
he not onely setteth vpon him agayne, but
in most shamefull manner, arrogateth vnto
himselfe y• dominion of ye world, which (indeede)
is none of his, though he doe vsurpe
vpon it (as we haue heard) & vpon the same
hath so brasen a face, as to bid Christ Jesus
the sonne of God (who was come into



the world to teach men, the true worship of
god) to giue vnto him that honour which is
due to god alone: He aunswereth him more
sharply then before he did, saying vnto him
auoyde Sathan, as if hee should haue sayd
get thee hence, thou aduersary to me, and
to all mankinde, thou enemy to all truth
thou seducer and deceiuer, thou lyer and vsurper,
auoyde out of my presence, for what
soeuer thou promisest, if it should bee performed,
for so much as thou art my professed
enemy it cannot bee of any good meanyng
of thee,The vew of the name of Sathan and what it signifieth auaileth to beat him backe. and therefore cannot doe me
any good. So that by this first braunch of
the aunswere of Christ Jesus vnto sathan,
we learne, to begin withall this lesson that
the consideration of the name of the enemy
and what it doth signifie, because it expresseth
his nature, is a forcible meanes to
beate him backe and disapoynt him of his
purpose, and weaken his strēgth. And therfore
it hath pleased the holy Ghost in the
scriptures, to terme him with these titles
whiche doe make manifest his disposition,
as the name of Deuil signifieth a deprauer
and wrangler, he is called Lyon in respect
of his deuouring of men; the terme of Dragō


               
importeth his venemous poyson, Christ
sayth hee is theIoh. 8. 44 father of lyes, to shewe
that he neuer meaneth so well as he pretē
               deth
and here hee is reproued by the name
of sathan which signifieth an enemy or aduersary.The fayre offers of an enemie▪ can not be in good meaning.
All is to this ende that we may
learne this lesson: that for so much as his
whole indeuour is to destroye vs, and that
he is a professed enemy vnto vs, those offers
that hee seeketh to bestow vppon vs (for so
much as they come from him that wisheth
vs no good) though we see no hurt in them,
yet are we iustly to suspect them: and therfore
to take heede, that we in no wise yeld
vnto them. Agayne we see how Christ taketh
him vp farre more sharpely then in the
former aunsweres he did, for then hee aunswered
him simply with the text, and neither
reproued him nor vrged the meanyng
of the wordes but onely in the bare alledging
of it, and here he not onely taketh him
vp with a most sharpe reproofe, but also
pressed him (as we shal see anone) with the
text in more forcible manner. The cause
whereof, we are to search out, that we may
haue the benefite of it to our owne instruction.
If you marke well these thynges that



sathan vrged vnto Christ before this, you
shal finde thē to be of an other kinde, namely
to concerne him selfe and not God (immediatly)
as this doth, for though it bee a
dishonour vnto God, when a man is vrged
to offend in the least poynt of his Religiō:
yet it concerneth the Lord more nearely
when one shalbe sollicited to violate that
worship and honour thereof hee is veryExod. 20 5.
ielous, and which he will not giue vnto an
other, and accordyng as it is more haynous
in the eyes of the Lord, so is it to be esteemed
a thyng more odious vnto man, and
therfore to be repelled with more courage:
Which (if you marke well) you shall in the
practise of our Sauiour in the combate, for
so long as sathan medled with those things
that concerned Christ himselfe (as the matter
of his body) he aunswereth him (though
alwayes most perfectly yet) more mildly,
but when he commeth vnto this pointe, to
vrge him vnto those thinges, whiche concerne
the threatning of God from the iurisdiction
of his creatures, and depriuyng
him of his glory and worship, he dealeth no
more mildly, & meckely but rebuketh him
in most vehemēt maner, and painteth him



out in his naturall coulours:VVhen wee are to shew our selues mylde, and when sharpe so that the example
of Christ is vnto vs a notable president,
how to behaue our selues towardes
wicked men in the world, wherof some are
enemies (thought to God in deede) in pretence,
onely to our persons: some euen in
speach & behauiour professed foes vnto our
Religiō, and so immediatly vnto the Lord,
concerning them that are our enemies (for
so much as we are to bee patternes of all
pacience andRom. 12. 21. to ouercome euill with
good) we must vse our selues more gently
towardes them2. Tim. 2 24. 25. reprouyng thē with all
long suffering, and meekenesse, to see if it
will please God to graunt thē repentaunce
& deliuer them out of the snares of the Deuill:
But if they be enemies vnto our Religion,
then are we to put on an other kind
of behauiour towardes them, that is to resiste
them (euen vnto their faces) with all
courage and boldnesse, that they may know
y• we be zelous for the Lord God of hostes,
and tender his glory, more then our owne
estimation, or benefite, whiche practise (if
we looke into the scriptures) we shall see
to be obserued by the most notable instrumentes
of Gods glory, for that is sayd of



               Moyses, that he wasNum. 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 3. meekest man that
was vpō the earth, & yet none was euer either
before him, or after him (Jesus Christ
excepted) more filled with zeale & courage
thē he shewed himselfe to be, whē he dealt
with them that were enemies to God and
his truth. The Apostle Paule who in hys
doctrine dothe so often exhort vs vnto
Exod. 5. &c. meekenes, and gentlenesse: yet looke
what singuler boldnesse hee sheweth him
selfe to bee of when hee dealt with thatEphes. 4. 2. 3.
sorcerer, who would haue peruerted Sergius
Paulus from the fayth. But (to goe
no further then our sauiour himselfe, who
is to vs an example of all perfection) doth
not hee bid vs learne of him, for hee is
lowly and meeke? doth not hee shew himselfe
in the whole course of his life most
milde? and yet howAct. 13 10. roughly and sharpely
dealeth hee with the Scribes and Pharisies,
who were deprauers of the truth ofMat. 11 19.
the law of GOD.Math. 23 23. We see (then) in what
manner, and at what tymes we ought to
be milde, & agayne when we must be earnest,
which is a lesson needefull to be learned
(as generally of all true Christians so
particularly & especially of vs Ministers)



for these are suche dayes (if not worse) as
our sauiour Christ spake of, that whether
we comeLuk. 7. 31 &c. full or fasting, we are refused,
if we pipe, they will not daunce, and if wee
weepe, they will not mourne, that is of
what spirite soeuer we be:The peruersnes of the world. whether milde,
or sharpe, whether gentle or rough, no way
will please them, because they will needes
be dampned. In which peruerse frowardnes
this doctrine will stād vs in good stead
that is, to be patient, and gentle in our own
cause, but zelous, and whot in the cause
of the Lord, and then let the world take exceptions,
as long, and as much as it can,
our conscience will beare vs witnesse, that
which GOD commaundeth: wherewith
whosoeuer is offended, sinneth not against
vs, but the Lord.
            
               (It is written, thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God and him onely shalt thou serue) this is
the repulse that Christ giueth vnto sathan:
& such a blowe as made him (finally) to depart
for that time. The wordes that are
here alleadged, be not to be found, in so
many sillables in any place of the scriptures,
though the sence and meaning is
in many places, that whereunto Christ alludeth



is written in two seuerall places
of Deuteronomy, where be these wordes:cap. 16. 13 10. 20.
thou shalt feare the Lorde thy God, and
serue him: In stead of feare, Christ putteth
worship: and to the worde (serue) hee ioyneth
(onely) both whiche are to be considered:
for the first: where Christ taketh
worshippe for feare, the difference is no
more,The difference betwixt the feare and worship of God. but to set downe the effect in stead
of the cause, for the feare of God is that
reuerent opinion that man ought to haue
of God, in regard of his greatnes and his
own weakenes: and the worship of God, is
that necessary fruite that feare bringeth
forth. Nowe for asmuch as Sathan challenged
vnto hymselfe worshippe, which is
the fruit of the feare of god (and therefore
is alwaies included in the worde feare)
Christ opposing his aunswere, to the demaund
of the enemie, taketh that part of
the sence of the commaundement (though
not the very worde) which the aduersary
did seeme to arrogate vnto himselfe. Now
for the worde (onelie) which Christ seemeth
to adde vnto the text, if wee marke it
well, we shall see that it is most agreable
to the meaning of the holy Ghost: for



that sentence (in so much as it belongeth
to the worshippe of God) must be referred
vnto the first commandement, wherein
God excludeth all others and taketh
all vnto him selfe, the meaninge of it
then must needes be, that this seruice is
(onely) to be giuen vnto God: Agayne
we know in the course of the whole scriptures,
that when god speaketh (as we call
it) indefinitely, the sence is euer to be taken
generally: as when he saythIer. 17, 5. Ioh. 5. 39. cursed
is he that maketh flesh and bloud his arm,
he meaneth all and euerie sort of flesh and
bloud, agayne when hee sayth, searche the
scriptures, for in them you thinke to haue
eternall lyfe: hee meaneth in them onely,
so when he saith, thou shalt feare the Lord,
and serue him, he meaneth onely him: you
see then how the answere of christ though
it vary something in the words of the text
which he aleageth, yet it differeth nothing
from the sence and meaning. Now if you
marke the wordes spoken and lay them to
the demaund of Sathan you shall see that
they are (being thus alleaged) much more
forcible then otherwise. For if Christ had
spoken in generall of the feare of God, Sathan



(being a cauyller) might haue replied
that hee required worshippe and not feare,
but whē Christ speaketh of worship, which
(in deede) is conteined in feare, he stoppeth
his mouth that way, agayne, if he had
said thou shalt serue God: Sathan might
(peraduenture) haue aunswered, so thou
mayest, and yet worship mee. But when
Christ addeth this word (onely) hee speaketh
no more, then the text conteyneth in
it (being compared with other places) and
yet cutteth of all occasions, from the enemies
of further wrangling. The manner
therefore of Christs dealing, with the text
doth teach vs: that for the right ouerthroing
of an aduersary, and conuicting of any
gaynesaier,An example how to alleadge the scriptures. it is greatly materiall how the
scripture bee aleaged: for it is not onely,
meet that the sword of the spirit be drawen
out to cut downe, all that is raysed
agaynst the truth: but also, that an edge be
set vppon it, by the wisedome of the handler.
For as euery one that canne handle
a swoorde, is not bye and bye able to
wounde his enemie, and defende himselfe
with it, so euery one that alledgeth the
Scripture (though hee alledge it truely,



and to a good purpose) is not able to ouerthrow
the aduersarie with it, vnlesse hee
doe vnderstand the true meanyng of it,
that hee may produce it, to the most aduauntage
to his cause. Thus we see how
Christ applyeth the Scripture, and what
we haue to learne, out of the manner of
the same. The doctrine that we are to
obserue out of the aunswere is this, that
(in the matter of Religion) not onely the
hart and inward affection, is due to God,VVhat it is to worship God.
and to bee geuen onely vnto him, but also
all externe and outwarde gestures either
of worde, countenance, or corporall behauiour.
Whiche is diligently to bee noted
because of our Papistes, who will confesse
that God (for so much as hee is aIoh. 4. 14 spirite)
must haue all spirituall worshyp, but
(say they) that letteth not, but wee may
giue outward worshyppe, vnto Sainctes
Images Reliques &c. Wherein they either
shewe themselues marueilous ignoraunt,
or (rather) wilfully obstinate, for
the worde that Christ here vseth for worshyppe,
is not to bee vnderstoode onely of
inwarde but outward worshyp rather: and
signifieth (properly) to prostrate, or fall



downe vppon the face or knees: Now for
as much, as Christ vendicateth this to be
due onely vnto God, it is euident that no
outwarde worshyppe (in respect of Religion)
is due to any other, but because
they will euidently shewe themselues, of
set purpose, to gaynesaye the manifest
truth, they flee vnto a foolishe and friuolous
distinction of two Greeke wordes Latria,
and Doulia: and say that (in deede)
the worshyppe, whiche is called Latria, is
due to God, but Dulia is due to Saintes
and Angels, but if I shall shewe vnto
them, that both those wordes are vsed in
the booke of God indifferently when the
worshyp of God is spoken of,The popish distinction of Latria & Doulia ouer throwne. what will
then become of their distinction, for the
first worde they make no question, and
therefore I neede not speake of it, but let
them (or their Clarkes that vnderstande
the tongues) looke into the sixtenth Chapter,
of the Epistle to the Romanes 6 theRom. 16. 18.
eightenth Uerse and there they shall see
that hee (speakyng of the seruice of Jesus
Christ) vseth the Greeke worde, from
whence Doulia is deriued: But let them
goe (as not worthy to be named when we



speake of the seruice of GOD) and let
vs learne the lesson that our Sauiour doth
teache vs in this place, to knowe that
God will haue all inward and outwarde
seruice that euer any man ought to doe, in
respect of Religion, and therefore let vs
take heede that while we parte stakes betwixt
him and others (who in deede can away
with no fellow) we procure his Maiestie
not onely to reiect our seruice as
stinckyng in his nostrells, but also renounce
vs and say at the latter endMat. 7. 23. depart
from me, ye workers of iniquitie.
            (Then the Deuill left him) Nowe followeth
(in a worde) the issue of his tryall:
First in respect of his aduersarie. Secondly
of himselfe, of his aduersarie that
he (beyng put to the foyle) went his way
and left him (Luke sayeth) for a season,
whereby we learne: First that the ende of
tryalls is, (Iames sayth) if we resiste the
Deuill hee will flee from vs. Secondly,Iam. 4. 7.
that yet hee will neuer finally bee ouerthrown
so long as we liue, for as he departed
from Christ (but for a season) so doth
he leaue vs, not as though he were vtterly
conuicted, but as one that goeth to



make better prouision agaynst vs, and to
wayte his better opportunitie, and therfore
wee may neuer promise our selues
rest, from his assaultes so long as wee
are in this tabernacle of clay (as is noted
aboue) subiect to corruption and
mortalitie: agayne it is a comforte for
them that are often tempted, that they
neuer distrust or dispayre, though theyr
troubles are many, for so much as it was
the lot of Iesus Christ the sonne of God.
            (The Aungels ministred vnto him) that
is, the Lord sent his holy aungels to comfort
him, not that hee was destitute before
but that in his tryall he hauing lesser feeling
of their presēce might now haue more
consolation, in their seruice, which is the
end of all the tryalls of al Gods Children,
(as wee are taught in manye places of the
scriptures) for that the Angels are also appointed
to serue for their comfort, which
shalbeHeb. 1. 14 heires of saluation. And therefore
let vs withHeb. 12 1. &c. pacience runne the race
that is set before vs, looking to Iesus the
aucthour and finisher of our fayth: Let vs
bee contented to abyde the blowes of Sathan,
the reproofes of the world: & pricks



of our fleshe, knowing that as it is Gods
will and determination to haue vs passe
thorow the furnace of afflictions: so will
he geue (in his good tyme) ioyfull issue
of the same, to his owne eternall glorye,
the endlesse confusion of our aduersaryes
that molest vs, & to the
euerlasting consolation
of our own
soules.
         
         
            
            ¶A Prayer after these
Sermons.
            
               MOst gracious God and louing Father,
we thy vnworthy seruauntes
present our selues here before thy
glorious Maiestie, not trusting to
our owne merites or worthynesse, but onely to
thy mercy in thy sonne Iesus Christ. For we acknowledge,
from the bottome of our hartes, against
our selues, that we are not onely conceaued
and borne in sinne, but also haue continued
in the same, from the beginnyng of our tyme
vnto this present, transgressing thy lawes and
commaundementes both in thought worde
and deede, in so much that we are not worthy
to appeare before thee much lesse to presume to
begge or craue any good thing at thy handes,
with hope to obteine the same, if thou shouldest
deale with vs according to our deseruinges, notwithstanding
(most mercyfull and holy Father)
for as much as thou hast commaunded vs to
call vpon thee, when we feele our selues loden



with the burthen of our sinnes, and hast promised
to ease vs. We trusting vnto the truth of
this thy promise do come vnto thee at this present,
most humbly beseeching thee (for thy
sonne our Sauiour Iesus Christes sake) to pardon
and forgeue vs all our sinnes, to blot them
out of thy remembraunce, and to bury them is
silence that they neuer appeare before thee to
accuse vs. And beseeche thee (good Father) to
worke in our harts an earnest loathing of sinne,
a detestatiō of all iniquitie with a carefull desire
and an vnfayned indeuour, to frame our liues
and conuersations, according to thy blessed
will. Lord for somuch as we haue learned out
of thy holy word, that all those whom thou hast
vouchsafed to giue into the handes of thy son
Iesus Christ, shall be cōtinually (so long as they
liue in this presēt world) be assailed, with trials,
temptations, tribulations and afflictions, by reason
of the malice of Sathan, their enemy, the
allurementes of the world: and the enticements
of their owne sinnefull nature: We acknowledge
and confesse, that a greater honor can no
way befall vnto vs, then to be molested by thy
enemies for the testimonie of thy truth: yet
(Lord) such is our weakenesse by nature, and
so vnfit is our fleshe to begin, or continue any



good thing, that we must needes quayle in the
same, and vtterly renounce thee and thy truth,
vnlesse thou of thy gracious goodnesse assiste vs
with thy grace, in such wise, as both the loathinesse
of our flesh (to do any good thing) be taken
away, and also thy fauour so support vs, that we
may be strengthened to abide in thy true feare
and seruice. We beseeche thee therefore good
Father (euen for his sake whose bloud thou accomptest
not too deare for our redemption) that
as it is thy will to impose vppon vs this estate
of bearyng the Crosse for thy sake, so thou
wouldest giue vs strength, contentednesse and
paciēce to make vs able to vnder go the same.
Lord let not our weakenesse, betray thy glory,
let not our shrincking, giue aduauntage vnto
thy foes: neither let our wantes, any way hinder
thy graces from comming vnto vs: but for
as much as thou hast thought it most meete, to
haue thy glory shewed in weakenesse, thy power
to be perfect in infirmitie, and the foolish ones
of the world to confounde the wise, graunt (we
beseeche thee) that wee may so sight vnder the
banner of Iesus Christ thy sonne, and so striue
to builde his kingdome, in the middest of his
enemies, that by vs thy name may be glorified,



thy truth may be magnified, thy Sonne Christ
Iesus may be aduaunced, and our soules and
consciences euerlastingly comforted.
Lord we pray thee graunt these graces,
not alone to vs that are
here present. &c.
            
               
            
            
         
      
   