
      
         
            
            
            A ſhorte and pithie Diſcourſe, concerning the engendring, tokens, and effects of all Earthquakes in Generall: Particularly applyed and conferred with that moſt ſtrange and terrible worke of the Lord in shaking the Earth, not only within the Citie of London, but alſo in moſt partes of all Englande: VVhich hapned vpon VVenſday in Eaſter weeke laſt paſt, which was the ſixt day of April, almoſt at ſixe a clocke in the euening, in the yeare of our Lord GOD. 1580. Written by T.T. the 13. of April. 1580.
            
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Richarde Iohnes. 1580.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right honourable my very good Lord, Philip Howard Earle of Arundell, &c. the teſtimonie of a good conſcience to Godward, continuance of bodily health, and encreaſe of worldly honour.
            
               I Am not a little ſorie, Right Honourable, that bearing a deſirous mind of long time to preſent vnto your view ſome argumente of my good meaning towardes you, the happe hath ſo fallē out, that nothing hath yet hapned vnto me that way, eyther woorthie your honourable inſpection, or anſwerable vnto my deſired expectation. Neuertheleſſe, not through negligence to omit ſuch oportunitie as hath bin offered, leaſt I might ſeeme ſlow in perfourmance, or careleſſe in dutie: and taking in hand by the importune motion of ſome freends, not now to holde my pen in ſilence in reſpect of ſo rare matter as hath hapned of very late: ſuche as it is, ſo ſmall, and ſo ſlender, in moſt humble wiſe I preſent vnto your honour. My right honourable good Lorde, it is a ſhorte diſcourſe of all Earthquakes in generall, and alſo my poore iudgement touching the maruellous viſitation of God in the terrible Earthquake whiche was felte of late dayes amongſt vs. VVhich as I acknowledge to be but extemporall and weake, ſo do I ſubmit it vnto the controulemente of better learned, leauing vnto them both matter and libertie to iudge and write thereof much more at large. And crauing at your honours

hands ſome maner friendly enterteyning of the ſame, if I may obteyne it, I ſhall not onely thinke my trauell well employed, but that of dutie I am farther endebted to make your honour, in reſpect of many great vertues that reſt in the ſame, patrone of ſome better labour heereafter. As knoweth God, to whom I commend you, and pray for you, to your beſt contentmente and liking. VVritten at London this thirteenth of April 1580. By him that remaineth your honours euermore at commandement:
            
               T.T.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶A pithy diſcourſe of the late Earthquake, on vvenſday in Eaſter weeke, being the ſixt of Aprill. 1580.
            
               
                  AMong the manifold ſygnes and tokens, wherby it hath pleaſed our moſt gratious God, and mercifull Father, in theſe the later times of the worlde, and very ripeneſſe of our ſinnes, to call vs to repentaunce, we may not accoumpt as leaſt this moſt dreadfull & daungerous Earthquake, which vnto the great terrour of all good conſciences befell of late vnto the Cittie of London, and as I ſuppoſe to the moſt part of this Realme, vpon wenſday in Eaſter week,Yea, and out of ye Realme to, in ſome Countreys lying Eaſterly. which was the ſixt day of Aprill. 1580. about ſix of the clocke in the after noone. Wherof, to the entent ſo merueylous a iudgement of the Lords may be known, to ſuch as perſonally were not touched with the ſame, and alſo ſo wonderfull a worke may not want it due effect, where it ſhall be heard: I am reſolued by his power, without whome we are able to doo nothing: and by your patience, to whome perhappes this knowledge may be aueyleable, to ſet downe ſomwhat briefly concerning the ſame in wryting.
            2. But before we enter any further into the bare bewraying of the matter, it is expedient that I diſcouer vnto you the cauſes, and ſubſtaunce of euerie Earthquake,Cauſes, and ſubſtance of Earthquakes, as they be naturally aſſygned. which I muſt be fayne to borrowe from the Prophane wryters, who haue moſt dilligently laboured in the ſearch of naturall cauſes, whervnto doubtleſſe they could not ſo clearly haue atteyned without the finger of God, which hath led men as well into the true contemplation of theſe matters, as of any other knowledge. And therfore following Ariſtotle as théefe in this behalfe: wée muſt vnderſtand, that the efficient cauſes of an Earthquake are thrée, to wyt, the Sun,

the other ſixe Planets, and a ſpirite or breath included within the vowelles of the earth: and the materiall cauſe one, which is an Exhalation, that is to ſay, a certaine ayre, breath, or ſmoake drawne out of the earth, which of nature is hot and drie.
            
               Howe Earthquakes are ingendred.3. Thus it is not hard then, to deſcribe the engendring of an Earthquake. For the earth is a drie body of it owne nature, and as dayly experience teacheth, it conteyneth within it great plentie of water. And when it is throughly heated by the beames of the Sunne, and alſo by bodyes of firie ſubſtaunce, whereof it imbraceth many: as Brimſtone, and ſuch like, partly by reſoluing the water into ayre, and partly by receyuing the lyke into the emptie hollowneſſe thereof, it comprehendeth within it great ſlore of ſpirit and windie matter, which being very ſubtill, ſwyft, and vehement, wandereth here and there vnder the earth, ſtriking the ſides therof with great force, and moſt times cauſeth the earth to quake and tremble, for that it séeketh iſſue continually to depart into it owne place.
            4. At ſomtimes therefore this ſpirit or Exhalation iſſueth wholly foorth together: ſomtime by laboring it conceaueth fire, and breaketh out in flames: otherwhiles, ſome part of it remayneth behinde, and is ſhutte vp againe within the earth, and miniſtreth matter for a new effect. And farther, as the ſearchers of nature haue reported of this kinde of accident,Earthquakes comōly happen at night, or in the morning the Earthquake hapneth (for the moſt part) at a calme ſeaſon, when as none or very ſmall windes blowe, ſpecially in the night, and at the dawning of the day: for that accuſtomably windes vſe to riſe at that time: or if in the day time it happen, then moſte at high noone, the Sunne being then in greateſt force, and driuing downe the Exhalations into the earth.
            5. Moreouer, the places moſt conuenient and likely for Earthquakes, are cauernous and hollowe places, where the

earth is looſe and falſe vnder foote, by reaſon of vndermining or digging for Metal, Stone, Cole, or ſuch like ſtuff, as vpon Mendeepe, Newcaſtle, and ſundry other places within this Realme. Alſo the hollow cliffes by the Sea ſide, where the water ſomtime freatteth holes in the banckes, cauſing great peeces of the earth to fall in: As of late dayes it happened betwéene Douer, and Folſtone, & moſt gréeuouſly may be ſéene euery day in experience, at the poore Towne of Whytſtable in Kent. And agayne, the Countreis that are verye full of great Hilles and mountaines:
                  Wales acquainted with particular Earthquakes. ſo that (perhapps) the vplandiſhe people of Wales are better acquainted with ſuch effectes than we are, as it ſtandeth with good reaſon, and I haue heard alſo ſome to report by tryall and knowledge.
            6 It chaunceth alſo many tymes, that by reaſon of repreſſing this Exhaltation, which is the materiall cauſe of the Earthquake, within the earth, there is hearde a noyſe lyke the working of the Sea a farre of, whiche, neuertheleſſe, doth not alwaies importe an Earthquake: for that peraduenture the Exhalation is not ſufficient in quantitie, or qualytie to ſhake the earth, but onely it belloweth, or barketh at the departure: as a Gun being diſcharged giueth the bygger or leſſer crack according to the quantitie or ramminge, more or leſſe of the powder, & yet maketh ſome noyſe when it is diſcharged although the powder were not of ſufficient force to make the péece ſhake, or recoyle.
            7. As touchinge other Accidentes, that are noted ouer and aboue, to accompany and follow Earthquakes:Eclipſes of the Moone import defect of heat. one is eclipſes, of the Moone, another Exhalatiue impreſſions in the ayre. Whereof the one may importe ſome defectt of heat, and then the colde byndeth vp the poares of the earth, & cauſeth the windes moſt times to blowe fiercely at ſuch ſeaſons: and the other giueth a taſte of the plenty

of hot and drie matter, which by probabilitie is concluded within ye earth, wherof that was ſome part which appeared, both which may miniſter great cauſe thervnto, as is already declared. And it is a thing ſpecially and aboue all thing noted, that a lyttle before, and euen at the tyme of the Earthquake, the Sun is darkened without a cloude, which is long of the ſpirite that breaketh foorth, which filling the ayre: taketh away the bright beames of the Sun from our ſight, after the manner of a thin myſt.
            8. The morning is calme and colde before an Earthquake happen, by reaſon of the hot ſpirite or breath which is included within the earth: and alſo after the Sun ſet, the Skie is cleare, for that the matter is ſoone diſpearſed: and often tymes there is ſeene in the Element a long narrowe clowde ſtretched foorth, which is the forerunner of an Earthquake.Some report that they ſawe this Clowd, although it were not generally marked. But to ſpeake of ſome conſequentes that doo followe them for the moſt part, although God haue his ſpeciall worke according to his good prouidence in them, yet are theſe ſuch as the naturall Philoſophers haue obſerued moſt often to enſue, & may not conueniently be omitted by me in this recitall, for ſpeciall purpoſe.
            9. Sometimes therfore, after an Earthquake great ſloare of water hath broken foorth of the earth, as béeing driuen out by the Exhalation,Straunge effectes of Earthquakes. in ſo much that the Sea, and other Riuers haue ouerflowed theyr banckes, and procured certaine particular Dilugies or drowninges of Townes and Countreyes. And many times by reaſon of the forcible burſting out of the ſpirite, mightie heapes of Stones haue bene throwne out of the earth, to the great admiration of the beholders. The Sea lykewiſe hath bene ſéene to rage wonderfully, as if it had bene moued by verie fowle weather, and Ilands haue bene lyfted vp wheras were neuer any before, and mayne Landes deuided where before was neuer Sea. And moreouer, it

hath bene knowne, that an Earthquake hath cōtinued the ſpace of fortie dayes, almoſt without intermiſſion: yea, of two yéeres, more or leſſe about one place, which hapneth by reaſon of the multitude of the ſpirite, and ſtrong reſiſtaunce of the ſides of the tauernous places wherein the ſpirite is conteyned.
            10. To be ſhort, the manner of the ſhaking of euerie Earthquake is of thrée ſortes.Earthquakes ſhake in three ſorts. For eyther it ſhaketh towards one ſide, and is lyke a certayne trembling or rocking, & this is a token of great ſtore of ye Exhalatiō: or elſe it lyfteth right vp in the middes, & letteth fall againe, after the manner of the Pulſe, or other beating veines of ye body, and this kinde ſhaketh more, and is moſt daungerous, and teſtifieth that there was much more plentie of the ſpirite or Exhalation lying déepe beneathe in the bottome: or elſe it ſéemeth to be compoūded of them twaine, and at the ſame inſtant dooth bothe rocke and lyft vp the earth together, and with the diuerſitie of motion & dauncing, as it were, it ratleth, and butteth the houſes & buyldings together, yet in ſuch ſort that none falleth, but the one is rather a ſtay vnto the other, & this diſcouereth plē
               tie of the ſubſtance after both the ſorts placed, & mouing.
            11. Yet the ende that any of theſe, yea the beſt,The beſt kinde is bad enough. dooth bring where there is ſtore of the matter, & continuance of the action and conflict betweene the conteyned & the conteyning, is moſt dreadfull quaking of the earth, trēbling of houſes, ſhaking of bu
                  •
               ldings, amazing of the people, & doubt of farther harmes. But where it pleaſeth God, that they rage with greater vehemencie: there followeth farre more outragious myſeries, as ſuddein ouerthrowing of houſes & buildings, ſubuerſion of whole Townes & Citties, vnprepared death of thouſandes of people, & ſomtime the vtter ſubuerſion of whole Kingdoms & Nations. And this much ſufficeth to be ſpoken of them in generall.
            
               
               A conferēce of al the tokens aforeſayde with our Earthquake.12. Nowe therefore, if by your patience it may be graū
               ted, let vs a while compare ſome parte of theſe generall tokens and Accidents, with this our particular Earthquake: ſince theſe for the moſt part, as I haue ſayde, are in ſumme, the obſeruations of the learned in Philoſophie concerning ſuch matter: and ſo ſhall wee bee the better able to diſcerne of this wonderfull worke of God, whether it be méere naturall, or no: and alſo take the better occaſion to report of euery poynt thereof, according as I haue beene enformed by perſons of credite. For why? for mine owne parte, I muſt thus proteſt before the lyuing God, whoſe matter wee haue in hande: that béeing not much paſt a payre of Butte lengthes without the libertie barres of the Citie of London, walking with honeſt godlye companye, and to my lykyng, euen at the inſtant of the quaking, as it ſhoulde séeme, neyther they, nor I perceyued any ſuch thing at all. But the Lorde hath his prouidence, and his workes are marueylous.
            
               God worketh euermore by ſecond cauſes vnleſſe hee worke myracles whiche are againſt the common courſe of nature.13 But that the Sun, the Planets, and other Starres are the efficient cauſe, aſwell of an Earthquake, as of the rayſing of a Comet, or any other firie impreſſion or Meteor conſidering ye euident force of thoſe heauenly bodies in daylye experience, it is no meruaile. For that hee which is the cauſe of al cauſes, in al his works of nature hath made them his vnder Deputies, remayning neuertheleſſe at his checke, without any abſolute aucthoritie of their owne▪ Theſe therefore (but eſpecially the Sun) becauſe of his great heate about and ſince the feaſt of Eaſter laſt paſt, and chiefly ſince Wenſday and Thurſday before Palme ſunday in Lent, might ſomewhat ſéeme to be of force to haſten the drying vp of ſome ſmal moiſture. Howbeit, neyther the one, nor the other can appeare to be of ſuch valure in reaſon, conſidering the great wet

that hath fallen this winter, as to conſume ſo great plentye of water, without ſome other naturall cauſe be aſſigned, are the ſpeciall prouiſion of God admitted.
            14. Neuertheleſſe, touching the plenty of water, that to the generation of an Earthquake is required, to be conteyned within the bowelles of the earth:Matter left for another Earthquak vnleſſe the Lords mercie be greater it cannot be denyed, but there hath beene great cauſe to thinke there was, and is yet ſufficient for this or a farre greater one yet to come, from which the Lord in mercie delyuer vs, if ſo be other cauſes alſo concurre, and the Lord doo conſent thereunto. But indéede, I am rather induced to feare ſome vnſeaſonable effects of the other ſmoake, or ſpirite which commeth from waters and moyſtie earth, and is called a vapour, and of nature is warme & moiſt, leaſt when we little feare, we finde the diſtemperaunce thereof to our hurt in our fruites and Corne, and other neceſſarie prouiſion of the earth. Whereof if a man would ſet downe an example, they may be froſtes, or ſléete in Maie, and hayle in Summer, and towards Harueſt, with ſuch like.
            15. But to procéede farther in our conference, whether this efficient ſpirite be wholy iſſued foorth with the Earthquake, or be in part left behinde to procure a news effect, or not, it reſteth in Gods knowledge, and I truſte not 
                  〈◊〉
               . But I heare not yet of any fyrie flames that were séene to iſſue foorth of the earth, the Lord be prayſed the more, for withholding that terror from vs. And for mine owne part, I am able to teſtifie of the calmeneſſe of that time wherein the earth is ſayd to haue trembled,Some ſay that the earth was ſhaken againe at midnight following. that if there blew any winde at all, ſurely it was but very lyttle. Mary, in this point it differed from 
                  •
               ecuſtomable time of the like Accidents, in that it happened not in ye night tyme, which doubtleſſe, would haue bene right gréeuous and terrible, although in déede it were in the

euening and towards night, when as the Sun was paſt his force of heat, as going then to glade: which is alſo a poynt woorthy the noting.
            16. And as for any holes, caues, or hollow places which might miniſter occaſion of conueyaunce or lurking of the matter of an Earthquake vnder the ground hereabouts, as yet I doo not know, ſpecially of any notable depth, ſuch as are aboue mentioned or elſe are found in the partes of Italy,
               Theſe are the cauſes of their hot bathes, and medicinable waters in thoſe Coū
                  treyes. or Sicile, and elſewhere, vpon like occaſiō, or by the continuall burning of the veines of Sulphur, Naptha, Bitumen, and Sea coales which are a kinde of Bitumen: ſo that the ayre poſſeſſing the vnſearchable hollowe roomes, might in expectatiō bring foorth this effect. Neyther are ye banckes of the Thames ſo clyfty, & therby hollow, that it might be that way feared. And as for Hylles, Moūtaines, and Dales,The ſituation of the cittie of Lō
                  do in a moſt, rytch, pleaſaunt and fertyle Leauell. the ſituation of London is ſo frée from them: that I haue heard ſome traueylers ſay, that there is not a Cittie in all Europe, that ſtādeth vpon a more rytch, pleaſant, and fertile leauell than it dooth.
            17. It may appeare alſo, that the Philoſophers admyt the earth to bellowe, roare, cracke and make a noyſe, ſomtyme without an Earthquake when as the Exhalation breaketh 
                  •
               oorth, and yet is not of force to ſhake the earth. How chaunceth it then we heard no ſuch matter, when as it appeareth, the efficient was of power to bring foorth the effect? It muſt be aunſwered, Gods wyll was otherwyſe. For I heare no report of any ſuch thing. Which if it had happened, would haue added great terrour to the feare that was otherwiſe procured by the ſhaking. Vnleſſe we ſhould vnderſtand it to be verified by cracking & ratling of tymber, poaſ
                  •
               s, walles, and wenſcots, which I ſuppoſe wanted not, but we may not ſo take theyr meaning, but rather of a voyce lyke the roaring of the Sea, or ſtroake of a Gun, when as the Exhalation iſſueth out of the earth.
            
               18. And as for other accidēts, true indéede it is, that not long ſince we had an Eclipſe of the Moone, to witte,In Eclipſe of the Moone, the laſt of Janu. 1580.
                the one and thirteth day of Januarie laſt paſt, about eyght a clocke at night, at what time, to ſpeake more Mathematically, the furious planet Mars being found in the ſigne of Capricornus, in the fourth houſe, euermore fore ſheweth and procureth Earthquakes within the time of that reuolution, as the learned in thoſe moſt excellent ſciences do affirme. And touching the apparance of Exhalatiue impreſſions, which I tearme by that name, for that the ſubſtance of them is hote & drie, although they be not caried ſo high where they might be ſet on fire, which is to the top of the vppermoſt region of the Earthe, and ſo take the name of fi
                  •
               ie impreſſions.
            19. Concerning ſuch, I ſay, and other Meteors,Of the ſtraunge exhalation ſeene in the aire, the 5. of March 1580.
                I néede not ſtand vpon the recitall of ſome that haue bin ſéene of late, which as I am credibly enformed, haue bin many, and oftentimes ſeene by ſundrie. And I my ſelfe alſo, vppon the fifth day of March laſt paſt, being Saterſday, almoſt at nine a clocke at night, in the company of certaine Worſhipfull Gentlemen, beheld a ſtrange, and great exhalatiue impreſſion in the Aire, whiche in mine opinion was not fired, but very thinne and cleere, for I might very perfectly behold the fixed Starres through it. The ſituation thereof was ſtretching endlong from the Eaſt to the Weaſt, ouer the Citie of London, or ſomewhat more Southerlie, and the forme therof was as the ſhape of the lath of a Croſſebow without a ſtring, whoſe backe bēded towards the North, and the bellie towardes the South. At what time I ſaw it, it was in my iudgemēt in ye tenth houſe, & raiſed ſpecially by Venus, or Mercurie, or by ſome fixed Starres of their nature, and as I remember, the Lyra was not thē farre off, but by nine a clocke or a little paſt, it was quite vaniſhed.
            20. Truly, I muſt néedes confeſſe, the ſight therof was rare, and whiche woorthelie drew the eyes of many into admiration of the ſpectacle, and from thence to lift their

minds with thankes vnto the wonderfull Creator of all things. And for yt I was knowne to haue bin ſomtime in place wher lerning is profeſſed, ſome yt ſtood by demanded mine opinion what it might be, & what alſo ſignifie? vnto whom I anſwered, yt in my iudgement, of nature it was an exhalation, & that otherwhiles it foreſhewed ye following of an Earthquake,The pre
                  
                     •
                  age of this Erthquake by the Authour. but moſt cōmōly of fierce winds and drought, whiche howſoeuer they be preſignified, the effect muſt be acknowledged to reſt in Gods hands only.
            21. Another adiunct token likewiſe, which is the darkening of the Sunne,The Sun darkened at the inſtant of the Erthquake. without any cloude, or Eclipſe at the inſtant of the Earthquake, was euident to be diſcerned, and is commonly reported by as many as made any obſeruation thereof. And for my parte, I durſt alſo affirme the ſame to be true, although I acknowledge, as before, mine inexperience of the ſtrange accident. Notwithſtanding, I remember that the Sunne ſhined not as we were walking, which was the time that the Earthquake hapned. And to confer yet farther, indéede the mornings before were cold and nipping, and afterwards at night the Skie was faire and cléere: but whether there appéered in the Elemente any long and narrow Cloude ſtretched foorth in length, eyther before or after, I can not ſay.
            22. Moreouer, I heare as yet of no great and newe eruptions of water by lande or Sea, but it is certainely tolde, of the ſtrange vnquietneſſe and working of the Thames at that time, without enforcement of winde or weather,
                  Pherecydes. The Ilāds Theron, Therea, and Aegypt, caſt vp by Erthquakes out of the Sea. The Iland Atlantis drowned by an Earthquake. euen vnto the hazarding of the liues of ſome, who, God be praiſed for it, eſcaped in ſafetie. But I heard none cōplayne of the thickneſſe of their pump or conduit waters, by which meanes Pherecydes once foretold of an Earthquake to come. Ne is there any ſpéech of heapes of ſtones lately throwen out of the Earth and diſcouered, nor of the riſing of any newfound Ilands out of the Sea, or freſh waters, as of the two Ilands of Theron, and Therea, in the time of Seneca: and before that of all Aegypt, as graue Authours do inſinuate: nor yet of the drowning of any Iland or Maine, as it is written of Atlantis, in the

Sea Atlanticum, whiche Sea afterwarde for a ſpace was turned al into mudde: nor yet of maine lands rent aſunder, as Europe was quite torne from Aſia, ſauing for a little necke or portion whereby they hang togither.
            23. But for the ſhortneſſe of the continuance of the Earthquake, we are of dutie to yéeld moſt hartie thankes vnto the Maieſtie of our moſt gratious God, who, contrarie to the naturall cuſtome that ſome Earthquakes do bring, hath preſerued vs from ſo great dread and danger. The Citie of Conſtantinople was ſo wonderfully ſhaken with an Earthquake an whole yéere togither,The Citie of Conſtantinople ſhaken with an Erthquake. that the Emperour therof, and all his people, were conſtreyned to dwell abroade in the fields vnder tents and pauilions, for feare their houſes & buildings would fall on their heads. But I can not yet heare otherwiſe reported by any, to make me coniecture that our ſhaking continued aboue the ſpace of one minute, which is the 60. part of an houre.
            24. And yet farther to follow a while mine owne probable collectiō. I am induced to thinke, that this quaking was not at one inſtant in all places wheras it was fealt, but rather came by degrées, and diſtance of time, after the maner of the beating of the pulſe, which the Phiſitions call Serratilis, or Vermicularis.
               Doubtleſſe the reportes ſhew this to be true. For comming from ye Eaſt parts where it ſéemed to begin, & to rage moſt fiercely, as with thē in Kent, & ſo procéeding to ye Weſt, it was felt at Rocheſter & Graueſend about v. a clocke, at London almoſt at vj. at Stanes & Windſore almoſt halfe an hour after that, & ſo, by likelyhoode it procéeded farther yt way, perhaps according to ye ſtretching foorth of ye ſtrange exhalatiue impreſſion, wherof I made mētion before, & ſo bended Northerly according to the proportiō of the bellie of the ſame.
            25. But to determine of the thrée ſorts of quakings felt commonly at the trembling of an Earthquake, and to ſay preciſely which of them this ours ſhould be,Earthequakes God be thā
                  ked, rare in England. perhaps had it pleaſed the Lorde to haue made me as well partaker therof in ſenſe, as doubtleſſe I muſt be in ſignification, I might ſomwhat haue cōiectured. Although this Accidēt be rare, & I pray God may be rarer, hapning ſcarcely with

vs in an hundred, yea, in a thouſand yéere. But as I may probably geſſe by others relation, ſurely it ſéemed to be the mixt kind, for that it was perceyued to rocke and lift vp both at one inſtant, and yet God be thanked, no houſes nor buildings knowē to haue fallen, which may ye better be ſo, for that in this mixt kinde, as the expert in thoſe Sciences write, the one part is a ſtay vnto the other.
            26. And although by our former reaſons it may apeere, that the matter of the Earthquake was but ſmall that cauſed but ſo ſhort a motion, yet am I perſwaded that the ſame was general vnto all England and Scotland to, & ſo to the whole Iland of Britaine,This Erthquake at the leaſt generall to all Britaine.
                with no more hurt doing, I truſt, or rather leſſe, than with vs héere. But where in former times and forraigne Lands it pleaſed God to let thē rage with greater furie, there what gréeuous outragies haue enſued, antient Hiſtories make mention. The Citie of Rhodes was wonderfully ſhaken with an horrible Earthquake.
                  Rhodes, xii. Citties in Aſia, Cāpania, Naples, Baſil, Caſtles almoſt an hundred, the Alpes and Rome, ſome shaken, ſome ouerthrowen with Earthquakes. Twelue antient Cities in Aſia were ouerthrowen, & ſome alſo ſwallowed vp into the earth. Campania, and Naples in Italy were ſore affrighted, and moleſted. The Citie of Baſile in Germany was mightelie ſhaken, and Caſtles and fortreſſes to the number almoſt of an hundred, were vpon the ſhoare of the Rhine vtterly ouerthrowen. The hugie Alpes haue trembled with the like, and Rome hath not once nor twice aſſayed, and eſcaped that danger.
            27. Indéede the ſuddaineſſe and ſtrangeneſſe of the thing was ſuch, that it tooke diuers men in diuers actions, and brought them into ſundrie conſiderations of the matter. Some doubtleſſe at their prayers, and hearing godly Sermons,Happy are they whom the Lorde ſhall finde weldooing. whome, as men, it muſt needes amaze, or bring into a muſe. Some at the Tauerne, and vpon their Alebench, and therefore might well ſuſpect that it was long of their liquour. Some in earneſt conference of worldly affaires, and ſo peraduenture they tooke ſmall or no regard at all of it. Some in ydleneſſe alone, and thoſe of likelyhoode it might ſorely abaſh. Some at game, and

therefore not muche moued. Some at common Playes, who as I vnderſtand, were horribly troubled. Some in wanton talke and diſport, whom it might well affright. Some perhappes worſe occupied, whome I would counſell to be more carefull of the Lordes ſuddaine viſitation. Some faſt a ſléepe, and therefore ſenſeleſſe: and ſome walking the ſtréetes and fields, or caried on Horſebacke, or in Couches, and therefore not able to diſcerne of any ſuch matter.
            28. Some that were aboue in their Chambers,Coniectures of thoſe thinges that happen moſt commonly. iudged that ſome violence had bin done to their houſes beneath. Some that remained below, foūd fault with tumbling and trampling aboue. Some imputed the ratling of waineſcots to Rattes and Wéeſels: the ſhaking of the beddes, tables, and ſtooles, to Dogges: the quaking of their walles to their neyghbours ruſhing on the tother ſide. And as their opinions were ſundrie, ſo were their ſpéeches therupon diuerſe, vntill a common conference beeing had, they were reſolued vpon their common caſe & daunger. For many not truſting to their own iudgement, and partly alſo mooued with feare, ran out into the ſtreetes to know if the like had hapned vnto others.
            29. I am aſſuredly enformed,Belles knowling alone. that aſwell elſewhere as in London, the very ſhakinge cauſed the Belles in ſome Stéeples to knoll a ſtroake or twaine. The toppes of halfe a dozen chimnies in London were caſt down: many ſtone workes and buildinges, for that they would not yéeld, are ſhrewdly ſhaken. And to ad alſo the moſt gréeuous chance of all, I truſt, that haue yet happened, or by Gods grace are like to be heard of, Alacke therewhile,Two children ſore hurt, wherof one died preſently. was ye fore hurting of two poore Children, by the fall of a ſtone from the roufe of Chriſtes Hoſpitall Church in London: wherof the one béeinge a Boy of the yeares of ſixteene, was ſlaine preſently, and the other béeinge a Girle about the ſame age, and daungerouſly bruſed, is yet liuing and like to recouer & who were both ſeruauntes in one houſe, vnto Iohn Spurlinge a ſhoomaker, dwellinge in S. Botulphes pariſh

without Alderſgate nigh London.
            30. Now, perhaps ſome would expect at my handes, that I ſhould ſet down my iudgement farther concerning the efficient cauſes, & alſo the conſequents of this Earthquake by the poſition of the Heauens and aſpectes of the Planets, and fixed Starres, for that preſente time: which now I muſt needes omit for breuitie ſake, till ſome other time more conuenient. And if likewiſe I were farther demaunded, what mine opinion is concerninge this Earthquake,This Erthquake not altogither naturall. whither I thinke it altogeather naturall, or not? Surely, I am otherwiſe perſwaded, and ſo I iudge many other to bée, that haue entred into ye déepe conſideration therof. But let it bee, as it is, ſurely it cannot bée without ye ſpeciall finger of God, whither it bée for our comforte, or terrour, as euery mans conſcience ſhal beare him recorde, although I am ſure there bée none that can excuſe them ſelues of ſinne.
            31. But whether the Angell of the Lorde in paſſinge by vs in viſitation,The Angel of the Lord thought to paſſe by in viſitation. hath ſhaken our habitations with his preſence, as ſome haue reuerently iudged: or in reſpect of the ripeneſſe of our ſinnes, our moſt mercifull God hath cauſed the earth to tremble, to the intente to mooue vs to repentaunce, as it may well bee coniectured: Let vs not ſtay, I béeſéeche you in the bowels of his deare Sonne Jeſus Chriſt, euery one to powre out his complaint béefore the fountaine of mercy, and to call vpon him to turne from vs thoſe plagues of Peſtilence, Sword, & Famine, which by ſuch quakinges are euermore foreſhewed, and our ſinnes doo woorthily deſerue. For to admit that it procéeded but of a méere naturall cauſe, ſo great and ſo many are the poyſons,The corruption of metals able to infect man, beaſt, and foule. corruptions, cankers, and ruſtes of mettalles and minerall bodies within the earth, that the venomous aire that iſſueth forth from them by the eruption of the exhalation in an Earthquake, is of ſufficient force, without the ſpeciall prouidence of God to the contrary, to infect and ſuffocate both Man, Beaſt, and Foule, immediatly.
            
               
               A comfortable coniecture of the Lords mercie and loue towards vs32. But ſhall wée now againe coniecture ſomewhat vnto our owne comforte, and not altogeather vnprobably? Since at all times theſe one and twentie yeares and vpward, duringe the raigne of our moſt deere and dread Soueraigne, and moſt gratious Queene Elizabeth, the Goſpell hath béene ſincerely and truely preached vnto vs, and that now duringe this time of Lente laſt paſt, and ſince Eaſter, not only in her Maieſties Courte, but alſo in her emperiall Cittie of London, as alſo in all other places of her dominions, moſt choice men for godlines and learninge haue béene appointed to ſow the ſéede of life, and to open the way vnto the kingdome of Heauen: what if in token of conſent, good liking, and concluſion of that which hath béene ſo manifoldly ſpoken, the Lorde would vouchſafe to giue a nod with his head, wherat, as the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh by the mouth of the Prophet Dauid: All the earth doth ſhake, and the hilles doo ſmoake, and the whole frame of the world is mooued?
            33. Neuertheleſſe, if the giltineſſe of our owne conſciences cannot ſo content vs, but that, as rightly we ought,Conſcientia mille teſte
                     •
                  . we be put in minde of moſt iuſt puniſhment for our offences: doubtleſſe I am moſt enclined vnto that perſuaſion, which with al my hart I wiſh wée al followed, & that with ſpéed. And herein I pray you let no man flatter or falſely perſuade himſelf with a natural cauſe, or with the miſchance of two poore childrens death, for that ſhall not ſerue when the time cōmeth. For, was their death caſuall thinke you? I know it was not,The Eirle died the Munday after, being the eleuenth of April. ſince there falleth not a poore Sparrow to the earth without ye prouidēce of God. Or were they the greateſt ſinners in ye cōpany? God knoweth, their yeares may ſomewhat anſwere for thē, & I think they were not, more than they vpon whom the Towre fell in Siloa. But ſurely if wee repent not, wee ſhall all likewiſe periſh.
            34. The iudgement, if wee perceiue it,Goddes iudgements already begun. is already begun at ye houſe of God, what fauour then ſhall others looke for? If it haue ha
                  •
               ned thus in the gréen trée, what ſhal become of the drie? Good brethren, let vs looke to this geare, yt the

Lords mightie hand light not vpon vs vnlooked for. The Axe is not only ſet to the roote of the tree, but it hath now hewen many ſtrokes, and ſome of the branches are fallen alreadie. The Lorde is comming in maieſtie to iudge the Earth, and to auenge himſelfe vpon his enemies, and doubtleſſe hée is not far of. Our ſtrange and hot and drie tokens ſéene of late time, as the wonderfull blazinge Starre, and the rare exhalations, ſhew that hée w
                  •
               l come ſhortly to conſume all with fire. But how vnprouided hée ſhall finde vs: the ſodaine comminge vpon vs of this Earthquake doth declare.
            
               All people exhorted to amend their exceſſes.35. Now I beſeech you againe, let euery man call himſelfe to an accompt, and looke narrowly into his owne life. Let the Blaſphemer ceaſe to abuſe the Lords name and power, to his damnation: Let the Adulterer leaue of and ſinne no more: Let the Uſurer take heede how hee can anſwere the Lorde for his Brothers hurte: Let the Murtherer remember that Abels bloud crieth for vengeaunce: Let the malicious man know that the Lorde ſearcheth the harte and reynes: Let the Glutton learne that the holy Ghoſt forbiddeth him to make his belly his God: Let the Drunckard begin to abhorre the daunger and abomination of intemperance: Let the couetous perſon perceiue that the ruſt of his money ſhall conſume his fleſhe: Let the hollow harted Chriſtian and ſubiect, vnto God, and his Prince, vnderſtand, that as the hollowneſſe was the cauſe of the ſhakinge of the Earth, euen ſo for his falſe and hollow hartes ſake, the Lorde will ſhake him from out his beloued flocke of Iſraell, and caſt him into that wofull place,
                  Iudas and Iulian, great Maiſters to Traytours and Atheiſtes.
                where hée ſhal receiue his reward with Diſſemblers and Hipocrites, and with Traytours and Atheiſtes, togeather with their great Maiſters, Iudas and Iulian, that lye perpetually tormented in vnquenchable Hell fire.
            36. And laſt of all, let the worldly man conſider, what certentie he hath in his ritches, or aſſurance in any thing vpon the earth, when as euen that alſo is ſubiect to ſhakinge

and mouing, wheron hee repoſeth his felicitie. And although the witte of man haue deuiſed remedies againſt the threatninges of Heauen: yet when the earth quaketh, where ſhall hee repoſe himſelfe in ſafety? Auguſtus Caeſar had a Denne made vnder the ground to ſhrowd himſelfe in from the rage of thunder,
                  Auguſtus Caeſars den againſte thunder and lightning. which remaineth yet to bée ſéene nigh Rome. But indeede, there is no fléeinge from the face of the Lorde, who, as the holy Pſalmiſt ſayeth, where euer wee goe to hide our ſelues, is preſent with vs: whether wee aſcend into Heauen, or goe downe into Hell, or take the winges of the morning, or dwell in the vttermoſt partes of the Sea, or couer our ſelues in the darkeneſſe: for light and darkeneſſe are all one before him.
            37. To conclude, I would wiſh that men liued not altogeather in ſecuritie, as though it were no ſtraunge thing that had hapned. But firſt, that they remayned in aſſurance of Gods good will if they bee thankefull as well for the frée gifte of his liuely worde and Goſpell, as for the life, reigne, and welfare of our naturall Soueraigne Quéene Elizabeth, whoſe dayes the Lorde for his mercy continue longe time ouer vs in all happineſſe. Secondly, I would exhort that Sermons were diligently reſorted vnto, and publique prayers made for all perſons, ſpecially for our vertuous Prince, as S. Paule willeth vs, her honourable Counſell, Biſhops, Nobilitie, all Magiſtrates, and the whole Clergie. Thirdly, I counſell that there bée ſpeciall care had vnto bodily health, chéefely béeinge now the moſt ſeaſonable time of the yeare, wherin the Phiſitions counſel may be taken and preſently executed, for the auoyding of farther perill impendinge. And laſt of all, vnder God I aſſure vs, that if we liue in his feare,Unto them that liue in the feare of God, all things happen for the beſt. and in the loue of his worde, and in duetifulneſſe to our good Quéene, and in loyaltie to our Countrey, and in charity one with another, wee ſhall not neede to feare the force of any forraine foes, nor the terrour of any Earthquake, nor the infection of any peſtilence, nor ſtande in

dread of any thing that the enemy can deuiſe againſt vs, but the Lorde abidinge alwayes on our ſide, ſurely there is nothinge ſhall, or can hurt vs. Which hee graunt for his mercie ſake, to whom bee all honour and glory, now and euer more. Amen.
            
               Reuelation. Cap. 22.20. and 16.15.
               Come Lord Ieſus. I come quickly. Behold, I come as a theefe. Happie is hee that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, leaſt he walke naked, and men ſee his filthineſſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   