
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  Lord, be mercifull.
                  O God, forgiue him.
                  Forſak
                        •
                      mee not, O Lord.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  O Lord 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                  
                  Lord, be mercifull
               
            
            
               The penitent Sonnes Teares, for his murdered Mother.
               
               
                  HE that has taught ten thouſand tongues to ſpeake
                  That horrid ſinne, that his ſad heart doth breake,
                  Now ſcarce can ſpeake himſelfe; for Woe denyes
                  A begging Voyce, and giues me begging Eyes.
                  Me thinkes the Shaddow of this reall thing
                  That wretched Mee into this World did bring,
                  Stands poynting now, (my guilty Soule to ſhake)
                  To th' bloudy wound, this bloudy hand did make,
                  That wound's a Mouth; her dead dry bloud, a Tongue,
                  
                  That ſayes, 'mongſt all, the moſt-forſaken throng,
                  That haue their liues branded with bloud and ſhame,
                  
                     J ſtand the formoſt; haue the fouleſt name.
                  Mee thinkes, I heare her tell mee, thoſe pale Hands
                  Haue gently lapt mee in my ſwathing bands;
                  Haue dandled mee; and, when I learn'd to goe,
                  Haue propt mee, weake, till I too-ſtrong did grow.
                  Me thinkes I ſee Her poynt vpon her breſt,
                  And tell me, there, I haue bin vſ'd to feaſt;
                  Thence oft haue fetcht my liuing; from her bloud,
                  By Heau'n conuerted to my wholeſome food.
                  And laſt, me thinkes, Shee poynts vpon that place,
                  
                  Where all my parts had their due forme and grace,
                  With theſe ſad words; Behold th' vnhappy wombe,
                  
                  Which I could wiſh, Heauen once had made thy Tombe.
                  A heauy wiſh; yet ſuch a wiſh indeed,
                  As I my ſelfe now, (with a Heart doth bleed)
                  Could ſadly breathe; 'cauſe that vntimely birth
                  Brought not a Man, but Monſter to the Earth.
                  From that deepe Dungeon, where, in bands I lye,
                  And from a depth, more deepe, I call and cry:
                  The depth of anguiſh; which thy ſight moſt pure;
                  Can onely looke on; and thy mercies, cure.
                  O cure my ſoule; 'tis that great worke, I know,
                  For which (ſo High) thou didſt deſcend ſo low:
                  Then, great Phiſician, Helpe mee; Heale my wound;
                  Great Shepheard, Seeke mee; Let my Soule be found.
                  That heauenly inuitation, made to thoſe,
                  Whoſe many ſinnes load them with many woes,
                  Is made to mee: For onely ſinne doth griue mee,
                  
                     And not my death; Then (bleſſed Lord) relieue mee.
                  Lord, let my teares be, to my leprous ſinne
                  As Iordan was, to Naamans leprous skinne;
                  And waſh it cleane: But, ô! ſo great a good
                  Ne'r came by Water, 'tis a worke of Bloud.
                  A worke of Bloud: the bloud of that pure Lambe,
                  That to purge ſinne, and ſaue poore ſinners came;
                  That precious Bloud: O Lord, that Bloud of thine,
                  Apply to mee, to purge this bloud of mine.
                  So, as of GOD I begge, I begge of Men,
                  
                  Their zealous prayers t'aſsiſt mee: And agen,
                  To quit that Goodneſſe, this Reward I'le giue,
                  I'le pray, my Death may teach all them to Liue.
                  
               
               FINIS.
               By Nathaniel Tyndale, ſicke both in ſoule and body: a priſoner now in New-gate.
            
            
               The much-afflicted Mothers Teares, for her drowned Daughter.
               
               
                  COme, tender Mothers, ſee a Mothers feares;
                  Sinnes Palſie, ſhake mee; and my Floud of teares:
                  Come heare my ſighs, and penitentiall prayers;
                  Deaths ſhade's my Manſion; my Companion, Cares.
                  
                  O! how much worſe than any ſauage Beare,
                  She-Wolfe, or Tygreſſe, muſt I now appeare?
                  Since they, their young, with ſuch reſpect doe cheriſh;
                  And mine, by Mee, doth thus vntimely periſh.
                  For, wretched J, (when fruitleſſe cares tooke place;
                  And cloudy paſsion, hid the light of gr ce)
                  More fell than theſe are, my poore Childe forgot,
                  And child-bed pangs, (the Mothers painefull lot)
                  Forgot thou wert my Fleſh; Forgot how oft
                  I kiſt thee; bleſt thee; and, to ſlumbers ſoft,
                  Within theſe armes haue lull'd thee: And againe,
                  How oft my pitties haue bemon'd thy paine.
                  Forgot how oft vpon my tender breſt
                  Thou haſt bin fed; how often taine thy reſt;
                  Forgot a Mothers nine yeeres cares and coſt;
                  All which, with thee, are in thy murder, loſt.
                  
                     All theſe forgot. When wee our GOD forget,
                  Then Satan comes, and in our Eye doth ſet
                  His poyſoned baites; which, 'cauſe I not withſtood,
                  Mine Eye drops Water; But, my Heart drops Blood.
                  For Death (alas) I care not: Could I ſumme
                  As many liues, as I haue houres to come;
                  I'de ſpend them all; And, with a ſmiling Face,
                  Meet all thoſe Deaths, to giue thy ſweet life, place.
                  But wiſhes (deare CLEMENTIA) are but vaine;
                  I drown'd thee (little Angell;) And againe
                  Should drowne thy Body, (wer't before my feares,)
                  In this New Riuer, of mine owne warme Teares.
                  
                  Theſe Teares, that euer from mine Eyes ſhall flow;
                  This lauiſh Floud of penitentiall woe;
                  This Wine of Angels, ſo the Fathers call
                  Thoſe drops Repentance lets ſo freely fall.
                  With Paul, with Peter▪ Dauid; and that ſonne,
                  The maze of Ryot, and hot luſt did runne;
                  And with the Woman, waſht her Sauiours feet,
                  Let my poore Soule that balme of mercy meet.
                  Thou' cam'ſt not (Lord) the iuſt and pure to call,
                  But impure ſinners; Nor do'ſt ioy their fall,
                  But their conuerſion: And, when Grace doth bring
                  One ſoule to thee, all the bleſt Angels ſing.
                  I know, 'tis late (O Lord) yet know thy power;
                  Know that's as much, in mans departing houre,
                  As in a rathe beginning; for my griefe
                  Has learnt the Leſſon of that penitent Thiefe.
                  
                  Like his, let mine, thy Mercies-Seat aſcend,
                  And purchaſe there, 'gainſt this ſad life ſhall end:
                  That life, to death, ſhall neuer more giue way;
                  So, while I weepe, helpe my poore Soule to pray.
               
               FINIS.
               
                  Anne Musket, the wofull MOTHER▪ for her loſt Daughter.
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London for Iohn Trundle.
            
         
      
   