
      
         
            
            
            The Schoolemaſter, or Teacher of Table Philoſophie.
A moſt pleaſant and merie companion, wel worthy to be welcomed (for a dayly Gheaſt) not onely to all mens boorde, to guyde them with moderate & holſome dyet: but alſo into euery mans companie at all tymes, to recreate their mindes, with honeſt mirth and delectable deuiſes: to ſundrie pleaſant purpoſes of pleaſure and paſtyme.
Gathered out of diuers, the beſt approued Auctours: and deuided into foure pithy and pleaſant Treatiſes, as it may appeare by the contentes.
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London, by Richarde Jones: dwelling oueragaynſt S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate. 1576.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The Printers preamble to al eſtates, for the friendly entertaynment of this Teacher of Table Philoſophie.
            
               YOu worthy wights, that hautie halles do hold,
               Whoſe tables ſundrie ſtates do dayly haunt:
               Giue leaue (my Lords) this Teacher may be bold
               To preaſe in place, and ſhew him ſelfe a flaunt,
               Amongſt your merie gheaſts of ſere & ſundry ſort,
               To play his merie partes, in playn & pleaſant ſport.
            
            
               What though his phraſe, & ſtile be rudely framd,
               His fruits are furthering to your healthes auayle:
               To deale in dayly dyet, although he may be blamd,
               To tell his minde therin he doeth not fayle,
               To ſhew the diuers kinds, of euery meat and drinke
               Bread, broath, fleſh, fiſh, or what you els can thinke.
            
            
               Yea, more then this, he meaneth for to ſhow
               Among the ſtates your table round about
               Demeanour meet from hie vnto the low,
               For ech degree to teach he doeth not doubt:
               The Prince, the page, the Gentle and the ſlaue,
               To ſerue his proper turne example heere may haue.
            
            
               Diuines perhaps, wyll hearken to his tale.
               The warlyke knight, the Squire, the ſouldier h
                     •
                  ld,
               The marchant eke that makes the merie ſale.
               The lawier to that pleads the caſe for gold.
               The Ladie bright will heare when he doeth ſpeak,
               The widow, wyfe, chyld, mayd, lame, blind, & weak,
            
            
               
               His problemes fine, wil ſomwhat pleaſe you all,
               And queint demaundes, ſo pithie in ech poinct
               His ieſtes I knowe will pleaſe both great ſmall
               And hit your veyne, and nick you on the ioinct
               What ſo you be, or where you do ſoiourne
               This pleaſant pithy booke wyll ſurely ſerue your turne,
            
            
               Then bid him welcome, Gentles all, and ſay:
               Come merie Gheaſt, come neare and ſit thee down,
               Vndoe thy packe, ſhow foorth we do thee pray
               Such newes as may vs mery make in field & town:
               Thus him to you I leaue, to ſee what he can ſhow,
               For doubtleſſe, I to ioy your mindes, this trauaile dyd beſtow.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the right worſhipfull M. Alexander Nowell, Deane of the Cathedrall Churche of S. Paules in London, Grace and peace from God, &c.
            
               
                  RIght worſhipful, hauing by chance happened on this Pamflet, comming vnto my hands both without name and orderly beginning: I did not onely peruſe it my ſelf (according to my ſimple ſkil) but shewed it alſo vnto ſome of my freends: of whoſe learning & Iudgement very many haue good opinion, and beeing therto ſufficiently willing of my ſelf, I was by them and others exhorted to publish the ſame in print, for that it ſeemed to containe nothing els but holeſome diet, ſauced with honest mirth and pleaſant paſtimes: and interlaced with pithy and effectual examples, tending vnto the aduaūcement of vertue and ſuppreſsion of vice, a fit meane to delight and recreate the weake, & ſpecially the ouer weryed ſpirits of Studients. Now calling vnto my remembrance (which I cannot forget) the manifolde benefits & curteſies at all times by your worship beſtowed on me & mine, aſwel in callīg me (moſte vnworthy) not a few times vnto your table, as otherwiſe, the leaſt part wherof I am not able of my ſelf to recōpence: my good wil not wanting, but mine abilitie fayling. I haue now preſumed to offer this poore preſent vnto you, comming from an vnfained hart, partely the

trauaile of another man, but the teſtimony of my harty affection, hoping that your worship wil accept it in the better part, the rather becauſe I haue perceiued you among other graue and waightie matters (aſwel of Religion as otherwiſe) to ſolace your ſelf and others at your Table, with ſeemly mirth in opportunities vttered, according to the knowledge and capacitie of thoſe your poore neighbours and others with whom your bourd is alwaies furnished, either cōcerning the qualities of meats, or their vſages in forrain cōtries, to the great delectation of the hearers: To the which purpoſe, there is much matter ſet down in this preſent work, as alſo to other effect, wherein if there shalbe any thing founde, not conuenient for your learned view and ſeuere Iudgement: I hartely craue your worships pardon: proteſting, that the ſame is not written for ſo graue eares, but deſirous to pleaſe all ſortes in honeſt delight: I thought it good not to leaue out any thing, but to admonish, that who ſo shall not ſo well like of ſome trifling tales of this book, in the fourth part, he may ſufficiētly recreate himſelf in the other .iii. parts.
            Thus much hauing been ouer bolde to vtter my minde vnto your worship, preſuming vpon your accuſtomed humanitie, there remaineth no more, but that I commend you vnto the tuition of the almightie: who alwaies keepe you and yours, and ſend you now a mery new yeer and many, to his good pleaſure and glory. Amen.
            
               Your worſhips to commaunde.
            
         
         
            
            This firſt booke of Table Philoſophie ſheweth the nature and qualitie of all manner meates, drinkes and ſawces, that are vſed at meales.
            
               ACcording to the ſaying of Macrobius.
               Macrobi
                     ••
                   lib. 1. de Saturnalia. It were a very vnſeemely thing that Philoſophie which intreateth curiouſly in bookes, of dueties, & behauiour at feaſtes, ſhould be afearde to ſhew her ſelf alſo at feaſtes: as who ſhould ſay, ſhee would not auouch that in deedes, which ſhee profeſſeth in words: Or that ſhee could keepe no meane or meaſure, who only preſcribeth the meane and meaſure her ſelf vnto al humane affaires. Neither do I now welcome her to my table to thintent ſhee ſhould moderate herſelf, whoſe order of inſtruction is to teach all other, how to moderate and gouerne themſelues. And ſhortly after in the ſame place he ſayth, VVherfore, ſuch a kinde of Philoſophie, there is no goodman, no place, nor companie, that wyll exclude it, which ſo behaueth it ſelf in euerie reſpect, that it ſeemeth to be neceſſarie in euerie place, as though it were vnlawfull it ſhould be abſent. Then foraſmuch as moderate Philoſophie ought to be preſent at the table and feaſtes of the wiſe, and learned: euerie goodman muſt vſe the ſame, both for to profite & delight others. For as the ſame Macrobius writeth, our talke ought to be merie at the table, more poudred with pleaſure the ſauced with ſeueritie. And our communication at the boorde, as it ought to be faier with honeſtie: ſo muſt it be pleaſant with delight. VVherfore, it is generally expedient, that all table talke be either concerning the nature & qualitie of the meates and drinkes wherof we feede, or of table queſtions wherwith we may be made merie and ſturred vp to mirth at the boorde, or els touching them their condition, and manners with whom we meete at the table, or laſtly of ſuch meriments and honeſt deuiſes wherwith we may be refreſhed and delighted at our meate. And for this cauſe I haue determined to intitle this worke, The Schoolemaſter or teacher of Table Philoſophie, and haue diuided the ſame into foure ſeuerall partes. The Arguments wherof, I haue thought good to ſet downe together before the whole worke, and afterwardes euerie Argument ſeuerally before eche booke whereto it belongeth.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The Argument of the firſt booke, which is of naturall Philoſophie.
            The firſt booke treateth of the nature and qualitie of all manner of meates, drinkes, and ſauces, that are vſed at meales.
         
         
            The Argument of the ſecond booke, which is morall Philoſophie.
            The ſecond booke ſpeaketh of the manners, bebauiour, and vſage of all ſuch, with whom we may happen to be conuerſaunt withall, aſwell at the table, as all other times among companie.
         
         
            The Argument of the thirde booke, and is of naturall Philoſophie.
            The third booke conteyneth certayne delectable and pleaſaunt queſtions and pretie Problemes to be propounded for myrth among companie at all times, but moſt conueniently at the table.
         
         
            The Argument of the fourth booke, and is of morall diſcourſes.
            The fourth booke, compriſeth honest Ieſtes, delectable deuiſes and pleaſaunt purpoſes to be vſed among companie, for delight and recr
                  •
               ation at all times, but especially at meale times at the table.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ The Teacher of Table Phyloſophy, aſwell Naturall as Morall.
         
            The first Booke of Meates, Drinks, and Sauces.
            
               Chap. 1. ¶Of conuenient time to eate meate, and how often a Man may eate according to his Complection.
               
                  
                     NOw firſt of all, let vs ſee concerninge the time and houre to eate, which were the moſt conueniēt: wherof Rhaſis maketh mencion, ſaying,Rhaſis. that it is beſt time to eate, when the weight of the meate which we eate laſt before is funck downwarde, and the bottome of the ſtomacke is become light, and there remaine no ſwelling nor fulnes, and a man haue moderatly exerciſed himſelf before, & hée haue a good appetite: then is it ye beſt time to feade. Moreouer, as the ſame aucthour ſaieth, a man muſt take héede that hée defer not to feade when his appetite ſerueth him, vnleſſe it bée ſome counterfeit appetite, ſuch as chaunceth ſumtimes to Drunkards, and thoſe that loath their meate. But ſo ſoone as one that is not drunke, beginneth to haue an appetite, and the nouriſhment which hée receiued before were not mutch nor groſſe: then ought he to eate preſently without all delay. But if hée deferre eating ſo longe vntill his appetite bée paſt which hée had before: then were it beſt for him to eate ſome of the Syrupe of Violets, or the Syrupe called Acetoſus, or drinke warme water, and ſo to abſtaine from eating vntil he haue vomited, or gone to ſtoole, or that his appetite begin to come againe. Likewiſe, the ſame aucthor in ye ſame place ſaieth farther. This is very diligently to be obſerued, that euery man eate ſuch meates as he hath binne accuſtomed vnto, and vſe to féede as oft as hee hath binne woont, vnleſſe this cuſtome of his hath bin éeuell, and therfore ought to bee eſchued

howbeit not ſuddenly, but by meanes, and by litle and litle. And a man muſt ſo diſpoſe his feeding times, that hee eate twiſe beetwéene one day and a night, or at the moſt twiſe in one day, or, which is more temperate thriſe in two dayes. As for thoſe which haue leane and drie bodyes, it is hurtfull vnto them to eate but once in a day. And it is éeuell for ſutch as haue groſſe and fat bodies to eate twiſe in aday. Alſo thoſe that do exerciſe themſelues, and labour mutch, haue neede of meate of more groſſe ſubſtaunce then thoſe which vſe contrary order, who require contrary meates.
               
                  Auerrois. in Cant. Auicen.The Commentarie writer Auerrois, vpon the Canticles of Auicen, ſaith thus: It is a more temperate and orderly cuſtome for a man to féede twiſe in two daies. For ſome doo thinke that the perfection of the third digeſtion is accompliſhed in eightéene houres, in proportion whereof when we eate thrée refections the digeſtion thereof is finiſhed in all partes of the body in that time, or much there aboute. And whereas I woulde haue eightéene houres béetwéene two meales: it is therby euident that the moſt conuenient time to eate, is when a man féeleth himſelfe lightned, and hath fully digeſted the meat which hée eate before.
            
            
               Chap. 2. Of Appetite, and cuſtome to eate.
               
                  Auicen. in Cant.COncerning Appetite and cuſtome to eate, Auicen writeth in the ſecond part of his Canticles. Wherefore let a man féede according to the vſe and cuſtome of his owne nature, not omitting to eate thoſe meats that are delectable. Vpon which place Auerrois writeth thus,Auerrois. in his Commentarie: Cuſtome is likened vnto Nature, which is to ſay, Cuſtome muſt néedes be obſerued although it were éeuell, and not to bée commended. And wheras hée ſaith: Appetite is not to bée omitted, which is a precept of this Art: it is to be vnderſtood in all meates whether they be deſired for that they bee of their owne Nature commendable, or otherwiſe. And therfore it is ſaid, that of two ſortes of meates that which is leſſe

good and pleaſeth more the Appetite: is better for vs, then that which is better and leſſe pleaſeth our fanſie.Rhaſis. 
                  Rhaſis alſo vpon the fourth of Almanſor ſaith: it chaunceth manie times,Alm. 4 that ſome meates that are éeuell, are founde to agrée with ſome natures which cannot abſtaine frō them as other ſome can. And perhaps ſome meates that are good, are perceiued not to agree with ſome mens ſtomackes, from which it were good for them to abſtaine wholy. And if there bée ſome meats agréeing with ſome Natures which are deſirous of them, although they bee not good nor holſome: yet are they to bee yéelded vnto the Appetite, vnleſſe they bee excéedinge eeuell▪ and a man muſt beware that hee vſe not alwaies naughtie nutriment.
            
            
               Chap. 3. Of the order of Meales, and eating Meate.
               THE cauſe why our Digeſtion is many times corrupt is this: becauſe at one meale wée féede on ſundrie ſortes of Meates, eatinge the groſſe béefore the fine, and fillinge our ſelues with ſundry kinde of cates made with broathes thickned with grated bread, and to to long protracting the tyme from the béeginning of the Meale to the ende. But for the better ordering of our diet, wée muſt note: that it is beſt in Winter to vſe meates actually hot, and in Summer actually colde. Howbeit we muſt beware of Meates ouer hot as they come out of the pot, or from the fire, and take héede of them that are verye colde, as ſutch as are cooled vpon the Snowe. Auicen in his Canticles ſaieth thus: that moyſt and ſlipperie meates are to bee eaten beefore ſutch as binde,Auicen. and that which is ſwéete muſt bée mingled with that which is ſower, and the dry corrected with the moyſt, and the colde with the hot. And wheras we ſay that the moiſte and liquid muſt be taken before the binding: that is a precept in the regiment and order of meate, for that it is required to the preſeruation

of health, that the meate be meaſured in qualytie, quantytie, time, & order. Adding alſo vnto theſe conditions, yt the Meate be good, and well dreſſed. Which rule is gathered of the contrarie, to wit, that one contrarie be brought to a iuſt temperature by his contrarie, as are the qualeties ſwéet by ſower, drie by moiſt, cold by warmthe, and ſutch like, aboue recited.
            
            
               Chap. 4. Of a conuenient place to feede in.
               
                  Auicen.ACcording to the aduertiſement of Auicen in his Canticles, we ought to haue a ſpeciall regard to the place wherin we féede, that it be quiet and colde, and through blowne with the winde, and that it be ſo at the time and houre when wee intend to feede therin. And therfore in this poynt it behooueth a man to be dylygent.Auerrois. 
                  Auerrois the Commentarie writer ſaieth, that we muſt looke to this moſt eſpecially in Summer, becauſe then erternall heat wéekeneth naturall heat, lyke as the ſhining of the Sunne putteth out the fire if it come to it, and yet when the fire is once come into the ſhadowe it reuiueth againe.Rhaſis. And Rhaſis in the place aboue recited, willeth vs to eate our meate at coole times, and if caſe we cannot get a colde place, yet to watch a colde time to féede in, and ſo after that we be refreſhed we may ſléepe, and take our reſt.
            
            
               Chap. 5. Of Meates and Drinkes, wheron wee feede at the Table.
               HEreafter wée haue to intreate of ſuch meats and drinkes as are for the moſt part vſed at the Table. And firſt of Bread,Rhaſis. 
                  Rhaſis writeth vpon the third Booke of Almanſor, ſayinge: Breade that is made of Wheat is in many reſpectes moſt conuenient f
                     •
                  r men, eſpecially if it be wel ſeaſoned, wel leauened, well 
                     •
                  aked, fine ground, & purely clenſed, although it be then ſumwhat hard of concoction.Auicen. And Auicen ſheweth the cauſe why it is ſo: ſaying that the better it is boulted the eaſier it is of diſgeſtion, and ſo m
                     •
                  tch the harder how mutch

the more it is ful of Bran. And the cauſe is: for that the bran hindreth the paſſedge, and the ſlipperineſſe of the voydinge of it. And that is the beſt bread whiche is baked in an Ouen, temperatly ſeaſoned and leauened, and made light, that when it is cut it be hollow like a ſpunge. Moreouer Rhaſis in the place before alleadged, affirmeth ye vnleauened bread is hard to diſgeſt, and diſcendeth ſlowly out of the ſtomack, cauſinge griping in the bellie, obſtruction in the liuer, and procureth grief in th
                     •
                   kidneis. Hée ſaith alſo that Barlie bread is colder then Wheaten, of ſmall nutriment ingendring windyneſſe, the collick, and other colde diſeaſes, & maketh a man coſtiffe. The bread of other kinds of graine is of qualitie according to the nature of the graine of which it is made. Auicen ſaith, let no Man eate Bread while it is hot, but when it is one night olde.
            
            
               Chap. 6. Of Wine, and the qualyties thereof.
               
                  WYne, as Iſaac ſayeth in the thirde booke of dietes,Iſaac. cauſeth good nutriment, bringeth health to the body, and preſerueth the ſame. And there is no drink nor meate to be founde ſo comfortable vnto naturall heate, by reaſon of a certen famyliaritie with it, for naturally it ſtrengthneth diſgeſtion. The heate therof is lyke vnto naturall heate, and therfore it is ſoone conuerted into naturall and moſt pure bloud. It claryfieth thick bloud, ſerching the paſſadges of the whole body, but ſpecially of the veines, and clenſeth them, it openeth the Liuer, it taketh away darke ſmokineſſe whiche ingendereth heauineſſe, repelling the ſame from the hart, it comforteth al parts of the body, it cauſeth the minde to forget ſorow and griefe, it bringeth mirth, it maketh hardie, it ſharpneth the wit. Wherfore it is conuenient for all ages, all ſeaſons, all cuntreis, being receaued according to ye cuſtome of him that drinketh the Wine, as ſo much his nature is able to beare. Thus is it manifeſt, that Wine is good for all men if they

take it moderatly. And therefore in ould times, Wine was likened vnto the great triacle, and to the Nature therof. For it heateth colde bodies, and cooleth hot, it moiſtneth the drie, and drieth the moiſt. And many times it quencheth the thirſt more then water.Rhaſis. 
                  Rhaſis in the fore alleaged place of his third booke, ſaith thus: Wine generally heateth the ſtomack, and liuer, making paſſedge for the nutriment, it alſo increaſeth blood, and fleaſh, and augmenteth naturall heate, helping nature to accompliſh her peculiar functions. By Wine digeſtion beecommeth ſtronger, ſuperfluities are expulſed, and the paſſedge made eaſie for their riddance. By wine health is permanēt, and ſtrength abideth, & oldage kept away. Wine alſo maketh the ſoule merie, but if it bée immoderatly taken it hurteth the Liuer, braine, and Sinewes, it breadeth the Trembling, the Palſie, and Apoplexie, and bringeth ſuddein death.
            
            
               Chap. 7. Of Meade, and the properties therof.
               
                  Rhaſis.THe drinke which is made of Honie cōmonly called Meade, by the auctorytie of Rhaſis is verie hot, ingendring redde Choler. It agreeth not with hot complexions, but it is verie conuenient for colde temperatures.Auicen. 
                  Auerrois alſo vpon the Canticles of Auicen, ſaith, that Mead is better then wine, for ſutch as haue naturall féeble ſinewes.
            
            
               Chap. 8. Of ſtrong or double Ale.
               
                  Rhaſis,
                  DOuble Ale ſaith Rhaſis, in the place aboue recited, & chiefly which is made of Barly, hurteth the ſinewes, maketh the head to ake, filleth the bodie with winde, but it prouoketh vrine, and repreſſeth the heate which cummeth of drunkenneſſe. But that Ale which is made of wheate, hauinge in it Mintes and Smaledge, well burned▪ is ſuppoſed to bée better for all men, but eſpecially it is forbidden them that are hot in the Sun and conuerſant abroade, and of hot diſpoſition, and in an hot time of the yéere.
            
            
               Chap. 9. Of fleaſh in generall.
               
                  IT is confirmed by the auctority of Rhaſis in the place before alleaged,Rhaſis. that of all nutriments Fleaſh nouriſheth moſt ſooneſt, fatteth, and ſtrengthneth. And thoſe that vſe it mutch: haue full bodies, and haue néede to bée let blood often, and ſpecially if they drinke wine with it. Generally, all fleaſh heateth, and is counted vnméete for thoſe that haue an Ague, and are troubled with replecion. Fleaſh that is red without fat: nouriſheth more then that which hath fat, for it ingendreth leſſe ſuperfluitie, and ſtrengthneth the ſtomack more. Courſe fleaſh which is of groſſe ſubſtance is fit for ſutch as laboure, and fine fleaſh for thoſe that vſe ſmall exerciſe.
            
            
               Chap. 10. Of the fleaſh of wilde beaſtes.
               EVerie beaſt generally, according to the diuiſion of Iſaac in his third booke of Dietes, is either wilde, or tame.Iſaac. The Fleash of wilde beaſts is drie, and hard of digeſtion, and yéeldeth diſcommendable iuce by reaſon of their ouermutch motion and exerciſe which they vſe, and the heat and drieth of ye aire wherin they abide, hapning through the vehement heat of the Sun, and lacke of couert from the parching Sun beames. So that wilde fleaſh is of no good Nutriment, neither in qualitie nor quantitie, ſauinge onely the fleaſh of wilde Goates. For their naturall coldneſſe is mutch repreſſed by the ouermutch heate and drieth, wherto they do accuſtome themſelues. Wherfore, ſeinge alſo that the taſt and vnſauerie ſmell of their fleaſh is corrected by their exerciſe: it is ſome helpe vnto digeſtion, that their fleaſh may be very wel and eaſely concocted. Al other tame beaſts in compariſon to ye wilde: are better to bée liked of, & do more nouriſh, by reaſon of their quietnes, & the temperate aire, yet are thei ſumdeale groſſe & hard of digeſtion. And among theſe in my iudgment, the Male beaſt is hotter & in different moiſt aboue ye female, and is therfore more commended and ye ſooner digeſted. The fleaſh of the female, is more colde with immoderate moyſture, and therfore ſlower of digeſtion. And ye fleaſh of thoſe beaſts that are gelded is of a middle nature betwéene both.
            
            
               
               Chap. 11. Of Kiddes fleash.
               
                  Rhaſis.AGaine, in the place of Rhaſis by mée erewhile alleaged, it is writen of Kiddes fleash, that it is temperate, hauinge no éeuel quality mixt with it, which albeit it ingender temperat blood: yet is it not conuenient for labourers. As for ſutch as take no great paine, but liue a gentlemans lyfe: they cannot chuſe a better kinde of meate then this. For it is not altogether ſo eaſie of concoction that it deſtroieth the diſgeſtion, neither yet yéeldeth it ſo groſſe or ſutch plenty of nutriment that the body be therby filled with replection, and corrupte bloud ingendred. But the bloud that is made thereof, is betwéene both, as neither thick nor thin: hot nor colde. In the ſame place alſo Iſaac ſaieth, that the ſucking Kiddes are the beſt, of al other moſt excellent both for taſt, nouriſhment, and diſgeſtion, ingendring good bloud, for the milke which they ſuck of their Dāmes giueth vnto them naturall moiſture.
            
            
               Chap. 12. Of Lambe.
               
                  Iſaac.LAmbes fleash alſo, as ſaith ye ſame mine aucthor Iſaac in the place often before alleaged, is good while they ſuck, by reaſon of the ſtoare of moiſture & ſlimines: yet the ſuperfluity of fleame which it ingendereth wherby it ſlippeth foorth of the ſtomack before it be fully concocted: maketh it ſumwhat fautie.Auerrois. Howbeit Auerrois in the fifte of his Collections ſetteth downe, how that moſt conuenient it is that Lambes Fleaſh be placed in goodneſſe next vnto Kiddes Fleaſh, whiche although it haue mutch ſuperfluity: yet is it of a moderate, and commendable temperature.
            
            
               Chap. 13. Of Rammes fleash.
               
                  Rhaſis.TOuching the Fleash of Rammes, Rhaſis in the place before alleaged is of opinion, that it is groſer then Kiddes Fleſh, and increaſeth more the ſtrength of Man, yéelding mutch more ſuperfluitie then Kiddes Fleaſh doth. Young Rammes

of one yéere olde are better then Lambs or Ewes, for if their fleaſhe bée well digeſted it ingendreth plentie of blood, and that good, ſpecially if it bée Weathers fleaſh, for the heate and moiſture of it is temperate which cauſeth the fleaſh to haue a very good taſt. But Galen the prince of Phiſitions,Galen as Auerrois reporteth of him in the fift of his collections, miſlyketh the fleaſh of weathers, and commendeth Veale excéedingly.
            
            
               Cap. 14. Of Veale.
               NExt inſueth to intreate of Veale, which according to the iudgment of Auerrois is good and holſome,Auerrois as not hauing that ſlimineſſe and coldeneſſe which is in Béefe, and is more ſwéete both to the mouth and noſe, then any other fleaſh. And in this reſpect it is better then Kid. But againe, kid is better then Veale bicauſe it ingendreth better humours. And mine aucthour Iſaac in the place often aboue rehearſed, ſaith: Béefe ingendreth groſſe blood, troubled, and Melancholike, yéeldeth mutch nutriment hard of digeſtion, and painfully ouercome by the ſtomack, and difficulti diſſolued into the partes of the bodie, and it bindeth the belly. And if a man that is of a Melancholik complexion, vſe to eate béefe: hée ſhalbe gréeued with the Spléene, fall into a quartaine Feuer, and come into a Dropſie. Alſo hée ſhall ware itchie, haue the Morfewe, Leproſie, Canker, ringewoormes, according to the complexion of him which agreeth fit with this meate.
            
            
               Chap. 15. Of Swines fleash.
               AFter the iudgment of Auicen,
                  Auicen. Swineſfleaſh is more naturall vnto men then the fleaſh of any other liuing thing on the ground, which experience it ſelf declareth according to Auerrois, in the fift of his Collections.Iſaac. And Iſaac alſo in the woork aboue named, writeth that Swineſfleaſh is colder and moiſter then the fleaſh of any other beaſt, eſpecially if it bée of a tame Swine. For wilde ſwineſfleaſh in compariſon of tame Swineſfleaſh, is hot and drie, and nouriſheth leſſe. Yet is it beſt to fáede on tame ſwineſfleaſh but ſeldome, and only vpon the extreame partes therof, as are the féete, chappes,

and Swineſfleaſh in déede nouriſheth mutch ingendreth good iuce, and loooſeth the bellie by reaſon of the ſtoare of moiſture and ſlimineſſe which is in it: howbeit, it prouoketh not vrine, and agréeth very well with them that vſe a ſlender diet. But the yong ſucking pigge is beſt of all, and nouriſheth moſt, and maketh paſſing good blood.
            
            
               Chap. 16. Of Deeres fleash, Hares fleash, and Beares fleash.
               ANd ſtill to folow the iudgement of my firſt auctour in the place aboue recited, Deares flesh is Melancholik & hard of digeſtion, but the yonge ſucking Fawnes are the beſt in that kinde, and the midle aged are next in goodnes vnto theſe, and the ould ones worſt of all. The gelded buck, and the barrein Doe, are beſt of the two laſt ſortes, for that they bée of a temperate heat, & drieth. Auicen.Howbeit Auicen ſaith, that they make groſſe ſubſtance which deſcendeth down to faſt, and breadeth the quartaine ague. And the top of the Deares taile is poyſon. The Hare, as ſaith Rhaſis, moſt certenly ingendreth Melancholick blood, aboue all other fleaſh. But Iſaac ſaith, that although it ingender drie, and groſſe blood: yet is it betttr then the fleaſh of the yong Kid or Goate. And Beares fleash, as hée writeth, is very clammie, repugnant to digeſtion, and yéelde eeuell nutriment, and is more to be vſed for Medicine, then for Meate.
            
            
               Chap. 17. Of the partes of Beaſtes.
               
                  Rhaſis.THe Head, ſaith Rhaſis, of euery thing is of groſſe ſubſtance, nouriſhing much, & heateth, & ought not to be eaten but at cold ſeaſons: For thereby many times is the Collick ingendred, it much comforteth bloud, & increaſeth the ſéede of Man.
               The Braine being colde, ouerturneth the ſtomack, and hurteth it, and therfore whoſo eateth Braines: let him eate thē before al other meate. Moreouer it is good for hot Complexions, and éeuell for ſutch as are troubled with colde diſeaſes.
               
                  Marrow cummeth very nigh vnto temperature, but it is ſumwhat of the hotteſt, it increaſeth naturall ſéede, and mollifieth

the ſtomack. The Vdder of a beaſt is cold & groſſe, and although it nouriſh mutch yet is it hard of digeſtion, and is good for them that haue a hot ſtomack, and Liuer. The Liuer is hot and moiſt, heauie, and hard of digeſtion. Iſaac ſaith that it ingendreth good blood, but ſpecially of young beaſtes that ſuck. But the Liuer of a Hen or Capon is better then of ſucklinges. The Hart, as hée ſaith, is of an hard ſubſtance, and is ſlowly digeſted, but being well digeſted: it nouriſheth mutch. The lights alſo, ſaith hée, is eaſely concocted, and ſoone departeth foorth of the ſtomack, by 
                     •
                  eaſon of the lightnes, and rarenes of the ſubſtance therof. The Kidneis are naughty in two reſp
                     ••
                  tes, the one is for the hardnes, & groſſenes of their ſubſtance: the other is, for that they be nouriſhed by the fattines of the vrine, wherby they ingender groſſe and very éeuell blood. Rhaſis in the place aboue cited ſaith,Rhaſis. that read fleaſh without fat, ingendreth dry blood, making but ſmall excrementes, and nouriſheth more then fat: Fat ingendreth very moiſte blood, cauſeth mutch ſuperfluity, and nouriſheth but litle. Fleaſh interlarded béetwéene fat and leane, ingendreth temperate blood. The féete augment ſlimie iuce. The foremoſt part of the rumpe is lighter and hotter, and the hinder-moſt heauier and colder.
            
            
               Chap. 18. Of Fleaſh in Paſties and Pies.
               FLeaſh, ſayth Rhaſis, which is baked in Paſties and Pies is éeuell,Rhaſis. and nouriſheth litle, but is good for them that haue the ſower belchyng. And generally all ſortes of Paſties and Pies yéelde but litle nouriſhment in compariſon of meates made with brothes. Yet many times they do good to them yt are full of humours, & pleaſure them that would dry vp, and make their bodies proper. Fleaſh roſted on the ſpit, is groſſe, and nouriſheth mutch, if it méet with a ſtronge and a hot ſtomack to digeſt it, it bindeth the belly, whiche is manifeſtly prooued, if a man eate the leane only without fat.
               Fleaſh boyled with Egges and Pepper is hot, and is a good meate for winter, for it ſtrengthneth the body, and nouriſheth

aboue al other meats, it increaſeth alſo ſéede, and bloud. It maketh a man well coulered, ſtrong, and well ſet. But in Summer it bringeth lothſomneſſe, heateth, and bréedeth the ſtone.
            
            
               Chap. 19. Of Foules in generall.
               
                  Iſaac.AL Foules generally, as Iſaac reporteth, are lighter and finer then the beaſts that go on the earth, but they nouriſh leſſe. And the wilde Foules are better then the tame foules, their fleaſh is more tender, & 
                     •
                  aſier of digeſtion. The cauſe wherof is the lightnes and rarenes or their fleaſh procéeding of their often flying, and the drineſſe of the ayre. But the tame Foules nouriſh more, and make commendable blood, and are more temperate by reaſon of the good temperature of their moyſture and exerciſe. But aboue all foules theſe are the fineſt the Stare, younge Pertredges, and houſe chickens, and next vnto them the elder Pertredge, the Feaſant, the houſe Hen, and the Capon. Chickens are lighter of digeſtion then other Foules, and ingender good blood. They comfort the appetite, and vnto all natures and complexions they are moſt agreeable, eſpeciall the Cockrel chickens nietheir to fat nor to leane.Auerrois. And Auerrois in the fift of his Collections writeth thus: amonge Foules the Hen is principall inſomutch that the broth thereof is good Medicine for thoſe that haue the Leproſie, and ſome ſay, that a Hens Braine augmenteth the ſubſtance of a mans braine, and ſharpneth the wyt.
            
            
               Chap. 20. Of the Hen.
               
                  Iſaac.THE Houſe Hen, ſaith Iſaac
                  ▪ is not althing ſo moiſt as is the Chick, & for that cauſe if it be compared to the temp
                     •
                  
                  rament of the chickins, it is hard of digeſtion, but if it be wel digeſted it nouriſheth mutch, and ſpecially if it bée ſhewed or boyled in fine broth, by which orderinge it taketh a certaine moiſtur of the water, and comforteth the ſtomack, and yéeldeth much nutriment.Rhaſis. Moreouer, mine aucthour Rhaſis in the

place often before alleaged, ſaith thus: The fleaſh of ye 
                  Stare is fownde by experience to be beſt of all other foules, and moſt fit for thoſe that meane to liue with a fine, and ſubtile diet. Next to this is the fleaſh of the Quayle, which ingendreth but litle ſuperfluitie, and is ſuppoſed not to be very hot. Then after this cumth the fleaſh of Chickens, and next of Pertredges which is more groſſe, bindinge the belly, and nouriſhinge mutch.
            
            
               Chap. 21. Of yong Pigeons.
               YOung Pigeons are very hot, ingendringe inflamed blood, and ſoone bringing an ague. And Iſaac mine auctour ſaith,Iſaac. that yong Pigeons are hot, and full of moiſture, wherfore they make groſſe nutriment, a witneſſe wherof is their heauines and 
                     •
                  naptnes to flye, but when they béegin to flye they waxe lighter and more acceptable to digeſtion, they bée méete for flegmatick perſons, but naught for the collericke. And alſo as the ſame writer ſaith: Duckes are the woorſt of al foules, for their fleaſh, ſaith Rhaſis, ingendreth mutch ſuperfluity, and deſtroieth apetite, and is very warme,Rhaſis▪
                   but if nouriſheth more then Hennes fleaſh doth. To conclude, the fleaſh of all water foules in generall bréedeth mutch ſuperfluitye, and if it haue therwith an éeuell ſauour: thē is it iudged much the woorſe.
            
            
               Chap. 22. Of partes of foules, as they bee eaten.
               THe Giſerd of all foules, ſaith Iſaac,
                  Iſaac. is full of ſinewes and hard of digeſtion, but béeing digeſted it make mutch nutriment. But of all Giſardes the Gooſes is beſt, bicauſe of the plentie of moiſture in it, and next vnto that is the Hennes or Capons Giſard. Likewiſe their Liuers is beſt commended, and moſt nouriſhing. The Winges of all foules are better then any other part of the body, bicauſe of their often moouing and exerciſe, for moouing conſumeth the ſuperfluitye of moiſture. The Gooſes and Hennes neckes are beſt of all other foules neckes, and all partes of carued foules are better

then of the ſtoned, which maketh the Capon to bée moſt excellent, and to yéelde beſt nutriment, and to ingender perfect blood. The Braines of foules are leſſe moiſt and ſlimy, but drier, then of foure footed beaſts, and therfore more to be lyked, chiefly of young Stares, Partredges, Hennes, & Cockes before they crowe, or come to bée carued.
            
            
               Chap. 23. Of Egges, and their properties.
               
                  Iſaac.FOraſmutch as Egges, ſaith Iſaac, do yéeld mutch nutriment for that their whole ſubſtance is conuerted into good iuce, by reaſon of the affinity which they haue to mans nature, and ſpecially the yolke: therfore in reſpecte of their temperament they bée moſt like vnto mans body. In this qualitye, ſaith Rhaſis,
                  Rhaſis. aboue the reſt are Hen egges, and Pertredges egges, both which augment ſéede in man woonderfullye, and prouoke him to Lechery: next vnto which are Ducke egges, in goodneſſe not mutch inferiour, but makinge éeuell iuce. Géeſe egges are lothſome, & haue an éeuell ſmell. Hen egges, and Pertredge egges are moſt temperate, and conuenient. The yolke being temperate in heat, cauſeth good nutriment. The white is cold and ſlimy, and hardly concocted. But concerning the yolke,Auerrois. in Cant. Auicen. 
                  Auerrois vpon the Canticles of Auicen ſheweth, how ſome bee of opinion, that it ingendreth as mutch blood in weight, as it ſelfe is of. And Rhaſis ſayth, that egges that are ſodden or roſted hard, are more hard to digeſt, and deſcend, ſlowlier out of the ſtomack. But ſoft egges are more quick to deſcend, being good for thoſe that are troubled with a bloody fluxe, whoſe ſtrength thereby is mutch decaied. As for réere egges which are nether hard nor ſoft, are as it were in ye middes betwen both ye other. Moreouer, egges are good againſt roughnes in the throat, and by them is ingendred tē
                  perate blood, and much ſtrength. What ſhal I ſay more? they are as good as fleaſh, and many times ſtand in ſteede therof, wherfore thoſe perſons yt be very fat ought not to vſe them.
            
            
               Chap. 24. Of Milke.
               OF Milke alſo it is Iſaacks opinion, that it is very like vnto blood.Iſaac▪
                   For in déed it is none other thē ye milk ye ſecond time

cōcocted in the breaſts or vdder, wherof it receiueth whitnes, taſt, and ability. Rhaſis likewiſe ſaith,Rhaſis. that new milk commeth néere to the temperment, although it decline a litle vnto coldnes and moiſture, wherby it fatteth and moiſtneth the body. It is medicinable vnto thoſe that haue the feuer Heſticae, and the drie cough, and the burning of the vrine. It miniſtreth excellent good nouriſhment vnto drie bodies, & bringeth them to temperature: it alſo increaſeth blood, and ſeede. But in that it is ſoone altered, it is noiſome for thoſe that bée haunted with ſharp feuers, or ar troubled with headache by accidēt of ſicknes, and to them that are ſubiect to the collick, or vnto any other diſeaſe comminge of cold. Cow milke of all beaſtes milke is counted the groſſeſt, and is good for thē that woulde fain bée fat of body. And Aſſes milke is the ſubtileſt of anye beaſts milke, & is good for all that are diſeaſed in ye Lungues. Goates milke kéepeth a mediocrity beetweene both, but Eewe milke cauſeth more ſuperfluities then any of them all.Iſaac. 
                  Iſaac writeth of milke in this māner: Milke of beaſts that be ſoūd & not ſicke, if it be not eaten often, nor mutch, but moderatly: ingendreth cōmendable blood, moiſteneth the belly, healpeth the breaſt, Lungues, & bladder, eſpecially if the watriſhnes therof, be ſumway corrected: as altred with bread, flouer, oatmeale, rice, or ſuch like and then eaten. Rhaſis writeth, ye 
                  Butter milke is good againſt ye Laſke proceding of red choler, and helpeth thē yt are leane, and haue weak bodies, & the rather, if there be a piece of hot iron or ſtéele often quēched in it▪ 
                  whey extinguiſheth red choler, it cureth ye ſcab, whelks, bliſters, the yelow iaundice, & healpeth thē yt are hurt wt drinking ſtrong wines. He ſaith alſo that Butter being raw, aſwageth the ſharpnes of the throat, helpeth the Letters and ringworms, taketh away the rednes of the face, and cleereth the ſkinne, maketh whole pimpels and quiddles yt are ſharp & dry being therwith annointed, but it breedeth lothſomnes, & aſcendeth vp to the mouth of the ſtomack. Seddē butter weakneth ye ſtomack, ſoftneth hard impoſtumacions, laid vnto them plaiſter wiſe: it reſiſteth ye moſt venemous bityng of Vipers. Whoſo

vſeth to féede mutch on butter ſhall continually be troubled with diſeaſes cumming of fleame. It nouriſheth moſt of any vnctuous thing, an
                     •
                   is of great facultie.
            
            
               Chap. 25. Of Cheeſe.
               LYkewiſe hee ſayth that gréene Cheeſe is colde and groſſe, and thought vnméete for colde natures. But ould Chéeſe is eſteemed of, according to the age. Tange Chéeſe which taſteth ſharp of ye rennet is hot, burning, bréedeth thirſt, and nouriſheth éeuel. But if a man eate a litle therof after meat: it ſtrengthneth the mouth of the ſtomack, alſo it taketh away ſatietie, and lothinge of the meat, which chaunceth many times in the mouth of the ſtomack after ſwéete meates, but it muſt bée neyther to newe Chéeſe nor to olde. Moreouer Iſaac ſaith,Iſaac. that all Chéeſe in generall is naught, noiſum to the ſtomak, and hard of digeſtion, ſo that they which commonly eate it fall into the collick, and are greued with the ſtone in the kidneis. Howbeit the better the Chéeſe is, the leſſe harme it doeth.
            
            
               Chap. 26. Of Fiſshes
               
                  Iſaac.THe temperament of Fish generally, as ſaieth Iſaac, is cold and moiſt, ingendring fleame, moſt agréeable vnto hot and drie complexions in Summer time, and in hot regions. And vnconuenient vnto colde & drie complexions, in winter time, and in colde Regions. Al Fiſhe is either of the Sea, or of the freſh water. Thoſe that are of the Sea remaininge in the déepe not neere the ſhoare in grauely and ſandy places, are moſt ſubtile and commendable and eaſier of digeſtion then the other ſea fiſhe and ingender better bloud, but they diſcend ſlowly out of the ſtomack and intrailes for lack of moiſt ſlimines. Freſh water fiſh are vniuerſally more groſſe and ſlimie, & ſlow of digeſtion, but they voide out of the ſtomack with more facilitie then the ſeafiſh, and nouriſh more. The beſt of theſe are they which remaine in dowfalles and ſwift running ſtreames, whoſe bottome is grauelly or ſandie,

and far of from the filthines of any towne or citie. Pond Fiſh is of all other the worſt, of éeuell ſauour and hard of digeſtion, eſpecially if they be far from the ſea or any running ſtreame. Rhaſis,
                  Rhaſis (mine aucthour (ſaith: all Fiſhes are hard of concoction, and tary longe in the ſtomacke, and make a man thirſtie. The bloud which younge Fiſh ingendreth is flegmaticke, bréedyng vicious ſlimineſſe in the body, wherof ſpryng ſundrie diſeaſes. Wherefore wee ought to chooſe ſutch fiſh whoſe ſubſtance is not clammy, nor very groſſe, nor haue any éeuel ſmel, nor wil quickly putrifie, nor that abide in pondes, Lakes and Méeres, that yeeld foorth a ſtinkyng ſauour. For they that are conuerſant in filthy places are not fit to bee eaten, neither ſutch as liue in waters aboundyng with vnholſome weedes wheron the Fiſh do feede, for they bee made therby vnapt to bee eaten. Saltfiſh ought not in any ſort be ſet on the boorde, nor to bee fead on, vnleſſe it were when a man for medicine ſake would cauſe himſelf to vomit. But if any bee deſirous to eate therof, let him eate but a ſmal quantitie, dreſſed with ſome ſlippery or vnctuous thinge, whiche may loth the ſtomack. The Crafish of the riuer is very good for weake perſons, as ſaieth Auicen,
                  Auicen. theyr fleaſh is good for them that haue a conſumption, ſo is their broathe, and Aſſes Milke. And ſome ſay, that they will breake great impoſtumarions if they bee layde therto.
            
            
               Chap. 27. Of Pulſe.
               COnſequently wee muſt intreate of Pulſe,
                  Iſaac. in all ſortes and kindes, and firſt of Rice, of which Iſaac in the firſt booke of the woorke béefore alleaged, ſayeth thus: Rice is drie in the fourth degree and hot in the firſt, whiche beyng ſodden with water is good againſt the Collick that holdeth but one day. But being ſodden with Almond milke it léeſeth the binding facultie, and nouriſheth well, and ingendreth good blood, and augmenteth ſéede. And if with the Rice or with the broth of it you waſh freckles, it taketh them away, and clenſeth the ſkin. Auicen writeth, that the huſke of Rice is thought to bee

poiſon, for if it bée geuen in drinke to any man, immediatlye hée féeleth paine in his mouth, and his tongue wilbée bliſtred.
               
                  Iſaac.
                  Beanes, after Iſaac, that bee gréene: are cold and moiſt in the third degree, and nouriſh but litle, they ingender groſſe and rawe humours, and bréede winde in ye vppermoſt part of the belly. Dry beanes are colde and dry in the firſt degrée, ingendring thick windes in the vppermoſt part of the belly, from whence there ariſe hurtfull fumes into the brain. They cauſe ſundrye groſſe and corrupt dreames, and are hard of concoction. The great white beane not béeing old, is the beſt, and if it bée ſodden in water there is mutch of the windines taken away therby, and of the groſſenes likewiſe, ſpecially if the firſt water be throwne away, 
                     •
                  nd they be boyled again in another. Béeing ſodden with Mintes, Organ, Cumin, and ſutch like, and ſo eaten, theyr windines is mutch amended. Whoſo is deſierous to clenſe the ſkin of his body: let him vſe to waſh himſelf with the meale of Beanes, and he ſhall haue his will.Rhaſis. 
                  Rhaſis, ſayth, that gréene beanes ingender groſſe and raw humours, augmentyng fleame in the ſtomacke and intrayles, whiche breedeth mutch windineſſe. Lentles alſo ſayth hee are colde and drie, ingendring melancholick bloud, and dryinge the body, they darken the eyeſight, and nouriſh Melancholicke diſeaſes, if a man vſe them mutch. Iſaac ſaith, they fill the Brayn with groſſe fumes and Melancholie ſmokes, cauſing payn, and fearful dreames. Iſaac deuideth Chitch Peaſen into white,Iſaac. and blacke. The white is hot in the firſt degrée, and moyſt in the middle of the ſame, hard of cōcoction, ingendryng wynde and fumoſitie in ſutch quantitie: that it puffeth vp the fleaſh, and driueth the ſkin abroad, ſo that they which vſe it haue a fayre white ſkin, for when the ſkinne is borne vp and ſtretched abroad: it ſheweth white, and cléere. The blacke Chitch is hotter then the white, but not ſo moyſt and is good agaynſt oppilation of the Liuer, if it bee boyled with Smaledge and Radiſh, and the iuce therof drunken, it alſo increaſeth Milke,Arnold. and ſeede, and prouoketh Vryne. Peaſon, according to the famous Arnoldus de villa noua, in his

gouernment of health: are of this nature: if they or Chitche
                     •
                   bée laide a ſtéepe all night in freſh water, and bee boyled next day in the ſame, a two or three wallops, and then bée ſtrayned and kept, and when yée goo to meat there be put vnto the liquor a litle white wine, and a ſmall quantity of Spikenard in pouder, and ſaffron, and a litle ſalt Indie, and then once boyled togither one wallop, and miniſtred at the beginning of the meale to bée drunken or eaten, crummed like potage. It clenſeth the ſmall veines, and the paſſedge of the vryne, eſpecially if the Peaſen and Chitches be layd in ſoke, and boiled with Perſley in the ſame water. The vnſkilfull ſort ſay that they ſhould bee layd a ſoke in Lie, but that ſoking taketh away all the openyng facultie, and the fineſt part of the ſubſtance of them.
            
            
               Chap. 28. Of Pothearbes.
               NOw let vs ſay ſumwhat of Pothearbes accordinge as order and doctrine requireth, and firſt of Garlike, whiche, as ſaith Rhaſis, is hot and drie, and taketh awaye thirſtines,Rhaſis. and increaſeth fleaſhly luſt, breaketh winde, and heateth the body. In hot regions, hot times, and vnto hot complexions it doth harme, and Galen calleth it the huſbandmens triacle.Galen. 
                  Beanes or Lentles ſod & eaten take away the ſtinking ſmell of it, and ſo doth Rue béeing chawed, and a litle therof eaten downe. So lkewiſe doth Setwall, or Mintes of the garden or wilde, if it be broken betwéene the teeth, and after it a litle quantity of vinegre bee receiued. To the ſame purpoſe ſerueth the roote of Beetes, ſaith Plinie, beeing roſted, and eaten after it. Sorrell in Rhaſis iudgment is cold and dry,plinie. it bindeth the belly, and ſharpneth the ſtomack,Rhaſes. extinguiſhing red choler, and thirſt. Auicen ſaith, that it taketh away toothach if they be waſhed with the iuce therof. Dill, according to Iſaac in the ſecond booke is hot and dry, and being drunken in wine:Auicen▪
                   reſolueth windines, puffines, and ſwelling in the ſtomack,Iſaac. and belly. The branches therof boiled in Oile, diſſolue ſwellings beeinge outward anoynted, aſwage payne, and bring ſleepe.

The ſéede drunken prouoketh vrine, increaſeth milke, clenſeth the ſtomack from putrified humours, it healpeth the hicket procéeding of the long abiding of meat in the ſtomack, and the often eating therof weakneth the eie ſight.
               
                  Iſaac.Garden Smalledge by the aucthoritie of Iſaac, being eaten openeth oppilations, prouoketh vrine, bindeth the bellie, is éeuell for the falling ſicknes, and hurteth wéemen with child: and ſutch as are wt childe & frequent the eating of it, it ingendreth in the childes body biles, and rotten impoſtumacions. Neither may we commēd ye vſe of Smalledge, for it draweth humours togither from all partes of the body vnto the ſtomack, wherof inſueth vomiting. The ſéede prouoketh vrine aboue the branches,Rhaſis. and as ſaith Rhaſis, Smalledge openeth oppilacions and puffeth vp there withall, it mooueth to venery, and taketh away ye eeuel ſauour of the mouth. Arredge alſo, ſayth hee, is colde and moiſt, looſing the belly, nouriſhinge well, and is good for them that haue an hot liuer.
               
                  Plinie.
                  Plinie in his ſecond booke writeth, that it ingendreth ſundry ſickneſſes,Lib. 2. and therfore the liquor wherein it is boyled, ought many times to bee chaunged, or els it ingendreth puſſhes, and foule ſpots in the ſkin. Perſnep, as ſaith Rhaſis, is hot and windy, ſlowly digeſted, it maketh the ſéede of man hot, and expelleth vrine, and farther ſaieth Iſaac, it helpeth fleſhly luſt, prouoketh the termes, and ingendreth diſcōmendable bloud.
               
                  Plinie.After Plinie in the ſecond booke, Beetes are of two ſortes, white,Lib. 2. & red. The roote of the red ſod in water killeth the itch, the iuce appeaſeth the auncient paine in the head, & the daſeling, and the ſinging in the eares, it driueth foorth vrine, it appeaſeth the toothach, it prouoketh to venerie, and is good againſt poiſon.Conſtantinus. 
                  Borage, as ſaith Conſtantinus, is hot & moiſt in y• firſt degrée, it purgeth red choler, it helpeth yt hart burning, and being ſtéepedin wine and drunken: it maketh them mery that are ſad by reaſon of Melancholie, and the hea rbe it ſelfe eaten raw, as ſome ſay, ingendreth good bloud.
               
                  Colewortes, according vnto Rhaſis opinion, bréedeth black choler,Rhaſis. troubleth the ſleepe with éeuell dreames, but it lenifieth

the throate and breaſt, it maketh the belly ſoluble, and taketh away drunkennes. Iſaac writeth of Colewortes,
                  Iſaac. that the iuce therof drunken looſeth the bellie, but eaten without broath they doo bind, and therfore to amend their faute, the firſt iuce wherein they were ſodden muſt be caſt away, & thē they muſt be ſodden with good fat meate. Onions ſeaſoned with oyle, do neither heaten nor coole, nor prouoke thirſt, but make an Appetite. And Dioſcorides ſaith,Dioſcorides. that if the iuce of them be receiued in at the noſe: it purgeth the head very wel, and ſtamped with Vineger taketh away ſpottes, prouoketh ſléepe, and ſoftneth the bellie.
               The Gourd after Auicen, is good for the cholerick perſons,Auicen. and hurtfull to the melancholick and fleagmatick, and Dioſcorides writeth, that the iuce therof holden in the mouth aſwageth the toothach.Rhaſis. 
                  Cummin according to Rhaſis is hot and drie, becauſe it healpeth digeſtion, and breaketh wynde, & Dioſcorides reporteth, that being mingled with Vineger, it ſtayeth the termes, and being drunken or annointed ſtoppeth the bléeding at the noſe, and maketh pale and low coulered. The ſéede drunken with water, doth effectually cure wringings, gripings, and windines in the guttes, and Iſaac ſaith,Iſaac. if it be mingled with windy meates, it rectifieth them, and killeth wormes being drunken. Fenell ſeede alſo ſaieth hee, increaſeth milke, it diſchargeth the ſtoppinges of the Liuer, and bladder, & expelleth the ſtone of the Kidneis, and is good againſt long agues, and ſaith Dioſcorides,
                  Dioſco. being mingled with eie confections: it taketh away ye miſtines frō them. Hyſſop, after Rhaſis, is hot, being eaten helpeth the eie ſight of weaknes, it remedieth ye whéezing in the Lungues, it driueth foorth woormes and cauſeth abortion, and healpeth to diſgeſt our meate. Garden Lettice, as ſaith Iſaac,
                  Iſaac. is the beſt of all other Hearbs to ingender good bloud, and being vnwaſhed it is the better, and is ſoone concocted. It prouoketh vrine, it quencheth red choller in yt ſtomack, it cooleth the boyling of the bloud, it bringeth ſléepe, and increaſeth bloud, and ſeede. Mintes alſo, ſaith hée, is hot and drie in the ſecond degree, comforteth

the ſtomack, & prouoketh appetite. It clenſeth away al lothſō
                  nes of meate from ye ſtomack, procéeding of corrupt humors, alſo it clenſeth the roughnes of ye tongue being rubbed therwith. If it be ſodden in vinegre, and wt the liquor the chawes be waſhed: it clenſeth the rottennes of the gummes, but they muſt afterward be rubbed wt pouder of dried Mints. Creſſes as Rhaſis ſaieth: are hot, and therefore heate the Liuer and ſtomack,Rhaſis. they alſo molifie the bellie, and driue woormes out of the Maw, they prouoke deſier of wéemens company, clenſe the Lunges, and take away the whéeſing, help ſtopping of the Milt, and procure abortion. Poppie, as Iſaac deuideth it, is white, and black. The black is yt wherof they make Opium, the white is more commendable, & nouriſhing, of which Dioſcorides writeth thus: They that are wont to eate Poppie, it bréedeth in them mutch ſléepe,Dioſc. and forgetfulneſſe. Rhaſis ſaith that the ſéede of white Poppie is colde, good for the throate and breaſte, and maketh one ſléepe. Perſley alſo, ſaieth Iſaac, is hot and drie in the end of the third degrée, it prouoketh vrine and Wéemens termes, reſoluing windines, and increaſing ſeede,Serapiour and, as Serapion ſaith, Perſley layd plaſterwiſe vppon wheles, ſcabbes, and morfew: cléereth the ſkin wonderfully, aſwageth the paine of the kidneis & bladder, rarefieth y• paſſedges of yt body in opening the pores, prouoketh vrine & ſweat, clenſeth the Liuer, and reſolueth the windie collick. I eekes, as teſtifieth Rhaſis, ar hot & dry although they prouoke appitite, yet make they the head to ake, and ingender éeuyll dreames,Rhaſis. and are hurtful for them yt are commonly troubled with the continuall headach, and thoſe that are ſoone offended with heat. Iſaac therfore giueth counſell that it were good immediatly vpon them to eate Lettice, Purſlain, or Endiue, that by the colones of one the heate of the other may bée delayed.Iſaac. Béeing eaten raw: they clenſe the pipes of the Lunges from groſſe humours, they open yt oppilacions of the liuer, & ſtop the ſalt rewme. Purſlaine, according to Rhaſis, by quenching thirſt and inwarde burninge, bindeth the bellie, and taketh away the chilneſſe of the téeth, & bindeth the laſke, procéeding of red choler, and it diminiſheth natural ſede. If wartes

be rubbed therwith, ſaith Auicen,
                  Auicen. they will come away by the rootes. Radish, as Rhaſis writeth, is hot and drie,Rhaſis. tareing long in the ſtomack, it maketh the iuce ſubtile, and lifteth it vp vnto the mouth of the ſtomack, and ſo prouoketh vomit. The leaues digeſt our meate, and prouoke appetite in vs, being receiued but in ſmall quantitie. And Iſaac ſaieth, that if they be eaten after meate they breake winde, and by reaſon of their heauynes they make the meate to go downe. And Dioſcorides addeth, that the roote being eaten with ſalt:Dioſco. increaſeth milke, prouoketh vrine and the Flowers, & with a litle grated Ginger put into an hollowe tooth, aſwageth the toothach preſently. The Rape, after ye iudgment of Iſaac is hot in ye ſecond degrée, and moiſt in ye firſt. It nouriſheth more thē al other hearbs, yet is it hard of digeſtion, it maketh ſoft and foggie fleſh, it ſtirreth vnto company of wéemen, & increaſeth ſéede. Plinie in ye ſecond booke writeth yt ye Rape being ſodden,Plinie. driueth cold out of ye féete. And ye cōmentarie writer Auorrois, in ye fift of his colections ſaith, yt the Rape hath a marueilous force to cléere y• eie ſight. Rue, as ye learned Iſaac reporteth, is good for concoction, bicauſe it hath ye faculty to expell groſſe & clāmie humors, it breketh windines, & moiſtneth ye belly. And Auicen ſaith, yt it taketh away ye lothſome ſauour of Garlick, Léekes, & Onions, ſharpnethe the ſight, and taketh away the deſier to weemen. Sage, after Dioſc. prouoketh ye termes, & procureth abortion. The broth wherin the twigs and leaues are boiled repres the thoughts of luſt, and motion to venery. The iuce of ye leaues maketh heire black. Macer ſaith thus of Sage:
                  Macer.
                  If it be laid vpon the bite: It heales the poyſoned rankling quite.
                  Spinage and Succorie are temperate, agreeable to the throate, Lunges, & ſtomack, the lenifie ye belly, & make very good nutriment. Todeſtooles, according to ye doctrine of Rhaſis, are cold & groſſe, & ingender raw fleame. Thoſe of thē which be red are naught, for if they be eaten they ingender the collick, and at no time they muſt be eaten without warme ſauces. Muſ
                     
                        •
                     hroms are farre worſe then Todeſtooles whereof ſome be ſtark poyſon, and will choke a man, & kill him preſently. But the beſt of them ingender fleame. Iſaac ſaith thus of them:Iſaac. by theſe tokens you ſhall knowe them that will kill men.

They be ſoft, ſlimy, and groſſe, and beinge ſlit in the middle and let to lye ſo all a night: the next morninge you ſhall finde them rotten.
            
            
               Chap. 29. Of Frutes.
               THus by experience the noble Galen writeth of Frutes, my father,Galen. ſaith hee, had his health all his life time bicauſe hée eate no frutes. And whē he was dead I began to eate frutes, and by meanes therof I fell into ſundry, and long continuing diſeaſes. And after that I abſtained from rathe frutes, I had neuer any ſicknes ſauing an ague which helde mée one day. Then ſhewed I the ſame vnto my friendes, and they that beleeued mée abſtained from rathe frutes, and in al their life time were neuer ſicke. This mutch of frutes in generall.
               
                  Figges, according to Rhaſis, clenſe the kidneis frō grauell, béeing gréene they bréed winde in the belly, and they looſe the ſame, and make indifferent good iuce. If they bée drye, they nouriſh mutch, and do heaten, the often vſe whereof ingendreth the itch, and lyſe, and looſe the belly béeinge eaten béefore meate.Iſaac. Of whom moreouer, myne aucthour Iſaac ſayth, in his ſecond booke, that if they méet with a ſtomacke well clenſed from humours, they are then good of digeſtion, they ingender good blood, clenſe the ſtomack, lungues, kidneis, and bladder if they be eaten faſting. Dates, ſaith hée, are hot and make groſſe nutriment, and if they be eaten oftentimes they ingender groſſe blood in the inner partes, they corrupt the teeth, and make ſteame and blood to abound. And in the ſecōd booke Iſaac ſaith, that Dates being hot and dry in the ſecond degree, are better of digiſtion then Figs, & more prouoking vrine. But whoſo accuſtometh himſelf vnto them: ſhall feele an hard ſwelling in his Liuer, & Spleene. Raiſens, as witneſſeth Rhaſis,
                  Rhaſis. whiche are very ſweete, are hot, but not ſo hot as Dates, neither ſo ſtopping as they are, they be windy and hurt mutch, they franke vp the body ſuddeinly, they alſo increaſe motion vnto venery, and woorke to the erection of the yeard. Thoſe which haue the thinneſt ſkin, do ſooneſt deſcend, and bréede leſſe windines, and the contrary do contrariwiſe.

Thoſe that are ſower do not heaten, but béeing waſhed in cold water, and eaten before meate, do as it were extinguiſh heat. Sower grapes are colde, they binde the belly, and they repreſſe blood and red choler.
               
                  Raiſens are temperate in heat, which cauſing good nutryment, do bréed no oppilacion as Dates do, although they nouriſhe ſtronger and in greater quantity.
               
                  Pomegranates whiche are ſwéete, according to Rhaſis,
                  Rhaſis▪
                   doo not coole, but puffe vp, and cauſe thirſtineſſe, but they lenifie the throat. The ſower ones make the breaſt and throat rough, alſo they puffe vp the ſtomacke and Liuer, but alwayes they moderate the heat of blood and red choler,Iſaac. they quench Feuers, and repreſſe vomites. And Iſaac ſaith, that Pomegranates are fitter for medicine then for meat, for they yéelde but ſmal nouriſhment, but it is good. It is the property of tart Pomegranates to extinguiſh the rage of humours, and to comforte the ſtomacke.Rhaſis The iuce dropped into their eies that haue the yelow Jandies taketh away the yellow couler.
               
                  Quinces ſaith Rhaſis, bée they ſwéet or ſower, they ſtrenghthen the ſtomack, but principally the ſower, they prouoke alſo a good appetite, and binde the bellye. Béeinge eaten after meate, they make the ordure to diſcende quickely, and expell it out of the belly. And béeinge eaten before meate they woorke the contrary effect. The ſower ones are ſtrongeſt in bindinge the belly.
               
                  Peares after Galen béeyng eaten béefore meate, do bynde,Galen. but after meate they looſe the belly. Peares that are very ſwéet do not puffe vp, but they all binde the belly, vnleſſe they bee eaten after meat. For béeing eaten after meat they driue the ordure foorth, and then they ſtrengthen the ſtomacke.
               
                  Iſaac alſo ſaith, ye ſweet Peares are temperate, and if they bee boyled with Muſſhroms they take away all theyr clenſinge, eſpecially if they be wilde Peares, by reaſon of theyr tartnes. Appels, after the iudgement of Iſaac:
                  Iſaac. are colde,

and bicauſe of their ſowerneſſe do binde the more. And although they agrée well with the mouth of the ſtomacke: yet they fill it full of ſlimy humoures. Auicen ſaith that Apples do comfort, eſpecially thoſe that ſmell ſweete. Baked in a Pie they help the appetite, but the dayly eating of them cauſeth ouermutch heating of the ſinewes.
               
                  Peaches, accordynge to Auicen, if they bée ripe: are good for the ſtomacke, cauſinge good concoction vnto meate, but they may not bee eaten after other meate, for they corrupte it, but rather béefore meate. If the Appels bee drye they bée harde of digeſtion, and although they nouriſh mutch yet are they not good.Iſaac. And Iſaac ſaieth, that the greater Peaches, if they bee ripe they looſe the belly, but otherwiſe they binde it. The leſſe whiche are called in Latin Praecocia, and in Engliſh (as I thinke) Africoes, are holſome for the ſtomacke, and take away lothſomneſſe. Medlers, ſaith hée are cold and dry in the firſt degrée, they comforte the ſtomacke, and take away the fluxe of choler, and repreſſe vomitinge, they prouoke vrine, and beeinge taken beefore meate they comfort the ſtomack the more, and hurt not the ſinewneſſe therof.Dioſc. And Dioſcorides writeth, that ſome ſaye they helpe mutch the toothach if they bée eaten while the teeth ake.
               The Pome Citron, after the opinion of Auicen, beeing pared and the rine eaten or chawed:Auicen. maketh the mouth ſmell pleaſantly. The ſower iuce beeinge anointed killeth ringewormes, the decoction drunken maketh a good couler, and fatteth the body. Mulberies which are ripe and ſwéete, as ſaith Iſaac, looſe the b
                     •
                  lly, are ſoone caſt forth out of the ſtomack, and prouoke vrine. Being eaten faſtinge out of coulde water, they are very cooling, they quench thirſt, and vnnaturall heat. Plummes, likewiſe, ſaith hée, are of two ſortes. Some white, which are harde of digeſtion, and noiſome to the ſtomake. The blacke of the gardein, béeinge ripe, moiſten the ſtomacke, and make ſoft the bellye, and pourge red choler. But if they be eaten ouermutch: they hurt the

ſtomacke, but they do leſſe hurt eaten before meat.
               
                  Cheries alſo, as the ſame aucthour writeth, are ſoone conuerted, they engender groſſe fleam and ſlimy with in the hollownes of the Liuer and Splene. And therfore ingender longe agues, and are very éeuell euery way. The beſt time to eate them is béefore meat, for when they be eaten vpon a ful ſtomacke, they flit aboue, and turne to putrifaction.
               
                  Almondes, accordinge to Rhaſis, are temperate in heate,Rhaſis which although they make the throat ſmooth, yet are they heauy in the ſtomack, and tary long there, they open oppylacions, and aſwage the burning of the vrine, and béeing eaten with ſugar: augment ſeede of generacion.
               The bitter Almondes, according to Iſaacks iudgment,Iſaac. are hot and dry in the end of the ſecond degrée, they clenſe, ſcoure, and comfort, they mooue vrine, and diſſolue groſſe and clammye humours, by meanes wherof they clenſe the breaſt and Lungues from fleagmatick humours, and releaſe the oppilacions of the Liuer and Splene.
               
                  Nuts likewiſe, ſaieth the ſame aucthour, in a cholericke perſon, and one that hath a hot ſtomacke: are ſoone turned into cholerick vapours aſcending into the head, cauſinge the payne and giddineſſe thereof. But if a man would correcte them and make them good, hée muſt crack them, and blanche them, and lay them a ſtiepe a whole night in water, that they may get ſome moyſture.
               
                  Dioſcorides ſayeth, that two Nuttes, and two dry Figges,Dioſco. and twentie leaues of Rue, or Hearbe Grace, and one grayne of Salt pounded together, and beyng eaten faſtyng: keepeth a man from infection of Poyſon, or Peſtilence.
               The Fildbeards, after Rhaſis,
                  Rhaſes. are not ſo hotte as the other Nuttes are, but are heauier, and are good agaynſt the ſtynging of Scorpions. And Serapion ſaieth of them, that if Fildbeards bée roaſted with a litle Pepper and eaten, they ripen the Catarre or Rewme.
               
                  Cheaſtnuts, as Conſtantinus writeth, are wyndie,Serapion. they mooue to the acte of the fleaſh, they yéeld mutch nutriment, they are

hard of digeſtion, and therfore accordin
                     •
                   vnto the counſell of Iſaac,
                  Iſaac. they muſt bee roſted, that their éeuell facultye may bée therby amended, and their ſubſtance rarified. Then do they aſwage the drineſſe of the breaſt and all the body, and moderate the difficulty of makinge water. The Acorne alſo according to the ſame auctour, béeinge diſobedient vnto digeſtion, bindeth the belly, but prouoketh vrine, and they do nouriſh. Beaten into pouder, and the pouder laide vpon the Vuula: drieth vp the rotten humours that vſe to haunte and hurt the ſame.
            
            
               Cap. 30. Of Spices.
               
                  Rhaſ
                        ••
                     .
                  PEpper, by the aucthority of Rhaſis, helpeth to concoct ye meat well, and diſſolueth windines, and beeing very hot: heateth the ſtomack and liuer, and hurteth hot bodies eſpecially in Summer. Ginger alſo, according to the ſame Aucthour is hot and moiſt, and in helping concoction is profitable for thoſe whoſe ſtomacks and Liuers are colde. It amendeth the dimneſſe of ſight riſing of moiſture,Auicen. and as Auicen writeth, it augmenteth the memory, and clenſeth the moiſture, of the head, and throat.
               
                  Conſtan.
                  Zeadoarie, according to the ſame Auicen, is a triacle or preſeruatiue againſt all poiſons, and as ſaith Conſtantinus, if conſumeth the ſwelling by winde, and comforteth the ſtomack: it prouoketh ye appetite, taketh away yt ſtinking of the mouth through eating garlik,Macro. and according to Macrobius, aſwageth the heat of the wine which wee haue drunken. Galingale likewiſe,Auic. as writeth Auicen, is hot and drye, it reſolueth windines, maketh the mouth ſauour well, helpeth the ſtomacke, concocteth the meate, augmenteth defier to weemen, and cureth the paine of the kidneis. Cloues alſo, ſaith hée, are hot and dry in the their degree, they make the body ſmell well, they ſharpen the ſight, they comfort the ſtomacke and Liuer. Cinamom,
                  Rhaſis. after▪ the opinion of Rhaſis: is hot and dry, which in ſtrengthning mutch helpeth the ſtomacke, & liuer, it cauſeth good concoction,Iſaac. and expelleth windines. Alſo, ſaith Iſaac,
                  
it openeth oppilacions, and prouoketh the termes. Saffron likewiſe, ſaith hée, beeing hot and dry in the firſt degrée:Iſaac. comforteth the ſtomack, openeth the ſtopping of the Liuer, helpeth them that are ſhortwinded, and comforteth the weake partes. And Rhaſis thus ſpeaketh of Saffron in his Almanſor.
                  Almanſor. A certen woman, ſaith hee, was very long in labour of childe bed, and could not bee deliuered. And I gaue vnto her one dramme of Saffron, and immediatly ſhée was deliuered, and this haue I tried often. And béeing drunken in wine, it is of ſingular force to make one merie.Plini. 
                  Plinie in his ſeconde booke ſaith: whoſo drinketh Saffron firſte,Lib. 2. ſhall not feele any ſurfet: and a crowne made therof and put vpon the head, releaſeth drunkenneſſe. Carawaies,
                  Conſtantinus. according vnto Conſtantine is hot and dry in the third degrée, it diſſolueth winde, it ſtrengthneth the ſtomack, it killeth woormes, it helpeth concoction, and prouoketh vrine.
            
            
               Chap. 31. Of Certen Sauces.
               MUſtard is hot and dry in the middes of the fourth degrée, it drieth vp the moiſture of the head and ſtomack.Auicen. And Auicen writeth, ſome ſay (quod hee) that if one that is faſtinge drinke it, it maketh a good vnderſtanding, and it clenſeth the humours of the head. And Plinie ſaith in the ſecond booke,Plinie. that muſterdſeede prepared with vineger, driueth forth grauell. Salt, ſaith Rhaſis, is hot and dry, it taketh lothſomnes from meates, and maketh the taſt ſharpe, and it prouoketh the appetite. But whoſo eateth ſalt in any great quantity, it cauſeth mutch aduſtion in the blood: it weakneth the eie ſight, it diminiſheth naturall ſeede, and ingendreth the itche. Venigre, according to the ſame aucthour, is colde and drye, making a man leane, & weakning the powers, it diminiſheth the ſéede, it ſtrengthneth Melancholye, and weakneth red choler and blood, and maketh the meat ſubtile and fine wherwith it is receiued. Honie,
                  Iſaac▪
                   as ſaith Iſaac in the ſecond booke is hot and dry in the ſecond degree, it taketh awaye the cauſe why the body cannot bee nouriſhed, and altereth the éeuell

diſpoſition vnto better, and expelleth the aboundaunce of éeuell humours out of the pores, and clenſeth the filth of the veines, and therfore is very agréeable vnto them that are cold and moiſt of Nature, and vnto old men. And vnto hot complexions it is as poyſon, for it is ſoone conuerted into choller. If it be turned into ye warmnes of blood, it maketh it the warmer. So that Honie being eaten raw: ingendreth windines, and maketh a man to ſwell, bréedeth the roughneſſe of the throat, and prouoketh vnto vomite and ſiege.
               
                  Oyle Oliue, as Plinius writeth in the fourth booke, maketh euery body ſoft which it toucheth,Plini. giueth force and ſtrength, reſtraineth al manner of poyſons, driueth away payne, looſeth the belly, clenſeth the face, appeaſeth the ſwelling, cléereth the eieſight, helpeth the headach, and aſwageth the heate of Feuers.Rhaſis. The Oyle of Nuts, ſaith Rhaſis, is very hot and diſſoluing, and according vnto Auicen, it is good againſt the ringwoorme, inflamacions,Auicen. and puſtles in any part of the eie. The Oyle of Almondes, after Rhaſis, is temperate, and is good for the Breaſt,Rhaſis Lunges, Bladder, and Kidneis, but if it be eaten it bréedeth lothſumneſſe, and departeth ſlowly out of the Stomack. And, as ſaith Dioſcorides, if it be mingled with Honie: it taketh away yt ſpots in ye face,Dioſco. & maketh ſmooth the ſkarres where wounds haue bin, it clenſeth the miſtines of the eies, and taketh away the ſkales from the ſkin.
               
                  Oyle of Poppie is to be iudged of, according to the nature of Poppie, wherof we intreated in the Chapter laſt goyng beefore. And thus endeth the firſt Booke, the contents wherof I haue gathered out of the beſt approued Aucthours.
               ¶FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The ſecond booke of Table Phyloſophy, which ſpeaketh of the manners, béehauiour, and vſedge, of all ſutch with whom wee may happen to bee conuerſant at the TABLE.
            
            
               The Preface.
               HAuing ended the diſcourſe concerning the Nature of Meates and Drynkes, which are ſet before vs vpon the Table, it followeth now, that wee ſay ſumwhat touchinge the Manners and conditions of whom wee be matched at the Boorde. For as ſaith Macrobius in the third Booke of his Saturnalia: There is no part of wiſdome ſo great, as to applie a mans talke to the place, and time, hauing a regarde to the eſtimacion and calling of thoſe that are preſent. For ſome will be incouraged with examples of Vertue, other with good turnes, and ſome with the commendation of Modeſtie, that ſutch as haue vſed themſelues otherwiſe, and hearing the ſame: may amende their liues. And therfore as touching them with whom we be ſet at the Table, I wyll ſay ſumwhat out of the auntient Records of our Elders, beginning with the moſt woorthy Perſonagies.
            
            
               Chap. 1. ¶Of Emperours.
               
                  ANd firſt to ſpeake of Emperours, how that ſome of that excellent calling haue bin very frugale & ſparing at their Boord,Sueton
                        •
                     
                     ▪ lib. 3. as Suetonius in the third Booke of the liues of the. 12. Emperours, writeth of Iulius Caeſar, ſaying that he dranke verie litle Wine, whiche thinge his enemies could not deney, and was indifferent about the reſidue of his diet. Vpon a time when at the Table the good man of the houſe where hee ſupped, had ſet before him olde preſerued Oyle that was ranke & ſtale, in the ſteede of new and ſwéete, when other in company refuſed it, he only eate it greedely, for yt he would not ſéeme to reproue him yt had inuited him to ſupper, either of litle good manner or couetouſnes.

The ſame Aucthour alſo ſaith of Auguſtus, that hée was a man of ſmall feeding, and drunke but very litle wine, for hee vſed not to drink therof aboue thriſe at a meale. Neither vſed hee commonly to drink Wine, but when he was drie hee woulde dip a ſop of bread in faire colde water, or eate the ſlices of a Cucumber, or of a gréene mellow Apple, whoſe taſt were tart, or ſumwhat like vnto wine. In the Ieaſtes of the Romanes it is written, that the Emperour Auguſtus was a very ſmall féeder. For he would eate common bread, and litle fiſhes, or cruddes made of Cowmilke which he would wringe in his hand, or gréene Figges which he lyked well, and theſe thinges would he eate in euery place, and when ſo euer his Appetite ſerued.
               
                  Helinan.
                  Helinandus in his Booke of the inſtitutions of Princes, ſaith that Iulius Caeſer,
                  Lib. 3 de inſti. committed his Baker to priſon, becauſe hee gaue him better bread at his Table, then he gaue to the reſidew of his Souldiours. Suetonius alſo in his worke beefore alledged,Suetonius. writeth of the Emperour Tiberius, yt at his firſt comming to the Empire he was very frugall and moderate, but afterward hee grue ſo glouttenous, and geuen to the bellie: that in ſtéede of Tiberius hee was called Biberius, for Claudius Caldius, for Nero, Mero, that is to ſay, one ouer much giuen to wine. And vpō a time ſpending two whole daies and nightes with Pomponius Flacchus, & Piſo: for a rewarde, he gaue vnto the one the gouerment of the Prouince of Syria, and to the other the Lieuetenantſhip of the ſame. He lyked better of one that preſented him with a Muſshrom and a kinde of Birde called Ficedula, then if it had bin a greater matter.
               
                  Eg
                        •
                     ſippusIt is alſo written of the Emperour Vitellius, by Egeſippus in his fourth Booke of the deſtruction of Iheruſalem. When hee knew there was ſecret wait layd for him,Lib. 4. in the meane time he gaue himſelf to feaſting and garmandize, bicauſe he would not loſe the famous ignominie of the ſhame that hung ouer him. Hee was drawne from the banket, hee was contemptuouſly inſulted vpon, and ſlaine in the midſt of the Citie, at one time together, both ſheading his bloud and vomyting his

ſurfeat, who if hée had liued any longer: would haue deuoured the treaſure of the Romane Empire in riot, and banketinge. To conclude, hée had reigned but eight Moneths and fiue daies, and yet Rome was able no longer to ſerue his bellye.
            
            
               Ghap. 2. Of Kinges
               
                  FRrontinus in his fourth booke and third chapter of warlike Pollicies, reporteth how that Alexander king of Macedonia,
                  Frontinus▪
                   was vſed to eate of ſutch bread as hée founde while hée traueiled vpon the waye.Lib. 4. Alſo in the fourth booke and vii. chapter, hee writeth in this manner. Alexander kinge of Macedonia, traueilinge by great iourneies through the deſertes of Affrica, both hée and all his armye beinge greatly athirſt, a ſouldiour offred him a draught of water in a Sallet, which in preſence of them all hee powred on the ground, deſeruing more prayſe by that example, then if hee had drunke it. Helinandus in the place beefore recited,Helinand. telleth how that Piſo deſiering Romulus to ſupper, and perceiuing how litle wine he had drunke at that meale: O Romulus, if euery man woulde do as thou dooſt, wine would be better cheape. Nay (quod hée) it would bee dearer if euerye man might drinke what hee would. Valerius Max. in his fift booke and ſixte chapter,Valerius Max. writeth that kinge Alexander vpon a time beeing repulſed from ſome purpoſe by a tempeſt in the winter, beeholding an ould Macedonian ſouldiour quaking and béenummed with could, and himſelfe ſitting in his regall ſeate by a good fier:Note. euen with thoſe handes wherewith hee was woont to beſtowe liberall rewardes, hee tooke the ould man that was crooked and doubled with colde, and ſet him in his owne place. What merueill was it then if it were pleaſant vnto them to ſerue ſo many yeeres vnder that captaine, which eſteemed more of the goodhealth of a common ſouldiour, then hee did of his own dignitye? In the ſame place it is alſo writen, that Pyrrhus the king, ſayd that certen Tarentines had talked of him very broade, and vndutifull language at a banket. Then demaunded hee of one of the companye, whether they had any ſutch

talke or not? yea truly ſaid hée, wée had ſo indéede, and vnles our wine had fayled vs theſe had bin but trifles in reſpect of that we would haue ſpoken. So pleaſant an excuſe of their rioting, & ſo frank confeſſion of the truthe, turned the Kinges wrath into laughter. By vſing of which clemency he obtayned this mutch, that his Subiectes the Tarentines thanked him when they were ſober, and praied for him when they were drunken.
            
            
               Chap. 3. Of Princes.
               
                  Plutrach.
                  PLutrach of the inſtitutions of Princes, citeth the aucthoritie of Plato, which ſaith thus: when Potentates oppreſſe their ſubiects, it is like as if the head of a body ſhould ſwell to ſutch hugines, that the other parts were able ſcarcely, or not at all, to beare it, but with great paine. Likewiſe when the hier powers do hate and perſecute the ſubiectes, it is lyke as if the tutor ſhould purſue his pupil to ſlay him with the ſword which he gaue him to defend him againſt others.Helinan. 
                  Hel
                        •
                     nandus in his booke of the inſtitution of Princes ſaith, yt a Prince ſhould do as the Phiſition doth, which neuer geueth extreme medicines, but when he ſéeth that gentle pocions will neuer recouer the Pacients health. Vnto which purpoſe ſaid Lucius very well,Lucius. that it behoued a Prince to be an old man in manners, & to follow ripe and wiſe counſell, and to imitate the order of good Phiſitions, which ſumtime cure by filllnge that which is emptie in ſpare bodies, & ſumtime by emptyinge yt which aboundeth to much in full bodies, aſwaging the greife many times with hot burning irons, & often with fomentacions, and ſumtime otherwiſe, vnto which intent hee ſetteth downe theſe verſes:

                     To puniſh let a Prince be ſlow, and quick to giue reward:
                     And let it greeue him when he is conſtrained to be hard.
                  
               
               
                  Ariſtotle.
                  Ariſtotle in the third of the Politickes writeth thus: whoſo would haue wit and vnderſtanding to gouerne (ſaith he) it ſemeth he would haue God and the lawes to gouerne: but whoſo will haue a man of himſelf without theſe to gouerne, putteth

a very ſauedge beaſt in aucthoritie. For when rage and luſt beare ſway, then good men go to wrack, ſo that vnderſtanding without affection is as good as a written law. Likewiſe Vegetius in his firſt booke and firſt chapter of the art of war, it is decent for a Prince (ſaith he) yt no man know mo things nor better things then he, for his knowledge may profit all his ſubiectes, and for that cauſe Princes ought to applie themſelues to the ſtudy of wiſdome.
            
            
               Chap. 4 Of the Gentile Byshops.
               
                  
                     ƲAlerius in his fift Booke and fift chapter, writeth of Horatius Puluillus, who being Byſſhop,Valerius. and as hee was after the guiſe at thoſe daies, conſecrating a great Church vnto Iupiter, while he was pronouncing the ſolemne woordes, & holding the poſt in his hand: woord was brought vnto him that his ſunne was dead: hee neither plucked his hande from the poſt, neither changed his countinaunce from the publique religion to his priuat ſorow, becauſe he would not ſéeme at that preſent to ſuſtaine rather the perſon of a Father, then of a Byſſhop. In the ſame place likewiſe he writeth of Xenophon, who being offring a very ſolemne ſacrifice, it was tolde him that his eldeſt ſunne was ſlaine. Then did he only put of the crowne from his head, demaunding of the meſſenger in what ſort he was ſlaine. And vnderſtanding that he was killed fightinge very valiently: he put the crowne vpon his head againe, ſhewing that he tooke more ioy of his valiencie, then he did greif of his vntimely death. S. Ierome in ye ſecond booke againſt Iouinian,
                  Ierome. writeth yt 
                  Zenon yt 
                  Stoick reporteth of the liues of the auntient prieſts of Egipt, how that ſetting all worldly care and buſines apart, they alwaies remained in ye Church, ſearching the hid natures of things, & obſeruing the motions of the ſtars They neuer companied wt their wiues, nor any woman, nor neuer ſaw their children nor kinſfolks after ye once they betooke thēſelues to diuine ſeruice. They abſtained frō eating fleſh & drinking wine, chefly to auoid ye motion to ye fleſh, which cōmeth by thoſe meats, & ye drink. They did ſeldome eate bread, but they vſed oyle both to driue away

lothſomnes, and to take away the roughnes of their throats. What ſhall I ſpeake of foules, ſéeing they eſchewed egs and milke as fleaſh, wherof they ſayde the one was liquid fleaſh, and the other bloud, the coulour onely being chaunged. They laide a footſtoole vnder their heades in ſtéede of a pillow,Ariſtole. and faſted two or thrée daies togeather. And Ariſtotle in the ſeauenth of his Politickes: the Prieſts ſaith hée, haue charge of althings appertaining to the God, and to ſée that houſes bee kept vp tight in repairacions, and thoſe which bee fallen downe may be builded vp agayne, and that others be appointed vnto their purpoſes, and for this cauſe they bee had in reuerence. Sum of theſe Biſhops are termed by one man, Princes, by an other Kinges, ſum call them Poteſtates, Prouoſts, and Maiſters. Sée then if the Prieſtes and Byſſhops of the Gentiles, were ſo religious, continent, and holie: what ought our Chriſtian Biſſhops to be?
            
            
               Chap. 4. Of noble Perſonages.
               
                  Tullie
                  TVllie in his booke of olde age, writeth that when a certen man in reproche ſaide vnto Themiſtocles, that hee had no honour of himſelfe, but that all his eſtimacion came vnto him by reaſon of his cuntrey: ſurely, ſaide Themiſtocles, if I were Sereſius I ſhould bee but a verlet, and if thou were an Athenian thou wouldeſt neuer haue bin of any eſtimacion.
               
                  Cecilius.
                  Cecil
                        •
                     us Balbus, of the toyes of Philoſophers writeth: that when one a time one being borne of the race of a Senatour and at that preſent mutch imbaſed, obiected to Epaminundas the vil
                     •
                  nes of his birth: I am glad (quoth he) that I am ryſen of my ſelfe, and thou art fallen of thy ſelfe, and wee both together are honour and diſhonour.
               
                  Saluſt.
                  Saluſt in the Oracion of Marius againſt Iugurth, when one 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ery mutch in his owne conceit in reſpect of his owne 
                     〈◊〉
                   and therfore reproched Marius baſeneſſe: although (ſaith h
                     ••
                  ) we haue one nature common vnto vs all, that eue
                  
                     •••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ma
                     •
                  , if he can, be moſt valient and moſt noble, yet if there 
                     ••
                   an
                     •
                   man that deſpice-me, let them do that which is a

agréeable to their manners, ſince the exerciſe of vertuous exploites, is the verie beginning of mine honour. They enuye at mine honour, let them alſo enuie at my paines, and mine innocency, and my traueiles, and my daungers, for by theſe haue I woon it. Now ſée (I beſéech you) how vniuſt they bée, they wyll not ſuffer me to get yt by mine owne vertue, which they boaſt in themſelues to haue bin gotten by another. And becauſe I haue no images, and my Nobility is new and now firſt riſen in my ſelfe, which better it is to get firſt, then to diſhonour it being once gotten before. As for mee, in my iudgment, there can no mans talke hurt mée. For if they ſpeake ill of mée, my béehauiour ſhal declare their report to bée falſe. The Speare and Shield, Enſigne, Barbed Armour for the Courſer, with other rewards of the Fielde, and ſcarres in the fore parte of my body, theſe are my Images, this is my Nobilitie, not left vnto me by inheritance as theirs is, but gotten by mine owne aduentures and traueill.Iuuenall. And Iuuenall the Poet ſaith very well.
               
                  I rather had Therſites ſun thou were, ſo that thou might
                  Like Pyrrhus beare Vulcanus Armes in midſt of Martial fight.
                  Then if Achillus ſhould beget one like Therſites foule,
                  A daſtard wretch, that could do naught, but prattle, ſcould & skoule.
               
               And Albertus vpon the firſt Booke of the Ethickes ſaith,Albertus. how it is read, that the Emperour of Rome Diocleſian, who gouerned that Empire very valiently, was taken from among ſhéeperds. And he is a right Gentleman, ſaith Seneca,
                  Senica. that is naturally diſpoſed vnto vertue.
            
            
               Chap. 5. Of Knightes.
               
                  
                     ƲAlerius Maximus in the third Booke and ſecond Chapter,Vale. Ma. writeth of a Knight that was Captayne of a band vnder Auguſtus, and had geuen many a ſharp ſhoure vnto Antonius, and went away euermore with the better hand. At length being taken by treaſon, and brought priſoner to Alexandria, Antonius aſked hym what hee ſhould do to him? Then the

Knight, ſaid commaunde mee to bee ſlaine (quod hee) for neyther with hope of life, nor feare of death will I bee perſwaded, to forſake Caeſar and ſerue thée. Howbeit, the more conſtantly hee deſpiſed his life, ſo mutch the more eaſly hee obtained it. For Antonius pardoned his life for his vertuous ſake.Frontinus. 
                  Frontinus in the fourth booke and firſt chapter of his warlike pollicies, reporteth, that when Flaccus and Varro were Conſuls then were Knightes firſt dubbed, and admitted vnto that order by an othe, for before they were gouerned by the Tribunes. The tenour of their othe was after this ſorte, that they would neuer departe one from another, nor breake their aray in the field, vnleſſe it were either to recouer their weapon or to ſtrike the enemie, or to ſaue a citizen.
               
               
                  Helinand.And our Knightes, ſaith Helinandus, march forth into the warres as it were to a wedding, for at Feaſtes they talke of Armes, and in the tentes they ſpeake of feaſtes. The arte of warrefare,Valerius. ſaith Valerius, in the ſecond booke and firſt chapter, beeinge earneſtly followed, brought the whole Empire of Italy in ſubiection to the Romanes. And gat them the ſouerainity of many cities, puiſant kings, and moſt valient kingdomes. That ſame opened vnto them the boſome of the ſea, and broke vp the ſtreights and paſſedges ouer the Alpes, and Mount Taurus, and deliuered them into their handes. And Clearchus, Captaine of the Lacedemonians, ſaith the ſame acthour, was wont to ſay often, beating it into the ſouldiours eares, that ſouldiours ſhoulde ſtande more in feare of their Captayne then of their enemies.
            
            
               Chap. 7. Of Squyres.
               
                  Vegetius.
                  VEgetius in the firſt booke and fourth chapter, ſaith, that the things which ar learned in childhoode are not learned very ſpéedely, but they ar retained very perfectly. And moreouer the nimblenes whiche beelongeth to a Souldiour, as in leapinge and runninge, is oftentimes to bee exerciſed, that the body waxe not vnweldye with age. For it is Swiftnes and nimblenes, which are gotten with daylye exerciſe,

that make a good ſouldiour. For vnto him that is ſo trayned vp it ſhalbe no feare to encounter with any enemy, but rather a pleaſure.
               And agayne in the ſame woorke and thirde chapter hee ſayth thus: I doubte not, ſaith hée, that anye man can bée of another opinion but that the common huſbandman is fitteſt for the warres, that can abide to toyle in the ſunne and open ayre, careth not for the ſhadowe, knoweth not the baynes nor hothouſe, is ignorante of delicacies,Note. plaine meaninge, contente with a litle, able to abide all paynes, to beare armour, to ditche, or caſt a trench, and of cuſtome to carye greate burdeins, not fearinge the Sunne or the Duſt. Wherfore, meeſeemeth wee muſt for the moſt parte take all our force out of the countrey, for mee thinkes hee muſt needes care leſſe for death that neuer felt anye pleaſure or ſweeteneſſe in his life, and therfore ſuch are to bee trayned vp in the warres.
               Likewiſe in the firſt booke and firſt chapter, wee ſée, ſaith hee, that the people of Rome conquered al the world be none other meanes then by exerciſe of the minde, by diſciplyne of the fielde, and dayly practiſe of Chiualrye, whereby they roſe to that greatnes. And when wee chooſe newe ſouldiours, wee muſt chooſe nimble men, and furniſhe them with daylye practiſe, for the knowledge of the order of the warres maketh a man bould to fight. For no man wilbee a fearde to do that which hee knoweth that hee hath learned to do perfectlye. And when they come to the battayll, the ſmall bande that is well trayned, is moſt like to haue the victorye. The rude and vnſkilfull multitude lieth alwayes open vnto ſlaughter.
               And Frontinus in the fourth booke, & ſecond chapter,Frontinus. lib. 4. ca. 2. writeth thus: Alexander Kinge of Macedonia, ſaith hee, with a fewe ſouldiours well trayned, which his father Phillip left behinde him, ſetting vpon the whole worlde: ſlew innumerable armies of his enemies.
            
            
               
               Chap. 8. Of warriours.
               
                  Ariſtotle.AS the noble Philoſopher Ariſtotle writeth, in the ſeventh of his Politickes, many cities haue flouriſhed by makinge warre, but when they had once obtained the ſoueraintye; through peace they fell to decay, as iron gathereth ruſt with lyinge ſtill. Valerius in the ſecond booke, and ſixt chapter, writeth,Valerius. that Laelius Atticus Dentatus was an hundreth and twentie times in batteill, vnto which hée alwaies went with ſutch courage of minde and force of body, that hée ſéemed euer to preſume of the victory. The ſame aucthour alſo reporteth that there was one which cut of the fingers of his left hand, bicauſe hée woulde not goo into the Italian warre. Then by the decrée of the Senate his goodes were openly ſolde, and him ſelfe caſt into perpetuall priſon, enforcinge him to yéelde vp that ghoſt moſt lothſomly in cheines, which hee refuſed valiently to venture in the fielde.Frontinus. 
                  Frontinus in the firſt booke, and ninth chapter reporteth, that one Seruius béeinge a younge man, and preſent in the batteill which kinge Tarquinius faught againſt the Sabines, perceiuinge thoſe that were about the Standards to fight very ſlowly: ſnatched away one of the Standards and thrue it amongſt the middes of the enemies. To recouer which, the Romans fought ſo ſharply: that they obtained both ſtandard, and victory. Hée telleth moreouer of Macillius which was Conſul, and at the warre which the Romans made againſt the Samnites, who perceiuinge the ſouldiours fleeing out of the batteill towardes their tentes: bent the force of his owne band which hee led, againſt them: ſwearing, that hee would fight againſt good Citizens if they would not fight againſt their enemies, and by that meanes brought them all again into the batteill.
            
            
               Chap. 9. Of Philoſophers, and Oratours.
               
                  Architarentinus.
                  ARchitarentinus in the ſixt booke, writeth, that when on a time Ariſtippus the Socration Philoſopher being throwē into the ſea by ſhipwrack was caſt a lande at the ſhoare of Rodes, and found there certain Geometricall figures and demonſtracions

drawne in the ſandes: hee cried aloud ioyfully vnto his Mates, let vs bée of good cheere Mates (quod hee) for I ſee heere the foote ſteppes of men. And foorthwith hee entred into the citie of Rhods, where diſputing in their ſcholes with profeſſours of Philoſophy, hee was rewarded with many coſtly gyftes, wherwith hee not onely appayrelled himſelfe, but alſo al that were with him, and bore their charges ſufficiently for meat and drinke. And when his Mates, being willing to returne into their owne cuntrey, demaunded of him what ſeruice hee would commaunde them home: tell my cuntrey men (quod hée) that I wiſh they ſhould prepare ſutch poſſeſſions and inheritances for their children, as if they chā
                  ced to eſcape ſhipwrack, might eſcape with them, and not be taken awaye neither by violence of conqueſt, neither by change of fortune, nor by any other aduerſitie. Behold héere a Philoſophicall and holſome document, moouing men more to the ſtudy of learning and wiſdome, then to heaping vp of Monye. In the olde time when cities weare in peace, ſayth Euſtacius vpon the firſt booke of the Ethickes, the noblemen and politick gouerners, prouided of the common charge,Euſtacius. for ſutch as were ſtudentes in Philoſophy, that they ſhould bee voide of all cares and troubles, and onely applye themſelues vnto contemplacion.Hermes. 
                  Hermes ſurnamed Triſmegiſtus in his ſecond booke of Conſtellacions, reporteth that Politinus the Philoſopher, béeing, as it were, made vnto all ornamentes of vertue, to the intent hee might expreſſe that which he taught by his owne example, and not by any others, and to a void all the inſultes of Fortune: choſe him a ſecret place of reſt, where hée was far from the trouble of humane conuerſation onely béeſtowing his time in diuine contemplacions. And firſt hee contemned all titles of honour, accoumpting thoſe to bée the true honours which by perfection of wiſdome hée had gotten. Hee coueted after no worldly thing, but iudged that to bee the true ritches, namely whereby a garniſhed minde may finde out the originall of it owne aucthoritye.Ariſtotle. 
                  Ariſtotle in the Secrets of ſecrets, aſketh th
                     ••
                   queſtion, what (ſayth hee)

hath ſo aduaunced the Empire of the Gréekes to bée perpetually renowmed ouer all the world? Surely that did the dilygence of ſtudents, and the vertue of the wiſemen which loued knowledge, and ſcience aboue all meaſure.
               
                  Aulus. Gellius.
                  Aulus Gellius in his booke of the Nightes of Athens, writeth, that it is one of the greateſt poincts of commendacion which was in Phillip kinge of Macedonia, father vnto Alexander the Great, that hée cauſed him whom hée thought ſhould bée his heier, to bee deliuered in charge vnto the moſt excellent Philoſopher Ariſtotle, to bee inſtructed in wiſdome, and learning. And, ſaith Seneca, in that world, which men cōmonly call the golden world, Poſidonius affirmeth that wiſe men gouerned kingdomes, theſe contayned their handes from othermens goodes, and defended the weake from the more mighty, they perſwaded men from diſhoneſty vnto honeſty, and through their wiſdome they declared what was profitable, and what otherwiſe.
            
            
               Chap 10. Of Phiſicions.
               
                  ISidorus in the third chapter of his Etimologies, writeth, that Apollo is reported to bee the firſt finder out of Phiſicke amonge the Gréekes.Iſidor. Which his Sun Eſculapius broughte more into the light, who was ſtrickē with a tempeſt of lightning and ſo died, and by that meanes both the art and the authour periſhed together, and lay vnknowne the ſpace of fiue-hundred yéeres, vnto the time of Artaxerxes king of the Perſians, at what time it was reuiued agayne by Hippocrates, ſunne to Aſ
                        •
                     ulapius.
               
               
                  Valerius writeth, that when Alexander kinge of Maced
                        •
                     
                     nia fell ſick at Tharſis,
                  Valerius. 
                  Phillip the Phiſition made him a potion with his owne handes, and miniſtred it vnto him. For this Phillip was both an Earle, and a Phiſition. And while hée was thus attendant vpon the kinge, there were certen letters receiued and opened, written to this effect, That the king should take heede of Phillip, as one of corrupted by Darius to poiſon him. But ſo ſoone as the king had read the letters,

without any ſtaying hée dranke of the Medicine, and deliuered them vnto Phillip to read, for whiche good opinion of his truſtie friende and Phiſition, hée receaued of the Gods an immortall reward. Howbeit I wote very well, that Quintus Cur
                        •
                     ius in the hyſtorie of Alexande
                        •
                     
                   the great,Quin. cur. telleth this ſtorie otherwiſe, namely, how that Alexander returnynge from Babilon, and ſpendyng longe time in reſt and idleneſſe, hée renued the ſolemnitie of Feaſtynge and Banquettinge, whiche of longe time hée had omitted, and thus in a ioylitie hée ſpent an whole day and a night, when Theſſalus his phiſition inuited him and his companions agayn to drinkynge a freſh. And takyng the Pot in his hand, when hee had drunk, as it were, half a draught, hée ſuddenly ſtayde in the middes and cried out: and his friendes reported that ſame to be the cauſe of his death. But the trueth is, there was Treaſon wrought agaynſt him, the infamie whereof was couered by the puniſhment of his ſucceſſours. And in déede Antipater was chéeif of the conſpiracie, and gaue the poyſon vnto him. Thus died Alexander in the xii. yeère of his reygne, his traitrous nobles falſly accuſinge his faithfull Phiſition of poyſonyng him.
            
            
               Chap. 11. Of youngemen.
               
                  MAcrobius in his fourth booke of Saturnalia, reporteth, how that Papirius when hée was but a childe,Macrob▪
                   came into the counſel court with his Father. And when he returned home, his mother demaunded of him what his Father had doone or ſayd in the Senate counſel. The child anſwered, that he might not tel. But when his Mother threatned to beate him vnleſſe he would declare it: immediatly he deuiſed a fine & pleaſant lye to ſtop his mothers mouth withal, ſaying, yt it was diſputed in the Counſel houſe, whether it were more expedient for man to haue two wiues, or for a woman to haue two huſbās. This news told ſhe immediatly vnto other Matrōs & goſſips of hir acquaintā
                  
                     •
                  e. And ye next day there came a great flock of them to ye Counſel houſe, deſiring ye honourable aſſ
                     •
                  
                  ̄bly, ye one womā might rather haue .ij. huſbands, then one mā .ii. wiues

The Senatours wondringe at that ſtrainge requeſt: merueyled at their ſo vnreaſonable, and diſhoneſt importuniti. Then the childe reſolued the Senat of that doubt, ſhe winge them what hee had tolde his mother. The Senate imbraced the childes wit and faithfulnes, and made an Act, that heareafter there ſhould no children come into the Senate with their fathers, but hee onely.
               
                  Vale.
                  Valerius alſo in the ſixt Booke and fift Chapter, writeth of Manlius Torquatus, yt while he was yong: he was of ſo blunt and dul a wit, that his father iudgeing him neuer like to bee profitable member to gouerne in the common wealth, ſent him into the cuntry to follow huſbandry. But afterward hee deliuered his father from danger of iudgment. And likewiſe his cuntrey in the tumult among the Latines, which was welnigh conſumed in the conflict, and obtayned therefore a moſt excellent triumph.Valerius. I ſuppoſe, ſaith Valerius, that he was imbaſed with this blemiſh of Fortune in his youth, wherby the excellency of his old age might appeare more bewtifull.
               And againe in the ſame place he ſaith, Scipio ſurnamed Affricane, whom the Gods would haue to be borne to the intent all vertue ſhould be effectually expreſſed vnto men in him, is reported to haue ſpent thriftely his younger yeares, but fartheſt of all other from ſuſpicion of laſciuious diſſolutneſſe.
               
                  Fabi▪ MaxAnd this alſo ſaith he, hath Fabius Maximus pu
                     •••
                  aſed vnto his poſteritie, that there was neuer any of better fame then hee while he was young, neither did our Citie of Rome euer bring foorth one that in his age was of greater honour and eſtimacion.
            
            
               Chap. 12 Of olde Men.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     ro. pom.
                  TRogus Pompeius in his ſecond Booke, writeth of Alexander the great, that on a time when hee was goinge foorth in a daungerous expedition: he leuied his armie not of Cutters and luſty youthes, but of ſuch antient ſouldiours as had ſerued his father and his cuntry in foretimes, to the intent hee might haue no common ſoldiers, but rather teachers of Chiualrie about him. Hee made no Captaines but men of thréeſcore

yéere olde, ſo that no man thought of fléeing, but of haueyng yt victory. And Valerius ſpeaking of the old Romanes,
                  Valerius. ſsith in thoſe daies yong men honoured old age, as though all olde men had bin their fathers. Cicero in his Booke of old age,Cicero. reporteth, that in a certen controuerſie when Piſiſtratus the tirant demanded of Solon, for what cauſe he durſt reſiſt him ſo boldly, he anſwered, becauſe of mine olde age.
               
                  Ioſephus in the firſt booke of Antiquities:Ioſeph. Let no man (ſaith hée) thinke that to be falſe which is written concerninge the long liuing of our forfathers in the old time. For in reſpect of their vertues, and the ſingular profits which they deuiſed for mankinde, as are the Artes of Geometrie, Aſtronomie, and ſuch like: GOD inlarged the tearme of their life, for elſe they could neuer haue come vnto that perfection in them. It is read in the Cronacles, that about the yéere of our Lorde a thouſand an hundred twentie nine, Ioānes de temporibus which liued in the time of Charles the Maine, and whoſe Squire hée was, died.
               
                  Papius in the beginning of his Romane hiſtorie,Papius. writeth that the ſame Romulus which builded the Citie of Rome, and called it after his owne name, choſe into his counſell an hundred Senatours whoſe aduice hee might vſe in all matters, whom by reaſon of their yéeres, and for the likenes of the charge, he called Fathers.
            
            
               Chap. 13 Of Citizens.
               
                  ARiſtotle in the third booke of his Politickes defineth a Citie after this maner.Ariſtotle. A Citie (ſaith he) is an vnitie of thoſe that be like, méeting together to liue in happy ſocietie. And felicitie is a certen treaſure ſurpaſſing all other thinges, and the very exerciſe of all vertues. And theſe be the things without which there can be no Citie, for why the lyfe of man requireth many neceſſaries. The firſt is foode, then Arts, next weapons to ſubdue the diſobedient: the fourth ſtore of mony: the fift inſtructions in religion whom they call Prieſtes: the ſixt a company of Judges to confer togeather what is right and what not, & if any of theſe be lacking it is no perfect city.

And therefore there muſt néedes bee Huſbandmen to prepare Victuales, Handycrafts men, Warriours, ritchmen, Prieſtes and iudges. And moreouer (he ſaith) whoſo hath abilytie to participate or communicate, that is to geue or take counſell, to rule or to bee ruled: the ſame is a perfecte Citizen.
               Likewiſe Citizens ought to agrée and not to fall out, for as ſaith Oroſius in the ſecond Booke of his Orchmeſtra,
                  Oroſius. the moſt wiſe Citizens of Athens, beinge taught by their owne harmes, haue ſaid that ſmal things grow greater by concord, and great things are deſtroyed by diſagréement, and whatſoeuer was done well or yll in their Commonwealth, their Domeſticall contention at home, and their continuall warringe abroade ſubuerted all, wheerby they left to their poſterytie an example of ruine with ſmall hope of recouery, but yet a moſt certen leſſon to learne, that it is good to folow that counſell in proſterytie, which ſeemeth beſt vnto vs when we were in aduerſitie.
               
                  Vitarbius.
                  Vitarbius in his worke of Architecture or Building, writeth that the Temple of Mars was builded without the walles of the Citie, becauſe their ſhould be no bloudy diſſention among the Citizens, but their force ſhould ſerue them to defend their walles in time of warre.
            
            
               Chap. 14 Of Marchantes.
               
                  Valerius.
                  
                     ƲAlerius in his ſeuenth Booke and fourth chapter, maketh mencion of one Claudius Centimmalus, who hauinge an Houſe ſtandinge very high vpon the top of the hill Celius in Rome: was commaunded by the Colledge of Southſayers, to take downe ſumwhat of the height therof, for that it hindred ſumdeale the perfect view of their Southſayinge. But hee immediatly ſolde it vnto Calphurnius Lauarius. Then Cato beinge a man of greate integritie, condempned the ſeller in the law, for that hée toulde not faithfully to the byer

both the commodities and diſcommodities like to enſue of the purchaſe, whiche hee ought to haue doone.
               Lykewyſe, the ſame Aucthour in the fyrſt Booke and ſecond Chapter, writeth, how that in the Preneſtine Siege it fortuned that one which cought a Mouſe, ſould him to another for two hundred Pence, ſutch was the ſcarcytie of victuales there. But it chaunced not longe after that hee whiche ſould it dyed for hunger hymſelfe, and he that bought it eſcaped a liue. The lyke Example is reported by Frontinus,
                  Frontinus, of the Caſſeline Siege.
               
                  Ariſtotle in the firſt of the Politickes writeth,Ariſtotle. that vpon a time a certen man reprochfully caſt Milleſius in the teeth that hee was a Begger, as though Phyloſophie were a knowledge vnprofitable to it ſelfe, and in no reſpect benificiall to the Profeſſours thereof. Then Milleſius perceyuinge by the iudgement of Aſtronomie, that the next yeare there woulde bee but verye fewe Oliues, in the Winter while there was great ſtoare hee gaue Monye in earneſt vnto the Fruiterers and Maiſters of Gardeines in Miletum and Tyrus, vpon a price for all their Oliues the yeare following, as though hee diſtruſted not but that there woulde be great ſtoare. But when the tyme came, and there were indeéde but fewe, and manie called for them, hee ſoulde them all ſuddainlye togeather, makynge what price hee lyſt, and by that meanes gatheryng a great ſumme of Monie, declared thereby how eaſie a matter it is for Phyloſophers to bee rytch when they lyſt, but Ritches is not the thing that they ſéeks for.
               In the ſame place it is alſo ſet downe that in the Ile of Sicil a certayne Marchaunt ſuddaynlye bought vp all the Iron that was there aboute, or that was to bee gotten out of the Mines. Afterwarde there came ſtrainge Marchauntes vnto the Marte, and no man ſoulde Iron but hee onely, not mutch rayſing the price, but of euery fiue Talentes hee gayned tenne Pence, reſeruing vnto himſelf a compotent profit.

But Dioniſius the Tyrant tooke his goodes from him, and would not ſuffer him (as a finder out of wealth, which thinge was mutch againſt his profit) to dwel any longer in siracuſis. For as the expoſitour ſaith vpon that place, tyrants may not abide to haue their ſubiectes ritch.
            
            
               Chap. 15. Of husbandmen and Husbandrie.
               IN the commendacion of huſbandry, Oroſius in the ſeuenth booke ſaith,Oroſius. that in the thrée hundred foureſcore and eleuen yéere, after the building of the citye of Rome, Quintus Cincinatus, which was Diſtator, was found in the cuntrey, and taken from the plough, and taking the honoure vpon him, and muſtering his Armye: obtained a great conqueſt ouer his enemies. And Valerius writeth,Valerius that they which were ſent vnto Aſtilius to come take the whole gouerment of the army vpon him, found him in the fieldes going after the plough tayll, ſowing of corne. Howbeit thoſe handes whiche were worne with exerciſe of huſbandrye, eſtabliſhed the ſure welfare of the commonwealth, and vanquiſhed hugie armies of raging enemies. And thoſe handes which not longe béefore guided the yokes of the drawing Oxen, held then the reignes of the triumphant charret.
               And Plinius in the xviii. booke of the hiſtorie of nature, it is the ſaying of Marcus Curius,
                  Plinie. ſaith hee, that theſame is a naughty Citizen, that cannot bee ſufficed to liue with ſeuen acres of lande. What was the cauſe then that they had ſutch plenty? Forſooth their generalles, and gouerners tilled the lande with their owne handes, and the grounde reioyced at a Laureat ſhare, and a triumphant ploughman. And looke with what diligence they went into the warres: with theſame they tilled their fieldes. And ordred their land with as mutch care, as they did their Camps. Many times captaynes, yea, and whole Senates haue bin fet out of the cuntrey. And now bondſlaues till theſame ground, and damned handes, and proſcribed countnances.
               
                  Valerius
                  Valerius in the ſeuenth booke and tenth chapter, telleth of

                  Valerius Coruinus, how hée béeing an hundred yéere olde,Vale. and in good ſtrength of bodye, left beehind him not onely a wiſhed example of dealing in Publique functions, but alſo in tilling the land, and all maner huſbandrie.
               And Noble Cicero in the fifte of his offices ſaith,Cicero. that among all trades, wherby a man may liue: ther is none to bee preferred beefore huſbandrye, nothing ſweeter, or more plentifull, nor fitter for a gentleman.
            
            
               Chap. 16. Of Handicraftes men.
               
                  ARiſtotle in his booke intitled ſecrets of ſecrets,Ariſtotle. ſheweth of the wonderfull operation of the influence of ye Planets in the natures of men and other things, by that which hapned vnto a childe the ſunne of the kinge of India. For when the childe his ſunne was growne to ſome yeeres, the king would haue had him brought vp in learninge, for which intent hee ſent him throughout all India and other Prouinces adiacent, very honourably accompanied, as it was beeſittinge for the ſunne of ſutch a Prince. But the fathers diligence profited him nothing at all, for why, the childes diſpoſition could not bée brought vnto anye other thing, but to bée an handicrafts man. Wherwith the kinge beeinge mutch troubled in his minde, ſent for all the wiſe men of his Realme to come vnto him, and when hee had told them that the cauſe why hée ſent for them was to knowe their opinions, concerninge his ſun: They anſwered him, that hée ſhould applye him to that wher to he was moſt inclined, and ſo hée did. In the ſame place alſo hee telleth of a certen weauer that had a ſunne, whoſe natiuity foreſhewed that hée ſhould bee a greate wiſe man, full of graue counſell, and in fauour with Princes. And when his father would haue inſtructed him in his own art of weauing: hee could not learne it. Then did hee whip him, and beat him and gaue him vp vnto his owne will, and the b
                     •
                  y ioyninge himſelfe vnto learned men, obtayned knowledge, and vnderſtanding of the heauenly motions, and of the gouerment of Princes, and at length was made one of the kinges Counſellers

                  Macrobius telleth in the ſeconde of his Saturnalia,
                  Macrob. that when Auguſtus returned from the Acticane victory: amonge thoſe that went to gratulate his returne, ther was one which caried a Chough whome he had taught to ſay: God ſaue thee Caeſar our Empe. vanquisher of Antonius &: being likewiſe ſaluted by a Parrat, hee willed y• they ſhould both bebought. And wondring at the ſame in a Pie, commaunded that to bee bought alſo. Which thing a poore Cobler béeholding, taught a Crowe to ſpeake in the ſame maner. And béeing ouercharged with coſt, and ſéeing that his birde would not anſwere, was woont to ſay often, all my labour is loſt, all my labour is loſt. But at length when the birde had perfectly learned the ſalutacion: hée offred her vnto the Emperour, who anſwered that hée had already enow ſutch Birdes at home, which ſaluted him after that ſort. Then the Crowe by chaunce remēbring the other ſpeach which his Maiſter, miſtruſtinge his docility, had often times vttred: béegan to ſpeake aloude before the Emperour ſaying: I haue loſt my labour, I haue loſt my labour, wherat Caeſar laughed, and commaunded him to bée bought likewiſe.
            
            
               Chap. 17. Of Ritch men.
               
                  Aemelius.
                  AEMilius Probatus in his booke, of Captaines of forrein Nacions, telleth a ſtorie of the Princes ſunne of Athens, how meruelous liberall hée was, who hauinge fermes and grainges in many places of the cuntrey: hee neuer put anye kéepers ouer his corne or frutes, but ſuffred euery man to take what hée liſt, his ſeruants followed him with monie to giue away if any lacked immeadiatly, leſt hée ſhoulde ſéeme to deney it by deferring it. If hee ſaw anye man ill apperrelled, hée woould giue him his owne clothes from his backe. Hee alwayes prepared great plenty of meat, that thoſe whom hée found vnbidden in the ſtréets, he mighte haue them all home vnto his houſe, which hee did euery day and miſſed not. His credite, his helpe, his goods, neuer was failinge to any that had neede. He encritched many, and buried many poore

folke of his owne coſt. Cecilius Balbus of ye Philoſophers toies,Cecili. bal. reporteth that Agathocles kinge of Sicilia ſaid, that a man ought to vſe plate of gold as hée would cuppes of clay, for it is far more better to ſhine in good maners, then in ritches. He vſed at his meales to dine and ſuppe in earthen veſſels, and on a time when one demaunded of him the cauſe, hée anſwered in this ſort:

                     Of Sicil though I now bee Kinge, a Potter was my ſier.
                     Whoſo to ritch and high eſtate ſhalt happen to aſpire,
                     Ariſing eft from baſe degree: vſe fortune reuerently,
                     And call to minde what was thy ſtate beefore thou roſe ſo by.
                  
               
               And therfore this kinge conſidering the baſenes of his parentage, was content to féede in earthen veſſel as other poore men are.
               
                  Valerius in his third booke, and fift chapter,Valerius reporteth that Marcus Curius, at what time the Ambaſſadours of the Samnites came to ſpeake with him, bid that they ſhould come into him, wher they founde him ſittinge vpon an euell fauoured fourme, very homely. Who merueiling at his pouerty, and deliuering vnto him a great ſumme of Mony which they deſiered him to accepte and to vſe it at his néede and pleaſure:Marc. Cu. hée refuſed it, willing them to tell the Samnites, yt 
                  Mar. Curius had rather rule ouer ritch men, then be ritch himſelf. And remember this, (quod hee) that I can neyther bee ouercome in batteill, nor corrupted with monie. The ſame aucthour likewiſe telleth of Frabricius, who was greater then any man in all the City in honour and aucthoritye, and match with the pooreſt in wealth and reuenue, who alſo ſent backe vnto the Samnites many great giftes, in whoſe tuition and charge they were. Hee was ritch without mony, and kept a great family, for why, it made him ritch not to poſſeſſe mutch, but to deſier ſufficient.
            
            
               Chap. 18. Of Poore men.
               
                  FRontinus in his fourth booke & firſt chapter telleth how that Scipio after ye hee had atchiued notable exploits in Spaine,
                  Frontinus.
                  
writeth, that according vnto a law made by Seleucus againſt adultrie, his ſunne, who was apprehended in the ſame, ſhould haue loſt both his eies. And when the whole City for the honour and duty which they bare to the father, deured that the puniſhment might bee remitted, long time refuſing to bée intreated, but at length relenting at the peoples ſute, firſt putting out one of his owne eies, and next one of his ſunnes: notwithſtanding fulfilled the whole puniſhment, deuiding himſelfe, as it were, beetwéene a mercifull father, and a iuſt iudge.
               In Policratus the fift booke, and ſecond chap. it is ſet down, that when on a time there aroſe a certen controuerſie béetweene King Alexander and certen of his ſouldiours,Policra. and the kinge had the foyle in the field iudgment: hée thankefully accepted the iudgment, and gaue great thankes to the iudges, whoſe faith hee had experimented in preferring iuſtice, béefore the reſpect of any Potentate.
            
            
               Chap. 23. Of Lawiers.
               
                  AVlus Gellius in his Nightes of Athens, telleth an hiſtorie of a young man,Aul. Geli. who cumming to Pithagoras to be inſtructed in eloquence, promiſed him a great ſumme of mony for his paine to bee payd that day, when hee firſt pleaded cauſe beefore the Judges and obtained it. But when hee had well profited in the art, and would take the handlinge of no cauſes vpon him: Pithagoras conuented him beefore the iudges, ſaying vnto him, now will I haue my reward, whether ſentence go with thee or againſt thee. For if ſentence go on ſhy ſide, then my rewarde is due: and if it go againſte thee, then is it due alſo, for haue I iudgment on my ſide. The
                     •
                   anſwered the ſchollar, vnderſtand this mutch Maiſter (quod hee) if ſentence go on my ſide then owe I nothinge vnto you by vertue of the ſentence: and if it go againſt mee, then by our bargaine I owe you nothing bicauſe I preueill not, and am not well taught. Which controuerſie the iudges perceiuing to bee very litigious, and doubtfull, deferred the Matter

vnto a very long day, ſo that I iudge the caſe is not yet diſcuſſed.Helinand. 
                  Heylinandus in his ſecond booke of the inſtitucion of Princes, telleth how on a time Demoſthenes demaunded of Ariſtodius what reward hee had receiued to ſpeake, who anſwered, a Talent: and I, (quod Domoſthenes,) had a more to hould my peace. Thus a man may ſee that ſome Lawiers tungues may do hurt vnleſſe they bée tied with a ſiluer chein, and many times they ſell aſwel their ſilence, as their words. Valerius writeth in the ſeuenth booke and third chapter,Valerius. howe that two men which were geaſtes in a houſe, brought certen mony and deliuered it vnto the goodwife with this promiſe, that ſhee ſhould deliuer it againe vnto them both togither. And a good while after, the one of them came and deceiued the woman, requiringe the monie, and ſayinge that his fellowe was dead, which ſhe foorth with deliuered. Not long after the other came alſo, and demaūded the mony. Wherat the poore woman beeing in diſtreſſe: made the oratour Demoſthenes of her counſel, who made this anſwere in her behalf. My friend (quod hee) this woman is redy to tender the mony, but ſhee may not pay it to you vnleſſe your fellow come with you, for as you ſay, this was the agreement beetweene you, that it ſhuld not bee payd to the one of you without the other.
               
                  Cecilius Balbus in the place beefore recited,Ceci. Bal. telleth of an auncient ſouldiour of Rome, who on a time being in ſome daunger beefore the iudges, beeſought Caeſar to come avrode into the court to helpe him. Vnto whom Caeſar appointed a good lawier. Then the ſouldiour ſaid, (O Caeſar quod hee) when thou waſt in danger in the Aſiane warre I ſought not a deputy, but I fought myſelf for thee, and there with all hee diſcouered vnto him the ſkarres of the woundes which hee had receiued there for him. Immediatly Caeſar ſprang foorth and came to helpe him, fearing leſt he might ſeeme not ſo mutch proud, as vnthankefull.
            
            
               Chap. 24. Of great mens Bailiffes.
               
                  IOſephus in the thirtenth booke and twelueth chapter of Antiquities,Ioſephus. writeth how that the Emperour Tyberius was

ſumwhat hard and waiward in all his buſines and affaires, and looke what Receiuers hee had appointed in Prouinces, hee ſeldome or neuer changed them. And beinge demaunded why hee did ſo: hee anſwered, bicauſe hee ſpared the poore people. For if the Receiuers knewe that they ſhoulde haue their office but ſhort time, then would they ſucke vntill the blood folowed, and how mutch the ſhorter time they ſhoulde bee in office: ſo much the more intollerable they would deale, and they that came new would deſtroy all that they founde. Which ſaying of his, hee confirmed by the example of a man that lay wounded by the way, in the Summer ſeaſon, and would not haue the flies driuen away which were about the wounde. And one which came vpon the way, ſuppoſing that of weaknes hee had let them alone: draue them away. Ah, (ſayd he) you haue done ill, for theſe flies were now full of blood and troubled mee but litle, and the freſhe ones whiche come will ſting mee more ſharpely. Euen ſo new appoynted officers do pinche the commons more eagerly.
               
                  Ariſtotle.
                  Ariſtotle in the Secretes of Secrets, writeth in this wiſe vnto Alexander: Neuer ſet ſutch a Bailiffe to rule in anye place which wil bee corrupted with mony, for in ſo doinge thou ſhalt ſubuert thy realmes, and beeſides thou canſt repoſe no aſſurance in ſutch a one as gapeth after treaſure, and commodity. For hee ſerueth thee for the golde, and giueth vp his ſences vnto mony, and by pouling of others: ſeeketh to fill vp vp his bottomleſſe bagges. And looke how mutch his mony increaſeth ſo mutch the loue therof groweth, and perhaps the loue of mony may induce him to ye deſtruction of thy ſelfe, and thy kingdome. And ſhortly after in the ſame place, hee ſetteth downe fiftéene conditions generally to bee required when wee would get, or chooſe a Bailiffe. The ſame Aucthour likewiſe in ye ſecond booke of his Rethorickes, prouing that Procuratours, Rent gatherers, Bailiffes & Receauers ought not vpon ſmall occaſion to be chaunged, wher hee vſeth for proofe Eſops fable of the wounded Foxe goinge vpon the way, and the flies which ſate vpon him and ſucked his blood.

Then the Vrcheon comming by, & mooued with compaſſion would haue driuen them away. To whom ſaid the Fox, do not ſo I pray you, for theſe are now full of blood, and if new ſhould come they would moleſt mee more, as new Bailiffes and Stuewards doo.
            
            
               Chap. 25. Of Frindes, and Frindship.
               
                  VAlerius in the fourth booke and fourth chapter,Valerius writeth of a paier of frindes, called Damon and Pithias, which were ſo faithfully linked in frindſhip, that when Di
                        •
                     niſius the tyrant would haue put one of them to death, and had giuen him reſpite before hée died to go home and diſpoſe his goods in order, the other of them doubted not to yéelde his life in pleadge for his frinde. And when the day of his returne approched, and hée was not yet came, euery man condemned this fooliſh ſuerty, of folly. Howbeit hée ſayd, that hée doubted nothing of his frindes conſtancy. But at the verie ſame houer and moment when his friend ſhould haue died in his ſtéede, hée came and offred himſelf
                     •
                   to death. Whoſe frindſhip and conſtancy the tyrant wondring at: forgaue the puniſhment, and moreouer requeſted them to let him bee the third frind, and to receiue him into their conſtant band of amity.
               Likewiſe the ſame Aucthour in the fift booke and ninth chapter, reporteth how that one Pretolius denyinge the requeſt of a certen frinde of his, why then, quod his frind what néede haue I of thy frindſhip? Nay, (quod Pretolius) what néede haue I of thine, if I muſt do a diſh
                     ••
                  eſt déede for thée? Tullie in his Booke of frindſhip writeth
                     •
                   y• when Tarquinius the proud was expulſed out of his kingdome, hée then vnderſtoode who were his truſty frinds, and who vntruſti, when he could neither bée éeuen with them, nor requite their benefits.
               
                  Seneca alſo in the ſecond of one of his woorkes,Seneca. writeth yt the philoſopher Artheſius had two frindes, a poore man, and one that was ſicke, but both of them for ſhamefaſtnes ſake, diſſē
                  bled their frindſhippe. Whiche thinge when the Philoſopher vnderſtood: hée thought ye hée ought to ſuccour them with out ſhamefaſtnes, and that with ſpéede. He priuely put a bag

of mony vnder one of their Pillowes, the other not knowing thereof, that laying aſide all fooliſhe and vnprofitable ſhamefaſtnes, his frinde might ſéeme rather to finde that which hée wanted, then to receiue that which hée aſked.
            
            
               Chap. 26. Of Kinsfolkes.
               
                  Valerius.
                  VAlerius writeth in the firſt booke and firſt chapter, that in the old time men were woont to make ſolemne feaſts, which they called Cariſtia, whereat were none preſent but kinſfolke and alies, that if chance there were any controuerſie or breatch béetwéene any of them at that ſolemnitye, in that time of making mery, the matter might bée propoſed, and heard, and frindly ended.
               Likewiſe hée writeth in the eight booke, that whē 
                  Decius the Generall or Emperour for the time, would haue ſet the imperial Diademe vpon his ſun Decius head, hée refuſed it, ſaying, I feare mee leaſt when I am Emperour I leaue to be a ſun, rather let my father haue the gouernment, and let it bée my dignity to be obedient vnto him.
               Moreouer in the fift booke and fift chapter, hee telleth of Ceſetius▪
                   who beeing commaunded by Caeſar, the conquerour both of all abroade, and at hom, to baniſhe his ſunne for that hée had miniſtred ſome occaſion of diſtruſte that hee affected the kingdome, anſwered him ſaying: truly Caeſar (quod hee) thou ſhalt ſooner take all my ſunnes from mée, then I will ſend away one of them at thy commaundement. Sée what great bouldnes this was, that hée would not yéeld vnto him to whom all the world was in ſubiection. Likewiſe the ſame aucthour in the fourth chapter writeth, that on a time the Praetor deliuered a malifactour, which was a woman, borne of a good family, vnto the Jailer to bée executed in the priſon, who béeing mooued with compaſſion towards the woman, put her not to death immediatly, but gaue leaue vnto her daughter to come vnto her, lookinge vnto her that ſhee ſhould bring her mother no foode, to thintent hee might kill her by famine. And when certein daies were paſt, merueyling how ſhe liued ſo long, in the ende hée perceiued how the

louing daughter reliued her mothers hunger with the milke of her breſts, which ſtrange fact being reported to the Counſell, procured the womans pardon. For what will not loue & duty finde out? and what is ſo rare to be ſéene, as the daughter to giue the mother ſuck? A man would thinke that it were againſt nature, vnleſſe it were the firſt and principall lawe of nature, to loue our parentes.
            
            
               chap. 27. Of good Weemen
               A Good Woman ought firſt of all, to ſet light by temporall goodes: touching which poinct Valerius,
                  Valerius. in the fourth booke and firſt chapter telleth the ſtory of Cornelia, which was mother vnto ye 
                  Gracchi: the ſame vpon a time receiued into her houſe of geſtred a gentlewomā of Campania, who ſhewed her very beutifull Jewels and ornaments, which ſhe had in ſtore made according to the faſhion in thoſe daies, but ſhe gaue her a quip for it: For when her children came home from ſchoole, and al theſe be my iewels & ornaments, quoth Cornelia. For truly, who ſo coueteth nothing, hath althing, & in greater aſſuraunce then he that hath mutch goods in poſſeſſion. And ſince worldly goods are but caſuall, yet are the vertues of ye minde ſutch as are ſubiect vnto no miſaduentures of Fortune. Secondly ſhe ought to ouercome all carnall deſire.Oroſius. Touching which poinct, Oroſius writeth in his fift Booke, that when the Germanes were ouercome by Marius, their weemen with a more conſtant courage then if they had bin the conquerours, deſired the Conſul that he would ſaue their virgins liues vppon condition yt they might preſerue their chaſtyty, and be reſerued to miniſter vnto the Gods. But when they could not obtaine ſo much of him: they daſhed the braines of their yong children againſt the ſtones and hanged themſelues.Vale. Thirdly ſhe ought to preſerue her loyaltie, & the tokens of her goodwill towards her huſband, whereof Valerius writeth in his fourth booke and fift chapter, that at what time the Spartanes kepte certen Lacedemonians in priſon, whom they deteined there to put them to death, their wiues being wéemen of noble blood, came thither, and deſiring to ſpeake with their huſbands before

they were executed: obtained licence of the Gailer to go into the Priſon vnto them. And when they were gone in they exchanged their apparel with their huſbands, and ſo the men departed out of the priſon in their wiues atyre, muffled, as though they had couered their faces for grief & heauines. Moreouer a woman ought to geue her huſband good counſell.
               
                  Seneca.The like example as touchyng the force herof, is by Seneca ſet foorth, ſhewyng yt when Auguſtus the Emperour of Rome bethought him how he might reuenge himſelf on one whiche ſought his death, the Empreſſe aduiſed him that he ſhould follow the trade of all good Phiſitions, who ſéeyng that they can not preuayle with Medicines of the ſame qualitie with the diſeaſe, apply the contrary. Wherfore ſayd ſhe, ſéeynge that you cannot preuayle by ſeueritie, proue to win by gentlenes, which hée did willyngly, and tooke effect.
            
            
               Chap. 28. Of wicked Women.
               
                  Oroſius.
                  ORoſius in his firſt booke of the woork before alleaged, ſetteth it downe, that when Ninus kyng of the Aſſyrians was dead his wife and Quéene Semiramis reygned in his ſtéede, blouddely embruing the kyngdome with ſlaughter the ſpace of .xly. yéeres. The ſame burnyng in luſt, and thirſtyng bloud, amōg ſo many horrible murders and abominable whoredomes, hauyng quatted her gréedy deſier with ſo many whoriſh deuiſes and ſtrange maners of couplyng, at length hauyng conceaued a ſonne by ſhamefull dealyng, and nouriſhing him vp by vngodly meanes, and hauing had with him inceſtious medling, ſhe ſought to couer her priuate ſhame with publique wickedneſſe. For ſhe gaue forth in cōmaundement that there ſhould be no ſutch reuerence nor reſpect betwéene parents and children, nor no diſcretion vſed in taking of wiues or obſeruinge of matrimonie, but in that point it ſhould be lawfull for euery man and woman to take whom they luſted. S. Ierome wryting againſt Iouinianus,
                  S. Ieaom. reporteth that the wife of Sylla was a common woman, or as they terme them a good fellow. And likewiſe Pompeius that ouercame welnigh the whole world,

had an incontinent Lady to his wife.Cato 
                  Cato alſo which was called Cenſorinus, married a very baggage of a meane parentage, yet was ſhe a ſhrew and a whore, and that more ſtrange is, proud and ſaucy to her Lord and huſband.
               
                  Iuſtinus the abridger of Torgus Pompeus writeth,Iuſtinus. that when Grippus which was ſun to Deme. had recouered his Fathers dominions, & had quite ended al forrein dangers, he was afterward aſſaulted by ye treaſon of his owne gréedy mother. Who for the deſire that ſhee had to reigne hauing betrayed one of her ſunnes and by that horible déede puttinge of all motherly affection, ſuppoſed now that her dignitie and honour was mutch embaſed by the conqueſt and renowme of her other child. Wherefore vpon a time ſhe watched opportunity, and preparing a cup of deadly poyſon, preſented him therewith when he came hot and thirſty from exerciſe. But her attempt tooke contrary effect. For Grippus, as it were offeringe dutyfull courteſie to his mother, deſired her to begin vnto hym. At the laſt he vrged her ſo far, that he found out great proofes of her purpoſe, wherewith the Quéene béeing ouercome, and turning the miſcheif vnto her ſelf, died with the poyſoned potion which ſhe had prouided for her ſunne.
            
            
               Chap. 29 Of maried Weemen.
               
                  
                     ƲAlerius writeth in the fourth booke and third Chapter,Valerius. that when Iulia, who was daughter vnto Caeſar & wife to Pompeius the great, beehelde her Lorde and Huſbandes Gowne brought home all bloody out of the féelde, beinge ſtroken with ſudden feare that ſome violence had befallen vnto him, fell downe in a ſwonde and was delyuered of Childe beefore her time, not with out great loſſe and detriment of the whole Empire.
               And Cecilius Balbus in the place before recited,Cecili. bal▪
                   writeth a ſtorie of a certen man whoſe name was Damelius, to whom a companion of his obiected that he had a ſtinking breath. Thē departed he home vnto his Wife diſcontented, & chiding with her for not telling him therof before. Thē his wife ſaid ſurely

I would haue done ſo (quod ſhe) but yt I thought that al men
                     •
                   breathes had ſmelt in that ſorte, and therfore very like it is that ſhee had neuer ioyned her mouth vnto any other mans.
               
                  Valerius.
                  Valerius alſo writeth in the ſixt booke, and third chapter, of Tercia Emilia the wife of Scipio African, whoſe ſinguler good will and pacience toward her huſband was ſo great, that perceininge that her Lorde bare good affection vnto one of her Handmaides: ſhe diſſembled the matter and would not ſee it, for that ſhe would not ſéeme to ſuſpect or blame her Lorde of incontinency, or to moue him to impaciencie which was conquerour of the worlde. Yea after her Huſbands deceaſe, ſhee made her handmaid frée, and beſtowed her in mariadge with one of her frée men.
               Lykewiſe Sulpitia was moſt diligently kept by her mother Iulia, becauſe ſhée ſhould not follow her huſband Lentulus into Italy, who was proſcribed and condemned to dye. Howbeit ſhe chaunged her atire, and put one the garment of a ſeruaunt, and taking with her two Handmaides, and two men, ſtole away ſecretly vnto him, not refuſing to baniſh her ſelfe, that her faith might be knowne to her condemned huſband.
            
            
               Chapter. 30. Of good widowes.
               THe word Vidua which ſignifieth a Widow, ſoundeth as it were Diuiſa, that is to ſay, one that is deuided and parted fom her Huſband. And Valerius writeth in the firſt booke & firſt chap. that in the old time thoſe wéemen yt were contented with one huſband & once marrying, were crowned wt a Garland of chaſtyty, ſuppoſing that the taſting of many and often wedlockes, was a token of a certen kinde of intemperancy.
               
                  Ierom.Saint Ierome in his woorke againſt Iouinianus reporteth that when Catoes Daughter had mourned foure wéekes for the death of her Huſband, a certen Matron demaunded of her when ſhe would make an ende of mourning? who anſwered, when ſhe made an ende of lyuing.
               Likewiſe ye ſame Aucthour in his booke de Anima, writeth o
                     •
                  her, that when on a time a frind of hers perſwaded her to

marry another huſband ſince ſhe was yet but young, and her beuty freſh & flouring: ſhe anſwered that ſhe would not: For, ſaid ſhe, if I chance to finde as good an huſbād as I had before, I will not ſtand in feare to léeſe him: but if hee bee éeuel, what néede I to trouble myſelf with ſutch an one? And agayne in the ſame place, when one in the preſence of Porcia, prayſed a certen woman which had buried one huſband and Married the ſecond, ſhe anſwered, that a good and an honeſt woman neuer marrieth but once. And ſemblably Valeria which was ſiſter vnto the Meſſalas, after the deceaſe of her Huſbande would neuer marry agayn, and béeing demaunded the cauſe, ſhe anſwered that her huſband alwaies liued vnto her. Arthemiſia alſo which was Quéene and wife vnto Mauſolus kinge of Caria, although in reſpect of her fidility towards her huſbands ſhée bee ſingularly commended, yet is ſhe moſt prayſed for that ſhee loued her Huſbande alwayes as deerely when hee was dead, as if hee had bin liuing: and in the honour of him ſhee builded a moſt bewtyfull and renowmed Sepulcher, in ſo mutch that thereof all greate and ſumptuous Sepulchers are called Mauſolea, that is to ſay, like Mauſolus monument.
            
            
               Chap. 31. Of Virgins.
               COncerning Virgins, Saint Ierome writeth againſt Iouinianus, that it appeareth in how great honour virgins were had among the people of Rome, for aſmutch as Conſuls and generalles of Armes ſitting in their triumphat chariots whē they returned home with conqueſt ouer their enemies, and finally all kinde of degrees were accuſtomed in meetinge them, go out of the way, and giue them place. Nichanor when hee had ouercome and ſubuerted the City of Thebes, was taken in the loue of a captiue virgin. And deſiringe her imbracinges and company in the commendable lawe of wedlocke, which thing a captiue might well haue liked of, hee found by triall that vnto chaſt mindes virginity is more deare then a kingdome. Whom the louer when ſhee was ſlayne held in

his owne hand, lamenting his owne greif, and her moſt miſerable condition.Seneca. 
                  Seneca in his ſixt booke of declamacions reporteth that a veſtale virgin wrote theſe verſes folowing:

                     O happy married wiues, your life is fraught with ioy,
                     For that I may not taſte your ſtate, I die in great anoy.
                  
Againſt which, there was alleaged an anſwere in this ſort:

                     As one that tried haſt a man, thou yeeldeſt vp the ghoſt,
                     Or dieſt bicauſe thou art denide the thing thou couetſt moſt,
                  
both which thinges ought to bée fartheſt from a woman of that cote. For vnto thée the Magiſtrates do caſt downe their faces in token of reuerence, vnto thée the Conſuls and Pretors giue the vpper hande in the ſtréetes, and it is no ſmall callinge to bee both a virgin and a prieſt: and that which hath bin ſpoken with ſo great affection that it ſeemed to procéede frō the very hark & intrailes muſt needes bee true, that what woman ſoeuer wiſheth the act, euen without the act doing is an harlot.Valerius. 
                  Valerius in the ſeuenth booke and third chapter, writeth of a certen veſtale virgine in Rome called Tuccia, whoſe chaſtity beeing obſcured with a ſiniſter report of incontinency, and ſhee her ſelfe beeing priuy of her owne innocency, tooke into her handes a ſiue, and thus prayed vnto the goddeſſe Veſta, ſaying: Veſta, if I haue alwayes touched thy ſacrifices with chaſte and vndefiled hands, commaund that I may take water out of the riuer Tyber with this Siue, and cary it into thy Temple. Which indeede ſhee accompliſhed, the common courſe of Nature giuing place to her boulde attemptes.
               
                  S. Ierom.Likewiſe Saint Ierome in the place béefore alleaged, writeth of another veſtale virgin named Claudia, who béeinge ſuſpected that ſhée had playd the harlot, and at that preſente the Image of the mother of the Gods ſtuck faſt in the Oaſe of Tyber in a ſhippe, to giue example therfore of her integrity, it is reported how ſhee tied her girdle vnto the ſhippe and that ſhée drew it ſo away, more thē many thouſand men were able to accompliſh.
               
                  And, Saynt Auguſtine in his woorke de ciuitate Dei,
                  s. Auguſt▪
                   writeth that the antient Romanes were wount to bury aliue the veſtale virgins that were corrupted, and whatſoeuer other Wéemen were taken in adultrye, they were one way or another puniſhed, but none were put to death: ſuppoſinge it méete to puniſh more ſeuerely the breach of a deuine vowe, then of humane chaſtity. And thus as I iudge I haue runne ouer all ſortes of men with whom a man may happen to bée conuerſant with all at the table.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            ¶The third Booke of Table Phyloſophy, which containeth certen delectable and pleaſant Queſtions, to be propounded while wee be at meate, or at any other time.
            
               The Preface.
               
                  
                     NOw, ſince we haue already breifly intreated concerning the manners and behauiour of thoſe, with whom wee may chaunce to be accompanied at the table, next it remaineth that with like breuity we run ouer certen pleaſant queſtions of table talke. For as witneſſeth Macrobius in his firſt booke of Saturnalia: A well nurtered minde cannot ſolace it felfe with more profit or ſeemelines, then in taking opportunity to diſpute and demaund queſtions after a learned and vertuous manner, and if neede be to anſwer with courteſy, and men cannot queſtion of any thing with greater delight then of matters of learning. And therfore as ſaieth, the ſame Macrobius in the third booke, the firſt thing which we ought to obſerue at the table is to weigh the eſtimation

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
and callinge of euery geaſt, and the next to take occaſion when he ſeeth it offred to ſpeake, not to poure forth our own ſecretes amonge the cuppes, neither yet to miniſter crabbed and vnpleaſant talke, but rather profitable and delightſome Queſtions.
            
            
               ¶The firſt Chapter containing fiue ſeuerall Queſtions.
               
                  
                     FIrſt therefore and foremoſt, this may bee demaunded: whether that the Aier or Meate bee more neceſſarie for the preſeruation of the lyfe of Manne? And it ſéemeth of the twayne that Meate is more neceſſary, ſince that is more neceſſarie whiche ſupplyeth that ſubſtaunce whiche is loſt, and whiche may be a member or part of a member of the bodie,Auicen. Conſtan. of whiche nature is our Meate according to the aſſertion of Auicen. But indeede Conſtantinus is of the contrary opinion, sayinge, that Aier is more neceſſary, to the body, prouing the ſame both by Reaſon, and experience. By Reaſon thus: Life conſiſteth in naturall heate, becauſe naturall heate is the beginninge of lyfe, wherfore that thinge which tempereth naturall heate, retayning it in the naturall temperature is more neceſſary, but the Aire which by way of breathinge wee drawe in, is of ſutch ſort: wh
                     •
                  rfore it is more neceſſary. By experience thus: If a man be ſuddenly brought out of a ſtinkinge cloſe priſon, firſt he deſi
                     •
                  eth to take the freſh Aier, and afterwarde calleth for Meate, and Drink. But againſt the reaſon firſt alleaged it may bee anſwered negatiuely, for lyfe conſiſteth in two points, the one is a beginning ſumwhat far of, as reſtoringe that which is loſt, and the conſeruation of all the members and parts. In reſpect of which, the nouriſhing of natural heat

is moſt neceſſarie, whiche is immedyatly and principally maintained by the qualities of the Aire. And therefore Aier is more neceſſary to the preſeruacion of lyfe, for that it reſpecteth the life principally and immediatly.
               Secondly, it may be demaunded which of the two, Meate, or Drynke, is more neceſſarie vnto life? To this may bee anſwered that Meate is, although that Drinke bee commonly more deſired then Meate. The reaſon of the firſt is, that that is more neceſſary which reſtoreth the thinge whiche is loſt, then that which ſerueth onely to conuey the iuce about al the body. But Meate is ordained to reſtore the parts, and Drink to cary the meate about the body: wherfore the concluſion is manyfeſt. And that Drink is more gréedely deſiered: the reaſon is, for that drink delayeth the vehemency of natural heat, in which reſpect it is more neceſſary vnto lyfe then Meate, as is ye Aier alſo. Thus Drinke hath two offices, firſt it conueieth the Meate vnto all partes of the body, and ſo is Meate a thing more neceſſary then drink. Secondly, it mitigateth the naturall heate, and preſerueth it in the iuſt temperature, and is therby more neceſſarie then meate. Wherfore any lyuinge creature can longer liue without meate, then drinke.
               Thirdly, this queſtion may be demaunded: Wether euel Aier or euell Meate do more hurt the bodye? Whereunto it may be abſolutely anſwered, that éeuell Aier hurteth more, for, that it is more noiſome vnto the hart, which is the fowntaine of Naturall heat, and of the ſpirites. Howbeit wee may vſe a diſtinction herein, that a thinge may do harme after diuers manner of wayes. Fyrſt, if it touche ſome noble and princypall part, and the other thing do not ſo. Secondly, if it alter it often times and it cannot otherwiſe be avoyded. Thirdly, if it touch it immediatly. And by theſe three meanes éeuill Aier hurteth more then éeuell Meate. For it toucheth a principall parte, and it is often drawne in, and it toucheth the part immediatly. Fourthly, a thinge may hurte the more, becauſe it maketh a ſtronge impreſſion. Fiftly, if it continnue there longe, and cleaue longe time vnto the

                  
                     •••
                  ber. And by theſe laſt meanes, corrupt meate eaten a
                  
                     •••
                   more then naughtie Aier drawne in.
               
                  
                     ••
                  urthly, this demaund may be moued: Whether Meate 
                        •••
                     pe do more comfort the bodye? It may bee anſwered, 
                     〈◊〉
                   lack of Meat doth more gréeue the body then lack of ſléep, and therby concluded that Meat is more neceſſary then ſléep. And the reaſon is this, for ye ſléepe reſtoreth not that which is loſt, neither appeaſeth the vehemency of natural heate from woorking vpon the natural moiſture, which being conſumed, then death is at ye dore, which meat doth: wherfore it is more neceſſary. Moreouer, there be thrée powers, the Vitall, Naturall, and Animall. The Animall is not ſo mutch appertayning vnto the ſubſtaunce and effecte of lyfe, as the other two are. Wherfore, nutriment which belongeth vnto the Natural and Vitall faculties: is more néedefull then ſléepe, which belongeth vnto the Animall vertue onely.
               Fiftly, it may come into queſtion: whether the Aier or Meat do more nourish the body? Vnto this may bée anſwered, that there is ſome kinde of Nutriment which goeth into the ſubſtance of that which is Nouriſhed, and is conuerted in to the ſame, and after this maner the moſt fineſt and ſubtileſt partes of the meate is nutriment vnto the ſpirits, and not the Aier. Secondly, a thinge may bee termed a nutriment vnto the ſpirites, becauſe it comforteth them, and thus wee call that the temperature or temperamēt of any thing which preſerueth the ſame and nouriſheth it, hauing ſome proportion with that which is nouriſhed. And in this manner, Aier nouriſheth the ſpirites, refreſhinge, and preſeruing them in their naturall temperature. And this mutch concerning this Queſtion.
            
            
               The ſecond Chapter containinge 12. Queſtions.
               THe ſixt Queſtion mooueth this demaunde: Whether euell Meate can ingender good iuce? And accordinge vnto the opinion of Haly ſuper tegni,
                  Haly. 
                  &c. It is anſwered that there may bee engendred good blood out of éeuell Meate, & contrarywiſe

alſo. The reaſon is this, good Meate may be éeuelly digeſted, and ſo therof become éeuell blood. And contrarywiſe, naughty meat well digeſted, and ſo conuerted into good blood. So yt in euery kinde of meat, yea if it were of a venimous qualiti are found two natures. The one, wherein it is vnproportionable vnto the nature of the partes of the body, and by this meanes eeuel meat ingendreth éeuel iuce, and this is the proper effect which éeuel meate worketh. The .y. nature is wherby meats haue the qualitie to become proportionable vnto the partes & like vnto them, and in this ſort naughtie meates may ingender good iuce. For when Nature is ſtronge, ſhe is able to remoue the other qualitie whiche is néereſt vnto her, to wit in the ſame meate which is receiued, and when it is altered ſhe bringeth it vnto her owne qualitie, and ſo of éeuel meate engendereth good blood. And contrarywiſe, if Nature be weake and feable, ſhe is not able to ouercome the meates, & to bring it vnto good effect, which of it ſelf is of power to be conuerted into commendable nutriment, & therefore fayling for want: turneth good meate into éeuell iuce.
               Seuenthly it may be demaunded: Whether a ſimple, or a compowned Meate be eaſieſt of digeſtion? To this wee muſt anſwer with Dyaſanus,
                  Dyaſanus. as appeareth in ye laſt of the Saturnalia that ſimple meate is the eaſieſt. For cruditie and ſurfeit commeth two maner of waies, either by the qualitie or quantitie of the meate. By the qualitie, into which the meat is conuerted if it be not agreeable vnto the reſt of the humours of ye body, & by ye quantitie therof, if ther be more receiued into ye body then nature is able to digeſt. Then, for as much as the diuerſitie of meats hath diuerſity of Natures, & ſome are ſoone digeſted and conuerted into iuce, whiles the harder lye boylyng in the ſtomack: the firſt waxeth ſower and vnprofitable and is perceiued by ſower & euell ſauouring belching, & there whiles that which is harder of concoction procureth gulping, & boyling in ye belly, euen as gréene wood lieth ſmoking when it taketh heat of the fire. Beſides that, the diuerſitie of meats prouoketh gurmandize, & a deſire to eate more then enough,

ſo that Socrates counſelled very wiſelye that men ſhoulde abſtayne from ſutch meates as ſeeme to prouoke appetite when the belly is full, or to increaſe thirſt, when a man hath drunken ſufficient.
               Eightly, it may bée demaunded whether it be good to walk immediatly after meate or not? And hereunto it is to bée anſwered, that there is two ſorts of Motions, or exerciſes. The one may bée termed a toyle, and that is not good after meate. The other is a kinde of walking either within doores, or abroad downe ſum hill,Iſaac. wherof Iſaac intreateth, and the ſame moderately driueth the me
                     •
                  te down vnto the bottome of the ſtomack, to the intent that 
                     ••
                  turall heate, which béefore was as it were a ſléepe may bee awakened and ſtirred vp, which is requiſite after meat.
               Ninthly, ſome man may demaund whether it bee good to ſleepe immediatly after meate or not? wherto I anſwere, that ſléepe is not holſome while the ſtomacke is burdeined, for it procureth the meate to bée burned,Auicen. as witneſſeth Auicen, li
                     ••
                   as the bread burneth when the Ouen is ouer heated, as alſo bicauſe it procureth the reume and payne in the head, wherfore moſt expediēt it were to deferre ſléeping vntill the meat bée departed out of the ſtomack.
               Tenthly, What is the cauſe that if a man ſtay lenger for meat then his accuſtome houre, hee leeſeth his appetite? It muſt bée anſwered, that when the ſtomack hungreth and findeth no meat to worke vpon, it draweth éeuil humours from al parts of the body & feedeth vpon them, and is therby falſly and coū
                  terfaitly ſatiſfied, and ſo deſiereth no more, wherfore in this caſe Rhaſis giueth aduiſe,Rhaſis. to drinke a draught of warmewater or tiſane, wherby to prouoke the party to vomit if it may bée.
               Eleuenthly, Are our bodies warmer beefore meat or after? Galen ſaith in his ſecond booke of the ſumme of Phiſick,Galen. that naturall heat is augmented thrée waies: either in quantity, as in applying ſwéete and warme furres, or the bellye of a young whelp vnto the ſtomack: or in quality by medicines, or ioyntly by both meanes in meates, and by this meanes the

body is warmer after meate then it was before.
               Tweluethly: whether doth faſting hurt more a cholerick perſon or a flegmatick? I anſwere according to Hyppocrates,
                  Hyppocr. that it hurteth moſt a cholerick, the reaſon is, for that heate more aboūdeth in a cholerick perſons ſtomack then in a flegmaticke ſo that the ſame heat conſumeth more, and conſequently maketh him more to deſire foode. Moreouer, fleame may be turned into blood, but choler can neuer, ſo that the flegmatick perſon containeth in his body the matter and ſubſtance of blood, and may therby the better ſatiſfie the appetite. As for the cholericke, he hath in him no ſutch mattter, wherfore hunger is more grieuous vnto him then to the flegmatick, as experience in them both proueth to bée true.
            
            
               The .iii. Chapter, conteinyng. x. queſtions.
               NOw in this queſtiō i
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  alleth out that many are deſirous to vnderſtand, what should bee the cauſe that many men are very hungrie, and looke when they ſit downe to their meat, they are immediatly ſatiſfied with a litle. Again, ſome haue but ſmall appetite, and when they bee ſit at their meate, they eate greedely: Whereunto wée muſt anſwere, that this chanceth according to the diuerſity of ſtomackes. For ſome mens ſtomockes are ſmall & hot, and in yt the ſtomak is hot deſireth much, and in that it is ſmall the heat diſperſeth ſoone the meat ouer all the capacity therof, and maketh a fantaſticall fulnes, ſo that litle meat ſufficeth ſutch. Other ſome haue large ſtomackes and could, and in that their ſtomackes are cold, a litle meat filleth them, but in that their ſtomackes are large, they feede much and a long time.
               Secondly: which of the twayne, thoſe which haue a ſtronge heat or a weake, are able longeſt to abide hunger? Surely I ſuppoſe that they which haue the ſtronger may faſt longeſt, ſince for the more part ſutch perſons are of the ſtronger conſtitucion. Howbeit this diſtinction is to be noted, that there bée two poincts to bée conſidered in faſting, to wit, ye reſolution of natural heat, & the vtter quenching of the ſame, & the ſtrōgeſt nature is able beſt to ſuſtaine them both. And ſecondly, the

diſcōmodities ar to be weighed which enſue faſting, of which the ſtrongeſt nature ſuſtayneth moe then dooth the weake.
               Thirdly: how chanceth it that thoſe whoſe powers be ſmall and narrowe, can abide honger better then they which haue wider? Bicauſe through wide and large pores, the body is more aboundantly reſolued, & leſſe through the narrowe and ſmall pores, wherfore ye remayneth which ſhould prouoke appetite.
               Fourthly: doth choler nourish or not? vnto this demaunde wee anſwere,Galen. Iſaac. Auicen. that although Galen and Iſaac ſay, that it nouriſheth not, bicauſe blood onely nouriſheth: yet Auicen holdeth opinion that choler nouriſheth alſo, which two opinions of ſingular learned men, we muſt make to agrée after this maner. Ther are two ſortes of choler, wherof the one, which is conteined within the gall cannot nouriſh: the other neceſſarely concurreth with the blood, wherwith the partes of the bodye which are of a cholerick conſtitution, are as well nouriſhed, as the ſanguine partes are with the blood.
               Fyfthly, whether can the ſicke or the whole beſt indure hunger? Some hold opinion that the ſicke can, bicauſe naturall heat in a ſicke perſon is buſie in reſoluing mo fumoſities, breathes, and vapours riſing from the humours, then in an whole perſon. Howbeit this reaſon is weake, firſt bicauſe there can bée no partes nouriſhed, nor ſpirites engendred by corrupt humours, and ſecondly if this were ſo, then ſhoulde there bée moe ſpirites in a ſicke body then in an whole, and bicauſe the ſpirits are the carriers of the powers and ſtrēgth into althe parts, the ſicke ſhould bée ſtronger then the whole, which is euidently falſe. But to growe to the purpoſe, wée anſwere that whereas the ſicke tollerateth hunger better then the whole perſon, there are thrée cauſes to bée giuen: the fiſt is bicauſe nature is occupied about the ſicknes, and the cauſe therof: the ſecond, for that the partes of the body are infected and cheaked with the corrupt matter, and therfore do not deſire nutriment: and the third is bicauſe the ſtrength of the ſicke party béeinge, as it were, layd a ſléepe and weakned, 
                     •
                  auſeth them to haue no appetite vnto meat.
               Sixtly, whether in the force of a ſtrong or weake ſtomacke

beſt able to abide hunger? The force of a ſtrong ſtomack deſireth moſt, but it may beſt ſuſtaine forbearing of meate, and contrariwiſe the appetite of a weake ſtomack looketh leſſe for meat, & is not ſo well able to abide delay from it.
               Seuenthly, which of the twayn is beſt able to indure hunger hee that is accuſtomed to eate much meat or litle? It may bee anſwered that hée that vſeth to eate much meat may beſt faſt for by reaſon of his great rauening hee hath but ſmall heate, and therfore may beſt indure hunger, & ſo likewiſe contrariwiſe, bicauſe of the contrary cauſe.
               Eighthly, whether doth faſting more grieue men in hoate or cold ſeaſons of the yeere? It is more noyſome in Summer then in winter, bicauſe the body is more reſolued in Summer then it is in winter, and therfore ought then to bée fead more aboundantly and very often, and in winter it ſufficeth to eate once in a day. Ninthely, why are thoſe that feede griedieſtly ſooneſt filled? Hereunto wée muſt anſwere as it is writtē in the Saturnalia, that they which feede griedely eate in mutch aier with their meat by reaſen of their wide gapinge, and often fetchinge of their breath. And therfore when the veines are filled with aier, the appetite is fully ſatiſfied.
               Tenthly, wherfore are wee able to abide hoat meates and drinkes in our mouth, which wee cannot for heat ſuffer in our handes? wée anſwere as appeareth in the place béefore alleaged, for that the naturall heat which is conteined with in the inner partes of the body is very ſharpe and vehement, and therfore it ouercommeth & weakneth whatſoeuer other hoat ſubſtance cummeth within the mouth, wherfore then when thou putteſt eny extreme hot thing into thy mouth, gape not wide nor fetch not thy breath in oftē, thinking therby to coole it, but rather ſhut thy lips almoſt cloſe togither, to ye intent yt the greater heat which cūmeth out of ye belly, may help the mouth, and that greater heat ouercome the leſſer, as for the hand that can abide no hot thing bicauſe it is holpen by no other heat then is in it ſelf.
            
            
               The. 4. chap. conteining. 7. queſtions.
               
                  SOme man may haply moue this queſtion: what is the cauſe that when a man which is hungry drinketh, thereby he aſſwageth his hunger? but if hee bee a thirſt and eate, his thirſt is not therby ſlaked? Vnto this demaund there is anſwere made in the Saturn▪
                   that there is no impediment but that liquor may paſſe into euery part of the body, and repleniſhe the veines therof. But the ſubſtance of meat is more groſſer, and it cannot paſſe into the veines vntil it bee digeſted by litle and litle, ſo that it cannot ſlake the thirſt which it findeth, yea rather it ſoketh vp ye moiſture which it findeth, wherby thirſt which is the want of moiſture, is more increaſed.
               Secondly, Such as are faſting, whether bee they more an hungred then a thirſt? By the ſame place I anſwere yt they thirſt moſt, foraſmuch as naturall heat worketh continually vpon the foode and nutriment which wée receiue, conſuming it away. Which alſo appeareth in children whiles they be infāts which conſume and concoct great ſtoare of nutriment by reaſon of their vehement heate. But contrariwiſe wée perceiue how eaſely old men can ſuſtaine faſting, by reaſon of the defaute of naturall heat in them. But in the middle age, if naturall heat bée ſtirred vp with exerciſe, it procureth a ſtrōger appetite vnto meat, for want of naturall heat. Wherfore, if there bée alwaies heate in appetite, & moiſture bée the peculiar ſubſtance wheron heat worketh, if when a man is hungry hée deſireth meate, ſurely heat eſpeciallye requireth his own nutriment, which being receiued, the whole body is therwt refreſhed, & cā yt lenger tary for more ſoūder ſuſ
                     •
                  enāce
               Thirdly, why is it that wee conceiue more delight in drinking when wee are a thirſt, then in eating when wee be hungry? Drinke, as a ſubſtance more liquid thē meat, ſoner perceath into the ſtomack & the reſt of ye body, and at one time make
                     •
                  h a great & ſenſible delectation of the body to ariſe in eueri part therof, wheras meat by ſmal and ſmall recomforteth ye want and weaknes of the ſame, wherby the delight therof is much diminiſhed. Fourthly: why doth the ſelf ſame drinke ſeeme ſtrōger to one tha
                        •
                      is faſting, thē to one that is full? Hūger emptieth

ye veines, & fulnes ſtoppeth thē, and therfore whē as the drink paſſeth through the empty partes, it is farre more euident perceiued, and cauſeth more ſtrong ſenſe of delectation vnto the taſtinge.
               Fiftly, If a man be thirſtie and haue a drie ſtomack, whether may a litle drinke ſuffice him or not? It is hereunto to be anſwered according vnto Galen,
                  Galen. thoſe which haue drie ſtomackes are ſoone a thirſt, and a litle drinke ſufficeth them. The reaſon wherof may be this, for that euery member which is dry, ſhrinketh togither and waxeth to be of leſſe capaſitie then it was before, whiche hapneth vnto the ſtomack which is drye, and therfore is ſoone filled, and with a litle drink. And in the ſtomack there is ingendred great thirſtines, when the mouth therof waxeth drie and deſireth to bee moiſtned with drinke, and then a litle drink ſufficeth it. For when that which was drie and hard, is ſhrunken togither, the capacitie thereof is ſoone filled with drink and a litle extinguiſheth the thirſt, inſomutch as it féeleth not it owne emptynes, and this thirſte ſoone returneth againe.
               Sixtly, May the ſtomack be ouer charged and troubled with to mutch drink? Surely Galen affirmeth the ſame,Galen. and the reſon may appeare out of the premiſſes. For if a dry ſtomack by reaſon of the narrownes therof, be full with a litle drinke, if then the drink be more then the capacitie of the ſtomacke be able to conteine, néedes, as Galen ſaith, muſt much drink ouer flow and runouer in it.
               Seuenthly, why can a moiſt ſtomack beare mutch? A moiſt ſtomack is in all points contrary to a drye, for it is very ſoft, like vnto a ſoft bottle or bladder, & for that cauſe is able to cō
                  teine more, for it yéeldeth euery way as the meate which is receiued chanceth to fall or ſway in it, & alſo apparent it is to ſence, that a moyſt bladder will receiue more then wyll a dry one, and ſo likwiſe wil a moyſt ſtomack. And moreouer forſomutch as it is moiſt without any drieneſſe, which may procure thirſte, therfore it mutch deſireth not drinke, howbeit it receiueth much and is nothinge gréeued therewith, as is the

drie ſtomack. And for this cauſe, the Danes, Polonians, Flemmynges, yea, and the Engliſhmen can beare mutch drink, bicauſe their ſtomackes are wide, procured by the ſoftneſſe of moyſture. But in hoat Regions as are Spayne, Barbarie, and ſutch like, the inhabitants do thirſt mutch, and drinke but litle, bicauſe of the drineſſe of the mouth of the ſtomacke, and in ſutch their ſtomackes can receiue but litle, bicauſe of the drineſſe therof.
            
            
               The. 5. Chap. of Thirſtineſſe, conteining 4 queſtions.
               NOw are wée occaſioned to moue this queſtion concerning Thirſtines, Whether the cauſe therof proceede ſumtime from the Lungues or no? Which Galen affirmeth, for that whē the Lungues are hoat and drie,Galen. they longe to bée moyſtned, which drines is ſpecially aſwaged by drawing in of cold aier, and cold and moyſt.
               Secondly, what is the cauſe why thirſtines, which cummeth frō the Lungues, is appeaſed by drawyng in cold and moiſt aier? And the drineſſe of the ſtomack by drink? It is thus to be anſwered, that there be two paſſages, the one for ayer, which is directed vnto the Lungues: the other for meate and drinke, & that paſſeth into the ſtomacke. And for this cauſe the thirſtineſſe which cummeth of the Lungues, is abated by drawyng in of colde aier, and that which riſeth of the ſtomack, is ſlaked with drinke.
               Thirdly, Is thirſt a deſire of that which is colde and moiſte, or of that which is hoat and moiſt? There are in the body two appetites or deſires: the one in reſpect of meat, to reſtore that which is loſt, which appetite is ſatiſfied with that whiche is hoate and moyſt, accordyng to the nature of the partes to bée nouriſhed. The other looketh for that which is cold and moiſt, to repreſſe the flame and firines of naturall heate, whiche is accompliſhed by drinke only, and ſutch drinke as men ſeldom vſe but in the way of medicine, or when they bée ſicke.
               
                  Galen.Fourthly, Which quencheth the thirſt beſt of wyne or water? Thirſt, as ſaith Galen de ſimplici medicina, is cauſed two maner

of wayes: the one by emptineſſe: the other by heate & drought of the heart. That which cōmeth by emptineſſe of the partes, is cheifly aſwaged by Wine which is both meat and drinke, for it requireth ſutch drinke as is able to reſtore that ſubſtāce which is loſt, which qualitie ſince it is in Wine, that is the only drinke then wherby that thirſt is appeaſed. But as for the other thirſt which is cauſed by heat & drought of the heart that is again double, the one cummyng of heat only, whiche is quenched with colde only, as with Vineger and ſutch like. And likewiſe ſome is cauſed by drieneſſe, & is ſlaked by moyſture. Againe, thirſt which is ingendred by heate, is of thrée ſortes: The one riſeth forth of the ſtomack: the other foorth of the Lungues, and the third from the parts which are farther of. So that whiche cummeth from the Lungues is ſlaked by drawing in of colde Aier, and that which procéedeth from the ſtomack and other partes neare therevnto, is quenched with colde water, but that which ſpringeth of ſome éeuil diſpoſition of ye parts and members which are far diſtant, as are ye Liuer and ſutch like, is delayed with water wherwith ſum pearſing and ſubtile thinge is mingled to cauſe it the ſooner to go vnto the place, as is vineger or ſutch like, for water of it ſelf is but ſlow and dull in operation, wherfore it is needefull that ſome ſharper thing bée ioyned with it.
            
            
               The 6. Chap. of Hurtes which come after meate, conteing. 15 queſtions.
               HEreafter wée meane to intreate concernynge certen accidents which chance after meate and drink, And firſt to begin with the ſower belching, it may be demaunded wherof it cō
                     meth? And vnto this point wée anſwere with Galen,
                  Galen. that the Sower belching procéedeth of a fainting heat, which fayleth & decayeth by meanes of colde. For heat is the beginning of the ſowernes which beginneth to digeſt, but is not able to accompliſh it, which defaut cūmeth eſpecially by hinderāce through cold. Secondly, why is not this ſowernes felt in the ſtomack▪ immediatly vpon the receiuing of meat? At ye firſt falling of the meat into the ſtomak, it remaineth a while in ye ſame nature

Which it had before it was eaten, and cānot ſo ſoone be ſower, but when once the heate beginneth to work vpon it, there inſueth indigeſtion, and after that the ſowrnes.
               Thirdly, Why hapneth this ſowernes rather, and in more aboundance to them that ſleepe, then do wake? In ſléeping the meate diſcendeth not downe foorthwith vnto the bottome of the ſtomack where the digeſtion is wrought, but remaineth in the mouth of ye ſtomack, fléeting there about, & ingendring windynes. But for the more part while men be awake, they be ſtirringe about or walkinge, whereby the meat is driuen downe, and enforced into the bottome of the ſtomack, whiche is the moſt effectuall place of digeſtion, and repugnant to the cauſe of ſowernes.
               Fourthly, Why (ſaith Auicen) do ſwete things ſooneſt wax ſower in the ſtomack,Auicen. as milk, and ſutch like? Milke, and ſweete blood are ſoone altered, and when ye ſtomack aſſaieth to digeſt them and cannot, then turne they to be ſower.
               Fiftly, Why will wine wax ſower quickly in the ſtomack? Wine and Milke of their owne nature are very ſoone conuerted into ſowerneſſe, & the ſtomack vſeth to bring thinges from power into acte, and ſo maketh them ſower.
               Sixtly, ſince all Wines be hote: How chanceth it, that they ingender colde diſeaſes, and not hoat? Wine of it ſelfe bréedeth no diſeaſe, but by filling the ſinewes and braine, and ſutch repletions inſue indigeſtion, and indigeſtion nouriſheth colde ſickneſſes, and by this meanes Wine bréedeth none but colde infirmities.
               Seuenthly, Wherof commeth wringing, and griping in the bellie? Wringing and gripinge chanceth in all partes of the body, and it is of diuers ſorts. One cummeth of groſſe windineſſe, and this happeneth in the bottome of the ſtomack: anoof groſſe & tough humours, and another of cholerick ſuperfluities. And this laſt kinde of gripinge in whatſoeuer it beginneth, for ye moſt part it endeth in ye ſtomack, the bottom therof being a place of great ſenſibilitie, notwithſtandinge that this griping alſo may paine any other place of ye guts wherſoeuer.
               
                  Eightly, May a ſick Man eate as much meat as he was won
                        •
                      to do when he was in good health? Cuſtome is a ſecond nature and hée that is accuſtomed to eate mutch when hée is whole, cannot faſt when hee is ſicke, and therfore muſt bée more often refreſhed with meat, euen as often as hee vſed to bée béeing in good health, and more abundantly then hée that eateth litle.
               Ninthly, whether doth bread or fleash more hurt vnto ſutch as are recouering out of ſicknes?
                  Rhaſis. 
                  Rhaſis ſaith that fleaſh is leſſe hurtful then bread vnto them, and among all fleaſh, Swines fleaſh nouriſheth moſt, and béeing light of digeſtion it is moſt agréeable vnto them.
               Tenthly, whether is bread or fleash moſt meeteſt for thē that haue an Ague? Concerning fleaſh, ther bée two poincts to bée conſidered in the dieting of Agues. The one is light digeſtiō, and herein fleaſh excelleth: the other is eaſie conuerſion into nutriment, and herein bread is better then fleaſh, for that fleaſh by reaſon of the oylines therof is ſoone inflamed.
               Eleuenthly, whether is it good to permit ſutch as recouer out of ſicknes to drinke wine immediatly after their fleash, or afore? In this poinct the common people is deceiued, for the fleaſh ſhould firſt bée eaten, and afterward the wine drunken bicauſe aboue all things wine is ſooneſt conuerted into blood, and ſpirits, & augmenteth natural heat, and therefore ought to bee giuen later then fleaſh.
               Tweluethly, whether ought one that is recouering out of ſicknes, to be dieted & gouerned two daies, like as when he was ſicke? verely hée ought ſo, and that for thrée cauſes. Firſt, for the debility of naturall power: Secondly, bicauſe of cuſtome: Thirdly bicauſe of ſome diſtemperature remaining yet with in the body ſince the ſicknes. This alſo may be a reaſon, that it is not good to change ſuddenly from that whereto a man is accuſtomed but by litle and litle, and therfore the recouerer ought for a while to reteine the ſame diet.
               Thirtenthly, Is groſſe meat good for ſuch as recouer out of ſicknes? According vnto the iudgment of Hyppocrates, it is not

for, ſaith hée, it is conuenient that they bée nouriſhed two or thrée daies with the ſame diet which they vſed béefore. For otherwiſe they would ſoone bee altered by feeding on groſſe meates, which were not good for them to do.
               Fourtéenthly, which of theſe two alterations hurteth a man moſt, from emptines to repletiō, or from repletion to emptines? The ſudden change from emptines to fulnes is more hurtfull then from fulnes to emptines, according to the opinions of Hyppocrates and Auicen.
                  Hypp. Auicen. The reaſon is, for that through the emptines which went before, the ſtrength of the body is ouerthrowen, the naturall heat and ſpirites beeing reſolued, ſo that hee cannot beare a great quantity of meat, nor a ſudden change vnto fulnes.
               Fiftenthly, how chanceth it that ſome meates of euell iuce as Eeles, fresh Beefe, and ſutch like, do many times free many men of the Ague? It fortuneth ye ſundry, many times are deliuered by ſuch contraries in their féeding, both by the prouocation of nature, who after the receiuing of ſutch meates is much lightned, and therby aſſaying to diſburden her ſelf doth often caſt herſelf headlong, ſumtime to better, & ſumtime to worſe: and alſo for the comforting of nature as taking greate ſtrength by ye receiuing of cuſtomable meats, & ſo the powers beeing ſtrong, the pacient is eaſed and freed by ſuch meates: but béeing weake, are ouerthrowen, and quite extinguiſhed.
            
            
               The. 7. Chap. of Bread, conteining. 8. queſt.
               BRead is in diuerſe places made of diuers & ſundrie ſortes of corne, and therfore it may bée demaunded, why bread, which is made of wheat, nouriſh more then that which is made of Barly? vnto which Ariſtotle anſwereth in his problemes, bicauſe it hath more moderate clammines, which it béehooueth all good nutriment to haue, whereby it may be ioyned and cleaue vnto ye body, alſo it ſticketh faſt togither in the moulding, and is therfore the more commendable.
               Secondly, why doth ſtale bread ſeeme whiter and fairer thē new? Moiſture is the cauſe of the blacknes which is more abounding in new bread then in ſtale, for in the new bread it

yet remaineth, but in the ſtale it is exalted away, and departed togither with the heat.
               Thirdly, why is vnſalted bread heauier then ſalted? Salt drieth & by it things are preſerued from putrifaction, ſo yt by ſalt the moiſture is conſumed & is expelled away by exhalatiō, which maketh ſtale bread to be lighter then new, and again, in new bread the moiſture yet remaineth and maketh it heauy.
               Fourthly, why is not bread made of wheat, hard whē it is cold? wheat naturally cōteineth in it a ſwéet ſlimy humour, which is as it were the ſoule therof, & will not permit it to bee hard.
               Fiftly, why doth wheaten paſt riſe, and barly paſt fall both in woorking and baking? Barly meale when the water cummeth vnto it ſhrinketh down, bicauſe it lieth houer and thin, and is full of huſkes. And wheaten meale riſeth vp, bicauſe beefore it lay very neere togither: but when once it cummeth to heat, thē dooth it puffe vp, and riſe vp into a greater heap.
               Sixtly, Why looketh the dough which is of wheat, white when it is wrought, and barly dough blacke? For two cauſes, firſt for that that which is in the vppermoſt of the wheaten bread is ſooner altered by the heate of the ouen as béeinge a thing hot and is conuerted into whitenes: And ſecondly bycauſe the huſky part of the barly reteineth in it more moyſture then doth wheat, which cauſeth the blacknes.
               Seuenthly, Since hony is a more clammye ſubſtance then water, how chanceth it that paſte which is made vp with hony is more brittle in the baking? Water is ioyned & glewed togither by heat of the fire. But hony glueth togither & drieth with al, and therfore is more brittle, for brittlenes cōmeth of drineſſe
               Eightly, why is bread which is made of new corne worſe thē that which is made of olde? In new corne there yet remayneth much watriſh and ſlimy clammineſſe, wherby it is leſſe commendable then that which is made of old grain.
            
            
               The. 8. chap. Of Wine, conteining. 13. Queſt.
               COnſequently I thinke it méete to intreat of wine, concerning which ther may be many profitable queſtions mooued,Auicen. & likewiſe reſolued not wt out delite, as firſt, if, according vnto ye aſſertiō of Auicen in his cātickles, & Rhaſis in Almanſor

it be good once in a month to be drunken with wine? Vnto this anſwereth Auerois,
                  Auer. Auicen. Galen. in his cōmentarie vpon the Canticles of Auicen, yt this opinion of drunknes is but a drunken opinion, & erroneus. For although accordinge vnto the iudgement of Galen, Wine is as agréeable to the mayntenance of naturall heate, as Oyle in the Lampe to preſerue the burnynge light: notwithſtanding like as to mutch oyle rather hindreth the light and extinguiſh the candle, ſo doth ouermutch Wine quench natural heat altogether. Howbeit if it be delayd with water it is more conuenient, but it hurteth the animal heate and the ſenſible organes therof, both the brain, and ſinews.
               Secondly, why ſurfet they ſooner that drink delaid Wine, thē they which drink it pure? Concerning pure Wine generally, Galen ſaith,Galen. that for ſutch as naturally haue weake veynes, it is better to drinke water then Wine. And to come nearer to the purpoſe,Ariſtotle. 
                  Ariſtotle in the third part of his Problemes giueth a thréefolde cauſe vnto this demaunde: the firſt, bicauſe that which is tempered or mingled by reaſon of the ſubtilitie thereof entreth into more narrow paſſages then doeth that which is not tempered: ſecondly, bycauſe men drinke leſſe of that which is mingled as liking not ſo well of it as of yt which is not tempered, and thirdly, that which is impermixt and without minglyng is hoater and digeſteth the reſidue of the meat, which is in the ſtomack, ſooner, then the delayd Wyne is able to do.
               Thyrdly, Why doth Wyne which is vnmingled with water ſooner cauſe a mans head to ake then that which is mingled? The vnmingled Wine is thick, and ſticketh in the paſſages, ſendyng vp the vapours and fumes with heat into the head: and the mingled Wine beeing thinner and alſo delayd, bothe perceth ſooner, and fumeth leſſe.
               Fourthly, what is the cauſe that mingled wine moueth a man more to vomite then the cleane wine doth? The ſwimminge of the watriſhnes of it about the ſtomacke, procureth lotheſomneſſe, and maketh apt to vomit.
               Fifthly, why do not children which are hoat of complexion,

loue wyne, which aged perſons, and men of perfit ſtrength beeing hoat alſo, do greedely deſire? Men are hoat and drie, and children hoat and moyſt, and the deſire vnto Wine is the appetite vnto moyſture, which moyſture abundyng in children kéepeth them from drinkyng, and the drieth which is in aged men & ſtronge perſons, prouoketh them to a deſire of drinke.
               Sixtly, when wine is clenſed from the Lees why is it ſtronger and not durable? Macrobius in his Saturnalia the fourth booke,Macrobius writeth that hauing no ſtrength nor matter to cleaue vnto, it is on euery ſide expoſed vnto dangers: for the Lees is as it were the roote wherby the Wine is ſtrengthned & preſerued?
               Seuenthly, why doth wine immoderatly taken ingendre both hoat and cold diſeaſes? It is to be noted that there be two qualities in Wine: the firſt is to heaten, and in this reſpect it rather procureth hoat then colde ſickneſſes: the ſecond is to ſtuf the brayne, and to fill the ſinews. Thus when cold vapours ariſe from the Wyne, they cauſe vnluſtineſſe, fulneſſe, and vndigeſtion, and conſequently procure cold diſeaſes.
               Eightly, Whether doth Wyne ingender moſt of Fleame or Blood? Séeing as wée haue béefore concluded Wine bréedeth colde humours, doubtleſſe it breedeth alſo more Fleame then any other humour. The reaſon is, that when wine is quaffed in great abundance, it is not perfectly digeſted & cauſeth likewiſe the reſidue of the meat to fayle in concoction, thereby ingendring abundance of Fleame: But indéede if it bee moderatly drunken, it increaſeth blood aboue other humours.
               Ninethly, Doth Wine hurt the brayne? Iſaac ſaith yea.Iſaac. Galen. And Galen alſo affirmeth that it hurteth the brayne, and helpeth the ſtomack. And albeit that at the firſt drinkyng wyne doth properly warme, yet bicauſe it fumeth mutch, it anoyeth the brayne, fillyng it with vapours and ſtoppyng the ſinews.
               Tenthly, Why doth ſtrong Wine hurt the braine and comfort the ſtomacke, and weake wyne worketh the contrary effect? Bicauſe Wine heateth the ſtomacke whereon conſiſteth digeſtion, ſtronge Wine is of greater effect in this caſe then is the weake. But agayn, how mutch ſtronger the Wine is, ſo

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
mutch the more it ſendeth vapours vp into the head, ſo that the ſtrength therof bréedeth inconuenience.
               Eleuenthly, Why doth the vſe of Wine ingender the ſower gulpyng or belchyng in the ſtomacke, more then water? The ſower belchyng neuer hapneth in the ſtomacke but when digeſtion is beegun, and Wyne ſtirreth vp naturall heate, and is as ſoone digeſted as Milke. Wherfore, like as when they bée out of the ſtomack they ſoone waxe ſower: ſo do they likewiſe in the ſtomack.
               Tweluethly, Whether doth wine or meate comfort naturall caliditie? Iſaac ſaith that wine doth, and the reaſon is, bicauſe it is very ſwiftly conuerted into natural heat,Iſaac. comfortinge it mutch more then any meat doth. But meate when it is conuerted into nutriment, doeth more reſtore that which is loſt, and comforteth and preſerueth the body longer.
               Thirtenthly, and laſtly, If wyne muſt needes be giuen vnto the ſicke, whether were it moſt expedient to giue them new wine or olde? Although the common people do contrary and mutch amiſſe, yet new wine is far more holſom for them then olde. The reaſon is, for that how mutch the newer the wine is, ſo mutch the leſſe it is inflatiue or windy, and for that cauſe is more conuenient for them, then are the old wines.
            
            
               The 9. chap. Of Fleaſh: conteinyng. 4. queſt.
               HEnceforward now let vs ſée what may bée ſayd of Fleaſh.
And firſt it may demaunded, why ſtrong Fleash is ſooneſt digeſted? It is anſwered in the Saturn. that naturall heate is ſtrong in a man which ſtoutly inuadeth the matter and ſubſtance which reſiſteth it, conſuming & diſſoluing the ſame, and that which is tendre & light it burneth ſooner into aſhes, then turneth it into iuice. For like as ſound wood being hewen in to pieces is ſoone conuerted into coales, & if chaf fal into ye fier there ſcarce remaineth any aſhes therof to be found: ſo fareth it in the digeſtion of ſtrong and light meates. So likewiſe an heauy milſtone breaketh the greateſt cornes, and letteth the ſmale depart whole. The ſtrong windes alſo throw downe hie Firtrees & mighty Oakes to the ground, & letteth the low

ſhrubs, & buſhes to ſtand: Euen ſo naturall heat digeſteth the hard fleaſh, and ouerpaſſeth the fine and tendre nutriment.
               Secondly, Why be Cullices which are made of Fleash, harder of digeſtion then the fleash it ſelf? The lightnes which it getteth by pounding, cauſeth it to ſwim vpon the top of all kynde of moyſture which it findeth in the ſtomacke, ſo that it cannot cleaue vnto the ſides of the ſtomack, the truth wherof is perceiued if ſome portion of the cullice be thrown into water, for it will alwaies fléete vpon the toppe, and for that cauſe is the ſlowlier concocted in the ſtomacke.
               Thirdly, which is moiſter of roſted or ſodden fleash? Wée muſt anſwer hereunto with Ariſtotle in the. 4. booke of the Meteors,
                  Ariſtotl
                        •
                     . that the roſted is moiſteſt: for in roſt fleaſh by reaſon of the fire the outward parts are hardened, and conſequently ye the pores are ſtopped, ſo that ye inmoſt moiſture cannot iſſue foorth. But in ſodden fleaſh the outward pores are reſolued through the heate and moyſture of the water, and ſo opened yt al ye moiſture departeth. Thus it hapneth that roſted fleaſh ſemeth drie without and is moiſt within, and ſodden fleaſh contrarywiſe. Fourthly, why do the beames of the Moone cauſe fleash ſooner to putrify, then of the Sunne? There can bée no putrifaction vnleſſe heat and moyſture do méete. And the putrifaction of fleaſh is nothing els but a certain ſecret diſſolutiō conuerting the ſodility of the fleſh into moiſture. And heat if it bée temperate, nouriſheth humours, but being immoderate drieth thē vp, & doth extenuate. So yt the Sun beeing hot, draweth all ye moiſture out of ye fleſh and drieth it. But ye beames of ye Moone, in whom ther is no manifeſt heat but an hidden warmth, increaſing the moiſture, ingendreth quickly therin great putrifactiō. For ther abideth in the beames of ye Moone a certen natural propriety to moiſten bodies, & to imbrue thē as it were with a miſty dew, wherunto ye heat which ſhe hath being ioyned, corrupteth ye fleſh which lieth any time in it.
            
            
               The. 10. chap. Of Egges, conteining. 9. queſt.
               THis Chapter requireth now ſome ſpeciall treatice of Egges, wherin the firſt queſtion which offreth it ſelf moſt fitly to be demaunded, is this:

                  which is the hoater of the yolke or the white? Amonge all humours blood is warmeſt in temperate warmth, ſo that the yolke as cūming neereſt vnto the blood, is ſurely ye warmer. Moreouer, the Liuer is hoater then the breaſtes, and the blood warmer then the milke, and the yolke in the egge is in temperature vnto the white, as is the blood in the Liuer.
               Secondly, why doth the yolke beeing caſt into water, ſinke downe to the bottom, and the white fleete on top? The white is very ſlimy, and cleaueth vnto that which is next vnto it, and by reaſon of the ſlimines ſwimmeth aboue the water, and the yolke bicauſe of the ſoundnes and want of pores, ſinketh downe.
               Thirdly, why haue birdes fewer egges and bigger then the fishes, and they haue moe and ſmaller then birdes? The greatneſſe in a thinge which is continuall,Auicen. is procured by a ſtrong heate: but a multitude in that which is diuided is long of the matter, bicauſe the matter is the beginning of diuiſion. And bicauſe birdes haue more heat then fiſhes haue, therfore haue they great egges in continuall, and but few in diuiſion, and contrariwiſe it fareth in fiſhes.
               Fourthly, why haue birdes egges an hard shell, and fishes egges a ſoft? Fiſhes lay their egges in a moiſt place, and therfore they néede no hard ſhell. But birdes lay their egges in hard and ſound places, as vpon the ground, ſtones, trees, and ſuch like, and therfore haue néede of an harde ſhell to keepe them frō hurt, vntil ſuch time as the chick or bird be hatched.
               Fiftly, why are birdes egges ſpeckled and of diuerſe coulers, and it is not ſo in fishes? In birdes ther is a ſtrong naturall heat which is able to ſeperate thinges of diuerſe natures aſunder, as the yolke from the white, and in fiſhes this heate is ſo weake that it is not able to worke the like effect.
               Sixtly, why are birdes egges long, and fishes egges round? Heat moueth from the centre, and eſpeciall cauſeth a forme like a piller, broad beneath and ſharpe aboue, as appeareth in flame of a fire which riſeth vp into a ſharp poinct. Wherfore, heat béeing more abundant in birdes then in fiſhes, the birds

Egges are long, and fiſhes round, for the weake heat carieth the matier equally round.
               Seuenthly, what breaketh the eggeshell when the chicke is hatched? There bée two cauſes hereof alledged, the one is, for that by long and continuall lyinge the ſhell waxeth ſofte and thin, as it is if an egge bée ſtieped nine daies in vineger: the ſecond is, for that when the young bird lacketh nutrimente, hée breaketh the ſhell to séeke meat.
               Eightly, why doth the yolke of an egge which is layd in the full of the moone, and in the light therof,
                  Rhaſis. 
                  ſcoure ſpottes out of cloth? The fatty drop in the middes of the egge béeinge the meanes of the generation, conceiueth a pearcinge and a diuiding heat both by the great light, and the moiſture which the Moone moueth, which it can not do at another time.
               Ninethly, why do ſome egges crack when they bee laid into the fire and ſome not? Such crack as haue within them windines, which is perceiued when the ſhell reueth, to iſſue forth with great noiſe and force. And this hapneth when the fire is great. For if a birds egge were caſt into the middes of the fire, the ſhell would ſoone breake, & the windines would ſtart forth with great noiſe and force, which it would not do if the fire were ſmall. But proportionably, there is mutch more windines in the egges of fiſhes, and therfore they make a great noyſe when they bee caſt into the fire, as appeare for example in the rowe of an hearring.
            
            
               The. 11. chap. Of Fishes, conteining 4. Queſtions.
               NOw let vs a litle come to demaund a few queſtions concerning the nature of Fiſhes, and firſt, whether Fishes do feed vpon their owne frie or not? wherto it is to bée anſwered affirmatiuely, both bycauſe they bee rauenous by reaſon of their cold ſtomackes, and alſo bicauſe they haue blunt ſences and cannot diſcerne their owne frie from other, deuouring vp all a like.
               Secondly, do Fishes chawe their meat? No, for if they did, ſuperfluous water would enter into them with their meate,

and ſuffocate them. Againe, they bee rauenous, and feede gréedely and eat downe their meat whole as it cummeth.
               Thirdly, why doth the raine profit fishes, and hurt birdes? Swéete water nouriſheth onely, and therwith are fiſhes nouriſhed beeing mingled with mud and clay. As for birdes they liue in the aier, and ſéeke their liuinge by flying about, and the feathers of their winges will clod and cleaue together with the rain, and ſo are hindred in their flying. Wherof it may bée gathered, that abundance of raine hurteth aſwell fiſhes as foules, for in ſuch times they fall into oppilations of the nutritiue partes, by reaſon of the ſwéetenes of ſutch water. For ſwéete thinges, as ſaith Galen, do ſtop the parts nutritiue.
               Fourthly, Why do the Roes of fishes crackle more in the fire then other thinges do? When the fire is ſo hot that it reſolueth more then it conſumeth then do they break in ye fire, as it alſo appeareth by the example of the cheſtnut: But whē it is ſo temperate that it conſumeth as much as it reſolueth, then do they neither réeue nor breake: béeſides that fiſhes egges or Roes do crackle by reaſon of windines included wi
                     •
                  hin them, which iſſuinge foorth at a litle hole, cauſeth a noyſe.
            
            
               The 12. Chap. Of Pultes or Podware conteining. 3. Queſtions.
               NExt wée maye take a conueniente occaſion to diſpute of Podware,Galen or graines contained in a Cod or ſhale, wherin wée may firſt demaund the reaſon, why Galen ſuppoſeth that ſutch as vſe to feede on that kinde of ware are mutch ſubiecte vnto the gowte? And the cauſe is for that béeinge harde and windy, they bée of euill digeſtion and are ſoone turned into fleame, and of fleame ſpringeth the gowt.
               Secondly, Beanes beeing windy, why do they not loſe that euill quality by boyling, as well as barly? Beanes are naturally more windy then barly. Or this may bée the cauſe, for that beanes are of a harder, more compacte and groſſe ſubſtance then barly which is light and houer, and is ſooner diſcharged

of the windines.Iſaac. Galen. Whereupon ſaith Iſaac accordinge vnto the doctrine of Galen, wée cannot altogether take away the windines from beanes, but wée may diminiſh it by boylinge them.
               Thirdly, may Lentils prepared with vineger, bee miniſtred in sharp diſeaſes? Auicen holdeth opinion that they may,Auicen. but Galen denyeth it. And therfore it is thus to bée vnderſtood, that Lentils prepared with vineger are noyſome in a Feuer with impoſtumation, bicauſe they freat and binde the paſſages, which thing Galen meaneth. But in a Feuer without impoſtumation, by reaſon of contrariety they bée good, as Auicen vnderſtandeth it.
            
            
               The 13. Chap. Of Pot hearbes, and Sallet hearbes. conteining. 6. Queſtions.
               HEreafter now inſueth to diſcourſe with like breuity concerning a few vſuall hearbes, where as firſt the cauſe and reaſon may bée required, why Colewortes do diſſolue drunkennes? Ariſtotle anſwereth herunto in the third part of his problemes,Ariſtotle▪
                   that Colewortes yeld a ſweete iuce, and conteine a purgatiue faculty, the effect wherof Phyſicions vſe to proue in the miniſtring of emollient Glyſters, ſo that by the ſame vertue it draweth the ſupefluous & indigeſted matter from of the wine or drinke in thoſe that bee drunken. For this being left in the vppermoſt part of the belly, the bodye waxeth colde, which beeing cold, the thinneſt part of the moiſture is conueied into the bladder. Wherfore the body beeing rid of this double moiſture, muſt needes bee diſcharged of the ſurfet.
               Secondly, why doth Purcelain take away the benumming, or edge of the teeth? The ſame Ariſtotle alſo in the ſeconde part of his worke beefore named, ſaith that the ſlimines of Purcelain entring within the teeth, draweth forth the ſharpnes which is the cauſe of beenumming, and likewiſe milke meltinge about the teeth, hath the ſame effect.
               Thirdly, why do Leekes and Onions proſper beſt in drye ground, and worſt in moyſte? It is alſo to bee anſwered by the ſame Authour in the firſt parte of the Probleames,

                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
as all that is milted by hoat and drie is of the nature of water as appeareth by all kyndes of Mettals. And Earth is turned into Salt, when it is clenſed from the droſſe in moyſture and burnyng heat, and drieth congelyng and hardenyng it, ſo that Salt is a certayn drineſſe of the earth burned by an heat into a watriſh hardnes, wherby the taſt therof cōmeth néere vnto bitterneſſe, which is ingendred of heat woorkyng vpon an earthly drie ſubſtance. Then beeing of this nature, by heat it is hot and drie, and by reaſon of the bitterneſſe it killeth the belly wormes, and by drithe it drinketh vp putrifiynge moyſture, aboliſhyng the ſame, and conſequently prohibiting all ſtinking. Now bicauſe it drieth, and conſumeth moyſture and heate, it hindreth generation and fruitfulneſſe of the grounde, and bicauſe it hath a ſharpneſſe of a burnyng heate, it ſharpneth the things that are mingled with it. And bicauſe it hath a certain bitter drineſſe, the taſt thereof is lothſome, and prouoketh thirſt by reaſon of drieth, and bycauſe of the ſharpneſſe it diſſolueth, and beyng mingled with other ſauces maketh them pearce into the tungue, and ſo it hateth other taſtes. Moreouer Salt hath a certein meruelous nature, which is to draw foorth the like vnto it ſelfe, out of another thyng. For if poudred Fiſh or fleaſh which is very ſalt be layd to ſooke in brine which is newly made, it draweth the ſaltnes out of it ſooner then freſh water doeth.
               Laſtly, Why doeth Salt crackle when it is caſt into the fier? According vnto the ſame doctrine in the fourth of the Meteors, Salte is of ſubſtance earthy combuſt mingled with water and therfore it crackleth when it is throwne into the fire. But if you would know the cauſe why Salt preſerueth fleaſh from corruption, read it beefore in the diſcourſe of fleaſh.
            
            
               The. 16. Chap. Of Hony: conteynyng 2. Queſtions.
               AMonge many other wée muſt not forget to ſay ſumwhat of Honie, and firſt to demaund this queſtion therin, which is the better of new or olde Honie? The choyce in Honie and

Wyne is quite contrarie, for the neweſt Honie, and oldeſt Wine is preferred according vnto Macrobius iudgement.Macrob. The cauſe hereof is this, for that the nature of wine is moyſt and of Honie drie, as the proofe appeareth in the vſe of Phyſick, for things which are to bée moiſtned, muſt bée fomented with Wine: and ſutch as are to be dried, muſt be clenſed with Honie. Thus in continuance of time there is ſome part of thē both conſumed away, and the Wine waxeth ſtronger, and the Honie drier.
               Secondly, If Hony be put into a Wine veſſell why do the Lees riſe vp vnto the top of the Hony, wheras whatſoeuer els is put in, the Lees as the heauier ſubſtance alwayes kepeth the bottome? The dragges or Lees, as béeing the moſt earthly and heauieſt part of the ſubſtance, fall downe to the bottome, and yet are ouercome by Hony, for Hony naturally by reaſon of the weight therof, falleth downe to the bottome, and driueth vp the Lées as lighter then it ſelf.
            
            
               The. 17. Chapter Of Oyle, conteinyng. 3. Queſtions.
               NOw laſtly wée come to the conſideration of Oyle, where theſe queſtions are to bée mooued.
               Firſt, wherfore fleeteth Oyle in the top, wine in the middes, and Hony in the bottome? The better the Hony is, the heauier it is: and that which lieth in the bottom is alwayes the beſt, and in Wyne that is, cheifeſt which lieth in the middle not troubled with the Lées, nor aboue corrupted by the ayer. For the huſband men of the countrey, not contented only to couer their veſſels abroad, hide them vp in the ground, and defend them from externall hurt, preſeruyng them as mutch as is poſſible from takyng the ayer, wherwith they bée ſo manifeſtly anoyed, that ſumtime the whole full veſſels are almoſt corrupted. Wherfore the Wine which is in the middes of the veſſell, béeyng fartheſt from the aier and the Lées in the bottome is beſt, as fartheſt diſtāt from two noyſom neighbours.
               
                  Secondly, why doth Oyle amend in goodnes, which is preſerued in a veſſell but halfe full? The aier filleth vp the other void place of the veſſell, and drieth vp the ſuperfluous moyſture which aboundeth in the oyle, which beeing taken away it getteth a new ſweetnes in the taſt.
               Thirdly, why doth Oyle congeale, but wine very ſeldome? Oyle is a ſmother and thicker ſubſtance then wine is, and therfore more apt to congeale: but wine is nothinge ſo ſoft, & béeſides is much more liquid. And wheras vpon occaſiō hereof it may bée replied, why vineger which is paſſing cold doth not freeſe, when other things do which are not ſo cold: Surely it may alſo bee anſwered by the ſame reaſon, for yt among all liquours it is the thinneſt, ſharpe alſo and eger, which is ſome hindrance, as it is euident if wee take the ſea for example, which by occaſion of the bitternes and ſaltnes therof, is kept from congealing. And now alſo of purpoſe a litle to digreſſe, what is the cauſe that Pepper and Muſtard béeing applied vnto the outſide of the ſkin do bliſter and inflame the place, but receiued into the ſtomack they offend very litle, or not at all? Sharp ſpices and drugges do exulcerate the vpper moſt part of the ſkin bicauſe they bee therto applied in their full vertue without the mixture of any thing els with them: but beeing eaten downe into the ſtomack, their force is delayd by the moyſture of the belly, ſo that they bee altered by the heate which is there, beefore that they bee able to do any harme.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The fourth Booke, of Table Philoſophie, which compriſeth many mery honeſt Ieſtes, delectable deuiſes, and pleaſant purpoſes, to be vſed for delight and recreation, at the boord among company.
            
               The Preface.
               Jn this fourth Booke we intend to ſet downe ſomwhat concerning honeſt myrth, and pleaſaunt recreation in wordes, wherby men are refreshed, at the table. For as ſayth Aristotle in the fourth booke of his Ethicks, In this life if at any time we haue the liberty to lyue in reſt & quietneſſe, and to refresh our ſelues with any paſtime, wee ought therein to frequent comelie and curteous ſpeache, and to behaue our ſelues gentlie, ſo that a mannes wordes and deedes do tende vnto delight, dyſpoſing himſelfe to vtter himſelfe accordinglie, and to beare the merrie deedes and wordes of others. Vpon which place, Albertus in his Commentarie ſayth: Euerie man that is geuen to ſtudie hath nede of recreation that his witte bee not wholy ouerthrowne. For whoſo euermore applieth his ſtudie, and bendeth his minde alwaies to practiſe or looke vpon ſumthinge: doubtleſſe his ſpirites shalbe reſolued, and the animall power be deſtroyed, and the proper functions of the partes ſurceaſſe: which partes being deſtitute, then is the force of ſtudie brought to ruine. In conſideration whereof thoſe which are ſtudious, and mutch troubled with affaires, haue neede of reſt, wherein theyr ſpirites may be releaſed, and their ſences reſolued in ſome pleaſure. For lyke as in the cō
                  mon courſe of our life nature wanteth ſleepe, ſo in ſtudie and trauayle, reſt is ſemblablie needefull. But who ſo is a ſtudent, or wearied with honeſt exercyſe, to ſuch is none other then honeſt recreation acceptable: which playnly conſiſteth in ſuch wordes & deedes as are not repugnaunt to vertue, but ſtyrre vp the delyte of our affection. For looke howe bodylie wearineſſe is cured by bodylie reſt: ſo is tediouſneſſe of the minde aſſwaged by pleaſure of recreation, which is alſo a certaine reſting of the minde. As it i
                        •
                      read in a certaine wryter, that as there was a man of rype yeares, and much addicted vnto contemplacion; playing for his delight among children which he taught: there came one by, who beholding the

ſame, mocked him to ſcorne. Then ſayd this good mā, why mockeſt thou? bend thy bow, which thou haſt in thy hand, and he dyd ſo. Nay, bend it more quod he: J dare not ſayd the other for feare of breaking it. Euen ſo, quod he, it fareth with my mind: For vnleſſe I should refresh it with ſome pla
                        •
                     e: it would fayle mee, and be quite extinguished. And therefore it is expedient to vſe honeſt recreation▪ by meanes wherof to recreate a mans minde, as namelie after godly ſtudies, and painefull trauayles And among many it is a pretie kinde of ſolace and delight, to vſe wyttie inuectiues & quippes one at another at the table, ſo that the wytte therein be exerciſed, not by byting: but by sharpning one another. Or whether it were in pleaſaunt queſtions or picked deuiſes, whereby the one prouoketh another to breake ſilence. Or elſe in pleaſaunt tales or hyſtories, wherewith the hearers are delighted, and made merie.
            
            
               Chap 1. Of pleaſaunt quippes, and tauntes.
               
                  Macrobius.
                  ACcording to ye doctrine of Macrobius in his fourth booke of Saturnalia, there be two kindes of quippes, or inuectiues. The one a plaine rayling, or chacking. The other a figuratiuelye ſhadowed ſpeach couered cleanly with myrth & ciuilyty, ſoūding one thing, & couertly meaning another, but not proceedyng to expreſſe bytterneſſe. The fyrſt kynd is altogyther to h
                     •
                  e baniſhed the table. For as the ſame aucthour wryteth, lyke as a lytle thruſt dryueth downe him that ſtandeth vppon a narrowe footing: ſo a ſmall griefe being ſprinckled and bathed with wyne, wyll ſoone dryue a man into madneſſe. The other kynd which is coouert, may alſo be ſauced with ſharpne
                     •
                  ſe. The lyke whereof is reported of Octauianus, who ſeemed to bee a noble man of byrth. Before whome when on a tyme Cicero pronounced ſomewhat, I heard not what you ſayde, quod Octauianus. That is maruayle ſayde Cicero, ſynce your eares were woont to be ſo well boored, which hee ſpake for this cauſe, for that Octauianus was borne in Lybia, where the maner of the people was to make hoales through theyr eares. This

kynde of nypping, becauſe it is next neyghbour to rayling: ought amongſt wyſe men to bée auoyded at the table. But ſome there is which hath in it leſſe ſharpeneſſe, as that which Cicero vſed againſt Gneus Seruilius, which was Conſul but one daye. In foretymes, quod Cicero, Flamines were but for one daye, and nowe the Conſuls bee ſo. And agayne, when Fannius had béene Conſul but a fewe dayes: then ſayde Cicero: there happened a great wonder in Fannius yeare, for when hée was Conſul, there was neyther Wynter, nor Spryng, nor Summer, nor Harueſt. And when Fannius demaunded of him, why hee came not to ſee him whyle hee was ſycke in his Conſulſhyppe: hee aunſweared, I woulde haue come, but the nyght came to faſt vppon mee. Theſe, and ſutch other lyke maye bée vſed, which touche certayne faultes and deformyties of the bodye, which ingender lyttle or no griefe at all, as are the crokedneſſe, ryſing vp, or flatneſſe of the noſe.
               Certayne nyppes and gyrdes, doe ſéeme at the fyrſt appearaunce to haue ſome reproochefulneſſe or ſclaunder in them, and yet they doe not touche the hearers, as this is. When Quintus Lucius ſayde vnto his friend which ſate by him, that his handes were cold, then ſayd his friende: that is great maruayle hauing brought them warme ſo latelye out of the Prouince. Wherewith Quintus was much delyghted, for that hée was without all ſuſpicion of thee uerie, whereas contrarywiſe, if hee had ſpoken it vnto one that had b
                     ••
                  ne guiltye and pryuie of his owne theeft: it woulde haue mutch troubled him.
               Or if a man ſhould ſay vnto one that lyueth very chaſtly, hée loueth a whore as well as you, it ſhould much delight him. Contrarywiſe, if you ſhould ſay vnto a coward or timerous perſon, thou art as hardie as euer was Achilles, or Hercules, or vnto ſome notorious naughtie perſon, I accoumpt thee more vicious then euer was Ariſtides: theſe wordes doo ſounde as a prayſe, when as in d
                     •
                  de they be plaine diſcommendation. Alſo in the vttering of a nyppe or inuectiue: it is wel cōmended if he which ſpeaketh it be alſo of the ſame condicion. As if a poore man mock at a poorer then himſelfe for pouerty, or one that is borne of baſe parentage, floute at another as meanly borne as himſelfe: as

dyd one Tharſeus, who from a Gardener comming vnto ſome better calling, flouted at his olde friend and acquaintance which was blinde & of baſe parentage: but immediatlie he added: And I alſo am borne of the ſame ſeede. There be moreouer ſome kinde of nyppes, which doe not onely not diſpleaſe the hearers: but make them merrie. The lyke whereof Diogenes caſt forth againſt Ariſtenes his maiſter, ſaying: This man of a rytch man hath made mee poore, and from a fayre houſe, hath brought mee to dwell in a Tub. For by theſe wordes he vttered better his ſence and meaning, then if he had ſayde, I thanke my mayſter that hath made mee a Philoſopher, and a man perfectly fraught with all vertue.
            
            
               Chap. 2. Of ſpeaches conuenient for euerie kinde of perſon.
               THe aſſembling togyther of men for honeſt myrth & banketting,Macrobius. as it is commendable, ſo ought it not to be dumbe, and without wordes, as ſayth Macrobius. And who ſo is deſirous to be a pleaſaunt companion, and a prouoker vnto talke, and dele
                     •
                  table deuiſes: muſt demaunde ſuch queſtions as are eaſie to be reſolued, and wherein he knoweth the partie to haue ſome ſkyll and exerciſe. For euerye man is glad when he is prouoked to vtter his knowledge in that wherein he is ſkylfull, and woulde not wyllinglie haue his 
                     •
                  unning hyd wherein he hath trauailed, which is perhappes vnknowne vnto the reſidue, be it Diuinitie, Phiſicke, Aſtronomie, Law, or ſuch lyke. For herein he ſeemeth to haue attayned vnto ſome ende of his ſtudye, when he hath gotten fytt occaſion to vtter yt which he hath read, without ſuſpicion of oſtentacion, wherewith he can not be touched, when he ſpeaketh, not intruding himſelfe, but being thereto required. Againe, it is a great griefe, and a poynt of diſcourteſie, to demaund a queſtion of a man in ſome matter wherein he is ignoraunt, and that alſo in companye. For he is then eyther enforced to confeſſe his ignoraunce, or to aunſwere vnaduiſedlye, or to commytte him ſelfe to the hazarde of a true or falſe euent. Suche as haue trauayled farre by lande and Sea, are glad when they be aſked of the ſituation of farre Countreys, or of the worcking of the wylde Seas. Captaines and Souldiors

doe wyllinglye blaſon theyr owne valiaunt actes, yea, ſometyme without any mocion of arrogancie. And generallye, euerie man reioyſeth to diſcourſe of his owne daungers & troubles, which he hath paſſed in his lyfe. If thou canſt, prouooke him often to talke, who hath bene many tymes fauourably entertayned of great perſonages, or hath accompliſhed embaſſages with happy ſucceſſe, or hath béen honorably entertained of ye Prince: or who ſo hauing béene beſet by Pyrates, among the whole fleete of his fellowes, hath himſelfe onely eſcaped awaye by his wytte & valiencie. It wyll lyke ſome man wel to declare if thou require him, the ſodaine felicity of his friend, which he would not vtter of his owne accorde, and yet is loth to ſuppreſſe it, for feare of ſuſpicion of enuie. He that loueth hunting, is delighted to talke of Hounds, Foreſtes, Chaſes, and the euent of hunting. If there be any religious perſon preſent, as Monke, or Fryar, gyue him leaue to gloſe of his owne holyneſſe, howe he maye deſerue well of God, what is the commoditye of Ceremonyes, and what rewardes are promiſed vnto the deuout fulfyllers of the ſame. But if there be euer an olde man in the company, you ſhall do him a great pleaſure to aſke him of ſuch matters as are nothing to the purpoſe, for that age is much giuē to talke, as wytneſſeth Macrobius. All theſe and ſuch lyke thinges may be inuented to delight and procure the whole aſſemblye to talking, and to fall vnto variable communication, of what calling ſo euer they bée.
            
            
               Chap. 3. Of apte pleaſaunt wordes.
               SWéete and pleaſaunt wordes do cheare the feaſt no leſſe then Wyne, as is the olde ſaying. For if this delightſome prouocation be myngled with oportunitye, it perſwadeth more then doeth any hearbe myngled with the Wyne, or whatſoeuer inchauntment it bée, no not the beſt iuyces which are brought out of India or Arabia, are of ſo great effect. For this is the charme wherewith that fayre Helen of Greece, allured her amorous gheaſt, and turned him from ſorrowe to ioye, euen the oportunity to vtter her pleaſaunt diſcourſes. Whereby it is euident, that pleaſaunt wordes and apte ſayinges, not exceeding the

boundes of honeſtie, do much cheare the table, & ſolace the company. And now to ſpeake of antiquitye, there be two very eloquent cōpanions, ſayth Macrobius, to wyt, Cicero & Plautus, excelling all other in delitefull converſation, where he bringeth in certaine places out of Cicero to the ſame purport, as this is, that on a time it hapned that Cicero ſupped at the houſe of Damaſippus the Philoſopher, who ſetting a lyttle wyne of Falernum before him: ſayd, drinke yee of this wyne which is forty yeare old: ſurely, quoth Cicero, it beareth his age well. Lykewiſe being deſired to dinner by a friend of his (for commonly he denayd none that requeſted him in that behalfe) which was but ſimple & ordinary, when he was comming away & taking leaue, he roūded the maiſter of the houſe in the eare, ſaying: I knew not before yt we two were ſo familiar and cōming alſo on a time vnto Pompeius houſe, ſome yt were there before, ſayd that he came to late: Naye not ſo ſayd Cicero, for I ſee nothing preuided. Lykewyſe ſeeing Lentulus his ſonne in lawe, a man of ſmall ſtature, going with a long ſword by his ſyde: who, quod Cicero hath tyed my ſonne in lawe to a ſword? The ſame beholding the counterfayte of his brother Quintus Cicero ſet forth very large, and in a great portrayture, and Quintus him ſelfe being a man but of a verye ſmall ſ
                     •
                  antling: halfe my brother ſayde hee, is bygge
                     •
                   then the whole. After the victorye which Caeſar obtayned Cicero being demaunded how he was ſo deceyued in taking part: anſwered thus: his gyrting deceyued mee, teſting at the maner of Caeſar, who was woont to let his gowne trayle downe after him, going ſomewhat wantonly & 
                     •
                  ff
                     •
                  minatly in apparell In ſo much that Sylla foreſeeing what might haplye inſue, ſayde on a tyme vnto Pompeius, take heede of that vngyrted boye. Laberius paſſing by Cicero and faking a place to ſyt on: I woulde gyue you part of my place then quod Cicero, but that I ſyt in a narrow rowme, thereby both diſ
                     •
                  ayning him, & ieſtyng alſo at the new Senate, the number whereof Caeſar had augmented beſide ryght and order. Howbeit he caryed it away not ſ
                     •
                  otree: for Laberius anſwerered him home agayne, ſaying: It is maruayle that you ſyt ſo narrowlye, which vſe to ſyt on two ſtooles at one tyme, thereby reproching Cicerces lyghtneſſe. Therefore, for as much

as theſe and ſuch lyke ieſtes, do prouoke laughter and delyte, in them that heare them: I haue purpoſed to fyll this fowrth part with the lyke, according to ſundrye eſtates of perſons, drawing them forth of allowable aucthorityes, and dyſpoſing them in a conuenient order, and begynning eftſones with the greateſt perſonages.
            
            
               Chap. 4. Of Emperours, and their merie ieſtes.
               
                  MAcrobius wryteth, that Auguſtus the Emperour was delyted in ieſting, hauing alwayes reſpect of his honour, and honeſtie.Macrobius. And many maruayled more at the ieſtes and quippes which he bare, then thoſe which he gaue. On a tyme when he ſaw a grauer grauing a tombe for his father: In deede quod Auguſtus this is the true reuerenſing and culture of the fathers ſepulcher. When he heard that king Herode among the chi
                     •
                  dren which were but two monethes old, whome he ſlew for Chriſtes ſake, had alſo kylled his owne ſonne, ſayd, that he had rather be Herodes hogge then his ſonne. There came vnto Rome a certaine young Gentleman very lyke vnto Auguſtus, whome whē the Emperour had ſeene, be demaūded of him if his mother had ſomtime béen at Rome or not? No quod the Gentleman, but my father hat béene often. When Auguſtus had written certaine inuectiues againſt Pillio: but I wyll hold my peace quod Pillio, for it is a ſhrewd matter to write againſt him yt can baniſh mee. Then one as he was paſſing by, ſayd, there goeth a tyrant: Auguſtus turned about, & aunſwered, if I were one, thou wouldeſt not dare to ſay ſo. One nyght as he lay in a vyllage in ye coūtrey, an Oule troubled him ſo with hyr crying, yt he could not ſleepe. But when one of ye ſouldiors going forth had taken the Oule, he commended his induſtrie, & commaunded that he ſhould ha
                     •
                  e a thouſand pence giuen him for a reward. Which the ſouldiour miſtyking of ſayd he had rather yt ſhe ſho
                     •
                  ld liue, & ſo let hyr flie. Who wyll not maruaile how this ſaucie ſouldiour could eſcape ſo well, hauing offended an Emperor? Lucan, ye Poet reporteth, that when 
                     •••
                   that was inferiour vnto Iulius Caeſar euert
                     •
                  , war
                  
                     •
                  ed him in certeyne matters, he au
                     •
                  ſweared him ſaying:
               
                  No ſtare whereto thou canſt aſpyre,
                  Can make thee wothie Caeſars y
                        •
                     e.
               
               
                  
                  Of a necromancer that deluded a noble man.There is a ſtorye tolde of a certayne Necromancer, who had a noble man to his Scholler, that promyſed him many great gyftes and bountifull rewardes. Whome the maiſter meaning to trye what he woulde doe in deede, wrought ſo by his art that he ſeemed vnto him ſelfe that he was elected Emperour. And hauing thus obtayned much lande and lyuing as hée 
                     •
                  hought, his mayſter deſired him to beſtowe ſome parte thereof vppon him. Why quoth his Schollar, I knowe thée not. Then ſayd the maiſter, I am hee that hat hath gyuen you all theſe rytches, and nowe I wyll take them awaye agayne, and there withall cauſed the viſion to ſurceaſe, and then hée found him ſelfe to be in caſe as hée was before. Thus many men promiſe many goodlye matters, which they neuer meane to perfourme.
               
                  The determinacion of Fredericke the Emperour.
                  Fredericke the Emperour lying in ſiege before the Cittye of Mill
                        •
                     yn, determyned if hée myght take it, to ſlay man, woman, and chylde. Then aunſwered the Erle of Subandia, ſaying, that his Maieſtye had yet a greater conqueſt then that in hand, which he muſt alſo obtaine. What is that, quoth the Emperor? truely ſayde the Erle, your owne wyll and courage of mynde. Which ſaying the Emperour hauing wel dygeſted within him ſelfe, altered his determination, & graunted them al theyr liues.
            
            
               Chap. 5. Of Kinges, and their ſundrye merye ieſtes.
               THe noble Seneca, in his booke which he wrote of anger, ſheweth yt 
                  
                     •
                  ing Antiochus, hearing certaine of his ſubiects euyl reporting of him, & rayling againſt him in a place where there was nothing but a curtaine drawne betweene them that ſpake, and him that harde: hée gentlie reprooued theyr follie, as it had béene ſome other man, ſaying vnto them, depart from he
                     •
                  ce leaſt the king heare you.
               
                  Hovve king Alexander vvould kyll the Aſſe dryuer.
                  
                     Ʋalerius in the ſeuenth booke & thyrd Chapter. Writeth, that king Alexander being warned by an Oracle, that whomſoeuer he met when he walked forth of ye Gate, he ſhould cōmaund him to bée ſlaine, ſeeing a dryuer of Aſſes, cōming a farre of, wylled immediatly that he ſhould bée kylled. Then ye poore Aſſe dryuer aſking the cauſe why hee ſhould bee put to death nothauing 
                     •
                  ffē
                  ded, they anſwered, yt it was the cōmaundement of the Oracle.

Then quod the Aſſe driuer, If it be ſo, O kyng, then hath this lot fallen vpon another & not on mée, for the Aſſe which I draue before me met with you firſt. Then kyng being delighted with this ſubtyll anſweare, and ſeeing howe he was reuoked from his errour, ſaued the man, & commaunded the Aſſe to be ſlaine.
               When the people of Athens would haue yeelded diuine honors vnto Alexander, beware quod Demades, that whyles ye keepe heauen, ye looſe not 
                     •
                  he earth.Of the va
                        •
                     
                     let that told king Philip that he vvas his kinsman. A certayne poore varlet meeting with Philip the king, deſyred him to geue him ſomewhat for that he was of h
                     •
                  s kynred. Which way ſaide the kyng? Marie quod the varlet, by our great grandfather Adam, Thou ſayeſt true quod the king, and commaunded that his men ſhoulde geue him a peny, Which when the varlet diſdayned at, ſaying, that it was no princely reward: The kyng anſweared, that yf he ſhould geue ſo muche vnto euery one that is as néere of kyn vnto him, as he, he ſhoulde leaue nothyng for hym ſelfe.
               Kyng Antiochus ſhewyng his mighty & excellently furniſhed armie vnto Hanibal,
                  Another pleaſant ieſt of king Antiochus. aſked him yf he thought not that it was ſufficient for the Romanes? Yes ſurely quod he, vnleſſe they be to couetous. Pleaſauntly ieſting at the kinges ſaying, who aſked him touching the number and ſtrength of his armie, and he anſwered of the ſpoyle. Philip kyng of Fraunce, hauyng certayne poore prieſtes with him at his table at dynner,Of the prieſt that toke a capon from king philips table, and hovv the king 
                        •
                     ſpied him. perceiued one that ſate fartheſt of at the boardes end conueying an whole Capon into his pocket. When dinner was ended, the king called him aſide, and enquired of him ſecretly what he ſtudyed? who anſweared, Diuinitie. Why ſayd the kyng, is it not written in the Scriptures, that you ſ
                     •
                  ould not be carefull for meate againſt to morowe? yea ſayd the Prieſt, and therefore becauſe I would put away all carefulneſſe, I haue done this thyng.
            
            
               Chap. 6. Of princes, and their merie ieſtes
               IN the ſecond booke and ſeconde Chapter of the before alle
                     •
                  ged aucthour Valerius,
                  Of a gentle man that kiſt the kinges daughter in the open ſ
                        ••
                     ere. there is ſet downe an hiſ
                     •
                  orie of a young gentleman, who burnyng in the loue of Philiſ
                        •
                     iatus d
                     •
                  ughter, which was Prince and Tyraunt of Athens, and me
                     •
                  ting with her by chaunce: kiſſed her openly in the ſ
                     •
                  reete. For which 
                     ••
                  ct,

his wife the queene dealt earneſtly with him, to cauſe the yoūg gentleman to be put to death. To whom hée anſweared, if wée kyl them that loue vs, what ſhal we do vnto them that bate vs? Frontinus in the fourth booke of his ſtratagemes, ſayeth, that it behooueth a Prince to be ſage and auncient in behauiour, meaning, that he ought to followe graue and moderate counſell.
               Againe, 
                     Ʋalerius in the firſt booke and thyrde chapter writeth, that when Dioniſius Prince of Syracuſe,
                  hovv Dioniſius called him ſel
                        •
                     e a robber. hauing ſacked the temple of Proſerpina at Locris, paſſed the ſea
                     •
                   with a merry winde and a proſperous courſe: he laughed vnto his frendes, ſaying: ſée what an happie iourney the immortall gods haue geuen to a theefe,Hovv king Dioniſius ſtole a goldē coate. and a ſtealer of holy things. The ſame king taking from the Image of Jupiter, a golden coate of a great weight, and putting him on another of cloth, ſaid, that the golden coate was to heauie for ſummer, and to colde for winter: and the wollen indifferent for both the ſeaſons. Likewiſe he tooke away the golden platters and crownes which the Images held foorth in their handes,Hovv dioniſius tooke the golden crovvnes from the images. ſaying, that it was a folly to refuſe their giftes whiche they offer vs, of whom wée require all kinde of good thinges. S. Auſte
                        •
                     
                   in his woorke de Ciuitate Dei, writeth of Fabius the deſtroyer of the citie of Tarentum, that when his ſecretarie demaunded of hym what ſhoulde be done with the images and pictures of the gods, whiche were many, and armed as though they were goyng to the warres? declaryng his incontinencie, he ſpake geſtingly ſaying: let vs leaue vnto the Tarentines their angrie gods.
            
            
               Chap. 7. Of Earles, and their meerie ieſtes
               
                  Hovv the Earle Subàdia anſvveared the Ievves.IN bookes of hiſtories I finde it written, that when certayne Jewes came vnto the Earle of Suba
                        •
                     dia, deſyring hym that they might dwel within his dominions, he forbid them, ſaying, that they had not yet made peace concernyng the vniuſt death of their Lorde, and therefore how durſt they be ſo bould, as to come into his land?Hovv the Earle Bellimo
                        •
                     t anſvveared the prieſt that begged tole. A certayne religious man, required of the Earle of Bellimount for Gods ſake, to geue ſome tymber out of his Foreſt towarde the making of ſeates in his Churche. Then ſayd a knight that was preſent, My Lorde wyll conſyder of the

matter. Nay quod the Earle, God forbid that I ſhoulde take any deliveraunce on this matter, ſince he aſketh for Gods ſake, of whom I haue receiued all that I haue, and therefore let him take whatſoeuer he néedeth for the ſeruice of God. A certaine ſouldier deſired an Earle, (his lord and maſter) to ayd and helpe him to bring vp his daughters, whiche were tenne in number. Which requeſt one of the Earles ſeruantes, a churliſhe fellow and very ritch, hearyng: excuſed his lorde, and ſayde,hovv a ſouldier gat a hundred poundes of a churle. that he had not where withall. Yeas ſayd the Earle, I haue thee, and I geue thee vnto him, and thou ſhalt geue him an hundred pound to redeeme thy libertie, and ſo he dyd. When the Earle of Bellimount was hardly beſieged in a Caſtle by the Infidels,HOVV the Earle Belimount ouer came the infidels that beſieged him. and determined to goe foorth with a fewe, and to fight for the fayth of Chriſte agaynſt an infinite multitude: one of his ſouldiers ſaid, that it was daungerous for a fewe to encounter with ſo great an hoſt: then quod the Earle, I would to God that as many as beleeue not in God, were here with them, and ſo by reaſon of his ſtrong fayth, be obtained ouer them a glorious victorie.
            
            
               Cap. 8. Of knightes, or ſouldiers, and their merie ieſtes.
               NOwe muſt we geue to vnderſtand, that whatſoeuer is here written of knightes, is likewyſe to be applyed vnto the name of ſouldiers, for that the latin woord, Miles,
                  Of a knight that ſaid that he vvas kin to niene kinges. is indifferent to them both, ſo that what ſo is ſayd of one, may be applyed to the other. But to come to the matter, I finde it written in hiſtories, that there was a certayne noble knight, which gloryed that he was of kinne vnto nine kinges, whereof hauyng named ſixe, he could not deuiſe the other three. Then a ieſter ſtanding by ſayd vnto hym, Syr, I knowe well the other three. O, well ſayd freend (quod the knight) I pray thee tell me which they be? Mary quod the ieſter, the three kinges of Collein.
               
               
                  Of a knight that made the prieſt to vvash afore him.
                  Of a knight that ſaid, it vvas good lucke to meete a prieſt in a morning.
               
               A knight which made a feaſt, would haue the prieſt to waſhe firſt: you doo well ſayd the prieſt to make vs waſhe firſt, and ſit downe laſt: Yea, anſweared the knight, me thinkes wee doo beſt, for of al other you ought to be fyrſt cleane, and laſt drunke.
               A certayne knight which was ryding to a turneament, chaunced to méete with a Prieſt by the way: and returnyng from the

turneament, brought home a broken legge with him. And perceiuing that the Prieſt came not to ſee him, demaunded the cauſe of him: who anſweared, I was afrayd that you had béen angry with mee becauſe I met with you before you broke your legge, for it was counted ill lucke to méete with a Prieſt, if a man were going foorth to warre, or to turneament. Nay ſayd the knyght, it was good lucke for me, for yf I had not met with you,Of the tvvo knightes that fought a combate perhaps I had broken my necke. Two knightes fought a combat for lyfe whiche ſhould ſlay the other, and when the one had ouerthrowen the other the conquerour ſtandyng vpon him, ſayd vnto thoſe that ſtoode by, ſome body take pitie vpon hym. And when he had often called vnto them, and no man would entrea
                     •
                  e for his lyfe: then quod this gentle knight, I my ſelfe wyl take compaſſion vppon hym, ſo he let hym ryſe, and they ſhoo
                     •
                  e handes, and departed both togeather ouer the ſeas.
               
                  Of a knight that aſked a d
                        •
                     onken Prior vvhat 
                        •
                     evves in the Abbey.There was a knight which me
                     •
                  te with the Prior of his Pariſhe, cumming home very drunke from the Chapter which was held in the Abbey wherof he was, of whom he aſked what newes? The drunken Prior anſweared, a vengeance on this Abbey, for they were woont to haue twelue diſhes of meate at a dinner, and this day they had but eleuen. Then anſweared the knight, If I had but two diſſhes of meate in my houſe, they would ſuffiſe me, and thou wretch as thou art, canſt not be contented with eleuen? ſurely I wyll geue thee the twelfth, and there withall he threwe him downe in the durt.
               
                  Of a knight that deſired to heare his vviues confeſſion.There was a knight which deſyred much to heare his wyues confeſſion, which ſhe denyed hym, becauſe he hadde on neyther Surplice nor Stoale. And when he had gotten them, and put them on and diſguiſed hym ſelfe, he called her, and ſhe confeſſed her ſelfe vnto hym, ſaying, that when ſhe was young, ſhe loued a young Gentleman, and afterward a Squ
                     •
                  re, and then a Knight, and next a Foole, and laſtly a Prieſt. Then the knight hearyng that, in a rage caſt of the Surplice and the Stoale, and aſked her angerly, if that Prieſt were nowe liuing, and ſhe ſayde yea, requeſting hym that he would reueile it to no man. And after three dayes, when he had ſufficiently bit on the bridle, and vexed him ſelfe: ſhe came vnto him and ſayde, Deare

huſband, vnderſtand, that that which I ſayde vnto you in my confeſſion, I ſpake it for the nonce, and I tould you the trueth: for firſt when I was married vnto you, you were a young gentleman, and afterward a Squire, then were you dubbed a Knight, and after that, you became a foole, becauſe you coueted to vnderſtand ſuch matters of your faythfull Lady, and nowe laſtly you are become a Prieſt, for you haue heard my confeſſion. Frontinus in his fyrſt boke, wryteth, that when Scipio landed in Africa, comming foorth of the ſhip, he fell downe to the ground, and becauſe his ſouldiers ſhould not be afraide, Heare ye my ſouldiers ſaid he, I haue now taken all Africa.
               
            
            
               Cap. 9. Of Squires and armour bearers, and their merie ieſtes.
               
                  QVintus Curtius in his hiſtorie of Alexander the great, wryteth,Quincut Curtius. that when Alexander fought with Darius, there was a Perſian who putting on the armour of a Macedonian ſouldier, came behind Alexander, and ſtrake him on the head,Hovve king Alexander forgaue the armourer that vv
                        •
                     uld haue killed him. but his helmet was ſo hard, that the ſtroke glaunced away, and did him no harme. Then being apprehended and brought before the king, and demaunded why he had done ſo: anſweared, that Darius and he had couenanted, that yf he coulde kyll Alexander, he ſhould then marrie his daughter, and haue part of his kyngdome. Then Alexander liking well of the couenant, and prayſyng his aduenture, ſuffered him to depart ſafe to his company.
               A certayne Squire offered him ſelfe vnto a king to ſerue hym, ſaying, that he was very ſturdie, and bould. On a tyme ſeeing raine lying vpon the kinges head, he would haue beaten it of, and as he was dooing, the king boughed with his mouth, to make him afraide. Then he immediatly lyfted vp his hand,
                     Of a knight that gaue the King a boxe in the eare.
                     Of tovv Squires, that vvere ſvvorne felovves.
                   and gaue him a boxe on the eare, that he caſt him to the ground, ſaying, wylt thou eate me vp? But when the other ſeruants would haue apprehended him, the king bid them let him alone, ſaying, I tooke him into my ſeruice becauſe he promiſed me that he was bo
                     •
                  ld. Two Squires were ſworne fellowes, concerning all their gaynes and pray, whereof one went into turneament, and gained much, the other went not, but required his

my Lorde ſayd the poore man,Of a lavvier that tooke avvay a poor mans covv. yf you heare hym ſpeake, then haue I ſurely loſt my Cowe in deede. An Aduocate 
                     •
                  ntred into the Ciſterian order, and was ſet to kéepe ſheepe. In a tyme when great trouble aroſe in the Abbey, there was none found that could geue any good counſell, but he only. At the length, being called and required,Of the Aduocate that vvas ſet to keepe 
                        •
                     hep. wh
                     •
                  rfore he medled not with the Monaſterie matters, anſweared, O brethren, God geueth abrode in the worlde, and the Abbot in the order of religion.
               A certayne Earle going forth on Pilgrimage, put his lawier in truſt with his wyfe, whyle he ſhould be abſent: When the Earle was departed, the Lawyer began earn
                     •
                  ſtly to ſollicite her to conſent to his incontinent luſt: whereunto, becauſe ſhe would not agree,Of a lavvier that vvas put in truſt vvith an Earles vvife he withdrewe from her her meate and apparrel, and other neceſſaries apper
                     •
                  eyning vnto her neceſſarie furniture. At length fearing leſt ſhe ſhould be ſtarued, and that the people would thinke that it came through ſome euyll deſart of hers, graunted to conſent vnto him, and ſent her handmaide to bed vnto him in her ſtéede. And when he had taken his pleaſure of her he cut her finger, which ye Lady hearing, tred a linnen cloth about her owne finger. Now, when the Earle was returned, and this bawdy Lawyer thought to haue ſhamed the Lady before her Lord, ſhe diſprooued his trecherie, and proued him a lyer, ſaying, Looke whoſe finger is cut, & ſhe it is that lay with you, and there withall ſhe plucked away the cloth, and ſhewed her finger that was whole. A certayne Lawyer had taken ſees of both parties, in a controuerſie: of one, a Cowe, of the other, an Oxe.Of the cliēt that bid his lavvier ſpeake Oxe. Nowe when he ſhoulde pleade for him that had geuen him the Oxe, he was dumb, and could not ſpeake. Then ſayde the Client, Speake Oxe, and he anſweared, The Cowe wyll not ſuffer me.Of the countrey man that aſked his Lavveir a monethes 
                        •
                     eſpite to pay him his Coſelinges. A man of the countrey deſyred an Aduocate to teache him the beſt woord belongyng to an Aduocate, and he would geue him a certayne number of Goſlinges for a reward. Then ſayd the Aduocate, whatſoeuer is aſked of thee in iudgement, deny it, and require a longer time to anſweare, although thou knowe it w
                     •
                  ll already. N
                     •
                  w when the Aduocate ſent his ſeruantes for the Goſelinges, the countreyman denyed them, ſaying that he owed him none.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  But at length confeſſing the det hée required a longer terme to pay him, which was an whole yéere after.
               A certein Lawier which obtained the vpper hande in all cauſes, became a Munke,Of a Lavvier which became a Munke. and beeing made ſolicitour for the Abbey, all matters went againſt him. And when the Abbot was much diſpleaſed therwith, hee ſaid vnto him, my Lorde bée not angry, for now I dare not lie and face as I haue done béefore, and therfore I looſe all matters that are committed vnto mée.
               And Aduocate béeing very ſicke,Of an aduocate that woulde he
                        ••
                      Iudgment, before he would receiue the comunion. his friendes that were about him thought it expedient for him to receiue the Communiō ere he died. Then ſaid he, I will hear iudgment whether it wer beſt for mée to do ſo or not. Then ſaid his frindes wee iudge it beſt. But I appeale frō your ſentence (quod hée) for you are not my iudges, and ſo died. And an old verſe there is written of lawiers many a yéere agoe:
               
                  I haue heard ſome which made their mone,
                  That Lawiers friendly are to none.
                  But whether that bee true or no:
                  It is not lawfull to ſay ſo.
               
            
            
               Chap. 12. Of Marchant men, byers and ſellers.
               A Proper ieſt of a certen Marchant that would neuer come to Church, nor heare ſermons,Of a Marchā
                     
                        •
                      that did not loue to go to Church. and beeing mooued often times by his wife therto, ſaid alwayes vnto her, go thou for vs both. On a night he dreamed that he was called into iudgment, and ſeeing his wife with many other holly folkes entring in at the doore of ye celeſtial ioy, and he likewiſe woulde haue gone in with them: the porter put him backe, and ſayd, ſhée ſhall go in for you both. Thus hee tareing without, awaked with ſorow and griefe and aterward leade a godlier life.Of a Marchāt that wroght a ſteight to try his wiue
                        •
                      falſhed.
               
               A certain Marchant hauinge occaſion to trauayle beyond the ſea, who had a fayre womā to his wife, which he had ſumwhat in ielouſie: At his home comminge, demaunded of his

wife, betwéene ieſt and good earneſt, how oft ſhée had made him cuckold ſince he went: who anſwered that ſhée had not done it at all, well (quod he) I ſhall know it on Sunday whē I come at church: how can you (quod ſhe) mary ſaide he, looke how oft you did it, ſo many hornes will appeare on my heade at church: well then (quod ſhe) try it a gods name: This marchant in the meane time got a companye of ſhéepes hornes, found the meanes to make thē ſticke in the heare of his head, and when Sunday came his wife and he went to church togither, and comming to church, either of them went to their owne Pew. And as ſoone as ye marchant had ſaid his praiers he tooke preeuely one of the ſhéepes horns and ſtucke it on his head, and by and by his wife ſpied it, but ſhe ſaid nothing, within a litle while after he priuely ſtuck on another, and his wife ſpied it, and yet ſaid nothinge, the marchante within a while ſtuck on the third horne: At laſt, the wife perceiued the hornes to grow vp ſo faſt, ſtept to her huſband and rownded him in the eare, and deſired him for the paſſion of God to get him out of the church quickly for ſurely ſaid ſhee, if you tary here any while you will haue a hūdred hornes on your head, ſo by that meanes, he tried his wiues falſhed, although not greatly to his contentment.
               A Marchant cumming to Paris, deliuered a caſket full of Gold and ſiluer to a certein ritch Citizen to keepe,Of a Marchāt that was deceiued of a caſket full of gold. who was godfather to Philip the French King. And when the marchant came to require his mony, the Citizen denyed it him, and ſayd that he neuer ſaw him before. Then the marchant complained vnto the King, wherat he being greatly aſtonied, cauſed the Marchant to hide himſelf ſecretly in his Chamber and cauſed the Citizen to be ſent for, whome curteouſlye interteined, and communed with him of many familiar matters. And ſeing a ringe vpon his finger, which he had often times offered to giue him: good godfather (quoth the Kinge) haue you yet your ringe: yea my Lord, quoth the Citizē, and I haue often deſired your grace to take it at my hande, and now again I deſire you to accept it. Then the King receiued

the ringe, and ſent it immediatly ſecretly vnto the Citizens wife, that by the ſame token ſhee ſhould ſende vnto her huſband the caſket of gold and ſiluer. In the meanewhyle he enquired of the Citizen touching the ſame caſket, which he vtterly denied that he had it, vntill the meſſenger returned, and the kinge brought it foorth beefore his face, and for the fact expulſed him out of the realme.
               One that had bought an horſe, when he had paid his mony,Of one th
                        ••
                      bought an horſe. demaunded of the ſeller if hee were good? yea (quod the ſeller) Why doeſt thou ſell him then (quod the byer) bicauſe I am but a poore man, (quod the ſeller) and hée will eate to mutch. What other euill conditions hath hée ſaid the byer? none anſwered the ſeller, ſauing that he will not clime trées. But when hée had bought the horſe, and brought him home, he bit euery body. Then ſaid his maiſter, he that ſould him to mée ſayd true, for he eates to mutch indéede. And another time ridinge foorth vpon him, when he came to a woodden bridge he would not go ouer. Which when ſome ſawe that wher with him when he bought the horſe, he tould you true ſaid they, for he will clime no trees.
               Ther was a certein good woorkeman which gained much and yet was alwayes poore.Of a drūkard that was inioyned to penance to drinke alway by meaſure And cumminge on a time to confeſſion, the Prieſt perceiued that hee was giuen mutch to drinkinge, and therfore inioyned him penance that hee ſhould not drinke aboue a certen meaſure of wine at a meale, wherunto he conſented, vnleſſe he ſould or bought ſumthing that day. On a day being at dinner with his wife, he drāk vp his meaſure of wine, & was yet a thirſt. Thē his wife knowinge of ye penance that was inioyned him, huſband ſayd ſhee, follow my counſel, I wil ſell you a cow & then you may drink more by couenant, and you ſhal ſell her to me againe, and by this meanes he deceiued himſelfe, and could neuer bee ritch.Of one that bought a horſe that would not ſtād by his fellowes.
               
               One bought an horſe, and demaunded of the ſeller what faut he had? None (quod he) but that if you traueill him in company, he will not ſtand with his fellowes. The byer lyking well of that, and imputing it vnto courage and ſtomack,

ſaid that he liked him neuer a whit the worſe for that. But when he prooued him, he found him a lame, dul, and tyred iade and could neuer reach to his bayte with his company, but alwayes was fayne to tarry behinde.
            
            
               Chap. 13. Diuers pleaſant hyſtories, and pithy examples of Vſurers.
               
                  Of certen vſerers that vvould not ſtand vp for the prieſtes bleſſing.A Preacher which in a Sermon had declared the vile wickednes, and abominacion of vſurers, pronounſing abſolution after the Sermon vnto all ſortes of people accordinge to the maner that then was, willed yt euery ſort of them ſhould ſtand vp to haue his Benediction, when hee named them, according to their vocation. And firſt (ſayd he) ariſe al you that be Carpenters, which they did, and when he had bleſſed them he bid them ſit downe agayn. Next ariſe Clothiers, and after them Shoemakers, and ſo of the reſidue. Now ſayd he laſt of all let the Vſurers ſtande vp to be bleſſed, and when none ſtoode vp, although there were many preſent: Good Lorde, (quoth hee) how will they appeare before God in the day of iudgement to receiue eternall damnacion, whiche dare not ſtande vp before men to receiue bleſſing?
               
                  Of the vſerer that wild to haue a bagge of mony vvith him.A certein Vſurer very ritche and couetous, dwellinge in the Citie of Mentz, being ſicke and perceiuing that hée ſhould die, willed that a bag which hee had ful of Monie ſhould be buried with him in his graue, for the ſure perfourmance wherof, he cauſed his friendes to ſweare vnto him by an othe.
               When hee was dead and buried, and afterward ſome came pri
                     ••
                  y in the night to his graue to take away the Mony, they ſaw there the Diuell ſitting with a great Spone of Iron burnying hoate, f
                     ••
                  dyng him with the Mony flamynge in at his mouth bright with fire.
               
                  Of the vſerer that confeſſed to haue ſined three maner of wayes,A certayne Vſurer which was ſick, confeſſed himſelf to a Prieſt, ſaying, that hée had but thrée ſinnes whereof he was gilty, to wit, Vſurie, Lecherie, and Gluttony. To whom the Prieſt ſaid, that hée could abſolue him of twayne of them, but of the third, that is to ſay Vſury he could not abſolue him, vnleſſe

he would make reſtitution. Then ſaid the Vſurer, do the Scriptures, and learned men ſay ſo? Yea quoth the Prieſt. But I will ſee firſt whether they ſay true or not, ſayd the Vſurer, for yet I will not make reſtitution, & therfore in Gods name you may depart.
               An Vſurer which was ſundrie times mooued to make reſtitution,Of the vſerer that was buried vnder the Gallowe
                        •
                     
                   notwithſtandyng could not be therto perſwaded. Falling ſicke, and waxyng weake to the death, he ſent for a Prieſt and deſired to haue the Rites of the Churche. The Prieſt denied him, vnleſſe he would reſtore the goods ill gotten, which the Vſurer refuſed to do. When the Prieſt was departed, he waxed weaker and weaker, and was euen at the poynt of death, and the Prieſt was ſent for in all haſt to commend his ſoule vnto God, but hee could not bee founde. Then (quoth the Vſurer) I my ſelfe commende my Soule vnto all the Diuels of Hell, and ſo died. But when hée was dead, his friendes beſought the Prieſt that he would burie the body in the Holly proceſſion pathe, which hée denied to do. Now the Prieſt had an Aſſe which ſerued him for none other purpoſe, but to carry his bookes to the Churche, and knew none other way but that. Wherfore ye Vſurers friendes, deſired the Prieſt to ſhew thē ſo mutch curteſy, as to let them lay the Corſe vpon the Aſſes backe, and looke whether ſoeuer hee carried it, there to bury it, ſuppoſing that hée would go directly to the Churche, or home to the Prieſtes-houſe, bicauſe hée knew none other way. The Prieſt was contented, and the body was layd vpon the Aſſes backe, and hée went forwarde, neuer turnyng to the righthand, nor to the left, vntil he came vnto the Gallowes, and caſt him downe there vnder the gallowes, and there was buried amonge his fathers.
            
            
               Chap. 14. Certayne mery ieſts of rude Huſbandmen of the Countrey.
               WHen kyng Liberius, of whom Macrobius writeth in the third booke of the Saturnalia, was lately aduanced from

the plow tayle vnto great riches, hée called certein Philoſophers vnto his table, & mocking at their oftē controuerſies & quiddities in Philoſophie, deſired them to reſolue him certein queſtions. Namely, why of white and blacke beanes grounde together, there riſeth Meale of one couler? Wherat Aricides diſdaynynge: then anſwer thou mée this queſtion ſayde hee, why if a man whip with a Laſh made of white and blacke thonges, the ſtrippes looke all alike whiche they make.
               A younge delicate Cocknie of the Citie was married vnto a ritche Fermour of the Countrey.Of a Cockny, mayde that maried a farmer of the countrey. And alwayes againſt hée ſhould come home to dinner or ſupper from his woorke, ſhe prepared him ſome fine litle deintie diſh in a potenger, wherwith he was mutch diſcontented. And once ſhe dreſſed him a capō for his ſupper, wherat he was much more offended then before. This prety parnel ſeing that ſhe could not pleaſe him, went and complayned to her mother of the matter, who aſked of her what ſhe gaue him to eate, who anſwered, this, and that, and recited as before is written. Then ſayd hir mother thou art mutch deceiued, but henceforwarde ſet béefore him a great bowle full of Beanes and Peaſon, with browne Bread, for hée is a labourynge man, and muſt bée groſely fead. Now when the daughter had followed her mothers aduiſe, he laughed and was mery, and ſayd that he laughed at the Capon which ſhée dreſſed for him the day before, but truer it is, that hée reioyſed bicauſe his belly was full.
               
                  Of a woman that was very willing to pleaſe her huſband.There was a woman which could neuer make Breade that would pleaſe her huſbande. On a time ſtrippyng her ſelfe naked, and waſſhyng her ſelfe cleane all her body ouer, ſhée made Dough and moulded it vpon a ſtoole, and when ſhe was wearie, ſhée forgat herſelf and ſat downe vpon the ſtoole and the Dough cleaued to her Buttockes. Anon ſhée aroſe and ſought for it, and her huſband aſked her what ſhée looked for, and ſhe ſayd for the lofe which I haue made for thine own tooth. Mary quoth hée, it ſticketh to thy buttocks, and then the cleanly huſwife remembred hir ſelf.
               An honeſte ſtronge woman of the Cuntreye, when her huſband

came home from woorke out of the fieldes:Of the woman that bleſſed her huſbands eye. hauing one of his eies ſo grieuouſlye hurte that he could not ſee with it, would needes bleſſe her huſbands other eie that it might not bée infected by that which was ſore. And ſo while both his eies were ſtopped, her ſweet hart, whom ſhe had hid vp in a corner, ſlipt out of the doores, the huſband not ſeinge him.
            
            
               chap. 15. Of mery Ieſtes of the Iewes.
               A Certein Jewe fell into a ditch vpon a Saterday which is the Jewiſh Sabboth,Of a Iew that fell in a ditche on the ſaboth day. at what time ther came a Chriſtian by and would haue helpen him foorth, but hee would not ſayinge, that he muſt not violate the Sabbath day. The next day the Chriſtian paſſed by again, and the Jewe called vnto him deſiring him to helpe him foorth. But hee anſwered, this day is Sunday, and now I may not breake my Sabbath, and ſo the wretch remained there. A good fellow in Merſeborow in an euening ſtole away a poore widows Cow, & brought her in the night vnto a Jewe to whom hee pawned her for fiue ſhillinges,Of a fellovv that ſtole a vvidovves Covv. and the ſame night he ſtole her away agayne from that Jewe, and pawned her vnto another Jewe for ſo mutch mony, and againe the ſame night he ſtole her from him and pawned hir vnto the third Jewe for the like ſome. Then deuiſing with himſelfe how the widowe might come by her Cow agayne, he ſtole her likewiſe from the thirde Jewe, and brought her home in the morning betimes by the horns. And meting with the widowes mayd that was goinge to the brooke to waſhe clothes, he chid her, ſaying, that if he had not ben, the cow had bin loſt for euer. Thus the knaue ſerued his owne neceſſity for mony, deceiued the greedy Jewes and reſtored the widow her cow.
            
            
               Chap. 16. Of mery Ieſtes of Theeues.
               A Theif wandring in the woodes, by chaunce met with a Prieſt, and ſaid vnto him, that he would fain be ſhreuen.

For,O
                        •
                      a theefe that vvould be 
                        •
                     hriuen of a p
                        •••
                     ſt in the vvoods. ſaid hee, there paſſed to day a Prieſt by this way, and I tooke his Horſe from him, and therfore I praye you inioyne me penance. Then quod the Prieſt, giue me fiue ſhillings to ſay maſſe for thine offence, and the theif told him out ten ſhillings into his hande, ſayinge, take here fiue ſhillings for the Prieſts horſe whiche I tooke away this day, and bicauſe you make ſo good a market, I giue you fiue more for the Horſe wheron you ride, and ſo hée tooke away his horſe alſo.
               
                  Of the thiefe that ſtole the poo
                        •
                     e mans gooſe.Ther was a theif which had ſtollē a poore mans gooſe who complayned therof vnto the Prieſt of the Pariſhe, deſiringe him to ſpeake to ye people therof out of ye pulpit the next Sunday. When Sunday was come, and the Prieſt in the pulpit, hee bid all the people ſit down, and when they anſwered that they were all ſeat, nay ſaid the Prieſt, for hee is not yet ſet that ſtole the pooremans gooſe (yeas quod the theef that I am) then (quod the Prieſt) for ſhame reſtore to the poore man his gooſe again,Of the thiefe that gaue one that ſolde an oxe a pice of his ſhirt to put in his mony. or els I will excommunicate thee.
               There was a theif which watched a man that had ſoulde an Oxe, and tooke acquaintance of him, and lead him to the Tauerne, and gaue him a quarte of Wine. And when hee that had ſoulde the Oxe, woulde haue bin gonne, ſayinge, that he muſt go bie him a purſe to put his mony in: Nay quoth the Theif, lay thy mony to mine, and let vs drink more, and I will giue thee a piece of my ſhirte to wrap thy mony in, and hee did ſo. But when hee departed, this couſening theif ran after him wt hew and cry, ſaying that hee had cut away a piece of his ſhirt with his mony in it, and ſhewed the place, ſo hee gote the mony, and the true mā was hanged.
               
                  Of a thiefe that couſened a gentlwoman of a Sil
                     
                        ••
                      Cup.A couſening knaue ſeeinge a ſiluer Cup in a gentlemans houſe, which was broken a litle in the foote: he bought a good Pickerell & caried it vnto the Gentlewoman, while her huſband was abroade ſaying, My maſter your huſband hath ſent you this Pickrell to be dreſſed for dinner, for he will bringe home geaſts with him, and willeth you to ſend him the broken cup that hee may haue it mended for the geaſts to drinke in, and ſhée deliuered it vnt
                     •
                   him. Now when he had toi
                     •
                  d

this tale to his fellow, ſurely, quod he, and I wyl haue the pickrell againe. And when he came to the houſe, finding there the Miſtreſſe, and all the houſholde wéeping, hee ſpake vnto her with a counterfayte merrye countenaunce, ſaying. Bée of good chéere now, for my maiſter hath taken the théefe, and ſentence is gyuen that hee ſhall be hanged immediatlye with the pickrell about his necke, and therefore you muſt ſend him the pickrell out of hand, which ſhee deliuered. Thus the théefe and his fellow had both the cup, and the pickrell.
            
            
               Chap. 17. Of Ieſters, and theyr merye deuiſes.
               
                  MAcrobius in his Saturnalia, wryteth of Cicero, that hée was ſo pleaſaunt in wordes, & ſo full of paſtime:Vvhat meanes a ieſter vſed to make Eurelius to laugh. that his friends tearmed him a ſcoffer and Ieſter. Fredericke the Emperours ieſter, with wordes prouoked verye much one Eurelius a learned man, to haue mooued him to laughter, but h
                     •
                  e could not. Shortly after perceyuing him to bée in ſome deepe cogitacion, he made a great many of lyttle balles of hearbes, and threwe them hard at him. And when he demaunded of him what he ment by that: the Ieſter anſwered, ſaying, I haue hard ſay that there is great force in three thinges, to wyt: wordes, hearbs, & ſtones, And as for wordes I haue ſufficiently aſſayd you with them & can auayle nothing, nowe wyll I trye you with hearbs: and if I can profite nothing that way, ſurely I wyll ſtone you to death: at which ſaying he fell in a laughter,Hovve a Ieſter taught his horſe to knele dovvn vvhē he ſayd Flectamus genua. & gaue the ieſter a reward. A Ieſter taught his Horſe to kneele downe on his knees as often as he ſayd Flectamus genua. It happened afterwarde, that a théefe ſeeing the ieſters Horſe to be a proper Gelding, ſtole him away. It fortuned this theefe ryding vpon this Horſe which he had ſtollen, to ryde through a déepe ſlough, and full of myre, which the ieſter ſeeing, cryed alowde, Flectamus genua, and forthwith the Horſe fell downe vpon his knées,Of a ieſter that eate poudered beefe greedilye, vvhen he vvas in daunger of drovvning. and threwe his ryder in the dyrt. Another i
                     •
                  ſter being vpon the Sea, and ſodainly a tempeſt ryſing, began very gréedily to eate powdered béefe, and when one aſked him why he dyd ſo: hée anſwered that perhappes he ſhoulde haue occaſion to drincke more ſhortlye then euer he dyd.
               
                  
                  Hovve a Ieſter in a tempeſt caſt his vvife ouer shyp boord.A certaine Ieſter being vpon the ſea in a tempeſt, euery man in the ſhyp was commaunded to caſt the heauieſt thing which he had ouer boord. Then tooke he his wyfe & threw her into the Sea, ſaying: that he had neuer any thing ſo heauie. A ſkoffer ſeeing theeues ryfling and ſearching his houſe in the night:Hovv theeus came to rob a Ieſter. ſirs quod he, I maruayle what you can finde here by darcke in the nyght, when I can find nothing in the broad day lyght. A certaine merie felow being ſick,Hovv a man Ieſter made his vvyll. was admoniſhed by the Prieſt to make his wyll▪ Mary gladly quod hée. And I haue none other goodes but only two horſes, which I bequeth to the Kinges and Princes of the earth But the Prieſt demanded why he would not rather giue them vnto the poore: aunſwered, you preache that we ſhould imitate God, and he hath giuen all the ritches of the earth vnto them and not vnto the poore, & therfore I would faine doe as lyke vnto him as I could.Of a Ieſter that should be hanged for rayling at a noble man. A Ieſter had rayled & ſkoffed ſo bytterlye at a noble man, that he threatned to hang him, whereſoeuer he tooke him, At length being taken by the noble mans ſeruants, & brought before his preſence, my Lord, then quod he, I ſee now there remaineth nothing vnto mée but preſent death, which I haue well deſerued: I beſeech you grant mee one requeſt, which may be profitable for my ſoules health, which aſ ye earneſt requeſt of thoſe yt ſtoode about him, the Lord frankly yeelded vnto. Then ſayd hee, when I am hanged, I beſeech you to come vnto mee thrée dayes after with a faſting ſtomacke euery morning, & kyſſe my bare tayle with your mouth. Now the Deuyll hang thée, and kyſſe thy tayle, quod the Lord, & went away in a rage,
                     
                        •
                     ovv a mery fellovv pre
                     
                        •
                     ented the Fiers that came to dinner. & ſo he eſcaped. A mery cōpanion, hauing prepared a morſell of good meat for his owne eating, & his wiues: there came vnto his houſe a company of Friars, & knowing not how to excuſe the matter & to ſhyft them of, ſayd vnthem: ſyrs I am very ſory yt you may not eate with mée, for I am excōmunicate. Then ſayd the Fryars, we wyll not beleeue thée, vnleſſe thou tell vs the cauſe why? For beating of a Friar quod he. Then a
                     •
                  t y• worthily excōmunicate ſaid they, & fearing leaſt he would haue beaten thē alſo, they departed incontinētly.
            
            
               Chap. 18. Of merie ieſtes of weemen.
               
                  MAcrobius writeth in his Saturnalia, yt when one demaūded of Iulia, which was daughter vnt
                     •
                   
                  Auguſtus ye Emperor▪
                  
why ſhe decked not her ſelf according to her fathers plainnes▪
                  The aunſvvere of Iulia the Emperour Auguſtus daughter. fragilitye, ſhe anſwered ſaying: My father forgetteth that he is Emperor, but I remember that I am the Emperors daughter. When ſome that were priuie of her incontinencie, woondred yt her children were ſo lyke vnto Agrippa her huſbande, conſidered that ſhee yéelded ſo commonly the vſe of her body abroade in euery brothel houſe: I neuer take any paſſenger to ſayle in my ſhyp, quod ſhe, but when my ſhyp is already fraught.Of Populia the daughter of Marcus. When one ſayd yt he maruailed why all brute beaſtes would not abide to company with ye males, but only when they would cōceyue young: Populia which was daughter vnto Marcus anſwered, bicauſe they be beaſtes. Fauſtus ſonne vnto Sylla,
                  A pretie quippe of F
                        •
                     uſtus to his ſyſter. knowing yt his ſyſter vſed the carnall company of twaine, namely Pompeius and a fullers ſonne: I muſt ſayd hee how my ſyſter cā haue any ſpet in her, whyle ſhee hath the company of a fuller? A woman ſeeing a ſouldior valiently behauing himſelfe in a turneamēt, much cōmended him, & fell in loue with him.Of a vvomā that fell in l
                        •
                     ue vvith a ſouldiour. But whē he put vp his beauer to take ye ayre, & the womā cōming apace to ſee him, perceiued that it was her huſband, ſhee made a mock at the matter, & cared not for him. A certaine ielous man ſet two ouerſeers to tend vpon his wyfe, who paſſing by the houſe where her louer was, for the nonce fel downe in the myre.Of a ielous man, and hi
                        •
                      vvife. And leauing her two keepers at ye doore, ſhee fayned an excuſe to goe into that houſe to waſhe her ſelfe, & when ſhee had made merye with her louer, ſhée came forth & went her way. There was a woman which oftentimes would ſay vnto her huſbād that if he ſhould dye, ſhée would neuer marry more.Of a vvomā that ſayd she vvoulde not marie, if her huſbande vvere dead. But when he was dead, & ſhee talked as touching marrying another, euen by his coffins ſide, her mayd rebuked her, ſaying, that her maſ
                     •
                  er was warme yet: If he be warme quod the miſtres, I wyl blow vpō him tyll he be cold. A certaine ielous huſbande followed his wyfe to confeſſion,of the ielous man that folovved his vvife to confeſſion. whom when the Prieſt ſhould leade behind the Aultar to be diſplyed, the huſband perceyuing it & doubting the worſt, cryed vnto him, ſaying: heare yee maſter Perſon, my wyfe is young & tender, I pray you let mee be deſplyed for her: And kneeling downe before the Prieſt, I pray you quod ye wyfe to the Prieſt, ſtrike him hard, for I am a great ſinner.
               
                  
                  Of a vvomā that tolde a gentle
                        •
                     an that her huſband vvas a good Phiſition.A woman whoſe huſband had ſwynged hyr well, went vnto a Gentleman that was diſſeaſed, and tolde him that her huſband was a very good Phiſition, but that he would cure no man vnleſſe he were fyrſt well beaten. Then ſhe cauſed him to goe thither, from whence he brought home his back full of ſtripes, and thus his honeſt wyfe was reuenged on him.
            
            
               Chap. 19. Merie ieſtes of maydens, and young vvomen.
               
                  Of an olde vvoman that cauſed her bitch to eate muſtarde for a policy.AN olde woman which was deſirous to make a matche betweene a young man & a mayde, cauſed a lytle bytch which ſhee had, to eate muſtarde, and when the bytche wept with the ſtrongneſſe of the muſtard, ſhée ſhewed hir vnto the mayd, ſaying, that ſomtyme ſhee had beene a mayd, & for refuſing a young man which loued her intirely ſhee was chaunged into a bytch, & for ſorrow therof wept ſo continually.Of a young man that gaue himſelf to the Deuil for the loue of a mayde. Which thing the mayd hearing, conſented vnto her louer. A certayne young man gaue himſelf to the Deuyl for a mayd which he loued ardently, and could not obtaine her loue. But when the Deuil alſo doing his beſt, ſaw that he could not bring it to paſſe, to make hir loue the young man, hée went to an old woman & promiſed hyr certayne ſkinnes for a reward, if ſhée could mollifye the maydens heart. Which when ſhee had brought to paſſe, and required the ſkynnes of the Deuyl, he reached them vnto hyr vpon the ende of a long poa
                     •
                  e, ſaying: I dare not come nere thée, bicauſe thou art worſe then I am, according vnto the olde verſe:

                     A wicked woman fraught with all euyll,
                     Is by three farthinges worſe then the Deuyll.
                  
               
               
                  Of the good man that tooke his vvife a bed vvith another man.A good honeſt whore woman, being by hyr huſband taken a bed with hyr louer, conſulted with an olde mother Bee of hyr acquaintaunce, how to excuſe the matter. But the olde woman perceyuing that the huſband ye night before had eaten an hearb called Cheruile vnto his ſupper, ſought occaſion to méete him in the ſtréete, and ſaluted him, ſaying: God ſaue you both. Then ſayd the huſband, why ſpeakeſt thou thus vnto mée, ſince I am alone? Then ſhée rubbed hyr eyes, ſaying: a vengeance on this hearbe Cheruile which I eate the laſt night, for 
                     •
                  uer it maketh mée to take one for twaine. The huſband rem
                     •
                  mbring that hée likewyſe had eaten Cheruile the nyght before, thinking the old

wyues tale to bée true, and that it had wrought in him the lyke effect, helde his wyfe excuſed.of the good vvyfe that kneeled before the hearth vvorm vvood. A certaine olde woman hearing a young wyfe euermore gyuing hyr huſband ouerthwart anſweres, & for that cauſe had borne him many a blow: ſayd vnto her, if thou wylt I wyll tell thée how thou ſhalt lyue in quiet with thyne huſband, wherevnto ſhee wyllingly agreed. Then quod the olde woman, thou ſhalt goe into my garden at the full of the Moone, and knéele downe before the hearbe called wormwood, and deſyre it to tell thée ſome counſell that is good. And marke well what the hearbe ſayth vnto thée, and doe ſo. At the tyme appointed the olde woman hyd her ſelfe behind the buſhe of wormwood, and when the young woman according to her inſtruction, began to vtter her requeſt to the hearbe, ſaying: O thou moſt bytter wormwood, tell mée what I ſhall doe that is good: the old woman anſwered:

                     If thou wylt liue in peace and reſt,
                     Anſwere with reaſon for that is beſt:
                  
And euer after ſhee vſed her tōgue better, & liued more in quiet.
            
            
               Chap. 20. Merye ieſtes of Boyes.
               
                  BOetius in his booke of the diſcipline of ſchollars,of the boye that byt his fathers noſe, vvhen he vvas going to the gallovves. wryteth a ſtorie of a boy whom his parents corrected not in his youth, for his naughtie demeanour. But increaſing euery day more & more in wickedneſſe, at laſt cōmitted ſuch great robberies, that he was led to the gallowes to be hanged, & deſyring to kyſſe his father ere he dyed, came vnto him and byt of his noſe, ſaying, that if he had corrected him for ſmal faults whē he was a chyld,of the boye that told his father that hee had forgot to beate his mother. he had not then come vnto that ſhame. A certayne lytle boy ſéeing his father beating his mother euery daye, & hearing him ſaye one night when he was a bed, that he had forgotten to doe one thing: I know what that is quod the chyld, what ſayd the father? Mary ſayd he to beate my mother. A man had two ſonnes, wherof one alwaies craued a piece of whatſoeuer was at the boord, whom the father rebuked,of the boye that hēmed to his father for meate. & ſet them both togither on a ſtoole. And when the young boy ſaw meat on the table that he lyked & durſt not aſke it, he hemmed, and the father threw a piece of meate at ye other. Then ſayd the lytle one, what a paine is this that I muſt hem, and another muſt haue the meate?
            
            
               
               Chap. 21. Merye ieſtes of bl
                     •
                  nde folke.
               
                  Of Senecas vvife, vvhen 
                        •
                     hee vvaxed blinde.
                  SEneca the wyfe, in his fifty two Epiſtle, writeth thus vnto a friend of his: you know Harpaſta ye fooliſh woman my wife, whoſe eye ſight ſodainlye fayled her. Shee requeſteth of her ſchoolemaſter to goe into another houſe, ſaying that it is verye darke where ſhée now is. In 
                     
                        •
                     raiectum the lower, there was a blinde man which by begging had gotten twenty poundes in Turone groates,Of the blind mā, that hyd xx. pounde vvhich hee gotte a begging. which he hyd vp in the pariſhe Church where he dwelt, vnder one of the pewes, which the clarke perceiuing, ſought for in the ſame place, & found it, and caried it away. The next morning the blind man ſeeking for ye money, according to his cuſtom, & not finding it: ſayd vnto his boy, leade me into the chancel among the chaplins, & marke whom thou ſeeſt to laugh bring mee to him & he dyd ſo. Then the blind man calling him a ſide, ſayd vnto him: Syr I haue hard much good report of you, yt you be of a very honeſt lyfe & vertuous cōuerſation, I haue a ſecrete matter to breake vnto you, which I would haue no man to heare. I am blind & weake, and I know not how ſoone I ſhal dye. So it is, that in this Church vnder ſuch a pew I haue hiddē twenty pound in Turon groates, wherof no man knoweth, & I meane to lay vp there twenty more, which I would haue you to take & to employ at your pleaſure, beſtowing ſome part therof for my ſoules health as it is conuenient. When yt clark hard this, he went & layd the twenty poūd in the place againe where he had it, hoping to haue the other twenty pound alſo. But the blind man comming to church very early in the morning, tooke awaye the money with him, & ſo deceyued the clarke that had deceiued him.Of the blind man that bid his vvife ſet a cādle light before him. A certaine blind man, cōmaunded his wyfe alwayes to ſet a candle a light by him. On a tyme the wyfe being offended at him, diſcouered her naked tayle and ſo ſtoode before him. Then ſayd he, wyfe is there a candle a light in the houſe? yea quod ſhée: Surely ſayd he, if there be neuer a better, yet is there a brighter.Of the blind man that turned the gooſe. A blind man & his wife had a fat gooſe to dinner, & while the wife was gone forth about buſines, & the blind man turned the ſpyt, there came a good fellowe into the houſe, which he hearing & thinking it to be a dog, roſe vp to ratle the diſhes to driue him away. In the meane whiles this felow ſtole away the gooſe, & put a great browne loafe which ſtoode there by vpon the ſpyt, & departed, and he turned the loafe about verye

dilygently. But when the good wyfe came in, he chyd her ſharply for leauing ye doore open, for ſayd he, there came in a dog euen now, & had I not mooued the diſhes to driue him away, he would haue done ſome harme. O huſband ſayd ſhee, it was no dog, but ſome theefe, and he hath ſtollen away the gooſe.Of tvvo that vvere eating a ioule of ſammon. One yt had but one eye was eating of a iowle of Sāmon with another yt had two eies, who being ready to eate ye Sāmons eye, he yt had but one eye cried vnto him ſaying, for Gods ſake giue me that eye for thou lackeſt none, and I haue but one.
            
            
               Chap. 22. Merye ieſtes of fooles.
               THere was a merry companion that ſayde there were fowre kindes of fooles.of foure kinde
                        •
                      of fooles. The firſt of thē that threaten ſo much yt no mā careth for them. The ſecond, that ſweareth ſo much yt none wyl beleue them. The third, yt giueth ſo much away to others yt they kéepe nothing for them ſelues. The fourth,
                     Of the foole that vvept vvhen the ſun did shine 
                           〈◊〉
                         laughed 
                           •••
                        n it 
                           •••
                        d.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         foole L
                           •••
                        inu
                           •
                         tha
                           •
                         
                        
                           •••
                        e not himſelfe vvhen hee had on his 
                           〈◊〉
                         coat
                           •
                        .
                   yt hauing none to helpe them, wyl not helpe them ſelues. There was a foole, who when he ſaw the Sunne to ſhyne wept, & when it rayned, laughed: & being aſked why he dyd ſo, anſwered that rayne cō
                  meth after the Sunne ſhyning, & therefore he wept: and when it rayned he knewe that afterward the Sunne would ſhine, & therefore he laughed. There was a foole called Lobellinus, who vpon a time putting on a new coate knew not him ſelfe, & wēt about inquyring of euery body if they ſaw not Lobellinus? Then one raught him a good ſowſe on the eare, ſaying, this I giue not to thee but to Lobellinus, & therewith he remembred himſelf who he was. A Lord gaue his foole a new caote wheron were imbroidred a great many Aſſes heads. Thē a ſtrange
                     •
                   ſéeing him, ſayd vnto him: It apeareth yt thou art a foole,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      foole that had 
                        ••
                     
                     coate imbroidered with Aſſe
                        •
                      heads. bicauſe thou weareſt ſo many Aſſes heads vpon thy coate, which ye foole hearing, went vnto ye Lord his maſter & byd him take his coate again, for he would not weare it. Why ſo quod ye Lord bicauſe ye makeſt mee a foole, ſayde he, in putting Aſſes heads vpon my coate. No ſaid ye Lord, they be deeres heads. Deeres heads, qoud the foole, where be the hornes? Then ſayd ye Lord, they haue no hornes yet for they be fawnes, & with that anſwere ye foole was contented, & ſo he anſwered vnto whoſoeuer mocked him therwith. Frederick the Emperor was wont to ſay, that they were 
                     〈◊〉
                   moſt fooles in all the world, that beléeue the puniſhmentes

and rewardes that ſhall be in the worlde to come, and yet lyue ſtyll in theyr ſinnes.Of the foole that hyd his money in the hole. A certaine fooliſhe fellow hauing a lytle money, hyd it in a hole, & couered it with a ſtone, wherevpon he wrote: here it is. Another comming by, and reading the ſuperſcription, and maruayling what it ſhould ſignifye, ouerturned the ſtone & caryed away the money, and layde the ſtone againe in his place, and wrote vpon it: It is not here.
            
            
               Chap. 23. Merye ieſtes of thoſe that are poſſeſſed.
               
                  Of a mayde that vvas poſſeſſed vvith an euil ſpirite.A Mayd in VVeſtphalia which was poſſeſſed of a ſpirite diſputed with euery one yt came to her in what ſcience ſoeuer, which a certaine maſter of Art, that came lately frō 
                  Paris hearing, came vnto her. To whom ſayd the Deuyl: thou commeſt lately from the vyllage of ſtraw, therefore tell mée the quantity & quality of this propoſition: Euery horſe is a mare. Wherfore he being amazed,Of the huſbandman that aſked the Deuyll hovve many children hee had. departed immediatly. When a certaine mā of the cuntrey demaunded of one that was poſſeſſed, how many chyldren he had: the Deuyll anſwered that he had one. Nowe it appeareth quod the huſbandman, that thou art a lyar, for I haue twayne? Nay ſayd the Deuyl, I haue told true, for one of them is not thine, but a Prieſtes. A Prieſt being defamed with a certaine woman, promiſed a deuil that if he would helpe him in his purgation, he would giue him a ſufficient rewarde. Then the Deuil promiſed him yt if he haply ſhould be ſearched, it ſhould not appeare at all that he had any mēbers. But when the tyme came, and he had ſtryped himſelfe naked, it was of all manifeſtly ſéene that he had as much as was requiſite for any man to haue. Thus wee may ſee howe they are deceyued that put theyr truſt in the Deuyll.Of one that cōmitted his vvife to the Deuyls cuſtody vvhile he vvas frō home. One that was going awaye from his wyfe bicauſe of her naughtineſſe, meant not to take leaue at his departure. Then ſayd his wyfe vnto him, to whom 
                     ••…
                  ll you commyt mée in your abſence: to the Deuyl quod he, & immediatly he went on his iourney. But when he was gone, & her louers according to theyr cuſtome came to the houſe, the Deuyll alwayes frayd them away. Long tyme after when the huſbande came home againe, now take thou the charge of thy wyfe againe, quod the Deuyl vnto him, for I had rather kéepe all the wylde boores in the whole countrey, then her onely.
               
                  One that was poſſeſſed, cōmyng through the Market place in a Citie, fell thriſe in a laughter:Of one poſſeſſed that fell thriſe a laughing in the market place. and being demaunded the cauſe, anſwered: the firſt was, becauſe he ſawe a man bying ſhooes and a Capon, and too day he ſhall die (quod he) for all he hath bought them. The ſecond was, becauſe he ſaw a Bayliff leadyng a poore théefe to hanging that had ſtollen a trifle, ſaying, that it was a ſtrange matter to ſée a great theefe leadyng a litle theife to the gallowes.
               Thirdly bicauſe hee ſaw a Prieſt following a childe that was going to burying, ſinging, and a huſbandman cumming after, weeping, when as in deede (quoth hée) it ought to haue bin otherwiſe, as namelye the Prieſt to haue wept whoſe ſunne hée was, and the huſbandman to haue ſunge as beeing diſcharged of a great burthen. The Diuell ſpake in one that was poſſeſſed, ſayinge: In hell there is no redemption, and therefore man is very vnwiſe that will hazard ſo noble a pleadg, which if it bee forfeited can neuer more bée redéemed. One vpon occaſion of talke ſaid to his fellow. I maruell ſayd hée, that the Diuell ſuffreth vs to liue, ſince wée bee all ſutch grieuous ſinners? to whom the other anſwered, but I maruel rather why hée hurteth not his ſeruants.
            
            
               Chap. 24. Of Popes and their mery Ieſtes.
               IT is read in the Cronicles that when the Pope is conſecrated,The manner of conſecrating Popes. as they terme it, ther is a great handful of Towe ſet on fire in preſence of them al, & therwith al theſe woords ſpoken: Thus paſſeth the glory of the world, remember that thou art aſhes and a mortal man. A good leſſon if they would follow it.
               
                  Sergius the Pope was called before hée was Pope Os porci,
                  Of Pope Hogs mouth that is to ſay, Hogs mouth, and ſince his time all Popes haue changed their owne proper names.
               
                  Euariſtus the Pope, appointed ſeauen deacons to gward the Popes perſon whyle hée preacheth, which I thinke is but ſeldome,Of the Pope
                        •
                      preaching. or to aſiſt him that hée erre not, wherby hée might come into obloquie, and bée diffamed by his aduerſaries, Adrian the Pope with the whole aſſembly of Cardinals, Byſhops, and prelates, and all the Synode gaue vp all the aucthority vnto

                  Charles king of Rome, to chuſe and appoincte who ſhoulde bee Pope. And moreouer that all Archbyſhops ſhoulde receiue their inueſture of him, and that all that were diſobedient vnto this decree ſhould bee accurſed: mutch repugnant vnto that wherin the Popes will take vpon them to make, and depoſe Emperours at their pleaſure.
            
            
               Chap. 25. Of Cardinals and their mery Ieſtes.
               
                  how the Pope ſent for frier Tortus, to make his Neece conceiue.
                  OCtauianus a Cardinal, cauſed the Pope to ſend for one frier Tortus to Lions, that had very good knowledg in Phiſick. And when he was come vnto him, ye frier demaunded ye cauſe why hee ſent for him. The Pope anſwered, I haue a Néece that hath bin this long married, and can haue neuer a childe, and I haue ſent for you bicauſe you are a Phiſitiō, to do your indeuour to make her conceiue. Then anſwered, the Frier, your hollines is hoate, younge, and luſtye you ſhould ſooner make her to conceiue then I can: wherat the Pope laughing tooke him to be his chaplein.
               
                  How two Prieſtes ſtriued for a benefice.Two Prieſtes ſtriuinge before the Cardinals for the Maiſterſhip of a certain hoſpitall, it is a ſtrange matter to ſe quod one of the Cardinals, how you two poore fellowes and vnlearded, can not agree for one ſimple Maiſterſhip of an hoſpitall. Nay, ſayd one of the Prieſts, it is more maruell to beeholde how you ritche prelates and learned men are at ſutch contention for one great Popedome. A certein Cardinall hearing of a frier yt alwaies preached againſt prelates, would needes haue him to preach in his audience, and hée did ſo. Then taking occaſion to ſpeake of Cardinals, hee ſaid that the Lords Cardinals were ſo termed of this Latin woord cardo which ſignifieth the hinge of a doore.Of a Pr
                        •
                     eſte that preached againſt Cardinals. For like as the hinges of a doore lacking oyle do alwayes murmour and make a noyſe, but beeinge oyled do open an ſhut very pleaſantly: ſo fareth it with theſe Cardinals, for vntill they haue promotion they neuer leaue prechinge and cryinge out at couetouſneſſe and ambition, and when they haue to mutch then they preach no more, but greaſe their bellies with dilicates and giue themſelues wholy to all voluptuouſneſſe.
               A certein Cardinall had a chaplein called Michael whom

hee promiſed that if euer God called him to greater dignitye,Of a Cardinall to p
                        •
                     e
                        •••
                      his Chaplein. hee would prefer him to his contentacion. Afterward beeing made Pope and troubled with many affayres, hee quite forgat his old Chaplein Michael. Who ſeeing that he could haue no acceſſe vnto the Pope, wrote vpon a doore by the whiche hee ſhould paſſe, theſe verſes following.
               
                  Here ſtandeth without before the doore, Michael the Chaplein pore,
                  Saying that honours do manners change,
                  But ſeld to better, for that were ſtrange.
               
               Which the Pope reading, and ſeeing him ſtanding before the doore, remembred his promiſe, & gaue him a good benefice.
            
            
               Chap. 26. Of Archbiſſhops and their mery Ieſts.
               A Certein Archbyſſhop preachinge vpon Palme Sundaye diſcourſed very much of Chriſtes humility,Of the biſſhop that preached of the ſhee aſſe that Chriſt
                        •
                      rid vpon. and of the ſhee Aſſe whereupon hee rode. And when the ſermon was done, he mounted vp vpon his lofty palfry, and was ridinge home. Then came an olde woman running, and tooke the horſe by ye bridle ſaying, I pray you my Lord, is this the ſhee aſſe whervpon Chriſt roade? An Archbyſſhop in a ſermon ſorely inveied againſt ye whole order of Preaching friers, & compared them to the Pharaſies. When the ſermon was finiſhed,Of the Archbyſſhop tha
                        •
                      preached againſt the friers. and the Archbyſſhop come down out of the Pulpit, the reader of the ſame couent aroſe and came to him ſaying: My Lord, your grace had forgotten one text which is this: Thy Nacion and thy Byſſhops haue deliuered thee vnto me. Againe, the ſame Archbyſſhop preached another time againſt Maſters & Readers in the vniuerſities,Of an Archbyſſhop tha
                        •
                      preached againſt mayſters. how they clothed themſelues in ſofte apparell, and ſought to bee magnified and placed in the chiefe ſeates in the ſcooles, and Churches, and ſutch like. Shortly after the ſame Archbyſſhop chanced to meete with a Reader, in a very foule and dirty place. Then ſaid the Archbyſſhop to the Reader, what do you here Maſter Ammirandu
                        •
                     
                  ? for that was his name: Mary my Lord (quoth he) I come to make cleane & neate mine apperell wherof your Grace ſpake of late and therewith all he ſhewed him his tayle all dirty behinde.
               An Archbiſhop beeyng in viſitation, ſharply puniſhed a certayn Lady Prioreſſe of a Nunrie for treſpaces which ſhe had

committed,Of an Archebiſhop that puniſhed the Lady priores. whom ſhée earneſtly intreated that in conſideration of a piece of money, hee would in part remit the puniſhment. But he deneying ſo to do, ſaying, that he loued her not, and therfore he would not pleaſure her ſo mutch: I thinke ſo quoth ſhe, and wel beléeue it, for there was neuer yet Capon that loued an Hen.
            
            
               Chap. 27. Of Byſhops, and their mery ieſtes.
               
                  Of one that flattered a biſhop for ad
                     
                        •
                     antage.ONe thinkyng to get the goodwill of a Byſhop by flatterie, ſaid vnto him, my Lord, if your Lordſhip would take leſſe paines you might liue yet fiue yéeres, but if you continued ſo ſtill you will ſcarce liue two yéeres to an end. Who anſwered, I had rather be a good Biſhop two yeres, then an ill Byſhop fiue yéeres.
               
                  Of one that obiected againſt a biſhop bicauſe he was couetous.One obiected vnto a Biſhop, that he was to couetous, for that by keping a nigardly houſe, he had ſaued mony enough to redéeme his Church lands which his prediceſſour had layd to morgage. But he anſwered that he was far more liberal then his prediceſſour, for (ſayd he) I haue payd his debts and mine owne alſo.
               
                  Of a biſhop that promiſed to giue a Prebend at the kinges appointmentA Biſhop in France, promiſed Philip the French Kynge, yt the firſt Prebend yt fell in his gift, he would giue it to whome ſoeuer it pleaſed the Kynge. And when many fell voyde, and the kyng was pleaſured with none, he was ſore offended. To whom ye Biſhop ſent this anſwer, deſiring his grace not to be offended, for he had yet giuen neuer an one of them, but ſould them all.
               
                  Of a Biſhop that courſed a Hart.The Biſhop of Mentz courſed an Hart, and after long rū
                  nyng, the beaſt leapt into a deepe ponde, and a greate Pike caught him faſt by the throat. And when the Hart came out of the water, hee brought the Pike with him hanginge by his throat, and ſo hée tooke them bothe, and ſent pieces of them abread for preſent to his friends.
               
                  A prieſt rebuked by the Biſhop for buryinge a 
                        •
                     ead Aſſe.A certain Prieſt was accuſed vnto the biſhop of the Dioceſſe for buriyng his dead Aſſe ſolemly with Dirige, & Maſſes of Requiem. And béeing much rebuked for ſo doing he certified the Biſhop that it was a very godly Aſſe, & had made a will, & had bequea
                     •
                  hed his Lordſhip fiue pounde, which he had now

brought vnto him. And when the Biſhop had receiued the money, he ſaid, let him then reſt in peace, & ſo diſcharged ye prieſt.
               A noble younge Gentlemen that was a ſchollar in Paris,
                  A gentilman that ſaid all biſhops were blinde. ſayd that all Biſhops in France were blinde, bicauſe they gaue not ſom good benefice to his maiſter, beyng but poore, and well learned. Not long after, being himſelf made a Biſhop, he was ſo blinded with his ſpirituall promotion, that he neither gaue his poore maiſter any thing, but on a time when he came to Paris, his Maiſter went and met him, bearyng a couple of Waxe candles burnyng in his hand. And when the Biſhop aſked him why hée did ſo: hée anſwered, bycauſe your lordſhip ſhould sée mée, for you are blinde.Of a Biſhop that preferred his kinſfolke,
               
               A certain Biſhop had many yonge Nephewes and Kinſfolkes in his houſe, which alwaies ſat at meate at a low table before him, and whenſoeuer any preferment fell voyde, he repulſed other, and beſtowed it vpon one of thoſe. Then a man of worſhip, whom the Biſhop had bid to dinner, ſet himſelf downe at the childrens Table. And béeing demaunded by the Biſhop why hée did ſo, hée anſwered that hée could not be preferred ſittyng at any other Table, neither knew he any other then thoſe that ſat there, aduanced by him vnto any dignitie.
            
            
               Chap. 28. Of Archdeacons.
               AN Archdeacon being in viſitatiō,Of a woman that told the Archdeacon, he did not his dutie. ſpent whole daies in feaſting & making good chéere, when the people looked that he ſhould haue preached vnto them the word of God. And as hee was going from hearyng Maſſe vnto dinner, an olde woman ſayd vnto him yt they looked for that which was his dutie to do meaning, to ſhew them their duties out of the word of God. Well (quoth the Archdeacon) I will not call thée to counſell what I had beſt to do. But ſhée anſwered, ſurely he had ſmall care of our ſoules that put them in truſt to thée.
               An Archdeacon viſited his pariſh Church,Of a mā tha
                        •
                      had a poore woman to his wife, aſked the Archdeacon if h
                        •
                      might not marry another that was 
                        〈◊〉
                     . from which hée was promoted vnto the Archdeaconrie. And there came vnto him an huſband man to aſke counſell, ſaying: M. Archdeacon I married a poore wife, and now I know where I may haue a ritch one, is it lawful for mée to f
                     •
                  rſake the poore one, and to take the ritche? The Archdeacon anſwered, by no meanes.

Then ſaid ye huſbandmā, but you haue forſaken a poore church and keepe a ritch Archdeaconry. Which he hearing, gaue vp his Archdeaconry, and returned to his owne Churche.
               
                  Of a Prieſt that killed a younge Aſſe in ſteede of a Calfe, &c.A certein Prieſt againſt his Archdeacon ſhoulde come in viſitacion, hauinge none other prouiſion, killed a litle Aſſe which hee had, and dreſſed him in the ſtead of Veale, and whē the Archdeacon fead hungerly theron at dinner and ye Prieſt himſelfe woulde eate none, the Archdeacon demaunded the cauſe. Then quod the Prieſt, your Maſterſhip ſaith yt I haue wit and learning litle ynough already, and therefore I neede to eate no aſſes fleaſh. When the Archdeacon heard this, he aroſe from the table in a rage, and immediatly departed.
            
            
               chap. 29. Of Canons and their mery Ieſts.
               
                  Of the Chanceler of Paris that had manie benefices.
                  IVlius in his booke of Bees, writeth an hiſtory of one Philip that was Chancellour of Paris, who hauing many benefices was in his ſicknes admoniſhed by the Byſſhop to reſigne thē vp, for feare of longer incurring Gods diſpleaſure: who anſwered that hee would try the truth of that, béefore the greate iudge. But ſhortly after hee was dead, hee appeared vnto the Byſſhop like a ſhadow, and ſayd: I moſt miſerable wretch am damned, and that cheifly for thrée cauſes: Firſt for my fruites which I kept from the poore: Secondly for my pluralitye of benefices: And laſtly for my deteſtable whoredome. Moreouer hee ſayd, is the world yet at an end? Then quod the Byſſhop, I marueill that thou hauinge in thy life time beene a great clarke, and ſeeing mee and other liuing, who muſt all die beefore that day come, ſhouldeſt aſke mee that queſtion? But hee ſayd marueill not at all, for in hell there is neither knowlegde, nor reaſon. Maiſter Albertus ſayd vnto a Canon of Colein,
                  Of the Carō that had got a diſpenſatiō, for many benefices. which came home from the Court with a diſpenſation to haue many benefices: Before you might haue gone to Hell without licence, and now you muſt néedes go thither by vertue of your diſpenſation.
               There was a Canon which had two Canonries, one in one Church, another in another, ye dreamed one night ye two ſtaues were reatched vnto him, and the ſame night ye biſhops of both Churches died. Then ſome of his familiars expounding

his dreame, ſaid that he ſhould be choſen biſhop in both places and riding out the next day morninge, he fell from his horſe and brake both his legges, and was faine to go with two crutches to beare himſelft vp withall.
            
            
               Chap. 30. Of the Hault and Lame.
               ON a time there came vnto a ſanctes church,How a prieſt did driue the hault and lame out of the Churche. ſo many hault and Lame people to be cured, yt the Prieſt could not driue them foorth. Then ſaid the prieſt, giue me your ſtaues & I wil heale you all. And when he had them, he ſent for fier, & beinge demaunded what he would do with it: Burne him yt is moſt lambe, quoth he, that you may all be healed with his Aſſhes. And when they heard this, they ran all away.
            
            
               Cap. 31. Of Prieſts.
               A Certain poore lecherous Prieſt had a concubine,Of a prieſt that loſt his Concubine and, his benefice together. whom he loued well, wherof the Archedeacon hearing, commanded him either to forſake his Church, or to leaue his concubin But being loth to depart from his Concubine, he reſigned his benefice, and when the harlot ſaw that he had nothing now to liue withall, ſhe would tarie no lenger with him, and ſo he loſt both profit and pleaſure together.
               A certein Prieſt had two Concubines, one yonge,Of a prieſt that had an yonge and an old concubin another olde: The younge bicauſe ſhe would haue the Prieſt to be like herſelfe, pluckt all the gray heares out of his head, and the olde pluckt away al the blacke, vntill betwéen them both thei had made him bald, not only in head, but alſo in his goods, and minde.
               A poore aged woman, being weake and like to die, bequeathed vnto a Prieſt one Hen which ſhée had,Of a poore woman that bequeathed her Hen. to bée deliuered after her departure. But the Prieſt came and tooke away the Hen while ſhe was yet liuinge. Then ſayde the olde woman, I perceiue that Prieſts bée worſe then the Diuell, for many a time haue I giuen my Hen to the Diuell, & the Foxe and they haue letten her alone, and now haue giuen her but once to a Prieſt, and hée taketh her away.
               There was a Prieſt which vſed to cary holy water, as they termed it, about vnto his friends & pariſhoners houſes, &, whē
                  
he came to a certein ritchmans houſe,Of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      that had 
                        〈◊〉
                      legge. he was ſure of nothing els but rayling, curſes, and euil language. It fortuned that he caught a ſore in one of his legges, and at the Prieſts next cū
                  mynge thither, he ma
                     •
                  e him good cheere, and deſired him to pray for him. Then quod the Prieſt, I pray God ſende your other legge to bee ſore alſo, that you may bee more deuoute. Which the ritch man hearinge, well bumbaſted the Prieſt, and with ſtrayning his leg found the pain to be eaſed. This or the like is alwaye the end of vngodly prayers.
            
            
               Chap. 32. Of Abbots and their Ieſts.
               
                  Of one Arſemus, that ſent both his Scholers to 
                        ••
                     e Abbots.IT is read in the booke intitled vitae patrum, that it belonged vnto the duty of one Arſenius an Abbot, alwayes to prouide an Abbot for a certein Monaſtarie beeing deſtitute, who ſent vnto them a ſchollar of his owne bringynge vp, one that was religious and ſeuere. But when the Munkes could not away with him, he ſent them another yt was calme & gentle, & finding him to be ſoft and tractable, thei yet miſliked him and required another. Then ſaid Arſenius, I haue ſent you twayne, whom I my ſelf haue bought vp, and I know that neither of them is deſtitute of the grace of ye holy ghoſt, who appeared in the forme of fire, & of a Doue, and in none other likeneſſe yt I haue heard: And therfore I can prouide you none other.
               
                  Of an Abbot that came 
                        •
                     uddinly among his munkes,A certein Abbot came ſuddeinly vpon a company of Munks as they were talkinge, & when they ſaw him, they were abaſſhed. Then ſayd the Abbot, wherof were you talkyng? Whervnto one yt had the redieſt wit among them anſwered, of your Lordſhip. And what ſaid you of me, qouth the Abbot? Surely we were talkyng, ſaid the Munke, how you and other Abbots can ſo ſoone waxe euill. Mary anſwered the Abbot, bicauſe wee be made of ſo ill ſtuffe, that is to ſay, of Monkes.
               
                  Of an Abbot that was by his munkes dep
                        ••
                     ued of his dignity.An Abbot being in the Chapter houſe among the Munkes, ſaid that he had no pleaſure nor reſt, but payn & vexacion both of body & minde in the office, & that he was no lord, but rather their ſeruant and vnderling. To whom the munkes anſwered: Midſummer and the feaſt of S. John the Baptiſt is now at hand, go play thy ſelf ſumwhere els, for wee will haue thy ſeruice no longer, and ſo depriued him of his office.
               
                  The Abbots roome of S. Denniſe in France being voyde,Of three munckes that gaue to the king fiue 
                        ••
                     po
                        ••
                      a peece, to haue the Abbotship of S. Denys. and the tyme of the election drawing neere, the Prouoſt of the ſame houſe, offred vnto the king fiue hundred pound for his good wyl, the Chamberlayne as much, and the Sellerer as much alſo: all whiche money hee ſeuerally willed them to deliuer vnto his Chamberlaine. When the day appointed for the election was come, and the king was ſat downe vnder his cloth of eſtate, thoſe three aboue named gaping euery one for the preferment, the king called vnto him a ſimple Munke which ſate in a corner, and made him Abbot: who alleaging his inſufficiencie for it, and the worthynes of many other in the Couent: the king ſmiling, I wyl ſupply your want, quod bee, and giue you fifteene hundred poundes toward your charges, (which was the Prouoſtes, Sellerers, and Chamberlaines money.) and beſides helpe you with the beſt counſell and ayde otherwyſe that I can.Of a mery demaund that the Abbot of Paris asked the ſcholemen. An Abbot of Paris, comming into the ſchooles at the Quodlibets, demaunded this queſtion, whether it were better to knowe a litle good and to followe it, or to know much and follow nothing? It was anſwered that the firſt was the beſt. Then, quod the Abbot, you bée all fooles, that learne many ſciences and followe none.
            
            
               Chap. 33. Of Priours and of their merie Ieſtes.
               IN the Priorie of Rameſſa there dwelt a Priour that was very liberal, which cauſed theſe verſes to be written euer his doore:Of the liberall priour of Rameſſa.
                  
                     Be open euermore, ô thou my doore,
                     To none bee ſhut, to honeſt or to poore.
                  
               
               But after his death, there ſuccéeded him another whoſe name was Raynhard, as gréedie and couetous, as the other was bountifull and liberall, who kept the ſame verſes there ſtil, changing nothing therein but onely one point, and made them runne after this manner:

                     Bee open euermore ô thou my doore
                     To none, bee ſhut to honeſt or to poore.
                  
               
               Afterwarde béeing driuen from thence for his extreme niggiſhneſſe, it grewe into a prouerbe: that for one point Raynhard loſt his Priorie. A Priour hauing gheaſtes to dinner, cauſed his

ſeruauntes to mingle water with the wyne,
                     Of a Priour that ſerued his gheaſtes vvith vvine mingled vvith vvater.
                     Of a Priour that told his Mūkes, that he vvas like to God in 
                           •
                        . qualities.
                     Of the Munke that diſplied the Priour vvith hard blovves
                   to the intent it might ſtretche the farther. And perceiuing one of the Munkes to bée very talkatiue, and full of wordes, ſayde vnto him: Brother when wyll your myll leaue clacking? It cannot leaue ſir, quod the Munke, as long as ye geue it ſo muche water. A Priour ſayd vnto one of his Munkes, that he was lyke vnto God into thrée qualities: Firſt that he could not ſinne, for that he defended ſo much his owne innocencie at t
                     •
                  eyr Chapters: Next in knowing althinges, for hee went about from ſhop to ſhoppe to learne newe; what was done or ſayd in any place: And thirdly in béeing in euery place, for he wandred very much abroade. A certayne Munke diſplying the Priour and others after Complin, ſtroke very harde blowes vpon the Priours head. But méeting afterwarde at the Chapiter, the Priour ſayde vnto the Munke: Brother, you know not yet wel how to diſplie. But when you diſple the Priour, you muſt ſtrike handſomely and gently, and not thus, and thus, and buffeted him well fauouredly about the eares, and ſo was euen with the Munke for his hard diſplying.
            
            
               Chap. 34. Of many merie Ieſtes of Munkes.
               
                  
                     Of the yong Munke that douckt alvvaies dovvnvvard till he had founde the keies of the Abbey.
                     Of an olde Munke that fell a ſleepe in the quire.
                     Of him that bid the Munke to drinke, vvhē he vvas in his prayers.
                  SOmetyme there was a young Munke in an Abbey, who alwayes went caſting his eyes to the grounde, and was very milde and lowly in behauiour. Afterwarde beyng made Priour, hee helde vp his h
                     •
                  ad aloft▪ and was very ſeuere and arrogant, which ſeeming ſtrange vnto them that knew him before, & being demaunded the cauſe of ſo great alteratiō: Anſwered, that before he alwaies looked on the earth for the keies of ye Abbey, if haply hee might find them: which now hauing found, he looked no more on the ground, but beare himſelf according to the dignitie wherunto he was called. An old Munke ſitting in ye quire▪ fell a ſléepe, and dreamed that there came vnto him a foule long ſlouen with ſuch a filthy wiſpe as they vſe to rub horſes withal, and looking grimly vpon hym, would forcibly haue wyped his face therewith. But hee ſtriuing to eſcape from him, pluckt backe his head and knocked it agaynſt the wal, and ſo awaked. A Munke being deuout in his prayers, one aſked him if he would drinke, who

wagged his finger, ſignifiyng that hée would not. Then ſayd the Munkes ſeruaunt, my maſter meaneth that he would drinke a cup of white wine. But when the Munke beck
                     •
                  ned with two fingers, ſignifiyng that he would haue none at all, and it was demaunded of his ſeruaunt what hee ment therby, hee anſwered that hee would alſo haue-a cup of red wine, ſo the maſt
                     •
                  r dranke but litle and the knaue dranke vp all the reſidue.Of a fellovv that tolde the Munke his aſ
                        •
                     e beīg loden vvas able to carry all the pacience in the Abbey. A certayne Munke leading his horſe to the water, ſaw a countrey fellowe going ouer a bridge driuing an aſſe before him ſo heauily laden, that hée could ſcarce mooue one foote by another, whom the countrey fellowe notwithſtanding beate forwarde without pitie or mercy. Then ſayd the Munke, why wylt thou kyll thy beaſt beeing laden? The fellow anſwered, he is not ſo laden, but hée wyll carrie al the pacience of your Abbey, whereat the Munke was very wrath. Then ſayd the fellowe: The dumbe beaſt murmureth not vnder his burden,Of the Frier that rāg the bel, and told the Munke he rang for the charitie that vvas gone out of the Abbey. and you are out of patience for one words ſpeaking. A certayne Frier comming vnto the gate of an Abbey, ſéeyng that hee could not get in, range the bell very hard, and a Munke comming to the gate, aſked why hée range? then ſayd the Frier, I ring for the charitie which is gone a way from the Abbey, which the Munke hearing, tooke the bell and range harder then hée had done. What meaneth this, then quod the Frier. Then quod the Munke, I ring for the pacience which is departed from your Frierie.
            
            
               Chap. 35. Of merie Ieſtes of preaching Friers.
               IT is written in the Cronicles of Friers, that after the Lateran counſell, when the Pope traueyled into the coaſtes of Toledo,
                  Hovv the Pope vvrit to Dominicke the preaching Frier. about certayne affayres, and would write vnto Dominick the Frier: hée ſayd vnto the Notarie, write vnto Dominick the Frier, and to the reſidue of the preaching Friers. Then ſtaying a while: write quod hee, vnto maſter Dominick, and to the preaching Friers: and after that tyme they began to bée called the preaching Friers. A certayne Frier toſſing the pot,Of the Frie
                        •
                      that ſaid he muſt drinke after euerie good vvorde and drinking very often at the table, was reprehended by the Priour. Then ſayd the Frier. It is an olde prouerbe, that a man ought

to drinke after a good ſaying. And there were ſo many read euen now,Of the frier that bid the officiall if he vvere the ſonne of God to make the ſtones bread. that there is not wine ynough to drinke after them all: for at that tyme the booke of the prouerbes of Salomon was read at the table. One maſter Hugh, an Officiall, hauing a Frier at his table at dinner, and ſeeing that he could not eate of the bread becauſe it was ſo harte, aſked of him why he dyd not eate? to whom the Frier anſwered: If thou bee the Sonne of GOD, commaunde theſe ſtones to bee made bread. Frier Nicholas of Bronſbarch, an auncient & 
                     •
                   reuerend father would often declare, how he was the Duke of Sa
                        •
                     ons ſonne,Hovv frier Nicolas of Bronsbarch ſaid he vvas the duke of Saxons 
                        •
                     onne. and after this manner. The Duke dreamed that the Dutches his wyfe, béeing with chylde, ſhould beare a chylde that ſhould bee poore and a begger, and therefore when ſhe was deliuered, hee commaunded the childe to bee ſlayne, becauſe hee ſhoulde not ſhame hym. But the Dutches béeing mooued with motherly pitie, deliuered her ſonne vnto a poore knights wife, to bring vp as her owne, and hée encreaſed in learning and knowledge, and taking himſelfe to bee that poore knightes ſonne, hée entred into the order, that the Dukes dreame myght be fulfilled. At length when he was made a maiſter of his order, and came into Saxonie: the Dutcheſſe much reioyced in him, and tolde him al the whole matter. Howbeit hee long tyme refuſed to credite her, ſuppoſing himſelfe in déede to haue béen the poore knightes ſonne.
            
            
               Chap 36. Of Friers called Minours, and of their merie Ieſtes.
               
                  Hovv a frier that had diſpleaſed the Pope made his anſvver.A Certaine Minour Frier had diſpleaſed Boniface the Pope, and by the Friers of the ſame order he was deliuered vnto him. Who being brought before the Pope, and deſiring pardon, ſayde the Pope vnto him, thine owne nation and thy Biſhops haue deliuered thee vnto mée. To whom the Frier in his owne defence anſweares: He that deliuered mee vnto thée, hath the more ſinne.Of the vvomā that bequethed her garment to the minor friers. At which anſweare the Pope being delited, ſent him away free. A certen woman of Brunſwik, bequeathed vnto the Minour Friers (of whoſe fraternitie ſhée was,) one garment

worth a noble. But whē the Antoniās came to the towne and preached great pardons and indulgencies of their fraternitie, this woman hearyng thereof, carried hyr garment vnto them, which they receyued with great thanks. Which when the Minors vnderſtoode: they blamed hyr much for ſo doing, who made them anſweare that all fraternities were one fraternitie. Then the Minours vnderſtanding that the Antonians had there in the towne a S. Antonies pig, that was fat and worth a marke, they tooke him home to theyr houſe and killed him. And when the Antonians complayned thereof, for that it was to great an iniurie, the Minours anſweared that the pigge belonged vnto their fraternitie, for that all fraternities are one fraternitie. In the ende the matter being brought before the iudges of the citie, it was agreed vpon that euery one ſhoulde keepe that which he had, and take better h
                     ••
                  de hereafter.
               A certaine Minour Frier of Brunſwik fell mad, but notwithſtanding▪
                  Of the frier minor that fell mad. hée could helpe to Maſſe. And ſeing the Priours man bearing a great Capon in a platter, whoſe legges hunge a great way ouer the platters ſide, he ran vnto him, enquiring of him whether it were a Crane or a Capon? But the ſeruant ſharply rebuked him away, and would not tell him. In the morning after, when the Priour ſhould ſay Maſſe, he would helpe him. And when the Priour began Confiteor, that is to ſay, I confeſſe, (a ſuperſtitious part of the Maſſe:) Now ſayd this Frier, tel me whether it were a capon or a Crane which you had yeſternight to ſupper, elſe I will not abſolue you? Then the Priour taking compaſſion vpon his follie, ſware vnto him by God that it was a capon. Then ſaid the Frier, Miſereatur veſtri, &c. God forgiue you, and ſo forth, and they procéeded in theyr l
                     •
                  uſines. On a time when many minour Friers comming frō the Chapter,Of a citezyn that deceyued a company of friers of their good cheere flocked vnto a certayne citizens houſe, carrying with them wyne and other prouiſion to make good cheere: the towneſman vnderſtanding therof (for he had béen foorth) cauſed the Belinan to ring alarme at the doore, and to cry out aloude as though there had béen enimies comming, which noyſe the Friers hearing, and fearing the loſſe of their horſes, and their almes: in all haſt ga
                     •
                   vp into theyr wagons, and rode away as faſt as they could, & the goodman

of the houſe came in, and tooke the wyne and other prouiſion, which laſted him to make merie withall many dayes after,
            
            
               Chap. 37. Of diuers merie Ieſtes of Nouices.
               
                  
                     Of the yong nouice that ſaide that he neuer read that Chriſt vvas either blacke or vvhite or gray frier.
                     Of the 
                           •
                        arle of Blaakenburgh ſonne that became a Nouice.
                  A Certaine Nouice of ye order of the Preaching Friers, being in place amōg other Friers where they cōtended of ye excellencie of their orders, euery man preferring his own before the othe
                     •
                  : thē ſayd this Nouice, is it true yt euery thing which chriſt did is for our inſtruction? Y
                     •
                  a, ſaide the Friers. But I neuer reade, quod the Nouice, that our ſauiour Chriſte was either a blacke, white, or gray Frier, but hearing that he was a poore Pr
                     •
                  acher, I had rather follow his ſteppes therein, then any others. The Earle of Blankenburgh hearing that his Sonne, whom he ſent vnto Paris to ſtudie, was become a Nouice: he roo
                     •
                  e thither to bring him from thence. Then ſayde his ſonne, I would go with you, if you could aſſure me of one thing. What is that, quod the father? The ſonne anſweared: that I may be ſure not to die ſo ſoone when I am abroade, as when I continue here. Which the father hearing, and perceyuing his obſtinacie, with ſorow departed,Of a poore mans ſonne, that became a Nouice. and let him alone. A certaine poore man had put his ſonne to ſtud
                     •
                  e at Paris, vpon whoſe maintenaunce he beſtowed all that euer he could earne, thinking that he ſhould haue kept and relieued him in his old age. But when hee was entred into the order of preachyng Friers, his father weepyng and lamenting thereat, aſked him why he had done ſo, who anſweared, bicauſe I woulde liue in pouertie. That might you haue done, ſonne, quod the father, if you had ta
                     •
                  ied at home with mee, and neuer haue gone out of the doores, for you ſhould haue found there pouertie inough. A certaine Nouice entred into the order at Paris,
                  Of the Nouice that vvas annointed vvith lampe oyle. and as he was going to bedde at night, a lampe fell downe and al the oile was ſpilt vpon him. Then they brought him vnto his bed, where were wollen ſheetes layde vpon a bed of ſtraw, and he was commaunded to keepe ſilence. The next day morning,Hovv Frier numbertſed certaine nouices vvith three peeces of bread. when the other Friers came vnto him, and aſked him howe he fared, and was vſed ſince he came into the order: He anſweared, yeſternight I was anoynted, and layd vpon ſtrawe, and made dumbe. One Frier Humbert a maiſter of the order, carrying with him certaine Nouices vnto

                  Lions, came to a village where they coulde get no meate. At length an old womā brought them a litle bread vnto the bridge whereon they ſate, whiche when the Nouices had eaten, he aſked hir if ſhe had any more, and ſhe brought another piece, and the younge men eate it immediatly very greedily. The thirde time he willed hyr to fetche more, if ſhe had any: which ſhe did, and they eate it vp all ſtraight wayes. Then ſayde the Maſt
                     •
                  r vnto the Nouices, he will prouide you bread, that encreaſed the fiue loa
                     •
                  es in the wildernes, reciting vnto them the whole ſtorie out of the Euangeliſt, and howe there were twelue baſkets fu
                     •
                  lle
                     •
                  t, ouer and beſides that which was eaten. Now by Jeſus quod the old woman, you be no ſuch, for you haue left none at all.
            
            
               Chap. 38. Of merie Ieſtes of Connertites.
               A Certaine Conn
                     •
                  rti
                     •
                  e ſeruing in an Abbey,Of the connerti
                        •
                     e that mockt the Munkes as they vvere at banket. wayted vpon the Abbot, Priour, and Monkes at a feaſt, after that they came from the Chapter, where there was much good cheere prepared. And hauing many diſſhes to carrie in, when he had brought in the firſt, he ſayd, there is no more, and likewiſe at the ſecond he ſayde, there is no more, and ſo at euery one. Then the companie being offended that they had fedde ſo much of one diſhe, ſeing there was plentie, & that they were ſo filled that they could not taſt of the other: demaunded of him, why he ſayde alwayes at euery diſhe that there was no more? In deede, ſayde hee, I ſpake that woorde, but I meant it not of meate, but of Paradiſe. For in this worlde you will weare ſoft apparell, eate delicate meates, ride with great traynes, and liue in all pleaſure, and therefore I meant that you ſhall haue no more in the worlde to come. All the Cattell belonging vnto a certaine Monaſterie,Of the Connertite that vvēt to fetch the A
                        •
                     bots cattel out of the pound. were carried away to the pound a good way of, and the Abbot ſent a ſimple Connertite whiche was in the houſe, to bring thē home, cōmaunding him that he ſhould not come againe emptie, but bring what ſoeuer he could get. But when hee whiche had them in pound, had anſweared him that he ſhould not haue them, notwithſtanding if he woulde ſit downe and eate meate with him, he ſhould be welcome: he fead very greedely. Which the Maſter of the houſe beholding, and reprouing him ſomwhat

therefore: he declared what commaundement was giuen vnto him, and bicauſe he could beare nothing elſe home with him, he would carrie at leaſt wiſe as much as his belly would hold. Then all the companie laughed well, and perceyuing the ſimplicitie of the man, gaue him all that he required.
            
            
               Chap 39. Of many merie Ieſtes of Nunnes.
               THe Nunnes of a certaine Monaſterie had this cuſtome, that when any of them were deliuered of childe, ſhe ſhould vſe recreations, and bathings, and other things neceſſarie for women in that caſe,The punishment of yong Nuns vvhen they be g
                        •
                     t vvith child. and the Nunnes would come a goſſipping vnto hyr, and bring h
                     •
                  r preſents. But bicauſe that the correction that belonged to the order ſhoulde not be abrogated, at the moneths ende ſhe muſt come naked into the Chapterhouſe before them all, and receyue three ſtrypes at euery one of hir ſiſters handes with a Fore tayle, whiche alwayes hunge vp in the Chapter houſe for that purpoſe. In a certaine Monaſterie were a companie of olde Nunnes, that had bene good fellowes in their youth, vnto whom the yong Nunnes cleaued very faſt.Of the yong Nuns that vvere reſtrained of their libertie. It fortuned the olde ladie Prioreſſe died, and there ſucceeded one that was more ſeuere in hir roume which forbad the comming in of religious men, or any other vnto them. So that the yong Nunnes ſeing themſelues reſtrayned of their libertie, ſayde vnto the elder Nunnes: happie are you, Siſters, for you loſt your virginiti
                     •
                   in your youth, whiche if you had nowe, there were as ſmall hope for you to looſe it as is for vſ.Other that ſaid in con
                        •
                     eſſiō, it vvas good reaſon to proue all thing. A certaine Nunne conf
                     •
                  ſſing 
                     •
                  yr ſelfe vnto a Biſhop, that ſhe had ſinned in the acte of the fl
                     •
                  ſh: he ſharply reproued hyr for ſo doing, and demaund
                     •
                  d what cauſe moued hyr thereto, and ſhee anſweared, good reaſon, for it is written, proue all thing. Yea, ſayde the Biſhop, but if you had read all that text, you had not done it, for it foloweth in the ſame place, keepe that whiche is good. But ſhée anſweared, O my Lorde, I did not turne ouer the leafe.
               
                  Of frier Cō
                     
                     
                        •
                     ade that called for 
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     ger in the
                        •
                     unrie.One, Frier Conrade, dining once in a Nunrie, called at the table for vineger, and the Nunnes ſayde then had none. That is maruell, quod the Frier, beyng ſo many broken veſſels in the houſe.
            
            
               
               Chap. 40. Of many merie ieſtes of ſyſters.
               A Certaine Syſter in a Priory, béeing an old mery wenche,Of a merie vvench in a Priorie ſaid that none might iuſtly finde faulte vvith her behauiour. made her boaſt that none could finde any fault with her behauior. For ſayd ſhée, if I laugh it is good fellowſhip, if I wéepe it is deuotion, if I ſpeake it is Philoſophie, if I holde my peace it is religion, if I ſléepe it is quietneſſe, if I ryſe it is a viſion, and ſo of many thinges more. But thée forgat one thing, that the more ſhee gloryed, the more foole ſhée was counted.
               A mery fellow that would faine ſet out the ydle occupations,Of a merye fellovv that drevv a paterne of all the ſyſters idleneſſe. wherin the ſyſters buſyed them ſelues: He made a 
                     •
                  yrle, wherin hée painted how thrée ſyſters were ſtealing of one gooſe: one helde him by the legge, another layde a knife vppon his necke: and the the third ſtrake the knife with an hammar: and round about the cyrcle it was thus written: Looke how theſe thrée holye ſyſters are occupied about ſtealing of a gooſe, ſo are all the reſt alſo. Certaine ſyſters conferred togyther on a tyme,Hovve the ſyſters imagined for each a ſeuerall death. by what deathes they would wyſhe to dye. One ſayd I would deſyre to bée hanged in the coard of contemplacion, according to the ſaying of Iob. The other ſayd, I would chooſe to bée buryed in the graue of humilitie. The thyrde coueted to bée burnt in the fyre of charitye: And the fowrth to bée drowned in the teares of compunction. But howe farre theyr inwarde thoughtes were differing from theyr outward hipocriſy, theyr holie and chaſt liues dyd well declare. A ſyſter being in the monaſterie bare headed and in her peticote onely:Hovve a ſyſter vncouered her lovver part to hyde her face from the Friar. two Friars knocked at the gate, and ſhée ran to the gate and opened it. And being aſhamed bicauſe ſhée was bare headed, ſhée tooke vp the tayle of her peticoate to caſt ouer her head, and vncouered her naked buttockes, and ran away as faſt as ſhée could. Then one of the Fryars calling vnto her, wylled, her to couer her naked partes, ſaying, it is better to ſée a womans bare top, then her bare tayle. It fortuned that in a Priorye one night, there was a Prieſt founde a bed with one of the ſyſters, vnto whoſe chamber many other of the ſyſters flocked to ſée the ſyght.Of the tvvo ſyſters that were taken a bed vvith tvvo prieſts. And when another of the ſyſters, in whoſe bed a;lſo at that preſent there laye a Prieſt, heard this ſtyrre, making haſt to goe ſee the

other, thinking to couer her head with her accuſtomed vayle, threw the Prieſts breaches vpon her head, and came vnto that mery or rather lamētable ſpectable to bewayle yt caſe among y• other, as though ſhée had bene gyltie of no ſuch matter. But when one of the ſyſters ſaw the breach: O ſyſter ſayd ſhée, and dearely beloued fellowe, what thing is this, or what meaneth this ſtrange ſight? who then beholding her owne naughtineſſe, was much aſtoniſhed, and becauſe of this accident, the other eſcaped vnpuniſhed, for that ſhée was founde not to bée in that faulte alone.
            
            
               Chap. 41. Of many merye Dreames.
               
                  VAlerius in the firſt booke and ſeuenth Chapter, writeth, that Alexander the king of Macedonie,
                  novve king Alexander vvas vvarned in a dreame of one that should kyll him. was warned of the hand yt ſhould ſlay him in his dreame, before that he felt it to be true in effect, for he thought that he ſawe him in his ſléepe yt ſhould kyll him. And ſhortly after, when he ſaw the partie, and knew that he was Antipaters ſonne, he declared the vanitie of his dreame, and he caſt out of his minde the ſuſpicion which hée had conceyued of the poyſon, whereof he dyed at Caſſanders handes. Lykewiſe he telleth that whylſt Amilcar, that was captaine of the Carthagians,
                  Of the dreame of Amilcar the captaine. lay in ſiege about the Cittie of Syracuſe, he thought that in his dreame he hearde a voyce which ſayd, that the night following he ſhould ſuppe within the City. Then Amilcar being careleſſe, or rather thinking himſelf ſure of the victorie, was ſomewhat negligent in not loking carefullye to his Armie, vpon whome the Syracuſians iſſuing forth the next daye, poſſeſſed his tentes, tooke him priſoner, and led him into the Citie,Of the the dreame of Fryar Iohn of Duren. where the ſame night he ſupped not as a conquerour, but as a captiue. Fryer Iohn of Duren, dreamed one nyght, that hée rode vpon a ſnayle, hauing two long hornes, & that his armes touched the grounde, and how the boyes in the ſtr
                     •
                  etes ſeeing him, laughed and ſhouted at him: after which dreame,Of the farmar that dreamed vvher great treſure vvas to be found. as he ſayd, he had verye good fortune, but wherein, he would not tell. A countrey man dwelling neere Ratiſbona, dreamed that vpon the bridge at Ratiſbona he ſhould find great treaſure. And comming thyther in the morning verye

earlye for that purpoſe, he met with a rytch man which aſked him what he ſought, and he told him the cauſe of his comming, and how and whereof he had dreamed the night before. Then the rytch man vp with his fyſt, & gaue him a boxe on the eare, ſaying: Ah foole, wylt thou beleeue dreames? I my ſelfe dreamed this night, how that in the vyllage of Regendolf in ſuch a place, (naming a certaine farme place) I ſhoulde finde a great ſumme of money, but I meane not to be ſo much a foole as to goe ſéeke it. But when the countrey man heard this, and perceyuing that it was his owne farme where he dwelt, thought within himſelf, it is happie for mee that I came hyther this day to haue a boxe on the eare, & going home immediatlye, dygged in the place which the other named, and found a ritch treaſure.Of the Cā
                     non that made verſes in his ſleepe.
               
               A certaine Cannon in VVerda nigh to the Rhine, which neuer could make verſe in all his lyfe, dreamed of theſe two verſes in his ſléepe, which he remembred well when he awaked, to this effect.

                     The wordes of reuenge, a bytter doome hath giuen on thee.
                     Though thou ne knoweſt, how that thy life shall shortly ended bee.
                  
And when he had openly told it at the table, one of his familyars ſaid vnto him, what euer it ſhould ſignify, if I were in your caſe, I would take order with my goodes, & diſpoſe them as I thought beſt, whatſoeuer ſhould befall: but others ſayd it was but a tryfle, & that dreames were not to be accoumpted of. But he being ſtroken into a dumpe, gat him vpon his horſe, & tooke his hawke vpon his fyſt, & roade abroade into the fieldes for pleaſure, to digeſt the melancholy. And comming homeward at night, where he muſt ryde ouer a bridge yt lay ouer an arme of the Rhine, his horſe began to ſtriue and plunge, and threwe them both headlong into the Rhine, and there were drowned.
            
            
               Chap. 42. Of diuers and ſundrie Artificers.
               
                  MAcrobius in the ſecond booke of the Saturnalia,
                  Hovve Seruilius aſked a painter vvhy hee painted not as vvell for him ſelfe as for others. wryteth yt when Seruilius of Rome, beheld the children of Mallius, an excellēt painter, how miſhapen & euyl fauored they were, ſayd vnto him, Mallius why doeſt thou not paint likewiſe aſwel for thy ſelfe, as thou doeſt for other men? To whome Mallius anſwered, I deuiſe in the night time, but I paynt in the day.
               
                  
                  of a keruer that carued Piſmares.One Gallatricus a keruer, made Piſmares of yuorie of ſo ſmall quantitie, that they were no bygger, neyther coulde be diſcerned from thoſe Piſmares that lyued in déede.
               
                  Of a Shoemaker that vvas made a Iudge.A certaine Shoemaker dwelling in a Cittie of Lumbardie, was made a Judge in certaine cauſes, before whome one of the ſame occupation had a mater then preſently to be handled. And perceyuing himſelfe to bée in ſome daunger, came vnto this Shoemaker Judge whereas he ſate in iudgement, and ſecretly requeſted him to bée fauourable vnto him, ſaying more-ouer vnto him: Doe you not know mée ſyr? I am ſuch a friend, and ſomtyme a fellow of yours. But he aunſwered him churliſhlye, and ſayde, ſtande away and trouble mée not, for at this preſent I knowe neyther thée, nor my ſelfe.
               Many mo examples, and ſayinges might bée alleadged of Artificers,The concluſion. of whome there is no ſpeciall treatiſe made in this booke. But becauſe I haue already touched the chiefeſt ſorts and degrées, and it were impoſſible to run through all: I ſhall requeſt the louing Reader to holde himſelfe contented with theſe fewe, which I haue gathered togyther for his delyte, and to receyue them for his part as friendly, as I haue wyllinglye employed the trauayle to wry
                     •
                  e them.
               FINIS.
               T.T.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ¶A Table contayning the principall matters compriſed in this preſent worcke of Table Philoſophie. And theſe are the contentes of the firſt booke, which is Philoſophie naturall.
               
                  THe Preface into the firſt booke. Of the times to eate, and howe often in one daye we should eate meate. Chap. 1.
                  Of appetite, and of the cuſtome in eating. Chap. 2.
                  Of the order of meates, and eating of them. Chap 3.
                  Of the place to eate in. Chap. 4.
                  Of meats & drinks wherwith men be refreshed at the table. Cha. 5.
                  Of wine and the properties thereof. Chap. 6.
                  Of mead and the properties thereof. Chap. 7.
                  Of double beere and ale. Cha 8.
                  Of fleshe in generall. Cha. 9.
                  Of the fleshe of wyld beaſts. Ca. 10.
                  Of Kiddes fleshe. Chap. 11.
                  Of Lambe. Chap. 12.
                  Of Mutton. Chap. 13.
                  Of veale. Chap. 14.
                  Of Porke. Chap. 15.
                  Of Deeres flesh, or veniſon. Ca. 16.
                  Of Hares fleshe. Chap. 17.
                  Of Beares fleshe. Chap. 18.
                  Of the parts of beaſts. Cha. 19.
                  Of baked flesh, or pyes. Cha. 20.
                  Of Fowles in generall. Cha. 21.
                  Of Pultrey. Cha. 22.
                  Of young Pigeons. Cha. 23.
                  Of the partes of Fowles. Cha. 24
                  Of egges and the propertyes therof. Cha. 25.
                  Of mylke. Cha. 26.
                  Of cheeſe. Cha. 27.
                  Of fyshes. Chap. 28
                  Of all kinds of fetches or podware, as: Rice, Beanes, Lentiles, Chitches. Peaſon. Cap. 29.
                  Of Pot hearbes, and ſallet hearbs, as: Garlike, Sorrell, Dyll, Smallage, Arrage, Bancia, Beetes, Borrage. Colewoorts, Onions, Gourdes, Comin, Fennell, Iſope, Lettice, Mintes, Creſſes, Poppie, Perceley, Leekes, Purcelain, Radishe, Rapes, Rue, Sage, Spinage, Mushrumes. Chap. 30.
                  Of fruytes, as: Figges, Dates, Rayſons, Pomegranats, Quinces, Peares, Aples, Peaches, Medlars, Pome citrons, Mulberies, Plums, Cherries, Almonds, Nuttes, Fylberds, Cheſtnuts, Akorns. Ca. 31.
                  Of Spices, as: Pepper, Ginger, Zedoarie, Galangall, Cloues, Cinanamon, Saffron, Carrowayes. Cha. 32.
                  Of Sauces, as: Muſtard, Salt, Vinege
                        •
                     , Honie, Oyle. Chap. 33.
               
            
            
               
               The contents of the ſecond Booke of Table Philoſophie, which is morall.
               
                  The Preface.
                  Of Emperours. Chap. 1.
                  Of Kings. Chap. 2.
                  Of Princes. Chap. 3.
                  Of the gentle Byshops. Chap. 4.
                  Of Noble men. Chap. 5.
                  Of Knightes. Chap. 6.
                  Of Squires. Chap. 7.
                  Of VVarriours. Chap. 8.
                  Of Philoſophers and Oratours. Chap. 9.
                  Of Phiſitions. Chap. 10.
                  Of Yongmen. Chap. 11.
                  Of old men. Chap. 12.
                  Of Citizins. Chap. 13.
                  Of Marchants. Chap. 14.
                  Of Husbandmen and Husbandrie. Chap. 15.
                  Of Artificers. Chap. 16.
                  Of Ritchmen. Chap. 17.
                  Of Pooremen. Chap. 18.
                  Of Religious perſons. Chap. 19.
                  Of ſtrangers & Pilgrims. Chap. 20.
                  Of Hunters. Chap. 21.
                  Of Iudges. Chap. 22.
                  Of Lawiers. Chap. 23.
                  Of Lords baylifes. Chap. 24.
                  Of Friends & friendship. Chap. 25.
                  Of Kinſfolkes. Chap. 26.
                  Of good wemen. Chap. 27.
                  Of naughtie wemen. Chap. 28.
                  Of Married weemen. Chap. 29.
                  Of good widowes. Chap. 30.
                  Of Virgins. Chap. 31.
               
            
            
               The contents of the third Booke of Table Philoſophie, which is naturall.
               
                  THe Preface.
                  VVhether aire or meate be more neceſſarie for life?
                  VVhether meat or drinke is more neceſſarie for life?
                  VVhether ſleepe or meat be more profitable for the bodie?
                  VVhether meat or aire nourish more? Chap. 1.
                  VVhether can good blood be ingendred of ill meat?
                  VVhether ſimple or compound meat be ſooneſt digeſted?
                  VVhether it be good to walke immediatly after meat?
                  VVhether it be good to ſleepe immediatly after meat?
                  VVhy the appetite faileth, when the accuſtomed time of eating is paſt?
                  VVhether our bodies be warmer before meat or after?
                  
                     VVhether faſting hurt more a cholerick or flegmatick complexion? Chap. 2.
                  VVhy ſome deſire much, and are filled with a litle meat?
                  VVhether they that haue a ſtrong heat can more tollerate hūger then they that haue a weake?
                  VVhy they that haue narow powers can better abide hūger then they that haue wide?
                  VVhether choler nourish?
                  VVhether ſicke perſons can better faſt then whole?
                  
                     Ʋ
                     Ʋhether the ſtrength of a ſtrong ſtomacke can better tollerat faſting then of a weake?
                  
                     Ʋ
                     Ʋhether he that vſeth to eate much can better abide to faſt then he that vſeth to eat litle?
                  
                     Ʋ
                     Ʋhether faſting anoy more in warme or cold ſeaſons?
                  VVhy are the greedieſt feeders ſooneſt filled?
                  VVhy we receiue hotter meates into our mouthes then we are able to abide in our handes. Chap. 3.
                  VVhy if one that is hungry drink, it appeaſeth hunger?
                  VVhether thoſe that faſt are more a hungred then a thirſt?
                  VVhy it is more pleaſure vnto vs when our thirſt is quenched with drinke or when our hunger is appeaſed with meat?
                  VVhy one kind of drinke ſeemeth ſtronger to one that is faſting then to one that is full?
                  VVhether vnto them that are thirſtie by a drie ſtomacke a litle drinke be ſufficient?
                  VVhether the ſtomack be burdened with much drinke?
                  VVhy a moiſt ſtomack can beare much?
                  VVhether thirſt proceede at any time from the Lungues?
                  VVhy thirſt of the Lungues be appeaſed by drawing in of cold aire, and of the ſtomack by cold drinke?
                  VVhether thirſt be a deſire of that which is cold and moiſt, or of that which is hot and drie?
                  VVhether water ſlake thirſt more then wine? Chap. 4.
                  Of the hurtes which happen after meate, with the queſtions therto belonging. Chap. 5.
                  Of Bread, and the queſtions therto apperteining. Chap. 6.
                  Of wine, and the demandes therunto incident. Chap. 7.
                  
                     Of fleshe, with the proper queſtions thereof. Chap. 8.
                  Of Egges, and the demaundes touching the ſame. Chap. 9.
                  Of Fyshes, and their queſtions. Chap. 10.
                  Of Pulſe and Podware, with their probleames. Chap. 11.
                  Of Pothearbes and Sallet hearbes, and their queſtions. Chap. 12.
                  Of Fruites, and certaine demaundes concerning the ſame. Chap. 13.
                  Of Salt, and the proper queſtions thereof. Chap. 14.
                  Of hony and oyle, and motions touching their natures. Cha. 15.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧ The contentes of the fowrth booke, of Table Philoſophie, which morally treateth of honeſt myrth, and pleaſaunt paſtimes.
               
                  He Preface.
                  Of honeſt myrth and paſtimes. Chap. 1.
                  Of pleaſaunt inuectiues. Cha. 2.
                  Of ſpeaches conuenient to euerye perſon. Chap. 3.
                  Of apt pleaſaunt wordes. Cha. 4.
                  Of Emperours. Chap. 5.
                  Of Kinges. Chap. 6.
                  Of Princes. Chap. 7.
                  Of Earles. Cha. 8.
                  Of Knights and ſouldiors. Cha. 9.
                  Of Squiers. Cha. 10
                  Of Phiſitions. Cha. 11.
                  Of Lawiers & aduocates. Cha 12.
                  Of Marchaunts. Chap. 13.
                  Of Vſerers. Chap 14
                  Of Huſbandmen. Chap. 15.
                  Of Iewes. Chap. 16
                  Of Theeues. Chap. 17.
                  Of Ieſters. Chap. 18
                  Of weemen. Cha. 19.
                  Of yong weemen & mayds. Ca. 20
                  Of Children. Cha 21.
                  Of Blindfolke. Cha. 22
                  Of Fooles. Cha. 23.
                  Of perſons poſſeſſed. Cha. 24
                  Of Popes. Cha 25.
                  Of Cardinalles. Chap. 26
                  Of Archbishops. Cha. 27
                  Of Byshoppes. Chap. 28
                  Of Archdeacons. Chap. 29
                  Of Cannons. Chap. 30.
                  Of the halt and lame. Chap. 31.
                  Of Prieſtes. Chap. 32.
                  Of Abbottes. Chap. 33.
                  Of Priours. Chap. 34.
                  Of Munkes. Chap. 35.
                  Of Preaching Friers. Chap. 36.
                  Of Minour Friers. Chap. 37
                  Of Nouices. Chap. 38.
                  Of Connertites. Chap. 39.
                  Of Nunnes. Chap. 40.
                  Of Syſters. Chap. 41.
                  Of Dreames. Chap. 42.
                  Of ſundric Artificers. Chap. 43.
               
            
            Thus endeth the Table.
            
         
      
   