
      
         
            
            
            
               THE Run-awyaes Anſwer, To a Booke called, A Rodde for Runne-awayes. IN VVHICH Are ſet downe a Defence for their Running, with ſome Reaſons perſwading ſome of them neuer to come backe.
            
            The vſage of LONDONERS by the Countrey▪ 
               People; drawne in a Picture, artificially looking two waies, (foorth-right, and a-ſquint:) With an other Picture done in Lant-skipp, in which the Londoners and Countrey-men dance a Morris together.
            LASTLY, A Runne-awaies Speech to his Fellow Run-awaies, Arming them to meete Death within the Liſtes, and not to ſhunne him.
            Printed MDCXXV.
         
         
            
            
            TO OVR MVCH RESPECTED AND VEry worthy Friend, Mr. H. CONDELL at his Countrey-houſe in FVLLAM.
            
               SIR,
            
            
               AT our parting from London to vndertake our ſadde Peregrination into the Countrey, (amongſt our Friends who are hard to be found) It pleaſed you to beſtow vpon vs a free and Noble Farewell. We remember it with thanks, which cuts off the ſinne of Ingratitude; yet becauſe Thankes, is but one word, and that your loue cannot receiue a Requitall but in many, wee ſend you a little bundle of Papers, full. For being Abuſde in a Booke Printed at London, in which we were called Runne-awayes, Wee in this our Defence requeſt you to be an Arbiter, to Iudge, whether we haue not iuſt cauſe, to ſtand

                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
then promiſde. Bid him therefore ſend all his Paper-Kites flying from his Stall, quite through the Citie, and from one Eude to th'other to giue notice of this our Anſwere. Bid him likewiſe to tell all Stationers, who haue any of thoſe Bookes (called A Rodde for Run-awayes) that it were good for 'em to ſell them away as faſt as they can, for when wee come to Towne, they ſhall be All callde in.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Runn-awayes Anſwere.
            
               THere hath of late come foorth a Three-ſheete-printed-Pamphlet (as if the Rodde had but three Twigges only) written (as the Title ſeemes to promiſe) by ſome Schoole-maiſter, for he calles it, A ROD FOR RVNNE-AWAIES. But We, vpon whom thoſe poore and wretched Names are pinned, no way enduring ſo to be laſh'd ouer the face in ſcorne, ſnatch the Rodde out of his hand; and to make him ſmart a little, thus print wee our Anſwere to thoſe bold affronts, by which he does challenge vs, vtterly diſdayning to be called Runne-awaies: and vtterly diſclayming thoſe offences, for which that London Whipper is ſo ready to puniſh vs.
            
               Firſt then for the Name.
               HEE is a Runne-away, who rather then he will learne a Trade (with ſome paynes) vnder a carefull Maiſter,Who are Run-awaies. turnes Roague, runnes into the Countrey a Padding
                  ▪ keepes company with Gipſeys, and ſtrowling Pedlers,A Run-away from his Maiſter. fatting himſelfe with the lazy bread of Sommer, tumbling (during that Seaſon) in a Hay-cock with his Dell; and in Winter, lying ſnug in a Brick-k
                     •
                  ll with his Doxy: If you wonder how we came by this Language? you muſt thinke, that in our Trauailes we could not chooſe but meete with Canters.
               
               Agen: He is a Runne-away, that being preſt for a Soldier,A Run-away from his Captaine. runnes away from his Captaine ere he be ſent a Ship-bord, or from his Cullors, before he comes to the Fight.
               He is a Runne-away, who hauing got looſe from a Sergeant,A Run-away from a Sergeant. takes his heeles, and runnes away from him.
               
                  
                  Roaring Run-awayes.They are Runne-awaies, who in a Tauerne Roaring in for more Wine then they are able to pay, giue a ſlippe out at the back doore, and ſo pawne a Drawer to the Barre for the Reckoning.
               
                  Good night Land-Lord Run-awayes.Laſtly, they are Runne-awaies, who lay the Key vnder the doore, and cry, Good night Land-lord.
               None of theſe baſe Ginges are wee: wee ſcorne to ſayle in ſuch ſtinking Dung-boates. So much therefore for the Name of Runne-awaies.
               
            
            
               Now for the Matter.
               THe very Beginning of the Booke is able to make any Coward Runne away, for ther's a Sett-Battaile, a Field appoynted, the 
                     Ʋan comming vp, and London leading it: then Shires and Counties preſt to martch in the Reare; the Generall buſy, Trompets ſounding the Alarum, our Enemies about vs, and the Weapons brandiſhed ouer our heads, which threaten to cutte our throates.
               Hee would make vs beleeue he has been a Soldado by his termes of Warre:He has ſeene Finsbury fields Muſtering. In the Field dialect wee tell him, that true it is, when the Armada of Gods anger was preparing againſt vs, when the Peſtilence beate at our Citty Gates, and the Arrowes of Infection flew into our Howſes, when in the heate of the day the Mayne-battayle gaue ground, and that many (or moſt) of our Commanders left the Field; what ſhould wee doe but flye?Flight not for feare, but ſafety, nor for ſafty, but on pollicy. It was not out of baſe feare, but ſafety: It was not out of a deſire to ſafety only, but feare, leaſt ſo many dropping downe euery hower before our faces, there would be found not Officers nor Miniſters enow to fetch off the wounded, or bury the Dead: Had we not reaſon to flye?
               
                  A rough March turnd to a weeping Aprill.
                  Before this tempeſtious weather beate vs, O! what glorious Sun-beames of Exultations, Reioycings, Hopes, and Comforts were riſing to ſhine vpon vs? We ſwallowed vp nothing but the Eaſt and Weſt-Indies in our Imaginations; the Golden-Age was comming in agen:All theſe Caſtles were built in the Ayre. Our Engliſh Almanacks ſeem'd to ſpeake of none but Holy-daies: Great-Brittaine ſtood on the toppe of her white Cliffes triumphing; London on tiptoe, ouerlooking

all other Cities in the ſwelling pride of her approaching Fortunes: For no ſooner was the old King dead, but our gloomy Noone was changed into the cleereſt Euening that euer our liuing Eyes beheld.
               A golden Sunne (within a few howers) lifted vp his head to reuiue vs; a new King was proclaymed, a Iames was loſt, but a Charles was found: A Queene was to come from France, and that Queene arriued in England: A Parliament was at hand, the Terme not farre off, Triumphes approaching, Pageants ſetting forward to meet our King and Queene going to their Coronation. No People could be fuller of ioy, no City prowder of happineſſe: When loe! a volley of Thunder ſhootes,Earth leuels out the groūd, but Heauen deuides the Acres. and batters down all theſe ſumptuous Buildings: And was it not time to flye? Heauen ſaw vs boaſting in our owne ſtrengths, and growing angry at it, hath turnd it into weakeneſſe: Mirth hath ſhaken handes with Mourning, Riches with Miſery, Brauery with a Winding ſheete, Proſperity with the Peſtilence, Health with Sickneſſe, and Life with Death: And what is He would encounter with Theſe?
               Hereupon, the City fledde the City, and ſhun'd that Enemy which fallowed her, and hath ſince mette her in euery corner:Folly to runne from that we can not ſhun. 
                  London was great with Childe, and (with a fright) falling in Labor (her owne time being miſreckoned) was deliuered of none but Still-borne Children.
               Neuer was ſuch a ſudden Ioy changed into ſo ſudden a Lamentation: Thoſe Belles which were ready to cleane the Ayre with echoes at King Charles his Coronation, did nothing preſently but ring out Knelles for his Subiects; by which meanes,Church-Muſick, beſt and worſt. as there is no Muſicke ſo ſweet as that of the Churches, none for daies and nightes together hath bin ſo iarring, ſo that in 13 weekes more then 33000. haue falne dead to the ground at their dolefull tunes: And who would (if he could chooſe) make one in ſuch dangerous Peales? Had wee not iuſt cauſe therefore giuen vs to flye?
               Be not you then (good Maiſter Runne-away-Beater) ſo ſharpe, ſpare your Rodde a little, and whippe vs not for going to ſee our They were gon abroad ere we came. Freinds in the Countrey, we doe not thinke but You yourſelfe (could you haue gotte a Horſe) would haue bin

one of the Tribe of Gad, with one of your Comerades; for ther's no Dancing now to your Theatrian Poeticall Piping: Neither your Frierians,
                  If there were, you would giue ouer your Trade of Pamphletts. nor Cock pitterians, can for loue or money helpe you to a Plaudity, we wiſh for their owne ſakes (and yours) they could: But many of them (that could get Winges) haue kept company with vs in our flight; neyther are Wee or They to be condemned; Fleſh and Bloud naturally abhorres diſſolution: All deſire to begett Children, but none loue to ſee them buried: ſo mortally doe we hate the name of Death, that though we lye in our laſt Sheete, ſaue one (which muſt winde vs,) we hardly endure the Name of Dying. The very Scriuener who makes our Willes, as he is cunning in other thinges, ſo is he crafty in that Conueyance, and knowing what Word will fright vs, he goes about the Buſh, and Writes thus: When it ſhall pleaſe God to call Ʋs out of this tranſitory Life:
                  To flatter ſick Mens Bodies may Foole away their Soules. We muſt heere the ſtring twang out Life ſtill, albeit Deaths cold fingers pull vs by the Noſes.
               Agen, (to adde one handfull more of Corne to this Sheafe of Defence, made vp by the Run-awayes,) Know, that many of vs that haue ſhut vp Shoppes & are gon, are yonger-Brothers; and are aſſur'de, that euen owne Fathers, (Knightes by Degrees, and great Men in Poſſeſsions,) haue for ſixe or ſeuen yeares together, ſuffred (nay at this very hower doe ſuffer) their owne Sonnes, (yea their only and Eldeſt Sonnes) miſerably to languiſh in Coumpters, and other Priſons, vpon two ſhillings a weeke maintenance: This is good pollicy to tame an Vnthrift, but little charity to murder a Mans owne Childe: It's a ſafe Locke to tye to a Runne-awayes Legge, but thers too much Iron in't: At this Ward wee haue no great ſtomacks to lye;Young Cockes loue no coopes. wee find our Fathers hard enough here, and are loath to tempt their affections, whether they will come to London, and cry to a Iaylor, Fellow turne the Key, let me ſee in what naſty Chamber lyes my Sonne. Wee are better as we are, and therfore fling away your Rodde, and doe not whippe vs for flying.
               
                  The more that run away whē a Field is loſt, the fewer fall.Beſides, had we all tarried at home that are fledde, in what miſerable caſes (according to humane reaſon, not diuing into the deepe and inſearchable Iudgements of God) had we all bin? If the Country loues vs not now that are amongſt them in

perfect health, how would they haue hated the City in her populous Thronges, when (perhaps) foure times the number now departed, had then bin ſmitten downe by the Contagion? What Markets would you haue had then? Where had Meate bin found to fill ſo many millions of mouthes? The caſting out ſometimes of Merchandize into the Sea in a Storme ſaues the rich Venture, and Our being driuen from the Fleete in ſo hideous a tempeſt, hath (we hope) giuen the reſt of the Wether-beaten Nauy more ſea-roome, and ſo aduantage to meete leſſe danger.
               Was it not hie time to take our heeles and be gon, when the Doctors themſelues playd the Runne-awayes? Doctors for the Soule, and Doctors for the Body, they both fledde:Whē the Leaders Flye, ſhall the Soldiers ſtand▪
                   Many of them that ſtood the Battaile, (and being worthy Commanders, fought brauely,) we heare are falne, and in their places (who were to looke to the Sicke and Wounded Souldier,) are crept into your City, a crew of prating Emperickes, cogging Mowntibanckes, and cheating Quacksaluers, who if they cure one, kill twenty; it being more danger for an infected Man to fall into their handes, then for a ſound Perſon to liue two dayes faſting in an infected Houſe.
               But what talke we of the flight of theſe? for Phiſick and Chirurgery,
                  Phiſick and Surgerie at a Non plus in this Sickneſſe. (thoſe two diuine Siſters ſent from Heauen) are both of them puzzelld in their Readings, and driuen a to ſtand in their owne Practiſe. This Sicknes turnes Knowledge into Ignorance, for experimented Salues and Medicines forfet their wonted Vertues to aſtoniſhment and admiration. Our Flight then you ſee is Warranted by Eccleſiaſticall, Martiall, Polyticall, and Phiſicall Authority: Let vs not therefore here-after be termed Runne-awayes; for though many of our Fellow-Londoners are in our abſence turned into Pine-trees, our hopes are at our Comming home,If there fall good ſhowers of Money, els not. to begett a new and proſperous Plantation.
               Well did the Rodde-maker indeed condemne vs for not leauing our Armor behind vs when we ran from the Army, (ſome peeces of Siluer to mainteyne the Poore:All our Money in the Cuntry is turnd into Quick ſiluer.
                  ) But whole Troupes of Vs haue bin ſo beaten in this Country-Leaguer, that we haue Siluer little enough to mainteyne our ſelues: Beſide, Numbers

(we are in feare) will be ſo blind with the Country duſt flying vp into their eyes, they will hardly finde the right Key-hole whilſt they liue (as they ſhould doe) to open Shoppes agen; the Wardes of the Lockes (if not well Oyld before) will by that time (t'is thought) grow ruſty. Let the Rich miſerly Runne-awaies,
                  If the Poore pine for all, let the Rich pay for all. who fl
                     •
                  do
                     •
                   to ſaue their Liues for their Moneys ſake, and to ſaue their Golden Idolls for their owne ſake, let them (in Gods name) pay ſoundly for their Horſe race; who haue too much Iuice may endure a ſqueſing.
               
               
                  Great-Men, Little-Houſe-keepers.If we left our Houſes, and No body to keepe them, t'is but the faſhion of Great-men, who reare vp Huge Buildings, in which well Rattes and Spiders more often then Hoſpitable Tennants.
               Now whereas your Qui mihi Diſcipulus, (with his Birchen Septer in his hand) 
                     •
                  hreatens to fetch Blood from vs, by telling what terrible Frightes we are like to be put into at our comming back: Alas! He drawes a Bowe too big for his ſtrength, and ſhootes that Arrow without any ayme.
               
                  
                     Iobs Eſtate.What did Iob, who had ſeuen Sonnes and three Daughters, 7000. Sheepe, and 3000. Camells, 500. yoke of Oxen, and 500 ſhee Aſſes:His Loſſes. to him one Meſſenger came, and told him the Sabaeans had tooke away his Oxen from the Plough, and the Aſſes, killing his Seruants: An other came and ſayd, that Fire from Heauen had burned vp his Sheepe and Shepheards: An other that the Caldeans had ſeizd vpon his Cammells, and ſlew the Men: An other that all his Children were ſlayne by the fall of the Houſe, as they were Banqueting at their eldeſt Brothers.His Patience. But what ſayd Job? Naked I came, and Naked I muſt hence: The Lord hath Giuen, and the Lord hath Taken.
               
               
                  No Caſt-awaies, though Run-awaies.Doe you thinke we are Caſt-awaies, becauſe counted Run-awaies? What ſhould we feare? Say at our Returne to London, our Friends be departed, our Kindred loſt, or Seruants dead, and our Goods ſpent vpon Whores in Tauernes; Or ſay, that comming out of the freſh Ayre, and falling ſicke, none of you will come neere vs, becauſe we Fled from you: Nay, ſay that Ludgate or the Compters muſt be our Innes, where if Infection ſetts her Markes vpon vs, neither Creditor, Phiſition, Surgion nor Apothecary will reſort to comfort vs: Yet haue we a helpe

in all this extremity; there is one Anchor to ride at in the fowleſt Weather: One Friend hath promiſed to ſtick to vs all;Well fare an old freind in a Corner. and that Friend, is the Deere, Louing and Beloued Earth: When Sonne nor Daughter will come neere our Coffin, but ſhun our Carcas as loathſome Carion, yet euen then, that good Grandame (the aged Earth) will open her Armes and Hugge vs, and lay vs in Beddes, to take our euerlaſting Sleepes, And ſhall we be affrayd to come back to London?
               No: for albeit your Whip-deedle was ſo bold to tell vs, that Londoners in the en
                     •
                   of the laſt great S
                     •
                  cknes, comming nere the City, looked pale, like men going to Execution, that compariſon frights not vs; we, 
                     •
                  n plaine & merry Engliſh bid the Twigger, not 
                     •
                  o be in ſuch feare of our comming backe: for an order will bee taken for ſome of vs, neuer to call at the Counter for a Freemans Horſe, to carry him on foot to Ludgate.
                  We haue ſet vp our ſtaffe already. A many of our Iouiall Fraternitie are glad they haue this vnpolitike aduantage. They muſt haue been driuen to ſtudie for a cleanly excuſe, which heer
                     •
                   of it ſelfe (without teaching) is growne very mannerly.
               There bee men that dare eate Spiders: Monkeyes ſwallow them, and by them get ſweet breaths; why then ſhould not many Limbes of our Eſtates bee made the ſounder by this Infectious fracture?
               There is an Ireland to flie to,O for a good Winde! and a Low-countries to roare in, and a Wales, to keepe the winde of Lawyers from vs with her Mountaines: Wee can bee Bankerupts on this ſide, and Gentlemen of a Company beyond-Sea: bee burſt at London,
                  Tis but changing our Copy and piec'd vp in Rotterdam. The Sea is a Purger, and at Sea muſt our Fortunes take Phiſicke.
               Amongſt many other euils, which might terrifie men from repayring to London, the griping hands of Clarkes of Churches, and their Sextons, and the villanous doggedneſſe of vncharitable Bearers, are two maine ones. Too many crie out vpon their crueltie; they flea the liuing, and diſhonor the dead,Theſe Bearers are worſe then Beare-wards. by tearing money out of poore peoples throats, at the buriall of Husbands, Wiues, or Children, when it were greater almes, to abate from ſuch Vulturous Deuourers (thoſe curriſh Coffin-Toſſers) their vnconſcionable racking demands, and to giue it

to the ſuruiuing diſtreſſed Creatures.A Londoners money in the Countrey is braſſe. Wee fare better in the Countrey; for there wee pay neither for Belles nor Bearers, neither Miniſter, Vicar, Sir Domine, nor his Clarke will take a penie for any of vs.
               And they deale noblier, then wee heare a Citizen was dealt with, in a Towne not aboue two miles from London, whoſe Mayd-ſeruant there ending her life, the Hatches of a Ship are not ſo cloſe, as the doores and windowes of that infidelian Village were;16.s for foure London Bearers. not one durſt for money, digge a graue, no reward bribe the Clunnicors to carry the body to Church: inſomuch that the Maſter of this Seruant was compelled with ſixteene ſhillings (for vnder they would not goe) to hire foure London-Bearers, to carry her to her graue, whoſe caſting vp likewiſe coſt a price extraordinary.
               This dreadfull ſeaſon of ſo many gaſtly apparitions, ſhould (as wee thinke) fright all wickedneſſe out of the Citie: but wee heare it does not. For all the diſtance of miles betweene you and vs, the ſwearing and curſing amongſt ſome of you, leaues a tingling in our eares. For, one woman hauing left Egges in a roome at her going foorth,Badd Egges hatch no good Chickens. and miſsing them (as forgetting where ſhee layd them) at her comming in, wiſhed that the Plague might conſume them that eate them. Yet after her anger was paſt,A Curſe rebounded. and forgetting her curſe, they were dreſt, and eaten by her children, all of them dying the next day after. You know this better then wee, and are neere to Blacke-Friers where the Curſe fell; if you haue a minde to examine the truth.
               This was a Rod for a Curſer: but this that is held vp next, was a Rod to whip Preſumption.
               
               A young man hauing ſome place in a Pariſh Church in London, being (as to vs it was reported) to locke vp the Churchyard, called to a man, who ſtood amazed at the deepe graues; and looking into one that was not filled vp,No Ieſting with God. the other called to him to Come away, and (after a ſcoffing manner) told him, he were beſt ſtay there all night, and take vp his lodging. No, quoth the other, you may lye heere (for ought I know) before mee. I lye heere (ſaid hee:) ſee, I can lye heere at my pleaſure; and ſo leaping into the graue, and ſpreading his body vpon

the dead, out hee came preſently in a ieſting manner:None but Doues i'th Countrey. But going home, ſickened that night, and lay there the next day in earneſt.
               We haue no ſuch foule-mouthed women neere the Villages wee incampe in: no ſuch deſperate youths ſo to tempt Fate.
                  We Londoners dare ſweare ſo much. No, no, giue the Countrey people their due, and there are none like them liuing vpon the face of the earth.
            
            
               The true picture of the Countrey people.
               IT is reported, that the gates of Innes, and doores of Victualling-houſes are lock'd againſt vs, and that we are vſed like Dogges. Wee ſtand vp for the Countrey: This is falſe:
                     And peepe out at loope-holes. Haue they not reaſon?
                     Exceeding deare.
                   Tis an arrant lye: for all the Countrey people take their houſes of purpoſe for Londoners: and for vſage, they make more of vs, then they can of their owne kinne.
               Moſt deare are they to the worſt Citizen that comes within their doores: Marry wee muſt tell you, thoſe are not very many; and the reaſon is, they will not (in a dangerous time) peſter men together.
               So well-giuen are they, that continually they  pray for vsTo bee gone.: and when (in the open fieldes, for ayre ſake, or vnder a hedge for cooleneſſe) wee ſit downe to eate or drinke, they (good ſoules) will not touch ſo much as a bit of our Bread;For feare it chokes 'em. it ſhall not be ſaid, They turned vs out like ſtaruelings.
               So mannerly are they (now) growne,A murren on their manners when they haue any. that if two or three Citizens walke through a Towne, all the Countrey people ſtep preſently in at doores, onely in modeſtie to giue them the Wall.
               And ſo cleanly are they in euery paltry Village, that if there bee but ten ſtragling houſes, you ſhall not for your heart ſee a foule paire of ſheets in any one of 'em.Nor cleanes ones neither.
               
               Tis reported in London, that wee are lodged in Barnes, in Hay-lofts, Hay-cocks, and Stackes of Straw: tis true, but why? Alas! when Londoners that haue trauaild hard, ſcramble to a Towne (all faint and weary) the honeſt Country people, point to ſuch places, to the ende they may there lye ſoft,Can any man wiſh more? till their chambers bee prouiding. O! they are the louingeſt wormes

Earth euer ſent forth: offer them money, they ſcorne to touch it:Tis pity they ſhould. neither (hauing ſo many Gold-Smiths amongſt them) doe they weigh Gold.Neuer, vnleſſe it be at football. Reach to take 'em by the hand, they will not doe it for an hundred pound. And why? Shall they and we be Haile-fellow well met?
               How groſſely doe they wrong them, that report, how they ſtop their noſes at vs, & would make Bonfires in their Townes to bee ridd of vs? This is another lye: They neuer come neere any of vs, but they are ready (Kinde whorſons) to fall downe at our feet: and for ridding vs away; why, take your leaue of them neuer ſo often, any Towneſman thinkes himſelfe halfe vndone,Nay halfe-hangd. if he but ſee a Londoner Departing.
               
               Much more could wee ſpeake in their praiſes, but wee are afraid theyle bee angry at this; for they loue not to haue their good deedes proclaimed to the World.Who can proclaime them? Wee will therefore conceale, what they would haue hidden. And albeit wee cannot glew vp Mens lippes,We ſhould be ſorry elſe. we know what we know of theſe People, and a good many of vs are ſure to be Bound to them for euer.
            
            
               Leaue Them, and now to our Selues.
               NOw ſhall you vnderſtand what we doe, and how we liue▪ or, though your Beadle who Whippes Runne-awaies ſaies, that we are merry in our Countrey houſes, and ſitte ſafe (as we thinke) from the gun-ſhotte of this Contagion, in our Orchards and Gardens:
                  Where the Treaſure is the heart dwels. Yet we would haue him know, that we looke back vpon our Diſconſolate Mother (the City,) we ſigh at her ſorrowes, weepe for her diſtreſſe, and are heauy in Soule, but to remember her Lamentations. Farre though She be from vs, yet doe her Miſeries flye into our Boſomes: And albeit (out of humane frailety) we left her hoping thereby not to fall into Deaths handes, (O wretched and deceiaued Men that we are!) Death hath with his long Arme, reacht vs and our Families;Death is a nimble Footeman and hath ouertaken vs. and therefore, ſcithence there is no Corner in the Kingdome (were it as vaſt as the World) to hide vs from his Face, thus doe we Arme one an other againſt him.
               
                  In theſe and the like Speeches (now following) doe's the Abſent Londoner giue his fellow Citizen a little Conſolation.
               
            
            
               
               A Run-awaies Speech to his Fellow Run-awaies, Arming them (though flying from Death) to meete Death brauely, and face to face.
               O My deere Brothers, and Copartners in miſery! Death is a cruell Creditor, and will haue all that we owe him.A Run-awaies Armour to be worne againſt Death. Man is an imperfect Garden, and to keepe it from being ouer-run with Weedes, it muſt be turn'd into a Graue. As our Birth brings the beginning of all things, ſo our Death ſhewes vs the end of all things: For if thou haſt liued but one day, thou haſt ſeen all that All Men before in the World euer ſaw; the ſame Light, the ſame Night; they came in as thou did'ſt, and went out as thou muſt.
               
                  Death then being a Part of our Selues, why ſhould we flye our Selues? Men, nor their Liues are meaſur'd by the Ell, but by the Spanne: No matter how long Life is, but how Good: No matter how Short, ſo the End be ſweet: It is but Once, and what happens but once can not be grieuous.
               Nothing makes Death dreadfull, but that which followes Death: The After-Reckoning troubles all our Arithmetick how to Caſt it vp: If nothing were to be hoped for after this Life, the baſeſt Creature were more happy then Man.
               
                  One intreated Caeſar that he might be put to death,An old Souldiers ſute to Caeſar.
                   becauſe he was Old▪ and Lame and C
                     ••
                  zed: But (quoth Caeſar) Ar't ſure to be dead Then? Let vs all be Caeſars: Whether we liue or dye, lett vs be like Belles which at Coronations and Funeralls are one and the ſame Ring: In Health or Sicknes, Croſſes or Comforts,Men ſhould be like Bells. Calmes or Tempeſts, in Countrey or in City, ſo Tune our Soules, that all the Notes may be Sett for Heauen.
               For Death hath his A B. C. printed on euery thing we looke vpon.Death's A. B. C.
                   To behold Sheetes turnd downe (at bedde-time) puts vs in minde, that that's the laſt Garment which we ſhall euer weare. If a Cloath be but layd on a Table, thinke on a Coarſe, and (in feeding) ſay to thy ſelfe; I fatten this Body for Wormes, which one day (how ſoone J know not) will fatten themſelues on mee. Our Laſt Day is the Maiſter-day,
                  The laſt Scaene crownes the Play. looke to that well, and the Calender of thy life goes well.
               
                  As thus we were Fortifying our ſelues againſt the Batteries of Death,A Hot-ſpurre Londoner. into our company ruſhes a Londoner, (ore that fights vnder our Countrey Cullors,) and Hee in a paſsionate Exclamation, cryes out, Are you ſending an Anſwere to The Rodde for Runne-awayes? And haue you written ſo fully in praiſe of our Countrey-Landlords; I am a Tennant as you are, let me pay them my Rent too, and ſo intreated that in our Packet, his Letters of Commendations might be incloſed, which begin thus.
            
            
               An other manner of Picture, drawne in Lant-skip, of the Countrey, ſhewing as well as the other, and (as ſome ſay that are trauaild into thoſe places) trewer.
               
                  Here the Morris begins Heres plaine dealing.
                  
                     ƲT que erat impatiens irae—O (quoth he!) Wee that haue left London, ran from a Storme to fall vpon a Ship-wrack; to ſaue our throates from cutting amongſt Lambes, we haue been bitten by Serpents, ſtung by Adders, worried by Wolues, and ſett vpon by Lyons.
               
               
                  The Name of Londoner hatefull,That Name (of Londoner) which had wont to draw out a whole Towne to ſtare vpon him, and a Church-yeard full of People (after Seruice) to gape vpon his fine Cloathes, ſpruce ſilke-Stockins, and neate ſteeletto-fied Beard: That Name, to be Called by which, all the Land (from one end to the other) ſends her Sonnes, here to Sow their Clownary, and to Reape Witte, out of that Witte, to Thraſh Wealth, and by that Wealth to climbe to Honor: That Name is now ſo ill, that he is halfe hanged in the Countrey that has it:
                     Ninnio in Spaniſh is a boy. As Spaniſh Women (in Sir Francis Drakes time) had wont to ſtill their Ninnios (their little Children,) with crying out, Huſh, the Drake comes: So now,A Londoner a Bugbeare. Men, Women and Children, cry out, Away, Flye, a Londoner comes.
               
               In Rufus his Reigne, an Engliſh-man durſt not in his owne Countrey ſay he was an Engliſh-man; a Londoner now is at the ſame paſſe.
               Be a Londoner neuer ſo reuerend for Age, neuer ſo Gallant, neuer ſo full of Gold and Siluer, neuer ſo ſweet in behauiour, ſo bewitching in Language, and but once come to be examined by (thoſe Ruſſet Images of Authority) the Countrey Bill-men, he

ſpeakes to the North wind, courts a Porpoſe at Sea,To Bayte one of theſe Beares in Smithfield would make good ſport. ſeekes to ſoften a Rocke, and ſtroakes a Beare in the Bayting: Euery one of theſe Tytiries is a Caſe of Rapiers to a ſingle Ponyard.
               It is no Tickling thē like Troutes, to make 'em turne vp their Bellies; No, he that makes himſelfe a Lambe amongſt them is worried: Feed a Foole ſo long as he will cramme,Suttle Gudgeons. and he burſts his Belly: The more you fawne on them, the ſooner they flye in your face: As Heate makes a flea to skippe,A Hay-gee Gentleman. ſo the warme breath of a Londoners mouth is able to make a Hay-Gee Gentleman ready to leape out of his skinne through feare.
               
                  Silly Creatures! their Countrey Spirits goe but with Wherries, Oares would drowne them; but miſerable Animals are they to be ſo cowardly, for Feare is a terrible Hangman, and his Halters doe they tye about their Owne Neckes. What can be more Noble then to doe Good? and what more Good then not to doe ill? But here in the Countrey (amongſt the Barbarous ſort) he is counted a Varlet that dares be mercifull, and he a good Townſe-man that dares turne Diuell.
               To goe Braue here, and for a Clowne not to care a Straw for you: Nay,No diſgrace in the Country to haue a Horſe-Fly play with your noſe. in a Drincking-ſchoole to haue him in his Sweate ſitte aboue you, and giue you baſe language, which you dare not for your guttes but put vppe, is no more diſgrace then to ſtand Bare to a Conſtable in England, goe Lowzy in Ireland, or to Fare hard in Spayne.
               
               To ſtand and Ieere a Londoner in ſcorne, as he paſſes along,This Faſhion will not hold long we trow. is the Countrey Poſture: To walke by, with an inſinuating face, lifting vp the Beauer, and crindging to a Carter is our City-Poſture.
               
               If now you demand how amongſt theſe Heluetians, we weare out our weariſome time; Here's one of the Bottoms. Of the Kinges of Macedon, who ſucceeded Alexander the Great, ſome were afterwards glad to become Ioyners, Scriueners, Painters and ſuch like: So Dioniſius King of Sicily, kept a Schoole in Corinth: So Aelfrede a Saxon, King of England,
                  One King a a Schoole-Maiſter, an other a Cow-Heard. was forced in extremity to dwell with a Cow-herd in Summerſet-ſhire: And ſo, many Citizens that haue been brauer Fellowes then Whifflers on Simon and Iudes Day, are fayne (in a number of Shires through England) to turne Hay-makers, Cock Barley, and ſweat

with Pitching the Cart with Corne, thereby to win the hearts of thoſe,
                  He muſt needs goe whom the Diuell driues. whoſe loues by no alurements can be won to them: For as Pitty amongſt the Stoickes was held a vitious Paſsion; So our Countrey Gnoffes (Hob, Dick, and Hick) are turnd Stoickes, and hate Pitty worſe then a Lawyer does a Clyent in Forma-Pauperis,
               
               Theſe are the ſower Plummes with which we haue bene fed in the Countrey;We hope for better winter-Fruite. we ſend them to you for Samples; but if you ſhould after dinner haue all theſe ſorts of Raw Fruict ſet before you, which were gathred for vs, and that you were conſtrayned to eate them, as we were, it is impoſsible but to driue you into Conſumptions, for many of vs here are falne into that Languiſhing Diſeaſe and we feare it will follow vs to London.
               
               
                  We will ſt
                        •
                     ale in by Owle-light but we'le ſee her.To London! O Beſt-beloued of Cities, what ſorrowes doe feele when we name thee, becauſe euen then we can not ſee thee? As Children long baniſhed from Parents, at their firſt ſight of them, Teares on eythers ſide (of Ioy) will ſeale vp all vtterance of Language, ſo will it fare with vs when we behold Thee.
               
               Aſtoniſhed ſhall we ſtand, too heare thee relate the Tragicall Ouerthrowes of thy Sonnes and Daughters, (our Brothers and Siſters:) And as ſadly wilt thou ſitte, liſtning to the Stories of our Peregrinations, in this Wildernes of Engliſh Wilde-men.
               
                  And they reward thee well for it.Nightes and dayes haſt thou opened thy Gates to receiue them into thy buildings: How often haſt thou nouriſhed them with the Milke of thy Breſtes? How often haſt thou emptied thy Coffers, to furniſh them with Money? How many of their Sonnes haſt thou taken from the Plough, and from their Poore and Ruſticall Parents, and plac'd thoſe Sonnes (after thou hadſt Tutord them) on the Pinacles of Honor? not only to ſtand there with commanding Eyes ouer thy Inhabitants (O now deiected London!) but from thence, thou haſt prefer'd them, to ride in more glorious Chariots, and to attend as Councellors, on many of our Engliſh Kinges.
               Yet (ingratefull as they are!) 
                     Ʋs haue they in our ſoreſt extremities, thruſt out of Doores, denyed vs houſe-roome, euen in their Stables amongſt their Horſes, refuzde for Money to throw vs Meate, (as Hunters doe to their Dogges:) and vſing

vs, our Wiues and Children, (numbers of vs being their owne naturall Children) with a more then Turkiſh crueltie; As if none els in this Kingdome had deſerued puniſhment from Heauen, but thou only (deereſt Mother,) and that God were the God of a City alone, and not of the Countrey.
               But ſtay, whither are wee caried? why does this torrent of mourning and complaining breake in to ouerwhelme vs, when an Arme from heauen hath ſtucke vp a Land-marke to ſaue vs from drowning? The weekely Bills are come downe (like the Doue out of Noahs Arke, with her Oliue-branch,The Bills decreaſing, are Ioyes increaſing. a bleſſed ſigne that the waters are fallen!) O excellent Muſicke! See fellow-Citizens, Death hath not cut off ſo many as he did in his foure laſt Battails, by 3000. perſons and odde. God begins to repent him of his anger, albeit numbers of vs repent not of our ſinnes. Celeſtiall harmony played vpon 3000 ſtrings; the Bells haue à deſire to leſſen their Conſort, they haue wearied themſelues with playing ſad leſſons, and deafned the Ayre to ſtay day and night to heare them. Theſe are Bankets vnlookt for (therefore the ſweeter; theſe are comforts vndeſerued, (and therefore the welcomer.) Our hearts being not a little (but wonderfully) reuiued, we will with ſome Tales of our owne misfortunes here in the Countrey, beſtow vpon you one half houres recreation.
               A Londoner of great Eſtate, riding at the beginning of the Contagion, with his wife and two onely children (hauing no more) was for his money well receiud into a Town, lodged in a faire houſe, the country-neighbors reſorted to him, and were glad of welcomes, for their ſtomackes were not ſo ſubiect to Qualmes, and watry ſpittings, as ſince they are fallen into. But in the end, God (to ſhew how far-ſoeuer we flie, hath wings to ouer-take vs) laid his hand vpon this Londoners two children, ſtrucke them with ſickneſſe firſt, and in a few dayes after with Death.
               Being dead, the Londoner (ſtruck in yeares) fell into conſideration of his leauing the Citie,A Caueat for Run-awayes. & (full of ſorrow) much lamented his departing from it, moſt peremptorily condemning him ſelfe, as guilty of pulling downe the wrath of heauen vpon his two ſweet Babes, for his haſtie flying (like Adam) out of Gods reach, when at the holding vp of a finger, hee would finde him

out. This added ſome heauy weights to his ſorrow, yet this ſeemed nothing, to what was layd vpon him afterwards. For his two children lying dead vpon a table,A rich Father Sexton to his own Children. the Miniſter would not come neere him to bury them; no Clarke (to get a Parſons liuing) would venture to Church with them; there was none to dig a graue for as much ground as the whole town ſtood vpon; and for Coffins! had he bin owner of coffers filld with gold, hee could not with them haue hired a fellowe to make one. Then came into his mind the happineſſe of Londoners at home: for all their miſeries, for all the tedious marchings of threeſcore or fourſcore in a day to one Churchyard, yet there was a Comfort, a bleſsing, a reioycing, to ſee thoſe bodies receiue decent Chriſtian Buriall. Had his children bin ſnatchd from him in London, I could, ſaid he (his heart-ſtrings being ready to crack with ſighing) haue had friends and kinred, to accompany them to their graues: no Ceremonies ſhould haue beene wanting due to the dead: But now! and then he brake off; recollecting his ſpirits, and reſoluing to make a vertue of neceſsitie, He determined (ſeeing no other remedy) to bury his children himſelfe. A graue herevpon he digged in the handſomeſt faſhion he could, & then fetching firſt one child, and after, the other (his Wife being a partner in this tragicall paſſage) he read Seruice ouer them; the Mother, when he came to theſe words, Earth to earth, Aſhes to aſhes, performing that dutie.
               
                  A Mother and her Sonne.This is too ſad; heres one more merry. A Prentice of London being handſomly attired in one faire ſute, and carrying another down with him, went to ſee his mother in the country 45 miles from London; with fetching a compaſſe (for he knew what danger it was to fall into the hands of that Engliſh-Spaniſh Inquiſition, (the Muſter of Billmen) he gat into the backſide of his Mothers houſe; to her, notice being giuen, that her ſonne was come from London, ſhee was ready to fall into a ſwound; ſhee could not hold a ioynt; her cheekes lookd pale, & her eyes with feare almoſt ſetled in her head: In the end, Affection conquering Paſsion, ſhe ventur'd to ſee him. He, as ſhe was approching, falling on his knees for her bleſsing, the firſt word ſhe vttered was this, God bleſſe thee, & God bleſſe me from comming neere thy company. And ſo charging him as yet not to come into the

houſe, but to keepe himſelfe in an out Wood-pile, whither a Bed ſhould be ſent him, with which the yong man was content, only it grieued him, that his mother (all the time that ſhee talked with him) ſtood not onely a great diſtance from him, but held her noſe betweene her fingers.
               My yong Maſter had brought a Comrade with him, who was to leaue him the next morning: that night therfore they would be merry: good drinke was ſent them by a Mayd, who ſet it a farre off, and they muſt fetch it:The Conditions had bene good in a deare yeare. then had they a ioynt of Meat laid to the fire, which was likewiſe ſent them, but with this cō
                  dition, They were to eat it vp euery bit; for not ſo much as the bones they left, ſhould bee giuen to any dogge in the houſe or towne. Night being come, & our trauailing Caualiers hauing a deſire to drinke Tobacco, which they brought with them: a clowne of the houſe (when the mother was in bed) pluckt vp a good heart, rubbd his cheekes and forehead, gaue halfe a ſcore hemmes, to fetch vp his ſpirit, which ran to his heeles, and lighting a candle, ſwore, Come life, come death,
                  A valiant Coward. he would to his yong Maſter, he had but a breath to loſe, knew he was graſſe and hay; but (how mortall ſoeuer) he would to Maſter Iohn, and drinke a whiffe with him. The valiant Desper-view did ſo: but the Watch walking the Round (when the Pipes were diſcharging) the candle plaid the Tel-tale, & told them;More feard then hurt. two Londoners were there. Vpon this, the Towne was inſtantly in a Hoobbub, the houſe beſet with Browne-Bills, and Authority in a Baſe-Organ-pipe-voice commanded the two dangerous Londoners to bee tredging, there was no ſtaying for them there. The mother aroſe, curſd Tobacco that ere it came to light, ſtood ſtoutly for her ſon awhile; yet the town-bullets of threats & perſwaſions thumping about her eares, in th'end ſhe yeelded, they ſhold raiſe the ſiege, and depart with Bag and baggage the next morning.
               In ſhew they did ſo, and marchd both away with ſmall diſhonor; but the ſonne ſecretly returnd agen at night, was lodged in ſome remote roome (good for nothing but a Londoner) & there kept till a new Suit was made him; which done, hee was waſhed naked twice or thrice, his other clothes ayrd in a ouen, yet being ſmelt out, his mothers houſe was ſhut vp for a month after.
               In another place, a poore man dying in the fields (as hundreds

round about the Country haue done the like) none would come neere the body,A Mans bowels eaten out by Doggs or Hoggs. none giue it Chriſtian (nay any) buriall: ſo that it lay ſo long aboue ground, that Hounds or Hoggs had eaten out his bowels, and ſo was left that beaſts might end as they had begun, to make their bellies ſerue for his graue. And this hapned within few miles of Kiddermaſter.
               
               We could tel you 500 diſmal euents hapning in the country, & put by the people vpon vs, & all others that trauell: ſo wretchedly haue they handled men in ſome places, that when a ſhilling has bin offred for a can of faire water, it could not be had for money, becauſe they durſt not come neere the parties; and in one poore village, a Horſe-ſmith, who neuer in his life was worth halfe a Barre of Iron, ſwore he would not ſhooe a Londoners Horſe for ten pound.
               We could giue you a full Picture of many others, drawn with infinite abſurdities about them of their owne naturall committing. But in doing ſo, we ſhall but diſgrace our owne Nation, and leaue a diſcouery to the world how weakely Mann'd their Soules are with Faith, and a confident reſolution, in the Omnipotent mercy of God.
               It is fitt to Fly, and withſtand this Peſtiferous Enemy by all faire and lawful meanes, but Theſe Countrey people run backward (with too much feare, but no wit) ſo that at euery footes remouing, they are in danger to breake their owne neckes.
               O London! how we hunger & thirſt to be within thy walles: Would to Heauen the Citie and Countrey were diuorc'd, and we parted from them, Away we determine to come, yet with many Arguments are frighted from ſetting forward: Wee lay ſeuerall Plots, but build vpon none: Sound euery little Creeke, and Riuer, and finde the water in ſome places too ſhallow, and in ſome too deepe, therefore too perrillous.
               Scinditur incertum ſtudia in contraria Vulgus.
               
                  We Londoners a thouſand Queſtions make,
                  Which way to goe, yet know not which to take.
               
               If we put not in at London, God proſper vs in our next voyage, which is, that we may all meet in Heauen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   