
      
         
            
            
            THE ROMANE CONCLAVE. Wherein, by way of HISTORY, exemplified vpon the Liues of the Romane Emperours, from CHARLES the Great, to RODVLPH now Reigning; The forcible Entries, and Vſurpations of the Ieſuited Statiſts, ſucceſſiuely practiſed againſt the ſacred Maiestie of the ſaid EMPIRE: And ſo by Application, againſt the Reſidue of the CHRISTIAN KINGS, and FREE-STATES are liuely Acted, and truely Reported. By IO. VRSINVS Ante-Ieſuite.
            
               Io. de Turre-cremat. de Illicitis diſpenſat.
Eccleſia iuribus & legibus regitur, ſiue debet regi; Non talibus actibus, ſiue exemplis.
            
               D. AND. Fol. 46.
Dum enim Henrici, Frederici, Lodouici pugnant: Sultani, Chami, Ottomani, miſerâ noſtrâ magni ſunt, ditiones ſuas perditione noſtra dilatârunt.
            LONDON Printed for Iohn Iagger, and are to be ſold at his Shop in Fleeteſtreete within Temple Barre. 1609.
         
         
            
            ¶The Names of the Authours out of whoſe Records, theſe memorials are Collected.
            
               Auentine.
               Bartolus.
               Barnus de vitis Pontif.
               Benno.
               Blondus.
               Catal. teſtium verit.
               Collenutius.
               Cuſpinian.
               The Decretals.
               Aeneas Siluius.
               Feronius.
               Functius.
               Gunther.
               Guicciardine.
               Hub. Goltz.
               Helmoldius.
               Hutenus.
               Ioan. de Cremona.
               Iouius.
               Krantzius.
               Gerard Moringus.
               Munſter.
               Mutius.
               Nauclerus.
               Otho Friſingenſis.
               Pandulfus.
               Paral. Vrſperg.
               Petrus de Vineis.
               Platina.
               Radauicus.
               Sleydan.
               Ia. Spigelij Annot.
               Theodore de Nyem.
               Tritemnius.
               Ab. Vrſpergenſis.
               Wimphelinagus Ger.
               Zeigl. de vir. illuſt. German.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the vnreſolued Reader, Peace and Profit.
            
               IN Diſputations words multiply words: In tedious Diſcourſes (for the most part) groūded vpon the ſole Authority of running reaſon, ſmall ſatisfaction is afforded to weake conſciences. In this Argument, I must confeſſe, matters of weightie conſequence are debated; The Romiſh Prelates are accuſed of Intruſion and Vſurpation: And they againe, as ſtiffely maintaine faire and filiall vſage, with ſucceſſiue diuolution. To what purpoſe were it then, for any man how learned, or zealous ſoeuer, to inforce his vtmost indeuours, to put end to a Controuerſied queſtion; If when all hath beene ſaid, that Truth and Learning can alleadge: Euery paſsionate and diſcontented Humorist may take vpon him with colours and cunning diſtinctions, to oppoſe and contradict his oppoſites Aſſertions. In this caſe, what conſcience can but remaine diſtracted in vtramque partem? The Diſputants on either ſide, are men of admirable reputation for their learning. Both of them bring warrant (or at leaſt) ſeeme to bring warrant to maintaine their partie. Yet oftentimes vpon priuate paſsion, ſo impertinently and maliciouſly, that either they ſeeme not to haue read the Authours whome they quote; Or hauing read them, they doe not vnderſtand them, or vnderſtanding them, they doe of purpoſe miſconſter them. Vpon which conceite it ſhould ſeeme, that this our Ante-Ieſuite, in aſſured

hope to worke more by Example, then Diſcourſe, hath purpoſely declined theſe ambiguous Diſputations; And in liew therof hath brought vpon the ſtage of Iudgement, Time and Teſtimonie, Veritatis parentes, to pleade nothing for themſelues, but matter on Record. A courſe that hath ſeldome in ſo doubtfull a Controuerſie beene preſented to Audience. The Remembrancers were men without Exception, and ſome of them by teſtimonies on either ſide, Genere, pietate, & eruditione Nobiliſſimi, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   harum rerum Teſtes pene oculati: Their names and credits you are acquainted with; your vnderſtandings will informe you of their Maners, and the Times, wherein, and vnder whome they flouriſhed. Nothing then remaineth, but a rectified conſcience, to make true vſe of the Application. Which to effect, behold our Ante-jeſuite, hath not onely runne the trueſt and plaineſt Path-way to confidence, but alſo in old and auncient faſhion, hath of purpoſe thus attired his Actors, that the buſieſt-headed Ieſuite that euer put pen to Paper, may rather with impudencie cauill at Antiquitie, then with his fierie wit, become a ſtumbling-blocke to the wauering, by Excepting to his Pen or Perſon. You your ſelues ſit Iudges; and as vnpreiudicated Arbitrators examine the Pleas: Both parties are at the Barre, and ſhall produce their best Titles, euen Titles of preſcription. Whereunto, how-euer Paul plant, or Apollo water, Let that great God who ſearcheth the reines, and loueth nothing but Trueth, giue a plentifull increaſe to the reſtauration of his reformed kingdome, Amen.
            
            
               
                  Thine in Aſſurance, C. H.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TRVE RELATION BY WAY OF HISTORIE, DISCOVRSING VPON THE TRECHERIES, INSOLENCIES, AND Tyrannies, which the Romane Popes from time to time haue practiſed, vpon, and againſt the ſacred Maieſtie of the GERMAINE Empire: And ſo by inſinuation, vpon all Chriſtian Kings, Princes, and free Common-weales.
            
               AMongſt the manifolde and infinite choyce of Precedents, arguing and prouing, God himſelfe, to bee both the Parent and Protector of Order: Herein eſpecially appeareth the moſt euident and remarkeable Confirmation thereof; In that all thoſe godly and goodly Conformities (whereby from euerlaſting, Religion, and the vnfained zeale thereof, together with the mutuall references of Humane life, and Ciuill ſocietie, haue beene by due and orderly proceedings maintained and perfected)

haue tended euen from the prime-birth of Mankind, by admirable prouidence, to aduance the Prieſthood to gouerne the Church, and the Temporall Magiſtrate to take care of the Commonwealth; and Both diſtinguiſhed by their peculiar Orders and Dignities, without intermedling one in anothers Office.
            
            For albeit the fathers of the Old Teſtament, Abel, Seth, Noah, Abraham, and Iacob, who liued before the promulgation of the written Law, are regiſtred to be ſole Gouernours aſwell of Religion as of Lay-matters: and that in ſucceeding ages, both amongſt the Egyptians, and many other Nations (the preſidents no doubt being taken from the examples of the foreſaid Patriarkes) none by the authoritie of Plato were choſen to be Kings, but ſuch as formerly had beene intereſſed in the adminiſtration of their Religious ceremonies: yet by the written Law of Moſes, God manifeſted his determinate pleaſure in diſtinguiſhment of eithers Authoritie: The Prieſts to Teach, to Sacrifice, to Pray: The Princes with the people, to ſit in iudgement, to obſerue Diſcipline, to procure Peace, and that according to Order and Equitie.
            
            In the new Prieſthood, in the New Teſtament (being the very inſtitution of Chriſt the Sonne of God, and the Sauiour of the world,) Himſelfe, being ordained by the will of his Father, a Prince, and a Prieſt for euer, vtterly refuſing to intermeddle in Temporall gouernement, tooke vpon him the charge of Spirituall matters onely: For that, his Kingdome was from eternitie and celeſtiall, not tranſitorie and politicall. For he knew, That in his Kingdome, worldly matters, temporarie, vaine, and paſſeable, were not to be managed;

but bleſſings heauenly and euerlaſting to be diſtributed. Whereupon he gaue Pilate, demaunding him as concerning his Temporalitie, this ſweete anſwere, That, His kingdome was not of this world:
               
                  John 18. 
               Neither that he came to be miniſtred vnto, but to miniſter; Yea,
               
                  Matth. 20 
               to lay down his life for the ſaluation of many. And when the multitude would haue created him a King, hee auoyded it. The iudgement, or portion of an offered inheritance, he refuſed: And not onely commanded to giue vnto Caeſar, that which was Caeſars;
                  John 6. but where the tribute money was demanded (leſt he ſhould giue an euill preſident to others) the Siluer being taken out from the Fiſhes mouth, he deliuered it vnto the Kings Officers.
                  Luke 12. Marke 12. Matth. 17.
            
            Moreouer, when he vnderſtood that his Diſciples diſtracted through the ambition of ſuperioritie, contended for Primacie, hee told them; That not they, but Temporall Princes were to affect Soueraigntie; hereby putting them in minde of their Calling, as diſ-vnited from worldly Gouernement, and humane Policies.
            At laſt, after his glorious reſurrection, he ſent them to Preach the Goſpel ouer the whole world, but with no other Commiſſion, then what he himſelfe had receiued from his Father. Intimating by this Mandat, that they were neuer called, nor choſen for Lordſhip, but that through the Preaching of the Goſpel, and the glad tidings of ſaluation, they were bound to beget a Congregation to the Father in eternitie: That, Him they ſhould loue, feare and inuocate with all their power: And being aſtoniſhed with no torments, calumnies nor threates, they ſhould not forbeare to confeſſe his holy Name before all men. That, in Prayer, they ſhould carie themſelues zealouſly, faithfully, conſtantly,

modeſtly, ſoberly, and chaſtly: That, vpon cauſe of offences, they ſhould ſtudie mildneſſe; compaſſion towards good men oppreſſed, and patience amidſt their miſeries: That, by the bond of peace, they ſhould retaine vnitie of ſpirit; And finally, that caſting away the care of earthly eaſements, they ſhould meekly indure pouertie, and worldly diſpleaſures, that thus by their doctrine, and example of life, Chriſt might be glorified, the Church increaſed, and their Miniſterie admired.
            And ſurely the Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſors, in all their trauailes ouer the face of the earth, thus vndertaken by the commandement of their Maſter, ſo behaued themſelues in all occurrances, but eſpecially in this obſeruancie of difference betweene politicall Gouernement and Eccleſiaſticall orders, that by this note onely they were acknowledged to bee the true Diſciples and followers of their glorified Maſter. For they not onely Preached with puritie the euerlaſting will of God (without intermingling of humane fancies) but alſo, in all places accuſtomed to teach; That vpon earth Caeſars (Kings) were to bee acknowledged next vnto God, and to be reuerenced before all other mortall men; They ſtiled them their Lords, payed them tribute, made interceſſion vnto God for their welfare; And vnto ſuch as ſpake euill of the Magiſtrate, they threatned reuenge from aboue. From all worldly affaires, eſpecially from the abuſe of Armes, they abhorred; Knowing that the twofold ſword of the Church was intruſted to ſaluation and regeneration, and not for diſtruction. So farre were they euen from imagination, to thinke it lawfull to diſenthronize any King

or Potentate, though a moſt wicked one; either to abſolue his people from their Othes of Allegiance, or to proue maſteries with him about Precedencies. But rather they thought it a worke worthy their calling, by the ſpace of two hundred and ſeuentie yeeres, to ſuffer moſt bitter and terrible perſecutions, and thoſe too rather to bee indured by ſtedfaſt faith in Chriſt Ieſus, by zealous calling vpon his Name, and by glorious Martyrdome; then by rebellious impatiencie,Sanguis martyrum ſemen Eccleſiae. and violent Meditation of requitall; And all this, not without admirable increaſe, and good ſucceſſe to the Church of Chriſt.
            For in what Age was the face of the Church more amiable, or liker the head thereof, euen Chriſt Ieſus, then when after his aſcenſion, his Diſciples (ſtriuing to fulfill his Teſtament; and their ſucceſſors, treading in the very ſame footeſteps) Preached faithfully and purely the Goſpel through Iudaea, Samaria, and Paleſtine? After that, when ſo glorious and conſpicuous, as when with their fellow labourers, taking their Iournyes towards other Nations, but eſpecially towards Rome (at that time the chiefe Seate of the Empire) and the bordering Regions, they imployed their times in dreſſing, in Planting and in watering the Lords vineyard, viz. From the time of Linus to Siluester, and Caeſar Conſtantine by the ſpace of two hundred and fiftie yeeres, vnder moſt vnſufferable Perſecutions, euen to the loſſe of their liues and deareſt bloods?
            But aſſoone as Conſtantine by the diuine prouidence had giuen peace to the afflicted Churches, and that the Biſhops being deliuered from their lurking corners, from Vaults and from dennes, wherein during

the time of Perſecution they had ſafe conducted their bodies, then, I ſay, ſhamed they not to giue themſelues ouer to the delights of the world, to vnprofitable idleneſſe: to liue a pleaſurable life; to degenerate from the wayes of their predeceſſors, through neglect of Gods word, being wholly ſeduced with carnall affections. Then began they to giue coulorable clothing to the doctrine of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, by Canons, Decretals, and Ceremonies: Then began they to deuiſe new appellations of Dignitie: To preferre one Church before all other, and finally bluſhed not to confound all orders both Ciuill and Eccleſiaſticall. Whereupon preſently followed ſo vniuerſall a confuſion of Doctrine, Diſcipline and Order, that they no longer ſeemed to repreſent the late Paſtours of the Lords flocke, but rauening Wolues; not Prieſts but blaſphemers; not Doctors but deiectors of ſoules from the ſweete aſpect of the face of God.
            For ſurely, they did not onely obſcure in a wonderous maner the ſinceritie of the Chriſtian doctrine by their humane traditions; gaue it ſo great a ſcandall by ſuperſtitious impietie, and heatheniſh inuocation of Soules departed; and ſo wickedly polluted it with blaſphemous Idolatrie; But all honeſtie and diſcipline being troden vnderfoote, in all ſeducement and oppreſſion of veritie, they ſpent their whole dayes in Sodomiticall abuſes, in Wantonneſſe, in Luxurie, in Ribaldrie, in Whoring, in Sacrilege, in Contention, in Necromancie, in Charmes, in Homicide, and ſuch like tranſgreſſions: And that more is, being poſſeſſed with a diabolical affectation of Gouernment & pride, cleane contrarie to the Diuine commandement, they began

to buſie themſelues in ſecular affaires; to withdrawe their faiths from the ſubiection of Kings, to vſurpe vpon other mens patrimonies; to thruſt in their crooked Syckles (and that at aduenture) into another mans Harueſt; to arrogate both Preſences; to challenge the iuriſdiction of both Swords; to tollerate no equall, much leſſe no Superiour; to defraude one of his right, an other of his Honour; to giue Law to Kings, and preſcribe them ordinances; baſely to eſteeme of Emperours, as if they reigned at will; to accurſe them and murder them; To ſet Princes together by the eares; to ſow diſſentions; to patronize factions; to abſolue Subiects from their Othes of Allegiance; and finally by their nouell and ſlie Policies, to mooue them to vnlawfull Rebellions: So farre forth, that after they had once pleaded preſcription in their incrochments, they more defaced the Maieſtie of the Romane Empire, by their diſsimulations, ſlaughters, warre, and ſuch varieties of wickedneſſes, then any forraine or barbarous enemy could haue done by the Sword or violence.
            For to let paſſe the Empire of the Eaſt, ruinated by the cunning and ſlie cariage of the Romane Biſhops, the Grecians being firſt expulſed Italy by the Lombards, and preſently (they againe being oppreſſed by the French) called in againſt Aſtulphus King of the Lombards, for calling vpon Steuen the ſecond for his Subſidy money: Euery man that is any thing ſeene in Hiſtorie, knoweth (the Romane Empire being by the prowes of Charles the Great, transferred from the Grecians to the Germanes) how the Emperours of Germanie haue beene harried by the incredible ſubtilties and combinations

of the Romane Biſhops; wearied with moſt lamentable warres, and laſtly the goodly and moſt flouriſhing forces of the Empire by their vngodlineſſe diſvnited, impoueriſhed, and waſted.
            Surely the remembrance of theſe times are ſo diſtaſtfull and lamentable, that I had rather waſh them out with teares, then aggrauate them by ſpeech: But fithence our Pen is fallen into repetition thereof, I perſwade my ſelfe, that it ſhall proue neither a digreſſion from my proiect, neither impertinent from the point of our Argument, to Paint out in moſt liuely colours, what hath beene the humilitie, obſeruancie, loyaltie & obedience of the Roman Biſhops manifeſted throughout all Ages, ſithence the dayes of the aforeſaid Charles towards the moſt worthy Germane Emperors, their very good Lords and eſpeciall benefactors.
            
               
                  ❧Charles the Great.
               
                  TO begin therefore with the Frenchmen, who firſt transferred the Empire from the Grecians to the Germanes: who liueth ſo ignorant, that knoweth not, with what immunities and honourable indowments they adorned the Romane Clergie? Firſt, Charles ſurnamed the Great, to his eternall renowne deliuered that Sea, being moſt grieuouſly laide vnto by Deſiderius King of the Lombards, to the vtter confuſion of his Armie. Againſt Heriſigus Duke of Benouent, he likewiſe defended his frontiers: And preſently

after that, hee reſtored Leo the third to his Sea, at Baryona, being expulſed from Rome by the faction of his aduerſaries.
            
            
               
                  ❧Lewes ſurnamed Pius.
               
                  This man was Emperour in the yeere of Chriſt eight hundred and fourteene, at what time Egbright gouerned the Weſt Saxons, and firſt called our Countrey Anglia.
                  
               
               
                  
                     LEWES ſucceeding his father Charles (as the Romane Chronicles record) with no leſſe liberalitie, granted vnto the Romane Biſhops and his ſucceſſours, the Citie of Rome together with his Dukedome: and defended the iuriſdiction and dignitie thereof, euen to the imputation of ſuperſtition.
               Notwithſtanding; neither the remembrance of the good ſeruices of the father, nor the vertues of the ſonne, could ſo farre foorth wey with Gregorie the third, as to ſuppreſſe, much leſſe to mitigate his diueliſh intendments once conceiued againſt this Lewes. For the Warre being on foote betweene Lewes and his ſonnes; He (as it behoued an Apoſtolicall Biſhop) ſought not to quench the fire of this vnkindneſſe betweene father and child, but being ſent by Lewes into the Campe of his ſonnes to capitulate the Peace, with condition to returne againe vnto the Emperour; reuolting from Lewes, he remained with his ſonnes, and like a true Apoſtata, abetted and complotted this vnnaturall

diſſenſion; ſo farre foorth, that the father was taken, and being committed to moſt ſeuere impriſonment, with his yonger ſonne was finally thruſt into the Monaſterie of Sueſſons. Behold here a moſt ſtrange precedent of ingratitude in children againſt their deareſt Parents, and the deteſtable impietie of a Biſhop againſt a moſt innocent Emperour; both equally gilty of like periurie and diſloyaltie.
               From that time, although the Royal Diademe continued for ſome certaine Ages in the poſteritie of Lewes, neuertheleſſe their helliſh humors did no more ſpare the iſſue, then in former time it compaſſionated the Parent. And no maruaile, for this was the onely marke that they ſhotte at, that hauing once ſhaken off the right which the Emperour pretended in the confirmation of Biſhops, they might with more ſecuritie euer after haue meanes to ouertop them in greatneſſe. Which their moſt prouident proiect was long a hatching, neither could it bee deliuered to diſcouerie, before the yeere eight hundred ninetie fiue. At what time Charles the Groſſe departing out of Italy to warre vpon the Normans, who at that time miſerably infeſted the Sea coaſts of France; Hadrian the third layed hold vpon this opportunitie, and in the very beginning of his Pontificie, made his complaint vnto the Senate and people of Rome; That in the Election of Biſhops, the Imperiall authoritie was not to be ſtood vpon, but that the Suffrages of the Clergie and the people ought alwayes to be free.
               
               By this Decree he diſſeyſed the Emperours of their whole right, which but lately they poſſeſſed both vpon

the Biſhops and the Citie; Thereby pointing out to his ſucceſſors a courſe how to attempt proiects of higher nature in future ages.
               And ſurely from thoſe times, what vpon the deficiencie of the iſſue of Charles the Great, which had moſt fortunately Gouerned the Empire for the ſpace of one hundred and odde yeeres: and what in regard of that moſt horrible Schiſme proceeding from that Chaire of peſtilence, managed betweene the Biſhops themſelues by mutuall Murders, Poyſenings, and all other kind of enormities, their continued machinations againſt the Emperours ſome-deale ceaſed; vntill they reaſſumed a new occaſion of plotting & reiterating their former courſes againſt Otho the firſt, Emperour of Germanie.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧Otho the Great.
               
                  He was choſen Emperour in the yeere nine hundred thirtie and ſixe. In England reigned Adelſtan.
                  
               
               
                  FOr at what time, in the Reigne of Otho, Iohn the thirteenth, Noble in trueth by Birth, but moſt baſe in conuerſation, Gouerned the Romiſh Sea, and polluted Peters Chaire with ryot, gaming, pandariſme and Women, &c. At that very ſame inſtant likewiſe Berengarius Duke of Lombardie, amongſt many other Cities, forbore not to preſſe hard vpon the Citie of Rome alſo. The Cardinals grew diſcontented, aſwell at the Popes Epicuriſme,

as at Berengarius his Tyrannie. Two of them more agrieued then the reſt (whether vpon ſcruple of conſcience, or in remembrance of the greatneſſe of the Romane name, or in hatred of the Pope) reſolued to pray in aide of Otho, a Prince of that time much celebrated for his vertues amongſt the Loraners, the French, the Hungariſh, the Danes, and all the other barbarous people, vnder his obedience throughout that part of the world.
               Whereupon, calling ſome others to Councell, by letters and meſſages they ſolicite Otho, that he would vouchſafe to aſſiſt the declining eſtate of the Church and Common-wealth: That hee would repreſſe the Tyrannie of Berengarius cruelly raging vpon the Chriſtian people: And that he would not let, to deliuer the Church from ſo fell and impure a beaſt. The Biſhop comming to the knowledge of theſe paſſages, firſt cut off three of his fingers, that indited the Letters, and then ſlit his Chancellors noſe, for giuing approbation thereunto. But Otho, who thought it not fitte to leaue the Church ſuccourleſſe in times of danger, hauing amaſſed all neceſſaries for warfare, marcheth into Italy with fiftie thouſand Souldiers. Expelleth both Berengarius and his ſonne Adelbert: then ſpeedeth towards Rome. Where arriued, although the inhumane cruelties of the Biſhoppe were not vnknowne to his Maieſtie: Yet in reuerence of the Apoſtolicke Sea, at firſt hee decreed no hard or vnbeſeeming cenſure againſt him, but cauſing all things that had beene iniuriouſly taken from him to bee reſtored, hee preſented him moreouer with great maſſes of Gold, Siluer and Iewels. And appointing him a time

of conference; ſecretly and friendly hee repeated what he knew of his fore paſſed offences, wiſhing him therafter to abſtaine from ſo groſſe and foule enormities; To leade a thriftie life; to bee an ornament, and not a diſhonour to the Church; That integritie of life was no leſſe commendable in a Churchman, then Artes and learning.
               For the preſent, the Pope proteſteth great hopes of amendment: The Emperour reioyceth thereat, and leauing Rome iournieth towards Papia, there minding to Winter, but withall exacteth a ſolemne Oath from the Biſhoppe taken vpon the body of Saint PETER; THAT IN HIS ABSENCE HE SHOVLD NO WAY BE ASSISTING TO BERENGARIVS, NOR HIS SONNE. The Emperour had ſcarce left the Gates of Rome, but the Biſhop returning to his wonted inclination, not onely followeth his pleaſures, his Whoredomes, his Ryottes, his poyſenings, and all other miſchiefes, of like nature; but alſo hauing forgotten his plighted faith to the Emperour, reuoketh Adelbert from Fraxineto, whether hee had fled out of Italy to the Saracens, and promiſeth him his vtmoſt aſsiſtance againſt the Emperour: Hee diſpatcheth alſo his Legats to make like complaint againſt him at Constantinople.
               
               The Emperour, vnto whome ſuch groſſe and wilfull periurie ſeemed more then wonderfull, vpon the firſt intelligence thereof, thought it not fitte raſhly to liſten thereunto, but diſpatcheth certaine of his Seruaunts to Rome to learne the certaintie of the buſineſſe.
               
                  Vpon their returne, and iuſtification of theſe, and more vile indignities, the Emperor (not vniuſtly moued to diſpleaſure) ſuddenly haſteth towards Rome: where pitching his tents hard vnder the walles (Iohn and Adelbert being fled into Campania) he is moſt honorably receiued into the City by the Inhabitants. Vnto him they promiſe faith and loyalty, and ſweare thereafter neuer to elect a Pope without the conſent of the Emperor Otho, Caeſar, Augustus, and his Sonne Otho.
               
               
                  Iohn being thus eſcaped; and for feare of Caeſar lurking in Campania in woods and corners; after three daies, at the inſtance both of the Clergie and the people (deſiring a Commiſſion to enquire vpon the life and conuerſation of Iohn) the Emperor agreeth, and proclaimeth a Councell; whereunto he calleth all the Biſhops and Abbots of Italie, ſuch as he knew to bee men of integrity, honeſt, and zealous.
               Who appearing vpon the day preſcribed, although his abominable life was ſuch, that euen by the generall opinion of the Councell, it could not but be deciphered by the remoteſt Nations, yet this moſt vertuous Emperor, tooke order that they ſhould not proceed to any raſh Iudgement, but to determine all accuſations with mildneſſe of mind and deliberate advice.
               Whereupon with the Archbiſhops of Liguria, Tuſcanie, Saxonie and France, he diſpatcheth his letters vnto Iohn, reciting therein the cauſe and maner of his accuſation: not forbearing to intreat him to make his perſonall appearance, to ſay for himſelfe againſt his accuſers.
               But he returning for anſwer; that it ſhould eaſilie appeare,

what ſlight eſteeme he made of that Councell; And that, he would ſuddenly proceed to Excommunication, in caſe they preſumed to elect Any other: the Emperor in a moſt ſolemne Oration intimateth to the Councell, his periuries towards himſelfe, and his diſhoneſt conuerſation towards the whole Chriſtian world.
               Vpon hearing wherof, with one conſent the Councell declared this Apoſtata Iohn for his euill life to be worthilie depriued: And Leo chiefe Secretary of the Romane Church was choſen to ſucceed him.
               In the interim wherof, the Emperor not to be burdenſome vnto the State of Rome, had diſmiſſed many of thoſe companies of Souldiers which at firſt hee had brought with him into Italie. Which comming vnto the vnderſtanding of this reprobate Biſhop, who full well was acquainted with the diſloyall and mutable humours of the Italian Nation, ſendeth his eſpialls to Rome, with exhortations to the people to attempt a ſurprize vpon the Emperor and his weake companies; for which their good ſeruice he promiſeth to reward them with all the Treaſures of the Church and Saint Peter.
               
               The Romans being hereunto incouraged, partly by the weakneſſe of Caeſars army, and partly with the conceit of theſe Golden mountaines, ariſe, and at the ſound of a Trumpet charge vpon the Emperor.
               He maketh a ſtand vpon the Bridge of Tiber, and there with his feareleſſe and old Trained companies, valiantly receiueth the charge: The Romanes receiue the iuſt reward of their trechery: for being routed, and put to flight, neither ſanctuary, nor vnſanctuary could

warrant any one mans life; the fury of the Souldiers ſlew the periurd, aſwell at the Altar, as in the Shambles.
               When this was done, Caeſar ſtood in good hope, that after ſo great a puniſhment, the Romanes would proue afterwards to be of more quiet and aduiſed diſpoſitions, and in this conceit, he haſtneth to Spoletum, the place of Adelberts rendeuou.
               
               Vpon which abſence Iohn betaking him to his wits, through the mediation of certaine good-wenches, heretofore of his ancient acquaintance, ſo worketh with many of the Roman gentry, that Iohn is receiued into the City; and Leo with much labour eſcaping their hands, flieth vnto the Emperor.
               The depoſement of Leo, and the cruelty of Iohn, which he had already inflicted vpon ſome few, being known; Caeſar repaireth his Army, with intention to be revenged vpon the Romans, as well for the iniury offered to his own perſon, as for the wrong in depoſing a Biſhop of his owne inſtitution.
               In midſt of which intendment, by the iudgement of Almighty God, meaning to make this Iohn an exemplary preſident to the world of his moſt iuſt indignation, it came to paſſe, that he died a moſt ſtrange kind of death.
               For when vpon a certain night without the walles of the City, hee was ſporting himſelfe with an other mans wife, the diuell gaue him ſuch a knocke on the Temples, ſaith Luitprandus of Ticine, that within eight daies he died of the wound.
               
                  Plati. in the life of Iohn xiij.Other write, that he was wounded by the womans husband; and ſo gaue vp his impure ſoule to the diuell

his maſter, whom he had long ſerued.
               But death gaue no ſurceaſe to the ſeditions firſt occaſioned by this monſter. For the Romans, in place of the deceaſed, ſet vp Benedict the fift, and afterwards required Confirmation from the Emperor, then reſiding at Spoletum.
               
               The Emperor diſallowing the Election, diſdainfully diſmiſſed the Romans, little miſtruſting any ſuch welcome: and by fire and ſword waſting all things about the City, finally compelled them, that expulſing (or rather yeelding vp) Benedict, they ſhould accept of Leo: binding them by Oth, that they ſhould not preſume to alter any thing, which he had ſet down for the Churches gouernment.
               Hereupon Leo being reſtored to his Sea at Barionea,
                  
                     Platina in the life of Benedict the fif
                           •
                        .
                     See alſo Krantzius lib. 4. cap. 9.
                     
                   and over wearied with the diſloyall humours of the Roman people, retranſferred the whole Authority of choſing the Roman Biſhops from the Clergy and people of Rome, vnto the Emperor; as it is ſet downe. diſtinct. 6. c. in Synodo.
               
               And Otho, having in this maner marſhalled his affaires, returned into Germanie, taking Benedict with him; who not long after through griefe of mind, being committed to the ſafe cuſtody of Adaldag, Othoes Chancellor, and Archbiſhop of Hanburg, died at Hamburg, and there lieth buried in the Cathedrall Church.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧Otho the third.
               
                  He raigned in the yeere of Chriſt 984. about the dayes of Etheldred.
                  
               
               
                  Naucler. general 34. Plat. in vita Gregorij V. Cuſpinian & Theod. de Nyem in the life of Otho the third.
                  SOme few yeeres after, as Otho ſucceeded his Grandfather in the Empire: ſo did hee likewiſe in the contentions of the Biſhops. For when as Iohn the xvij. being dead, by the right of Election, inueſted vpon him by the donation of Leo the viij, to his predeceſſor Otho the great, hee had choſen Gregorie the v. for Pope; Creſcentius and the people ſtomacking that a man of the German nation ſhould be aduanced to be their Biſhop, and him alſo choſen by the ſole authority of the Emperor, they reſolued to depoſe him; and in his place they ſubſtituted, Iohn the xviij. of that name, firſt Biſhop of Placentia, a man well ſtored with coyn, and a great Scholler.
               
                  Gregorie maketh his repaire into Germanie to the Emperor, and there vnfolding his hard vſage, ſo prouoked the Emperor, that he beſiegeth the City, and preſſed it ſo cloſely, that the people almoſt hunger ſtarued opened their Gates, and receiued his Maieſty.
               Being now in poſſeſſion, and vnderſtanding, that like power by warrant of Gods word, was bequeathed him ouer a wicked Biſhop, as ouer a common theefe; at firſt he gaue commandement that the eies of the captiue Biſhop ſhould be put out, the fingers of both his hands to be cut off, and then clothed in vile attire, with his ſtumps and feet manacled, to be ſet vpon an Aſſe, ſo to be conueyed through the City, and finally

to be thrown headlong from the rocke Tarpeia.
               
               
                  Creſcentius the Conſul hee alſo cauſed to be mounted vpon a baſe Beaſt, his face towards his taile, his noſe and eares to be cut off, ſo to be a common ſpectacle to all beholders, and laſtly to be hanged vpon the common Gallowes in ſight of the City walles.
               Thus hauing wrecked his iuſt indignation vpon his aduerſaries, he not only reſtored Gregorie, the xj. moneth after his depoſall to his priſtinate dignity: But alſo this good and moſt excellent Emperor, left an example to his ſucceſſors, that theſe proud Churchmen were not to be managed by lenity and mildneſſe, but to be curbed by roughneſſe and ſeuerity. For it was the receiued opinion of that age, that looke which of the Caeſars ſhewed himſelfe to be of more milde diſpoſition, then ſome others; ſo much the more wantonlike would they dally with his lenity, and more baſely proſecute him with railings, & foule-mouthed reproches; As by that which followeth, I will clearely make manifeſt vnto you.
            
            
               
                  ❧Henricus Niger.
               
                  Hee ruled Anno Chriſti. 1039. In England Harold Harefoot.
                  
               
               
                  THis ſeuerity of Otho, laſt before ſpoken off in puniſhing the treaſon of Iohn,
                  Cardinal Benn
                        •
                      of the l
                        •
                     fe and geſts of Hildebrand. for ſome certaine time ſo terrified the Biſhops, that vntill the ſmart was forgotten, openly they

attempted nothing againſt the Maieſty of the ſacred Empire. But no ſooner had Benedict the xj. by Satanicall and magicall Inchantmentes leaped into the place, but by how much his skil and confidence in that profeſſion was remarqueable, by ſo much the more inſolent was his cariage in the Popedome.
               For no ſooner was Conradus, (a moſt faithfull ſteward of the Law and Religion, Emperor of Romans, alwaies Auguſtus) gathered to his fathers; but this firebrand going to counſell with his minion Laurentius, and other his fauorits; bendeth his ſtudies, how hee might diſpoſſeſſe Henrie the ſonne of Conrade from his hereditary ſucceſſion to the Crowne of the Empire; and diſturbe the peace of the Church with Schiſme and diſſenſion.
               To the effecting of which ſtratageme, hee ſendeth the Crowne of the Romane Empire vnto Peter King of Hungarie, with this Motto vnder written.
Petra dedit Romam Petro: tibi Papa Coronam.
                  The Rocke gaue Peter Rome: to thee the Pope this Crowne.
But the Emperour, vnder the leading of Godfrey Duke of Lorain, a moſt excellent Souldier, and faithfull ſeruitor, confronted Peter, tooke him Priſoner; and further, meaning to repay Theophilact the ringleader vnto ſo dangerous a Schiſme, according to his deſerts, ſet forward for Rome. Vpon brute whereof, Theophilact, (alias Benedict the ninth) ſtroken in remorſe of conſcience, and amazed with terrour, bartered the Papacie to one of his Companions, the Archprieſt of Saint Iohns de Porta latina, the Maſter of Hildebrand, for the Summe of one thouſand and fiue hundred

pounds. Who aſcending the Seate by the ſtaires of ſuch abominable iniquitie, by changing his Name, was thenceforth ſtiled, Gregorie the ſixt.
               Now is the Cup brimfull;Benno. Plati. in the life of Silueſter the third and Gregorie the ſixt. and the Papacie ſo managed, that all good men being either reiected or oppreſſed, euery other party, as he was caried away by ambition, or inabled for briberie, caſt to lay hold-faſt vpon this ſo high a ſtep of Dignitie; more entring like theeues and robbers by the windowe, then by the doore. So that in theſe dayes (beſides the Archprieſt Iohn Gratian) aſcended alſo into this Seate of iniquities; Iohn Biſhop of Sauoy who (changing his Name) was otherwiſe nominated Silueſter the third. Thus was the Roman Church ren tinto diuers factions: Three Popes appeared at one inſtant, viz. Benedict the ninth, Silueſter the third, and Gregorie the ſixt, and euery one claimeth lawfull ſucceſſion in Peters Chaire, and pleadeth poſſeſſion. Where is now the Church? Who is this head? Who ſhall now ſtand vp to arbitrate ſo difficult a controuerſie? None is now to be ſeene but the Emperour; And him, without queſtion, ſurnamed Niger, God himſelfe ſtirred vp (hauing ſet Germanie in good order) with an Armie to trauaile into Italy, where calling a Councell, he inforceth Theophilact to flie: Hee impriſoned Gregorie, and afterward with Hildebrand, exiled him into Germanie. The Biſhop of Sauoy he diſpatched to his charge; and in their places conſecrated Syndoger Biſhop of Bamberg, otherwiſe called Clement the ſecond. Of whom he receiued the inauguration of the Imperiall Crowne, and then inforced the Romans to take an Oath: That thereafter they ſhould neuer preſume to meddle with the Election of a Romane Biſhop, without

expreſſe Commiſsion firſt obtained from the Emperour.
               
               For his moſt excellent Maieſtie did well foreſee, that in thoſe times the world was giuen to ſo much licentious libertie, that euery factious and Potent companion, though moſt ignoble, would not ſticke to arrogate vnto himſelfe that ſo eminent a dignitie, by corruption and vnderhand-courſes, which by the ſtrict commandement of God, was not to be beſtowed vpon any liuing creature, ſaue him who for learning and ſanctitie of life, ought worthily to bee preferred therevnto.
               This vſage now grew vnto ſo inueterate a cuſtome, that euery ſedicious and wicked varlet preſumed, that hee might without ſcruple of conſcience vſurpe vpon Saint Peters Chaire; As did Damaſus the ſecond, by birth a Bauarian. This man hauing gotten poyſon for his purpoſe, ſlue Clement, and laboured by villanie to attaine to that promotion, which whilom was accuſtomed to bee beſtowed onely vpon vertue. But God, the moſt iuſt reuenger of ſuch wickedneſſe preuented him, and the three and twentie day after his vſurped inſtallment, ſent him to accompanie the dead in the place of darkeneſſe.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧Henricus quartus.
               
                  He raigned in the yeere of Chriſt 1056. in Germanie. In England Edward the Confeſſor.
               
               
                  ALbeit, that euen hitherto, from the dayes of Charlemaine, the Romane Biſhops being generally poſſeſſed with the ſpirit of Supremacie, by ſleights and deuiſes, did continually oppoſe themſelues againſt the Maieſty of the Empire, and left no practiſe vnattempted, that might weaken or diſcountenance the Emperors ſoueraignty; that ſo they might diſpoſe of all things at their pleaſures without all feare of controlment: yet was it not the will of Almighty God, to ſuffer them as yet totally to caſt off the yoke of duty, by warrant of Holy writ inueſted vpon Princes and great perſonages placed in Authority. But what can humane wiſedome plead in ſearch of Gods purpoſes? perdere quos vult Iupiter, & hos dementat: For now the malice, impiety and treaſon of the Roman Clergy, together with their diabolicall ambition, eſpecially vnder that figuratiue Dragon (Gregorie the ſeuenth) grew like a violent tempeſt ſo outragious and exorbitant, that thoſe times may truly be recorded to be the daies, which vtterly razed, blemiſhed, and wounded the Maieſty of this famous empire with the fatall ruine of glory and Honor.
               For this miſchieuous monſter, not contented to haue poiſoned ſix Biſhops, and to haue depoſed his Maſter Alexander, for imploring aſſiſtance from the

Emperor; Neither mindfull of the fauours which Henrie (ſurnamed Niger) had afforded him, in curteouſly diſmiſſing him from perpetuall Impriſonment, ſeperated from the company and ſight of all mortall creatures, whereinto (as we told you before) he had beene condemned with Gregorie the ſixt: At what time, the Normans raged through Apulia, Calabria and Campania,
                  Of this Matilda, whence and what ſhe was, ſee Krantzius lib. 5. Saxon. partly relying vpon the great wealth of Matilda, a moſt potent woman in thoſe daies, and partly animated to ſee the Empire diſtracted with moſt dangerous wars raiſed by the warlike Nation of the Saxons againſt the Emperor, ſcarce three yere ſeated in his gouernment; together with the reuolt of the Germane Biſhops whom the Impoſtor our perpetuall aduerſary had ſeduced from the ſeruice of their Maſter: Then I ſay, this man firſt of all other, againſt the cuſtom of his predeceſſors, abſolutely vſurped vpon the Papacy, without all conſent of the Emperor, before that time alwaies accuſtomed to be mediated in the Election of theſe Biſhops.
               And in future; to preuent the reſidue of the Biſhops and Abbots from ſeeking their confirmations at the Emperors hands,Formula decreti extat. C. ſi quis deinceps. he ſet forth a decree vnder pain of Excommunication; That hee had not onlie power in heauen to bind and to looſe, but alſo that he had plenitude of iuriſdiction in Earth, to take away, and to giue Empires, Kingdomes and Principalities. Then began he impudently to boaſt: to vſurpe vpon the temporall and Supreme iuriſdiction, and that by a law of his own coyning: to eſteeme of Kings and Emperors as tenants at will: to impriſon Caeſars Ambaſſadors oppoſing againſt his inſolencies, & finally leading them through

                  Rome in ignominious manner, to expell them the city.
               
                  Henrie, albeit he were infinitely perplexed with the war of Saxonie, yet knowing that this nouell and vnvſual pertinacie of the Biſhop, was not to be forgotten, calleth a Councell at Wormes; wherein, audience being giuen to the Ambaſſadors, which came from Rome, and Hildebrands diſloyall Letters being read; beſides the Saxons, all the German and French Biſhops, made a Decree; That ſithence Pope Hildebrand a fugitiue Monke firſt of all other incroched vpon the Papacie without the good liking or priuity of the Romane Emperor, conſtituted of God to be his Soueraigne Lord, and that, contrarie to the Custome of his Predeceſſors, contrarie to law, and contrarie to his oth of inſtalment: And moreouer had vſurped vpon both iuriſdictions, the temporall and Eccleſiaſticall, as the Decij and worſhippers of falſe Gods were accuſtomed to doe: That ipſo facto he was depoſed from his Biſhoprick; for ſheep were no longer to be intruſted to the keeping of ſuch a woluiſh Shepheard.
               One Rowland a Clerke of Parma, was diſpatched to Rome with letters containing the ſentence of the Councel: In whoſe Name he was commanded to interdict Gregorie from all Eccleſiaſticall Function; and moreouer to enioyn the Cardinals, that making choice of another for Biſhop, they ſhould preſent him to the Emperor.
               In like maner, Caeſar himſelfe dateth his Letters vnto Hildebrand, to the Clergy, and the Roman people: commanding according to the Iniunction of the Councell; That himſelfe ſhould returne to a priuate life; and That, they forſaking Hildebrand, according to their accuſtomed Priuiledges ſhould proceede to the

election of a New Paſtor.
               At the receit of this newes, Hildebrand became not ſo much lenified, as furiouſly exaſperated, and inſolently imboldned. For, whereas before he had Excommunicated but ſome certaine of the Emperors familiars, whoſe aduice he preſumed Caeſar to haue vſed in theſe his proceedings: now preſumeth hee by nouell preſident to Excommunicate Caeſar himſelfe in a helliſh conuenticle, againſt the order of Chriſtian piety, ratified by the ſacred Canons of Holy writ; Him, I ſay he preſcribeth,Vide formulam abrogationis apud Plat in. in vita Gregorij. 7. Be
                        •
                      no. depriueth of all kingly Authority, diſpoileth of his Kingdom, and abſolueth his Subiects from their oths of obedience.
               Behold, he was no ſooner riſen from the Seat wherin he ſat to Excommunicate Caeſar, but the Chaire being lately made of ſtrong and new timber, ſuddenly by the prouidence of God in moſt terrible manner was rent into a thouſand ſhatters: manifeſtly foreſhewing, That by that raſh and vnaduiſed Excommunication, this cruell Sciſmaticke ſhould proue the Author of a moſt fearefull diuiſion in the Church of God.
               And ſurely theſe were neither blind nor idle predictions. For the Princes and German Biſhops, taking notice of the Curſe, ſome vpon a vaine ſuperſtition, ſome in hope of bettering their eſtates, and others in remembrance of their ancient hatred againſt Henrie, at the next aſſembly of the States, threatning a Reuolt, vnleſſe he would ſuppliantly deſire forgiueneſſe of the Pope (now reſolued to come into Germanie) brought the controuerſie vnto ſo narrow a pinch, and his Maieſty into ſuch miſtruſts of deſpaire, with the diſpoiling him of his reall poſſesſion, That he was fain

to promiſe the Princes, that hee would goe vnto the Pope, and perſonally craue abſolution at his foot.
               Wherupon putting off his regall habiliments, with his wife and yong ſonne barefooted, and clothed in canuaſſe, being made a ſpectacle for Angells and men to admire at, in a moſt bitter winter, and a moſt dangerous kind of trauell, commeth to Canuſium where the Pope then reſided: There before the gates of the City faſting and ſutor-like from morning till euentide, he danceth attendance: Meane while Hildebrand within,Benno. Nauclerus generatione 36. 
                     Ʋrſpergenſis. Platina in loco ante citato. amongſt whores and ſhauelings laugheth him to ſcorne. Three daies he patiently indureth this lamentable affliction, deſiring admittance. He is denied. At three daies end inſtancing admittance with greater importunacie, It is anſwered; That his Holineſſe is not yet at leyſure to attend his ſuit. Henrie by patience making a vertue of neceſſity (In that he could not be admitted into the City) contenteth himſelf to abide in the Suburbs, but not without many incommodious greeuances. For the wether was ſharpe, and all places appeared hoary with froſt.
               At laſt, after his inceſſant three-daies petitioning, and deniall, at the inſtance of Maud the Counteſſe of Adelaus Earle of Sauoie, and the Abbot of Clunois, he is admitted vnto preſence.
               Vpon the fourth day in ſigne of vnfained penitency, he reſigned his Crowne and imperiall Enſignes, and maketh a proteſtation that hee were vnworthy to enioy the Title of an Emperor, if he ſhould againe commit the like offences againſt the Roman Sea, as formerly he had done.
               
                  
                  For all this, this inexorable Prelat would neither pardon nor abſolue him, vnleſſe he would put in good ſecuritie, that according vnto his Popiſh pleaſure he would expiate the offence in a Councell, and be forth comming at euerie day and place appointed, (there the Pope being Iudge) to anſwer vnto all accuſations without once plotting in his thoughts anie ſcruple of reuenge.
               
               2. Yea after his purgation, and reconciliation, either to retain, or forſake his kingdom, if the Pope thought it ſo fitting 3. Thirdlie, that before the Examination of his Cauſe, he ſhould not preſume to weare anie Kinglie habit, neither haue borne before him anie Imperiall enſignes, That hee ſhould not meddle in ſtate gouernment, nor exact anie oth of allegiance vpon his vaſſalls.
               
               Vpon promiſe of performance, and future obedience,The Pope will deale ſurely. the attonement is now at length confirmed aswell by Oth as Indenture, and Henrie abſolued.
               Now obſerue I beſeech you, the reſtleſſe humours of attainted conſciences. The Court of ſhauelings, deep polititians, men of profound reaches; and admirable well ſeen in the principles of Machiuell, and carefull aſwell to preuent future blowes, as to oppoſe againſt preſent perils, either reuoluing in their far reaching wits, or ſuſpecting in their ſeared conſciences, that Henrie beeing ſure ſeated in a peaceable eſtate, could not poſſibly diſgeſt ſo vilanous an indignity, nor the world allow of ſo baſe a tiranny; fall againe to their old plots, but a new-Counſell; viz. how they might vtterly diſpoſſeſſe Henrie of his Empire. Rodulph Duke of Sweuia, Henries brother in law, is preſented with a golden Crowne, thus inſcribed.

                     Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho:
And withall the Biſhops of Magunce and Colen are commanded, that (rebelling againſt Henrie) they ſhold ſet it vpon Rodulphs head, and asſiſt him therin to the vtmoſt of their forces. Was it for Loue, or Honor may the world diſpute, that the Pope became thus bountifull of an other mans patrimony, to beſtow it vpon Rodulph? Or doth any Hiſtory make mention that Rodulph was a more kinde Son to the Church, then Henrie? Beleeue me, the Pope did neither vpon any ſuch reſpects, it was far from his imagination. But this was the windlace of all: if Henrie muſt liue in peace, Henrie muſt ſeek reuenge: but if the Duke of Sweuia find him play on one ſide, Romandiola ſhall be ſecured on the other ſide. Let Rodulph or Henrie ſinke or ſwim, meane while res noſtrae tutiores redduntur, that is, the Court of Rome may ſecurely ſwagger; If Henrie haue the better, yet ſhall he be much the weaker: if Henrie haue the worſe, then all the care is taken, for Rodulph is infinitly beholding vnto vs. And be it as be may: nether party (being potent Princes) ſhall haue cauſe to laugh at their bargain; let time try the ſequell; and ſo it hapned. O the blind folly of ambition.
               For albeit that Rodulph was the Emperors ſworne liege-man, his brother in law by mariage, indowed with the Dukedom of Sweuia after his deceaſe, and honored with many other fauours: notwithſtanding being ſeduced by the faire and falſe proteſtations of the Biſhops, and borne out by his own greatneſſe and the ſuccours of Saxonie, he inuadeth the Empire, and rebelliouſly to his vtmoſt power moueth war againſt his Soueraigne maſter.
               
                  
                  Caeſar by the admoniſhment of the Biſhop of Argentine, ſeeing the danger ariſing from all parts, leuieth his people, affronteth Rodolph, and ſetteth all vpon the hazard of a battell. The iſſue whereof was this, That the Pope vpon miſtruſt of the worſt, commanded both parties to Peace, and that Henrie ſhould expect his ſentence at the Synode, which ſhortly hee would proclaime to be held in Germanie. Which limitation, when Henrie ſtomacked, vpon proteſtation that hee would ſuffer no Aſſembly to bee holden in Germanie, vnleſſe Rodolph were firſt remooued: The Pope (rather then hee would diſharten Rodolph by finall Peace) renueth the Excommunication, and ſendeth foorth his Mandates full ſtuffed with helliſh furie.The forme of the Curſe is extant in Platina. 
                  Henrie is nothing abaſhed, but the third time giueth the battell at Eliſtrum of Miſia, and there ouerthroweth his enemy. This came to paſſe in the yeere 1080. the Ides of October.
               
                  Vrſperg. fol. 238 doth witneſſe this conference betweene the King and the Biſhops.
                  Rodolph being grieuouſly wounded, and from the field conueied to Merſeburg, intreateth the Biſhops and the Leaders of his people to compeere before him. Where being aſſembled, Rodolph feeling death ſeazing vpon him, ſtretched forth his right hand and ſaid: My Lords, this is the hand with which I plighted my faith to my Lord Henrie. At your intreaties, thus, and thus many times hath it vnfortunately fought againſt him: Returne yee, and make good your firſt Othes to the King: I am to depart to my fathers.
               
               
                  See the iudgement of God.
                  Rodolph being vanquiſhed, and Germanie by his death reſonably well quieted, Henrie neither forgetting Hildebrands iniuries; neither hauing his ſpirits ſo peaceably affected, but that hee could call to remembrance,

how the Pope had twiſe Excommunicated him; how for three dayes ſpace being a moſt ſuppliant Petitioner in a very cold ſeaſon, he could attaine no reconciliation; As alſo, that cunningly hee had aſſiſted his enemie, euen the competitor of his Kingdome, proclaimeth a Synod of the Biſhops of Italy, Lombardy, and Germanie, to bee celebrated at Brixia a Citie of Norica.
               
               Where being aſſembled, and the Acts of Hildebrand examined, with one conſent they promulge this ſuffrage.
               
                  For that it is apparently knowne, that Hildebrand was not Elected of God,
                  Abbas Vrſperg. 
                  but moſt impudently by fraud and briberie, made his owne way to the Papall dignitie: And therein being ſeated, hath ſubuerted all the Orders of the Church, diſquieted the whole Chriſtian world; intended the death both of body and ſoule, to a moſt peaceable and Catholicke King; defended a periurd Prince, and amongſt the peaceable, ſowed ſeedes of diſcord, &c. Wee here Congregated by the Grace of God, and aſsisted by the Legats and letters of nineteene Biſhops, aſſembled againſt the foreſaid Hildebrand at Mognuce the eight day of Pentecoſt, doe canonically giue iudgement againſt the ſaid Hildebrand, That he is to bee depoſed and expelled, for vnaduiſedly Preaching of Sacriledges and factions, defending Periuries and Scandals; Abclieuer of Dreames and diuinations, a notorious Necromancer; a man poſſeſſed with an vncleane ſpirit; And therefore an Apoſtata from the true faith: And vnleſſe vpon the receite of this our iudgement, hee ſhall voluntarily reſigne the Seate, we doe finally Accurſe him.
               
               Theſe buſineſſes being thus diſpatched, and Germanie quieted, in the yeer 1081. the Emperour iournyeth

to Rome, and pitching his Campe before the Caſtle of Saint Peter, hee chargeth the Romanes with ſo many aſſaults, that they are glad to pray for Peace, and to open their Gates. The Biſhop with his followers retireth into the Baſtile of Adrian: wherein being beſieged, he worketh the Emperour more diſquiet by craft and ſubtiltie, then the Emperour could doe him, by Mine or Engine. For as Henrie accuſtomed frequently to make his Oriſons in Saint Maries in Mount Auentine, this Traitour ſuborned a certaine villaine, ſecretly to conuey vpon the Rafters of the Church, great and maſſiue ſtones; and ſo to diſpoſe them, that as the Emperour ſhould kneele at his Prayers, from aloft they ſhould fall vpon his head, and daſh out his braines.
               As this villanous Regicide, the Miniſter of Popiſh iniquitie, was haſtning his diſſiegne, and labouring to fit this maſsie ſtone to the execution of his Treaſon, the ſtone fell down and drew this villaine downe withall: So that bruiſing the Table whereon it fell, ſupported with ſtrong Treſſels, it reſted on the Pauement, and there by the iudgement of God, daſhed in pieces the carkiſe of this Trayterous workman. The Romanes vpon notice of the Treaſon, faſtning a corde to one of his legges, for three dayes ſpace dragged him along through the ſtreetes of the Citie.
               This failing, had the Pope ſo ſhallow a pate, as to carie about him but one ſtring to his bow? Or was he ſo honeſt a man, that rather then hee would ſpare the blood of Chriſtian people, hee would giue ouer his owne life, nay his Seate, for the ſaftie of many thouſands? Obſerue what followeth: To be ſure, that neither Germanie ſhould long breath in peace, now Rodolph
                  
was gone; nor the Emperour bee ſecured in Italy;Ab. Vrſperg. Helmoldus in his 30. cap. of the hiſt. of S
                        •
                     lad Krantz. and innumerable others. he turneth to the Art of diuerſion (a point of Warre well knowne amongſt Souldiers) and ſtirreth vp the Saxons in his abſence to create Harman Prince of Lucelburg in Lorain, Emperour at Iſleb. by Hercinia: Who likewiſe by the prouidence of GOD at the ſiege of a certaine Caſtle, was miſerably ſlaine by the fall of a ſtone caſt from the battailement of the Wall by the hand of a ſiely woman.
               Hee being gone, (the Romiſh Religion will ſtill be dealing, rather then looſe one iot of their reputes, if they cannot otherwiſe preuaile) this inhumane Tyrant thirdly ſtirred vp Ecbert Marques of Saxonie: and him alſo God predeſtinated to ſuffer condigne puniſhment for his Rebellion. For the fift yeere after, he was beſet in a Mill neere Brunſwicke by the Emperours Guard, and thete miſerably ſlaine.
               Once againe, Hildebrand flieth to his wits,I hope the Romaniſts of this age are not behind for ſhifts▪ &c. and perceiuing, that his ſtake in Germanie was cleane loſt; Himſelfe immured in a Baſtill, where he could not alwayes continue, and that he had ſmall reaſon to fall into the ſight of Caeſar, hee diſſembleth a parley, and during the conference Iudaſlike forſaking his companie, in diſguiſed habit flieth vnto Salerne amongſt the Normans.
               
               
                  Caeſar forthwith aſſembled a Senate of his Nobles and Biſhops, according to the cuſtome of his predeceſſors, giueth order for an Eccleſiaſticall Diet: Where Hildebrand, as a thiefe and a robber; a perfidious fugitiue, a forſaker of the fold; a Traytor to the flocke, a debalker of Chriſtian charitie, by the vniuerſall conſent of the Conuocation, is denounced and condemned.
               
               
                  In his place is promoted Guibert Archbiſhop of Rauenna, a louer of Peace and Concord; a man learned and religious: By the conſent of the Cleargie hee is Conſecrated Biſhop by the name of Clement the third, in the yeere of Chriſt 1084. This done, he Rein-ſtalleth Caeſar and his ſpouſe Bertha, and ſaluteth them Auguſti, with the vniuerſall applauſe of the people. As for Hildebrand, either through griefe, or guiltineſſe of conſcience, he died in exile (as the ſaying is) Ab aris & focis in the Towne of Salerne.
               
               But this firebrand of Warre and diſcord being extinguiſhed, the furie of the Prelates amongſt themſelues was neuer the neere allayed; howbeit, thereby, the world enioyed peace; and Germanie her priſtinate Maieſtie.
               For Vrban (after Victor the ſecond, a Biſhop but of a fewe dayes ſtanding) intruded vpon the Papacie at Gurſtung by the faction of Hildebrand, but eſpecially by the money of Matilda, and the Armes of the Normans. Him the Emperour with the greater part of his Nobilitie accuſed of Irreligion, and denounced him in the number of the wicked. This fellow, notwithſtanding that he had long wandered ſine lare, ſine grege, yet he ſo artificially finiſhed the webbe begun by Hildebrand,
                  Benno. that inſtead of Vrbanus, the world ſtiled him Turbanus, yea, hee went far beyond his Schoolemaſter Hildebrand in wit and villanie.
               
                  A
                        •
                     . Vrſperg, Aue i
                        •
                     inus. Naucler.For, being not able any way to wrong Henrie by ſecret inuaſion (Papiſts will doe nothing openly, or at leaſt without pretext) he commandeth the Canons of that moſt peſtilent knaue Hildebrand, to be confirmed and holden in force againſt him.
               
                  Then draweth he into Parricide Cunrade the ſonne of Henry, begotten on his firſt wife, by his fathers appointment Viceroy of Italy. Vpon him he beſtowed Matilda the wife of Roger the Norman, and by him expulſeth Clement the third, Inſtalled by the good liking and conſent of his father.
               But Vrban and Cunrade being both quickly diſpatched, Paſchal the ſecond loth to come behind his predeceſſors in Treacherie, and taking it for good Policie, to giue Caeſar no breathing time to prouide againſt tempeſts, by the example of Vrban, in a Synode at Rome reuiueth and ratifieth the Curſe of Gregorie againſt the Emperour. Buls are but words, and words are no weapons for Popes. Whereupon a quicker coraſiue muſt bee applied: The other Sonne of Henrie (named alſo Henrie) the Princes of Aquiſgrane muſt ſalute as Caeſar, notwithſtanding that already he had giuen his father his Oth of Loyaltie and true Leigeman.
               O Lord! where ſhall not a man finde a man for blood, if promotion, or money, or Mariage be offered for recompence; but eſpecially, if the man of blood may reſort vnto a Churchman, and receiue abſolution for ſo cruell and vnpardonable miſchiefes? Of ſuch perſons, and ſuch ſtratagems, behold in thoſe dayes the Popes made their eſpeciall vſes: they may be as bold in theſe times and in theſe points to pleade vniuerſalitie and antiquitie as they did and doe for their Maſſe, and the reſidue of their trumperie. For yong Henrie is vp in parricidiall Rebellion: Papa impellit, ſaith the Hiſtorie: and being borne out by the Armes of the Saxons, ſo caried the Warre, that this moſt valorous Emperour, and ſtout reuenger of the impeached Maieſtie

of the Empire, being harried with continuall conflicts, and weary of his life through the perpetuall burden of Popiſh vexations, as he trauailed towards the Dyet of Mogunce,
                  Krantzius li. 5. c. 22. Vrſperg. 362. Helmold. in the annals of Sclauony. li. 1. ca. 32.
                   by treaſon vpon the high way, and that againſt a publique oth of ſafe conduct, was taken by his Sonne Henrie: then being degraded moſt vnwillingly of all imperiall enſignes, as alſo of his Crowne by the Biſhops of Mogunce, Colen and Wormes; hee was committed to priſon in the towne of Leyge: where pining to death through griefe, he finiſhed his troubleſome daies in this moſt lamentable maner.
               Notwithſtanding ſuch was the irreconcilable rancor of theſe charity-preaching fathers, that they not contented with theſe their moſt cruell turmoiles practiſed againſt his life; Hyena-like, with as barbarous beſtiality they alſo preyed vpon his liueleſſe carkaſſe. For the body being already buried in the monaſtery of Leyge,
                  See more hereof D. Barlo 240. at full. they inforced the Biſhop of the place to dig it vp againe, and without either honor to ſo great a perſonage, or reuerence to holy ſepulture, they commanded it to bee caſt amongſt other carcaſes into a prophane place. The reaſon was grounded vpon one of their owne Canons: Quibus viris eccleſia non communicat, illis etiam nec mortuis communicare poſsit. Repentance etiam in nouiſsima hora, and the reward of him that came into the vineyard at the cloze of the day, equalized to his, that began to worke in the dawning, is of no force with them. It is ſcripture; and ſcripture, you know, is not ſufficient for ſaluation. I quake in writing. Councels may controll It; the Church, The Councels; and who is the Church? the Pope; For otherwiſe it were folly to broche ſo many poſitions, as it doth,

againſt law, conſcience and ſound diuinity, if it lay not in their fulneſſe of power to doe and vndoe, ſay and vnſay.
               To conclude, at laſt,See Krantz. lib. 5. Vrſperg. fo. 264 H. Mutius ſeuenteenth of his Cronicles. the body is conueyed in a coffin of ſtone from Leyge to Spire, and there alſo for fiue yeeres ſpace, it remained without the duties of Chriſtian buriall.
            
            
               
                  ❧Henrie the fift.
               
                  NOw let vs ſee, if Henrie the fift, ſeduced by the witchcraft of the falſe Pope, to vſurpe vpon the Empire of his father, experimented any other allowance of loue and fidelity from the Biſhops, then did his anceſtor.
               Comming vnto Rome to be crowned with the imperiall Dyadem, he thought it much to concerne his honor, to demand reſtitution of his right in the confirmation of Biſhops, Abbots and Prelates. The Pope forgetfull of all former fauours, doth ſtoutly deny the motion. From requeſt they fall to blowes, inſomuch that the Pope with certaine of his ſeruants was taken priſoner, and conueied to Mount Soracte, now called Mount Silueſter.
               
               
                  Paſchal ſeeing no remedy,C. Adrian. c. in ſynodo 63. diſtinct. c inter vos. ſent vnto the City for Notaries, and at length confirmeth and reuiueth to the vſe of the Empire, the auncient prerogatiues claymed by the EMPEROVRS in the Creation

and Inueſtiture of Popes and Biſhops: and in requitall is honoured againe by the Emperour, with many rich preſents.
               But ſuch was the iuſt iudgement of God towards this Henrie; that as he obſerued not faith towards his father, no more did others keep towards him. For euen thoſe men who for his ſake had forſaken his father, riſe now in rebellion againſt the Son. For preſently vpon his returne in the yeere 1116. into Germanie, the Pope congregateth a full Councell of his owne creatures, and there bewailing his ſinne,A Pretext for Periurie. which he had committed in ſurrendring his priuileges; after long and ſolemne debating of the caſe, vndoeth all he had done before; confirmeth the Decrees of Gregorie the ſeuenth; and vpon the cuſtome lately taken vp, Excommunicateth Henrie.
               
               Hereupon many the Princes of Germanie, and eſpecially the Biſhop of Mogunce fall into rebellion. Caeſar ſendeth vnto the Pope, to treat a peace, but by his death that buſineſſe was determined.
               After his deceaſe the Cardinalls create Gelaſius Pope, neither calling Caeſar to Councell, nor once acquainting him with their determinations. Whereat Caeſar being agreeued, flyeth to Rome, & conſecrateth Mauritius Archbiſhop of Brachar for Pope.
               
                  Gelaſius being depoſed, and Maurice confirmed, they both conſpire with ioynt conſent to curſe the Emperor in his retrait from Rome, diſperſing their Miniſters through Germanie after the precedents of their predeceſſors to incite the Subiects of the Emperor to rebellion. Henrie fearing the ſequell, haſtneth into Germany.
               
               
                  Gelaſius being dead, Calixtus the ſecond being his

ſucceſſor, warreth vpon the Antipope, whom as wee told you the Emperour had conſecrated. Henrie perceiuing the Pope, vnderborne by the Armes of the Normans, to bee too ſtrong for him, and that he began to meate the ſame meaſure towards him, as his predeceſſors had towards his father: In the yeere 1122. by the ſpeciall mediation of the Apoſtolicke Legat Lampert, afterward Pope, and called Honorius, he became ſo deuote a Conuert to Papacie, that hee reſigned his whole right of Inueſtiture concerning the Ring and the Staffe; granted a free Election and Conſecration to be thenceforth vſed in all Churches; and couenanted to reſtore, or at leaſt, to cauſe to be reſtored all Regalities, formerly renounced, or at leaſt as many as remained in his diſpoſe.
               The Pope againe couenanted, that the Election of Biſhops and Abbots ſhould be done in the Emperors preſence, without violence: ſo farre foorth that the Elect ſhould receiue his Regalities, by the Scepter from the Emperour. This Concord bore date at Wormes, Nono Cal. Octob. Anno Dom. M.C.XXII.
               
               But, albeit this Henrie vtterly diſcouraged with the Thunder-bolts of curſes, gaue way to all Popiſh vſurpations, and to the euerlaſting ſtaine and impoueriſhment of the Germane Empire, thruſt his necke vnder the yoke of the Romiſh tyrannie, yet, in regard of new tumults and rebellions practiſed in Belgia and the higher Germanie, he could not liue out the remainder of his daies in affected peace. For appeazement wherof, as he trauelled towards Vtrick, he fell ſicke, and died without iſſue. This accident, and not iniuſtly, men argued, to haue proceeded from the iudgement of God,

for that contrary to his commandement, he had behaued himſelfe ſo vngraciouſly towards a father, that had ſo well deſerued of him his ſonne.
            
            
               
                  ❧Lotharius Saxo.
               
                  Hee raigned in the yeere 1125. about the fiue and twentie yeere of Henry the firſt.
               
               
                  
                     HENRIE being gone, and Germanie ſtill reeking in blood and ciuill war: The greateſt care that the Biſhops tooke, was to prouide, that the people ſhould not reunite their forces, and take time to breath from theſe inhumane and vnnaturall murders. Whereupon after the death of Henrie, when as Cunrade Duke of Sweuia, Henrie the fift ſiſters ſonne, laied claime to the Empire; againſt him by the cunning of Albert Archbiſhop of Mogunce, they ſet vp Lotharius Duke of Saxonie, the man in truth whoſe infidelity they had vſed in the miſcarriage of Henrie the fifth.
               
                  Cunrade is now in march, and hauing ouertopped mount Septim. is honorably receiued of the Millanois and crowned by the Archbiſhop Anſelme at Modoecia, the chiefe Sea of the Kingdome of Italie. Honorius, in fauour of Lotharius, and in deſpight of the Houſe of Henrie (which he thirſted vtterly to extinguiſh) depoſeth Anſelme,
                  Otho friſing. li. 7. ca. 17. Nauclerus gen. 38.
                   and by the terror of his Curſes inforceth Cunrade to poſt out of Italie: Who finally in deſpaire of the Germane aide by reaſon of their factions and

diſſenſions, vtterly giueth ouer his further hopes of inioying the Empire, and by the mediation of S. Bernard of Clareual, falleth to make his peace with his corriuall Lotharius.
               
               
                  Lotharius being now ſole and abſolute Lord of the Empire, according to his Saxoniſh ſimplicity, honouring the Papall Sea with more then common obſeruancie, ceaſeth not to deſerue well thereof by all the offices of loue and duty, which an obedient ſonne to the Church could poſſibly imagine to performe. Innocentius the ſecond, the ſucceſſor of Honorius, expulſed by Anacletus Antipope and Roger Duke of Apulia, flying vnto him for ſuccour, to his infinit charge he reſtored to his Sea at Barionea.
               But beleeue me, neither theſe kind offices,Nauel. gen. praeallegata, ſaith that this was done at Leyden, before his iourny into Jtaly. nor any worldly reſpects, were of ability either to fruſtrate or to mollifie the Popiſh auarice: for when the Pope had declared Lotharius Emperor, he made ſhew as if he would againe ſeeke reſtitution of the auncient rites, which the Empire claimed in the election of Biſhops and Abbots: But the rauenous Pope not only refuſed to vnlooſen his talents vpon what he had already ſeiſed,Otho Friſing. and Naucler. in the fore alleged places. but alſo re-attaching whatſoeuer Lotharius himſelf either by the perſwaſion of Bernard, or in feare of further ſedition, had voluntarily offered to the Romiſh ſea, he laboured by all other meanes to adde more to the former, through his immeſurable avarice.
               For when Lotharius hauing expulſed Roger the Apulean; would haue beſtowed the Dutchy vpon Earle Reignold the generall of his armie; the Biſhop impleded him, as concerning the right of donation, with ſo vehement a contention, that neither being minded to

yeeld to other, the controuerſie at laſt was faine to be thus determined: viz. That both parties ſhould lay their hands vpon the Staffe of the Feodarie enſigne, then to be deliuered to the new Duke of Apulia: Thereby ſignifying that both of them had equall intereſt in the tranſportation of that Dukedome.
               
               So that, the more humility accompanied with ſweet behauiour and moderation, that this all-praiſe-worthy Emperor ſhewed towards the Papacie: The more the waywardneſſe and malice of the Romaniſts began to ſhew it ſelfe, and that without feare or modeſty. For whereas this Emperor in receiuing the Diademe had caſt himſelfe at the Popes feete, the Clergie, to vſe the precedent to the debaſement of ſucceeding Emperors; and to deliuer it as a trophee to poſterity, as ſoon as his backe was turned, ſet vp in the Lateran pallace his protraiture, with this inſcription.

                     Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores:
                     Poſt homo fit Papae, ſumit quo dante Coronam.
                  
                  
                     The King attends before the gates: and ſweares the City-rites to keepe:
                     From Romes great Paſtor takes his Crowne, and vowes to hold in vaſſalage.
                  
What was this, but a bewraying firſt of their frowardneſſe, manifeſted in deſpiſing the Maieſty of ſo high a calling; and ſecondly of their pride, in that forſooth, they would ſeem either to ouertop, or obſcure, the victorious geſts of him, who to his immortall commendation had ſubiected vnder tribute, the Duke of Polonia,
                  Cuſp. in the life of Lotharius of Saxonie. the Pomeranes and the Ruſsies: who I ſay, to the no ſmall honor of the Maieſty Imperiall; had inforced the King of Denmarke to beare the ſword at his Coronation;

had ſubiugated the ſtates of Cremona, and Papia,
                  Naucl. Gen. 38.
                   and brought the vanquiſhed Bononians and Piemontois into the forme of a prouince: and finally with the conqueſt of Apulia, had brought vnder obedience many moſt noble Cities in that Dutchy. Now is he vanquiſhed, and acknowledged the Popes bondſlaue. For what other ſignification doth the Popes (Creature) import, but to be his vaſſall or ſeruant?Hominem fieri. Such are theſe admirable ſeruants of ſeruants, whom euen Emperors themſelues are glad to acknowledge and reſpect as Lords and Maſters.
            
            
               
                  ❧Conradus tertius.
               
                  He raigned in the yeere of Chriſt 1138. about the third yeere of King Steuen.
                  
               
               
                  
                     LOtharius, in his ſecond retrait out of Italie, being departed this world not farre from Trent, Conrade the ſame Prince (whom as before we told you) the malice of Honorius had fruſtrated of the Empire, and baniſhed Italie, now ſucceedeth his dead predeceſſor. But, albeit (after the deceaſe of Lotharius) the Princes of the Empire, and that in the preſence of Theodoret the Popes legate,Cuſpin. in the life of Conrade. and with his very good liking, did elect him King of Romans, yet by no meanes could the Popes aſſent be gotten to perfect the Election.
               For whereas hee had conferred to Roger Duke of Apulia, that Dukedome, with the titulary dignity of a Kingdome, in liew of ranſome for himſelfe, and his

Cardinalls taken in battell; and Conrade in preiudice of the Empire would neither ratifie, nor hearken vnto ſo vnreaſonable a motion: Nocentius complotting with Roger,
                  Naucler out of Antoninus and Godfridus Gen. 38.
                   incited Guelfo Duke of Bauaria, to rebell againſt Conrade, for that hee could not obtaine at his hands the graunte of his brothers Dutchie: Herewith, the Emperour had ſo much to doe to defend his owne, that hee quite forgot to thinke vpon the recouery of Sicil and Apulia. Behold here a preſident of Papall fidelity,Nauc. gen. 38. & 32.
                   if his auarice bee not ſupplied by loſſe to the State.
               About this time theſe fatall factions of the Guelfes and Gibellines (whereof others haue diſcourſed) began in Germanie.
               
                  
                     Bartolus in a peculiar book of the Guelphs and Gihellines. Panorm. in c. Lucanis & Piſanis de reſt. ſpol.
                     Cuſpin. in the life of Fred. the ſecond.
                  For as Nauclerus reporteth out of Hermanus, whilſt the battell was fighting betweene Conrade and Guelfo, thoſe of the Kings party tooke for their word or Motto, Hie Wiebling, which is as much to ſay, The King: as being nobly diſcended from a village of that appellation: Thoſe which followed Guelfo, reclaimed, Hie welf. Where after it came to paſſe, that thoſe two denomidations of Guelfes and Gibellines, became the originall of all the factions in Italy. Which falling out happely for Gregorie the ninth to make vſe of, from thenceforth, he gaue them ſuch large entertainment, that no City, towne nor people were cleere from the infection of ſo ſpreading a contagion. For vpon no other ground, ſaue the vſe of theſe names, euen vntill our daies with more then admirable fury, City bandied againſt City, Prouince againſt Prouince, yea & in a City one part of the people confronted another.
               Not only the factious people continued this diſſenſion

amongſt themſelues: but the Biſhops alſo in this quarrell proſecuted one another to the vtmoſt of their furie.
               Amongſt others, that Boniface the eight,Plati. in the life of Bonef. the eight. Naucle. gen. 44.
                   then whom the Romane Sea neuer indured a more fell monſter, perſecuted from place to place all thoſe whome hee knew to bee of the Gibelline faction, ranſacking and ſpoiling all places whereunto they made any repaire of abiding. Whereupon ſome finding no ſafety in Cities, ſetled their abodes in woods and forreſts: manie of the Gentrie, like wilde beaſtes inhabited the Sea coaſtes, and at laſt left Italie to bee companions with pirates. For they aſſured themſelues, that the Pirates could not haue vſed them worſe, then this Malefacius Nero would haue done, if he had once caught them in his clutches.
               As for example: When hee heard that certaine of the contrarye faction were fledde to GENOA, hee poſted after them, with full determination by deſtroying them all, to haue razed their verie name from the memorie of mankinde through the whole world. Heere likewiſe it happened vpon Aſhwedneſdaie, as hee was caſting Aſhes according to Cuſtome amongſt the people: the Archbiſhop of the City kneeling vpon his Maribones with his head vncouered to receiue the Aſhes; the Pope by chaunce vnderſtanding that hee was a Gibelline; where his Holineſſe ſhould haue ſaide, Remember Man that thou art but Aſhes, and into Aſhes thou ſhalt returne againe: Not ſo (quoth the Pope) Remember Man that thou art a Gibelline, and with the Gibellines thou muſt bee turned to duſt:

and therewithall in a moſt furious manner, without once regarding the holineſſe of the place, the preſence of the people, or the regard of Religion, of ſet purpoſe (miſſing his head) he caſt great quantities thereof into his eyes: Afterward he depriued him, and then againe reſtored him.
               At laſt by Gods iudgement it came to paſſe, that thoſe Gentlemen, who (as we told you) left Italy with the Pirats, returned againe, and gathering together ſome companies of ſuch as here & there lay lurking in feare of Maleface, breaking open the gates of the place where he lay, miſtruſting no ſuch aduerſe aduenture, they tooke him, and brought him priſoner to Rome: where in the ſpace of fiue and thirtie dayes, what for griefe and greatneſſe of ſtomacke, he breathed out his loathſome ſoule, ouer-laden with innumerable miſchiefes.
            
            
               
                  ❧Fredericke Barbaroſſa.
               
                  He raigned Anno Chriſt. 1152. about the ſeuenteenth yeare of King Steuen.
                  
               
               
                  
                     FRederick, for his redde Beard, commonly termed Barbaroſſa, the ſonne of Frederick Duke of Sweuia, the brother of Conrade, a Prince of excellent partes both for body and minde, ſucceeded this Conrade, a Prince alſo no whit inferiour to his ſucceſſor for his honourable carriage in peace and warre.
               To ſpeake little of his Nobility, it is recorded, that

the intire right of the moſt noble Families of the German Common-wealth, viz. of the Henries of Gweiblingen and Gwelforum of Altorff, deſcended vpon him.
               Howſoeuer; by the conſent of all writers, hee was reputed to bee of an excellent capacitie, prouident in Councell, of a good memorie, eloquent, conſtant and valiant, a good Souldier, and well practiſed in Armes; To the humble, courteous; To the peaceable, milde. Amongſt honeſt men, vertuous; Amongſt proude perſons, imcompatible. Very bountifull, and in ſcience of many humane ornaments, not immatcheable to any. In regard of which his manifold vertues, by the ſuffrage of the whole Nobilitie, he is declared Emperour, not without aſſured expectation, that through his worthineſſe, Peace ſhould be maintained through Germanie, the diſgraced forces of the Empire reſtored, and Italy now growne inſolent through continuall rebellion, brought into order and requiſite acknowledgment.
               The Romiſh contentions with the Germane Emperours, by vile and nouell preſcription, ſeemed now ſo poſſeſſionated, that the Biſhops, by whoſe ſuffrage the Emperours were to be confirmed, began to make ſmall or no account of the Imperiall Maieſtie, which the prepoſterous ambition, and immatcheable pride of the Romaniſts, the Germane Princes (and who can blame them) taking to heart, could hardly diſgeſt: but by how much this noble Heros in the greatneſſe of his mind, meditated to abate the inſufferable pride of this pernicious rable: by ſo much the more found hee all things to oppoſe againſt him with more and more diſaduantage, to the impeachment of all his proiects.
               
                  Which his noble exploits albeit they are not vnknowne to all men; neither is it any part of my minde, nor the proiect of this pamphlet to ſet them downe punctually (for ſo they would require an Ilias) yet by patience I will glance briefly at ſome of them, which in my iudgement ſhall ſufficiently informe you, what was the obſeruancie, and what the fidelity of the Biſhops of theſe times, towards the ſacred maieſtie of this moſt worthy Emperour.
               Obſerue therefore, that the third yeare after his election, this Frederic hauing ſet Germanie in order, and eſpecially through infinite paines taking procured a firme peace betweene Henry the younger, and Henry,
                  Nauel, vbiſupra. Raaouicus li. 3.
                   Dukes of Saxonie and Austrich, with a populous armie marcheth into Lombardy, now by the long abſence of the Emperours, growne confident in ability of reſiſtance, by proiecting many infallible ſignes of inſolencie and rebellion. By the way, he deſtroyeth the camp of the Millanois, Roſatum, Gailarda, Treca and Gaira, and ſetteth the citie of Ast on fire: Derthona moſt ſtrongly fortified by art and nature, hee taketh by force: and from thence remouing his troops through Romania and Tuſcanie, hee paſſeth as farre as Sutrium.
               
               In theſe times the Romane ſea ſtood incumbred with moſt dangerous contentions. William King of Sicil, who ſucceeded Roger (the ſame that we ſpake of in the life of Conrade) had taken from Hadrian the fourth, by birth an Engliſh man, the ſuburbs of Beneuent, Ceperanùm and Bacùm in Campania.
               
               Moreouer, the Romanes by the inſtigation of Arnold of Brixia, redemanding their loſt liberties in chuſing

their ſenate for the gouernment of their Citie, maintained the contention ſo farre forth againſt Hadrian, that as, after his election, hee made his progreſſe towards the Lateran to be conſecrated, the people meeting the Cardinal of Saint Pudentiana in the via ſancta taking his way towards the Court, twice wounded him.
               At this outrage Pope Hadrian grew out of all patience, accurſeth the King, releaſeth his ſubiects of their oath of allegiance, & the eaſier to draw them into rebellion, leaueth them at libertie.
               The Romans ſped no better, vntill vpon alteration of their humours, they baniſhed Arnold out of the Citie, and renouncing their Conſular prerogatiues, diueſted the abſolute gouernment of the place vpon the diſcretion of his Holineſſe.
               Who now hearing that Frederic was vpon his way towards Rome, the Pope with his Cardinals, neither for loue nor in honour, but to mediate reuenge againſt the Romans and Roger, goe forth to ſalute him.Funcius li. 10. Chro. Barnus de vitis Pontif. 
                  Frederic reioyſing at the approach of his Holineſſe, receaueth him with wonderfull deuotion and maieſtie; holdeth his left ſtirrope as hee alighteth from horſe-back, & ſo conducteth him to the Imperial pauilion. Could more reuerence be deuiſed to be done by an Emperor to a Pope? when Chriſt came to Ieruſalem vpon Palme Sonday, did Herod or Pilat ſo obſerue him? or did Nere ſo ſalute Peter at his firſt comming to Rome?
               
               Well, theſe ſo great perſonages being arriued at the emperiall pauilion;Helmold. in the Cro. of Sclauony ca. 81.
                   The Biſhop of Bamberg in the name of the Emperor in the exordiū of his oration, began to diſcourſe, with what earneſtnes of affection his

Maieſtie had deſired this long expected conference with his Holineſſe. And God be bleſſed (quoth he) that he now is become master of his deſires. Humbly and ſubmiſsiuely he requesteth your Holineſſe, that according to the accustomed maner, by the Inauguration of the Imperiall diadem, you would declare him chiefe Prince and defender of the Catholique Common-weale. And herewithall the Biſhop concludeth honeſtly, and elegantly, with the reaſons and cauſes, which could not but inable him moſt worthy of ſo reaſonable, ſo iuſt, and ſo Chriſtian-like a confirmation.
               The Biſhop hauing ended his Oration, the Pope commendeth the ſpeach; but withall replieth; That the contents thereof, and the matter in hand were of farre different arguments. For albeit (quoth hee) that the matter whereof I meane to ſpeake of, be triuial & paſſable; yet can it not be denied, but that there is cauſe of feare, that hee, who becommeth negligent in ſmall matters, will proue more negligent in greater.
               
               At this, the company rowſing their attentions, and wondring what offence his Holineſſe ſhould intimate; he goeth on; ſaying, As I alighted from my horſe, he held the left ſtirrope of my Saddle: and whether he did it in mockage of vs, or vpon ſome other like fantaſie, wee can not gueſſe, for ſurely if he meant to haue honoured vs, he knew that the right ſtirrope, and that with the right hand, ought to haue beene holden.
               
               
                  Caeſar being nothing moued with this baſe prattle of the Biſhop, ſmiled and replied; That he had not been brought vp to hold a ſtirrope: you (most Holy father, quoth he) are the first vnto whom we haue vouchſafed this office: And by and by after his oriſons, forgetting his patience;

                  I would know (ſaith he) whether this office be to be done of dutie, or of good-will. If of good-will, who would finde fault at an eſcape or ouerſight? If of dutie, then wee thinke amongst friends there is ſmall difference, on which ſide the partie that meaneth to honour his friend, approacheth. Thus bandying a few bitter words, they brake company, but not without ſtomaking.
               But the Emperour being a moſt prudent Prince, diſſembling what he had heard, and ſeene to proceede from the helliſh heart of this proud prelate, the next day following re-inuiteth the Biſhop to a ſecond conference. The Biſhop approcheth, the Emperour maketh ſpeed to meet him; and by his former ouerſight, being now become a better Prentize in his occupation, layeth hold on the right ſtirrope, and ſo leadeth his Holineſſe into his pauilion.
               Being ſet, thus Hadrian thundereth:Barnus in vita. Hadriani, ex Johan. de Cremona. 
                  Thine auncestors (ſaith he) Princes of the auncient world, who made their holy repaire vnto this ſea to receiue the crown at our hands, were accustomed to manifest their loues towards vs, by ſome notable emolument bestowed vpon S. Peters chaire; thinking it their duties to preuent vs, that ſo they might call the world to witneſſe, that they obtained our benediction and their inauguration with an eminent gratuitie. So Charles, after he had tamed the Lombards: So Otho, after he had ſubdued the Beringary; And ſo Lotharius, after he had repreſſed the Normanes, merited the Imperiall diadem.
               In like manner, Let your Serenity, reſtore vnto vs and the Church, Apulia an appendancie of the Romiſh ſea, now arrogated by the Normanes, and then ſhall you, with our very good will, obtaine as much as appertaineth vnto our loues to performe.
               
                  Vpon the reading of this Hiſtorie, can any man call this Prelat ſervum ſeruorum, who aſhamed not to exact from ſo great an Emperour, his Lord and Maſter, as from a baſe and mercinarie ſouldier, the laborious toiles, and the extreame expence of warfare gratis? Are conqueſts of Kingdomes, ſurrendring of Prouinces, and ſuch like paſſages (let any man tell me) thoſe ſpiritualia, whereof our moderne Papiſts doe hold the Pope capable?
               When the Nobility ſaw no remedie, but Hadrians hand was as hard as Pharaos heart, ſo that it were folly to expect a Coronation, vntil at their proper coſts and charges they had reſtored to the Apoſtaticall ſea, Apulia (in truth an appendancie of the Imperiall right) from William King of Sicil; they thought it fitteſt to content his holineſſe with this ouerture; That ſithence their preſent forces were wasted through continuall labour and indefatigable iourneyes, that Caeſar hauing leuied a new armie in Germanie, would returne, and accompliſh his expectation. The Biſhop flaming what with indignation againſt William, & almoſt halfe dead to heare, that againſt his will hee muſt volens nolens giue him time of breathing and re-inforcement, ſhewing a countenance as if he liked well of their excuſes, allowed thereof, and ſo diſmiſſed them with promiſe that hee would ſet the crowne vpon Fredericks head.
               
                  Friſing. li. 2. cap. 21.
                  Theſe buſineſſes thus diſpatched; the Emperour with the Biſhop departeth from Sutrium, and iournieth towards Rome. Mid way certaine Romane Orators, as full ſwolne with pride, as their Maſter with diſdaine, accourt him with this rude welcom: For their theame they begin to extoll, euen aboue the skies, the antiquitie of

their Commonwealth: At concluſion they fall in glorious termes to intimate, That of mere good will the Roman people had called Frederick out of Germany ouer the Alps, firſt to create him a citizen, and afterwards a Prince of Rome: but with this per-cloſſe; That the Romans ſtood ready to receiue him; vpon condition; That hee ſhould confirme the fundamental lawes of the City:
                  If the Pope can not haue Apulia preſently, he muſt haue gold without excuſe. 
                  That hee ſhould beſtow vpon the Romans who were to bid God ſaue him, in the Capitol, fiue thouſand pound of gold: That he ſhold defend the commonwealth from iniuries, euen to the hazard of his own life: And finally, that he ſhould confirme all theſe capitulations with an oth, and thereto ſet his hand.
               
               
                  Fredericke beeing beyond meane inraged at theſe their mad and arrogant motions, roundly taketh them vp for their follies in a moſt pithy oration: and telleth them, That the Empire deſcended vpon him, not by any the leaſt well-wiſh of the Romanes, but by the meer vertue of the Germanes. And perceiuing their knauery, that vnder pretext of theſe demands, they meant to gull him of mony; he told them in plaine termes: That he came not into Italie, to bring it in, but to carrie it out. With which anſwer when theſe impudent ſhauelings were not ſatiſfied, but ſtill vrged the Articles, his Maieſty diſgracefully commanded them to depart.
               And perceiuing that their comming vnto him was but to put ſom trick vpō him, he cauſed his men of war to fortifie the Church of S. Peter and the baſtile of Leo. The day following he entred Rome, the people following him with great applauſe and being honorably accompanied, was crowned and bleſſed. 4. Calend. Iulij. in the fourth yere of his raigne.
               The Emperor being about his Coronation in the

Church of S. Peter, the Romanes ſtomacking the buſineſſe, and betaking them to their armes, kept the gates of the City ſhut, vnder colour, that the Emperour ſhould bring in no forces to the preiudice of the Citie. And perceiuing that Fredericks troopes had pitched their tents in the Neronean medowes, through the gate of Hadrian they breake out into the Vatican, to preuent Caeſars ſouldiers from entring thereinto.
               
                  Caeſars ſouldiers made ſtrong reſiſtance, and driuing the inraged people from the Vatican into the City, they ſlew about one thouſand, and tooke ſixty priſoners: whom, the ceremonies being ended, at requeſt of the Pope, the Emperor diſmiſſed in ſafety, and prouided for his returne into Germanie.
               
               But before his departure, it is reported, that ſuch a like buſineſſe happened betweene him and the Pope, which I thinke not fit here to be pretermitted.
               
                  Innocent the ſecond, he whom a little before Lotharius had reſtored vnto the Papacie, had cauſed to be painted in a Table, the Pope (as it were) ſitting in his chaire, and the Emperor with his hands held vp together, receiuing the Imperiall Diadem: where vnder were written the foreſaid two verſes, Rex venit ante fores &c.
                  Cronicon Herſaugienſe in vita Hartuigi abbatis. Radenious li 3. num. 3. & 10.
                   When this picture with the inſcription, was ſhewed vnto his Maieſty, it did greatly diſpleaſe him, and caſting foorth ſome obiurgatorie word, he inſtanced the Pope to take it away: which hee promiſed to doe, leaſt ſo friuolous a ſpectacle might giue matter of diſcontent to many worthy perſonages then reſiding in the City.
               
                  Frederick is departed: and Emanuel Emperour of Conſtantinople vnderſtanding with what deſire of reuenge

the Popes ſtomack burned againſt William King of Apulia, by Palcologus his Orator and Embaſſador, he offereth vnto the Pope his voluntary ſeruice; and withall, to expulſe William out of Italie; vpon condition, If the buſineſſe tooke expected iſſue, that then, according to the treaty; the Grecian ſhould inioy three maritime cities in Apulia. Doubt not, I beſeech you, but that he who had already depriued William of Apulia, for contemning ſuch religious wares, as are Popiſh Bulls and Curſes, did not ſtraine much curteſie to accept of the Articles. Whereof William taking notice, and withall ſomewhat fearefull, by his Embaſſadours moueth his holineſſe to hearken vnto peace; promiſing not only to reſtore vnto the Church, whatſoeuer he had taken away, but alſo that he would adde ſomewhat of his owne thereto: Moreouer, that hee would thencefoorth containe the Romans, rebells to the Church, in their due obedience.
               Theſe were honourable conditions, but that the Pope ſhould not accept therof, the Cardinalls diſſwaded him, like true men of armes, hoping to reape more crownes by war, then by peace. Whereupon, warre is proclaimed againſt William. Hee leuieth an army throughout Sicily, landeth in Apulia, waſteth the country by ſword and fire, and finally routeth Emanuel, who had pitched his Tents not far from Brunduſium vnto Beneuent, where at that time the Pope with his Cardinalls reſided, he gaue ſuch ſharpe aſſaults, that in deſpaire of their liues, he inforced them to ſue for peace.
               
                  William accordeth, and is receiued into fauour, and proclaimed king of both kingdoms, on this ſide and beyond Pharum; but vpon oath, that from thenceforth

hee would neuer againe infeſt the territories of the Church.
               Thus, as you heare, matters being ignominiouſly compounded, the Pope riding in viſitation through the territories of the Casſinates, Marſi, Reatini, Narnienſes and Tudertini, at laſt ariueth at Ouieta; and there is giuen to vnderſtand, that Rome is in combuſtion, the Conſuls doing their vtmoſt to reſtore the City to it former liberty.
               Hereupon groundeth He his deadly hatred againſt Frederick, moſt greeuouſly complaining, that being in diſtreſſe between the ſwords of the Romans and William, that contrary vnto his ſuperabundant promiſes, againſt all right, he had forſaken him; yea, that he was now ſo incircled with perils, that he could not liue in ſecurity at Rome: As if the Emperor were a veſſell eſpecially choſen rather to patronize the Popes wilfull errors and ouerſights, then to defend the innocency of the Chriſtian flock committed vnto his tutelage.
               But Fredericke taking in euill part many the Popes actions, but eſpecially the alienation of Apulia, being an appendancy of the imperiall dignity, without his conſent or knowledge: As alſo calling to remembrance, That the Pope had wreſted from the late Emperors the right of Inueſtiture of Prelates:
                  Nauel. Gen. 39.
                   
                  That by his miniſters hee had impoueriſhed the ſubiects of the Empire, and by their ſubtill diſperſions of treaſonable practiſes, had done what in them lay, to raiſe ſedition throughout the Empire: Vpon theſe grounds, I ſay, the Emperours Maieſty now thought it high time to put remedy vnto theſe violent intruſions vpon the regalties of the Empire.
               Hereupon hee exacteth an oth of fidelity of all the

Biſhops of Germany; The Popes Legats (ſuch as were not called in by his good pleaſure) he commandeth to depart the Teutonick kingdom: prohihiteth his people either to appeale or trauaile to the Romiſh Court and in his mandats cauſeth his name to be inſerted before the Popes.
               Vpon the proclaiming of this Inhibition, it happened, that a certaine Biſhop in his way from Rome,Radeuicus li. 3. ca. 9.10.
                   (whether as a contemner of the Emperors edict, or vpon any other cauſe, I know not) was taken priſoner, and committed to ward.
               Now hath the Pope found an occaſion by the taking of this Biſhop, to fulminate his long-conceiued diſpleaſure againſt the Emperor, and by a proud Embaſſie, ſeemeth only to be agreeued, that the Biſhop is not deliuered from Captiuity; but withall interlaceth, both in his letters, as alſo in the ſpeeches of his legat, many blundering Items; which did abundantly inſinuate in what manner he deemed the Emperor to be obliged vnto him.
               For by his letters he wiſht him to re-conſider, how from him he had receiued the confirmation of the Imperiall crowne; and yet did his Holineſſe nothing repent it, had the fauours which he had beſtowed vpon him, been far more beneficiall.
               Vpon the reading of which letters, the nobility falling into diſcontent; one of the Legats roſe vp, and reſolutely tooke vpon him to broach: That the Romane Empire was transferred from the Grecians to the Almans, not to be called Emperor, but King of the Teutonicks, vntil he were confirmed by the Apoſtolique ſea: Before conſecration he was a King, after an Emperor: Whence then hath hee

his Empire, if not of the Pope? By the election of the nobility he hath the name of a king, by conſecration of the Pope, the ſtile of an Emperor, and Caeſar Auguſtus, Ergo per Papam imperat. Search Antiquity: Zachary inobled Charles and gaue him the ſirname of Great, that he mought be Emperor: and ordained that euer after the Teutonic King ſhould bee Emperor, and Champion of the Apoſtolique Sea: That Apulia, by him ſhould be pacified, and reſtored to the Church, being in truth holden of S. Peter, and not of the Empire.
               
               
                  Rome is the ſeat of the Pope, Aquis in Arden is the Emperors: Whatſoeuer the Emperor poſſeſſeth, he holdeth it whollie of the Pope. As Zachary transferred the Empire from the Greeks to the Teutonics: So may the Pope retransfer it from the Almans to the Grecians. Behold, it is in his power to giue it to whom he pleaſeth, beeing onlie conſtituted of God ouer Kingdoms and people; to deſtroie, to pull downe, to build and to plant. In concluſion, he termeth the Germans cowards, for that they could neither expulſe Roger out of Italy,Radeuicus vbi ſupra. 
                  nor would at anie time bring the Danes and Friſlanders to ſubiection. Vpon the hearing of theſe ſcandalous exorbitations, both the Emperor conceiued a iuſt diſpleaſure, and the whole nobility ſo ſtormed thereat, that Otto of Wittelſpach drawing the ſword, which he accuſtomed to beare before the Emperor, had ſhethed it in the body of the Legat, had not the Emperor thruſt betweene them. Of theſe abuſes the Emperor or euer after made vſe, pretending that the cauſe of his ſo and ſo doing, took originall from theſe ſaucy and malepert ſpeeches of the Popiſh miniſters. And thereupon cauſing the Legats to be ſafe conducted to their lodging, at break of day hee commaunded

them to be packing; with eſpeciall caution, that they ſhould not rome hether and thether vpon the liuings of the Biſhops & Abbots: but that they ſhould keepe the high way towards the Citie, without declining therefrom either to the right hand or the left. The eſpeciall reaſon was, that according vnto the accuſtomed dog-trick of the Romaniſts, they ſhould not diſperſe their conceiued poyſon of diſcontent ouer all the Churches and Pariſhes of the Kingdome; neither ſtrip the Altars, nor carie away the vtenſils of Gods houſe, nor fliece the croſſes.
               And becauſe that no man ſhould imagine, that this intimation was inflicted aboue deſert, nor any commotion ſhould thereupon ariſe, Caeſar by the councell of the wiſe men of his Kingdome, ſendeth his letters through the whole Empire, ſhewing the tenour of the cauſe. And thereunto adioyneth his moſt paſſionate complaints vpon the diminution of the honor of the Empire: with a declaration, That by the election of the Princes, vnder God onely, the Empire had deuolued to him and his ſucceſſours. Againſt which, if any man preſumed to affirme that the Emperour ought to hold of the Pope in fee, he was to ſuffer puniſhment, as a perſon guilty of an vntruth, & one that maintained an opinion contrarie to the diuine inſtitution, & the doctrine of Saint Peter.
               
               The Legats ariue at Rome, where in moſt calumnious manner aggrauating their wrongs and iniuries, in the preſence of Hadrian, by adding flame to fire, they ſo incenſe his holineſſe already tranſported with furie and reuenge, but to thinke that Frederick had done, what his aunceſtors durſt not haue dreamed of (for of

which of the Romane Emperours is it read of, that euer interdicted the Romaniſts Germanie.) That forthwith hee addreſſeth his minitory letters vnto Caeſar: wherein moſt bitterly and papally hee expoſtulateth with his Maieſtie of theſe and all fore-paſſed greeuances. The tranſcript whereof becauſe they are worth the reading and animaduerſion, for the benefit of the Reader I will here inſert.
               Adrian Biſhop, ſeruant vnto the ſeruants of God, ſendeth greeting and apostolicall benediction vnto Frederick Emperour of Romanes.
                  Nauel fo. 761. Gen. 39.
                   
                  As the Diuine Law aſſureth long life vnto thoſe, that render due obedience vnto their parents: So, vnto him that diſobeyeth his father or mother, it inflicteth the ſentence of death, and damnation. The voice of veritie doth teach vs, that euery ſoule that exalteth it ſelfe, ſhall be humbled. Whereupon (beloued ſonne in the Lord) according vnto your wiſedome, we are not a little amazed, that you ſhew not that meaſure of reuerence towards Saint Peter, and the Romane Church, as you are bound to doe. In your letters dated to our Holineſſe, you inſert your ſtile before Ours. Wherein, you incurre the ſcandall of preſumption, I will not ſay, of Arrogancie. As concerning your fealtie auowed and ſworne to Saint Peter and vs, how is it kept, when you require Homage, exact fealty, and hold the holy hands of thoſe betweene yours, who are duly dedicated to God, being his most glorious children, viz. the Biſhops, ſhewing your ſelfe manifestly rebellious vnto vs, in denying our Cardinals (directed vnto you from our ſide) not onelie entrance into the Churches, but alſo into the Cities of your Kingdome? Repent, repent therefore wee aduiſe you, least that in ſeeking to deſerue a Crowne and coronation, at our hands, in affecting things vngranted, you loſe not what

is alreadie granted. We tender your nobleneſſe.
               
               What inference of humility or apoſtolicall lenitie appeareth (I beſeech you) in theſe letters? nay, rather may not a good Chriſtian without offence terme ſuch a pride to be truly Luciferian, that taketh ſo great a ſcorne to haue the papall ſtile placed behinde the Imperiall, as if other Emperours in their letters to His Holineſſe, had not before times done the like? See 97. dist. c. victor. & 63. distinct. c. tibi.
               
               After the receite of theſe blunt and proud-papall mandats, the Emperour according to his excellent ſufficiencie in Chriſtian ſapience, requiteth him; and as the prouerb is, driuing out one naile with another, he payeth his holineſſe home in this manner.
               Frederick by the grace of God Emperour of Romanes alwaies Auguſtus,Nau. fo. 792.
                   
                  vnto Adrian Biſhop of the Catholique congregation. Whatſoeuer Ieſus began to doe and to teach, in all things ought wee that to follow. The Law of Iustice distributeth vnto euerie man his owne. Wee derogate not from our parents, as long as in this Kingdome we vouchſafe them due Honour, from whom, viz. our progenitours, wee haue receaued the dignitie and Crowne of the Kingdome. I pray you in the time of Cōſtantine was Silueſter known to haue anie intereſt in the Regalties? By his Pietie, the Church obtained libertie and peace: and what euer iura regalia your Papacie can claime, they accrewed vnto you by the bountie of Princes. Turne ouer the Cronicles, and if you pleaſe not to belieue what I write, there ſhall you finde as much as we affirme. What ſhould then let vs, that we ſhould not exact homage and oathes of allegeance from them, which are Gods by adoption, yet hold of vs in regaltie: ſithence that He, who was ours and your Master (taking nothing from

the King, but distributing all his goods indifferentlie amongst all perſons; paying tribute to Caeſar for himſelfe and Peter, and leauing the example behinde him for you to follow) hath warranted the preſident, by ſaying; Learne you of me, for I am meeke and humble of heart. Wherefore, let them either reſigne their regalties, viz. their temporalities; or in the name of God, if they ſhall iudge them profitable, let them giue vnto God the things that are Gods, and vnto Caeſar, what belongeth to Caeſar. The reaſon wherefore we interdicted your Cardinals, the Churches, and forbad them our Cities, was becauſe we finde them not Preachers, but robbers: not peace-makers but money masters: not conuerters of the people, but heapers of inſatiable treaſure. Yet, when we ſhall finde them, ſuch as the Church ordaineth them; meſſengers of peace, lights to their Countrie, and impartiall aſsistants to the cauſe of the Humble, then will we not deferre to relieue them with competent ſtipends, and neceſſarie prouiſions: meane time you wrong humilitie, the Princeſſe of vertues, and mightilie ſcandalize your ſubmiſsiueneſſe, by terrifying the conſciences of ſecular perſons, with poſitions wholy impertinent to religion. Let your fatherhood therefore take heede, leſt while you motion points of ſuch nature (whereof we make light account) that you offend not thoſe, who would otherwiſe euen in hast open their eares as willingly vnto the words of your mouth, as vnto a preſage of a ioyfull accident. Theſe things we can not but aunſwere, ſithence ſo detestable a beaſt of pride hath crept into S. Peters Chaire. Fare you well alwaies, and God at all times make you carefull for the peace of the Church.
               
               What humane ſpirit can ſcandalize theſe the Emperors letters? What ſcruple of equity, of piety, or vprightneſſe can any man ſay is wanting in them? Who

can iuſtifie, that hee wrote otherwiſe then became a true and a Chriſtian Emperor? He but retorted the Biſhops pride; he maintained but the honor of the Empire; he ſought but reaſon, and that was, Chriſtian humility and modeſty in Chriſtian Churchmen; which in thoſe times, as the world then complained, was not to be found in that ſort of people.
               What followed? Peace I warrant you: nothing leſſe. For the Pope not contented that by letters hee had bandied with the Emperor, but writing vnto all the Archbiſhops and Biſhops of Germany, he punctually noteth downe the cariage of the cauſe,The Epiſtle is to be ſeen in Radeuicus li. 3. c. 15.
                   and aggreuateth the indignity of the fact: Admoniſhing them, that ſithence the action concerned the whole body of the Church (for they will make vs beleeue that without their intruſions all Chriſtendom muſt periſh) that they ſhould corroborate themſelues, as a wall of braſſe to ſuſtaine the declining eſtate of the houſe of God. And that they ſhould not only find meanes to reduce the Emperor into the right way, but alſo take open and condigne ſatisfaction vpon Rainold the Emperors Chancelor, and Otto Earle of Wittelſpach, who forſooth had belched out infinit blaſphemies againſt the Apoſtolike Legats and the Church of Rome: That as the inciuilitie of their ſpeech had offended the eares of manie,
                  Notable policy cunning and hypocriſie. 
                  ſo their penances might be an example to reſtore as manie againe into the right path of obedience.
               
               But for that (as certaine of the writers of that age doe teſtifie) the then Biſhops were not ſo eagerly addicted to maintaine the Popes vſurpations,Iacob. Spigelius in annotat. ad Ligurinum Gunthori. li. 6. fol. 143.
                   as many of them are now, they conuocated a Councell, and thus wrote backe vnto his fatherhood: That they were

not onlie wonderfullie agreeued at theſe abuſes;
                  Epiſt. extat li. 3. ca. 16. in Radeuicus. Auent. li. 6. Annal. Boior. ſo. 636.
                   
                  but alſo Arnold of Mogunce and Euerard of Saltzburge by their priuate letters admoniſhed all Roman Prieſts, Cardinals, Archbiſhops, Biſhops and Maſſemungers, to giue ouer their ſaucineſſe, their pride, their auarice, their perfidie, and all other enormities, by which they robbed the poore, and diſturbed the peace of the Empire. Finallie they humblie beſought them, that they would put their helping hands to worke Adrian to obſerue peace: vndertaking for the Emperor that he ſhould do nothing, but what ſtood with religion, reaſon and equitie.
               
               Sure theſe were bitter pills for Hadrians ſtomach: But what remedy? Popes, as they are curſefull, ſo are they politique, and beeing well skild in ſpeculation, they know by the Planets, when it is high time to hold a candle before the Diuell. He that now reigneth is not Henrie the fourth, but Frederick the firſt: who is now preparing for Italie; and hauing ſent his honorable Embaſſadors, Rainold his Chauncellor and Otto of Wittelsbach, before to aſſemble a conuocation of the Princes and Biſhops of Italy, prepareth his way in potent and Princelike manner, and meaneth himſelfe in ſhort time to ſit in perſon in Councell amongſt them.
               Now is it time to fly vnto the fox his caſe; a necromantique ſpell hath informed vs, that the Lions skin will nothing preuaile vs:Nau. Gen. 39. Auenti. loco prae allegato. Rade. li. 3. cap. 17.
                   Humble letters are diſpatched towards Auguſta to lenifie the Emperours diſpleaſure; and Henrie Duke of Saxonie and Bauaria with Otho the Friſon; made interceſſors to reconciliation.
               No long time after, Hadrian betakes himſelfe againe to his perſpectiue, where obſeruing that the Cities of Italy (Crema being hardly beſieged by Frederick) had

interpriſed a conſpiracie to re-uindicate their liberty, the Pope hauing vtterly forgotten his yeſterdaies reconciliation, traiterouſly adhereth to the faction and animateth the conſpiracie vpon theſe conditions. Firſt That neither partie ſhould accept of peace without the good leaue of the other. Secondly, That if the Biſhop chanced to die, that none but one of the ſame faction, ſhoald be created in his ſtead.
               
               And then to giue the better countenance to the rebellion,Nau. Gen. 39. ex Joh. Cremonenſi. for an infinit Maſſe of mony hee is corrupted to accurſe his Maieſty. So ſaith mine Author; but in theſe daies, I am of opinion, that malice is as powerfull in a Papiſts breaſt as corruption in the Papall Court.
               But our beſt and great God, who by the mouth of his ſeruant Dauid, ſeemeth punctually to cry out againſt theſe hired Excommunications of Popes: They curſe, and thou bleſſeſt: Let thoſe that riſe againſt me be confounded, but thy ſeruant ſhall reioice: This good God, I ſay, inuerted this execrable maledict vpon the Popes own head, and miraculouſly confounded the man, to the terror of all poſterity. For being at Anagnia, the place where hee had excommunicated Fredericke, it chanced that as he walked abroad amongſt his familiars to take the aire, as hee was drinking at a certaine fountaine, a flye flying into his throat, ſtucke ſo faſt therein, that no phyſicall experiment could giue him eaſe; and ſo he died miſerably choked.
               Would it not amaſe any humane fleſh, to ſee ſo huge a gyant in the middeſt of his armed and rebellious battalions, but euen now ſcorning the Emperor and all his forces, preſently to lye dead with the ſtroke of a flie? Or is there any Prieſt amongſt them ſo irreligious,

that dare but imagine, that this ſtroke proceeded from caſualty, and not from the finger of God, conſidering that that throat which had but now belched out ſo iniuſt an execration againſt a moſt godlie and innocent Emperor, was alſo appointed the inſtrument to confound his ſpirits? Yea this vnſhamed rabble, being nothing terrified with ſo miraculous a preſident, could by no meanes be diuerted from their intended conſpiracy. For perceiuing that they could not haue their wills vpon his Maieſty by force, beeing ſtrōg in ſoldiery, Lord of Italy, & in diuers ouerthrows putting the Millanois to the worſe; they made their recourſe to villany, and by treaſon laid wait for his life.
               To the execution whereof, by great rewards they cunningly corrupt a fellow of a ſtrong body vnder the habit of a foole or ieſter to goe vnto Landa, the place where the Emperor then reſided, and there vpon oportunity to offer him violence.
               The traitor wholly animated by their large promiſes,Radeuicus li. 4. ca. 40. & 4. Guntherus in Ligucinoli 9. circa finem. reſolueth vpon the villany, goeth to Landa; entreth the Campe, and by ieſts and fooleries maketh his acceſſe euer into the Emperors pauilion: His Tent at that time was pitched vpon the very banke of the riuer Abdua, ſo ſteep and ſliding, that if any thing fell thereinto, the ſwift courſe of the ſtreame would forth with carry it away with violence. Which the foole-villaine obſeruing to be a fit proiect for his intended treaſon, aſſaulteth the Emperor (according to his cuſtome going alone vnto his prayers by day dawning) and by ſtruggling and tugging laboureth to carry him to the foreſaid ſteep place. The Emperor plaieth the man, ſo that both parties being intangled with the tackling of

the tents, fell to ground; by which time the Gentlemen of the chamber being awaked, by the calling of the Emperour, runne to ſuccour, and taking the villaine, they threw him headlong into the ſame place of the riuer. This ſtratagem being f
                     •
                  uſtrated, they fall to a ſecond, but will be ſeene in neither.
               They ſuborne eight creatures of their owne with plenty of crownes, to ſet Landa on fire. One of them miſtaking the night, and laying his traines, was taken by the watch, with an other of his companions a counterfeit Monke, and both hanged.
               Being alſo deceiued in the execution of this Gunpowder plot, they fall to a third; and ſend forth a certaine Mountebank, reſolute to death, accompanied with ſome ſuch fellowes as himſelfe, to ſet to ſale in the Emperours Campe poyſoned rings, bridels and ſpurres, ſo deadly inuenomed, that if the Emperour had touched any of them, he had ſurely periſhed. But his Maieſtie being fore-warned, cauſeth this Marchant to be watched and apprehended: Commandeth him to be examined, but finding that he ſcorned both queſtions and torments, without more a-doe hee ſendeth him to the gallowes.
               
                  Hadrian (as we told you) being choakt with a Fly,Ab. vrſperg. Plat. in vita Alex. Nauc. Gen. 39. Rad. li. 4. ca. 54.
                   the Cardinals begin to wrangle about the choiſe of a ſucceſſor. For two and twentie, being the Emperours aduerſaries, would haue choſen Roland of Siena, one of thoſe Cardinals; whom a little before Hadrian had ſent Legat vnto Frederick, and Frederick had baniſhed Germanie: But nine others adhearing to the Emperor, by the ſuffrages of the Prefect of the Citie, and the people, created Octauianus a Romane borne, Prieſt and

Cardinall of Saint Clements, and ſtiled him Victor.
               
               But theſe raſh elections being likely to foſter infinite diſſenſions, It was agreed betweene the Electors of both parties; that neither of the Elected ſhould be confirmed, before it was agreed vpon at all hands who ſhould be the Man, and the contention quite ſilenced.
               But the Rolanders being the maior partie, falſifying their oathes, proclaimed the election of Roland, and new chriſtned him Alexander the third. From hence aroſe a mighty Schiſme. Victor remaineth at Rome, Alexander flieth vnto William King of Sicil, and there the twelfth day after his election, is confirmed Pope. And to preuent,Behold the Emperiall iuriſdiction ſolicited. Radeu. li. 4. cap. 58.
                   that this diſſenſion ſhould not draw with it the finall deſtruction of the Church of Rome, by his legats, hee intreateth the Emperour Frederick, that by interpoſition of his authority, he would vouchſafe to put end to the Schiſme. The doubtfull iſſue of a new Schiſme much troubled Frederick; wherefore, finding that both the Elettos, being orderly conſecrated, he could not lawfully determine the ſtrife, without the authority of a Councell; after the examples of Constantine, Theodoſius, Iustinian and other Emperors: (knowing that the ſummoning thereof appertained vnto him) he nominateth the day of the Aſſembly to be held at Papia; and thether he warneth both the Biſhops to appeare, promiſing alſo to be there in perſon to take cognizance of eithers greeuances.
               After proclamation whereof, Alexander goeth to Anagnia,
                  Generall councels ominous to Popes. whereat the Emperour being angrie for his contempt, deſpatcheth his letters vnto him by Daniel and Herman, Biſhops of Prage and Verdim, citing him

by the name of Biſhop, and not of Pope, to appeare at the Councell.
               
                  Alexander reiecteth Caeſars Ambaſſadors moſt contumeliouſly,C. Patet. & canemo 9. q. 3. Item 17. q. 4. ca. Si quis ſuadente in extremo. Item diſt. 40. c. ſi papa. Naucl. gen. 39.
                   and in very arrogant termes telleth them plainly, That the Romane Biſhop was to bee iudged by no mortall creature. They doing no good vpon Alexander, retire towards Octauianus, him they ſalute as Pope, and accompany to Papia. There the Councell being aſſembled, and the cauſe vpon ſufficient witneſſe through all circumſtances iudicially examined, Victor is declared Pope, and ſo acknowledged by all the German Biſhops by the commandement of Caeſar.
               
               At which pretended iniury Alexander being mooued, he accurſeth Fredericke and Victor: and forthwith dateth his letters of iuſtification vnto all Chriſtians Kings and Potentates; That what He did, was done with equitie and good reaſon. But at his returne into the City, finding many new vpſtart aduerſaries, openly oppoſing againſt him, he went to Tarracine: And there going on ſhipbord, purpoſely there layde for him by William of Sicil, hee retyred into France: where by the good leaue of Philip, aſſembling a Conuenticle in Claremount, in all haſt he proclaimeth his curſe againſt the Emperor and the Antipope.
               His Maieſty, albeit he foreſaw the miſchiefes likely to ariſe vpon this diſſenſion; notwithſtanding he continueth his ſiege againſt Millan, vntill enforced by famin and wants, the inhabitants voluntarily ſurrendred the City at diſcretion, This diſpatched, he ſent his Ambaſſadors to the French King, to deſire that he would call a Councel at Didion: Whether if hee would bring his Pope, then would his Maieſty alſo promiſe to bee

there, and with him, to bring his Pope alſo. What anſwer theſe Ambaſſadours receiued,Nauc. gen. 39.
                   it is not truely known: but ſo much is recorded to memory, that the Earle of Blois gaue the Emperor his faith, that the King his maſter would not faile to be there. Whereupon, at the prefixed day the Emperor with Victor kept promiſe, and pitched his tents neere Didion: Thither came alſo Henrie the ſecond, and William kings of England and Scotland.
               
               But Alexander could not only not be perſwaded to come; vnder pretence, that the aſſembly was congregated by the Emperor, and not by him: but he alſo ſo wrought with Philip, that he came vnto the place indeed, but before the Emperor; where waſhing his hands in the riuer hard by, forthwith by the voice of an Herauld he ſummoned his Maieſty (as if herein he had ſatisfied his oath) and ſo departed. Wherewith the Emperor, the Kings, & the other Princes being much agreeued, wiſhed Victor to returne to his Popedome, and they retired euery man to his own home.
               
                  Naucl. vbi ſupra.
                  Victor ariued at Lucca in Hetruria, fell ſicke, and died: in whoſe place ſucceeded Guido Biſhop of Cremona, called Paſchal the third. And vnto him at Goſlaria the Emperor, and all the Princes and Biſhops of Germany did their reuerence.
               
                  Alexander who was yet in France, to keep Rome in obedience, conſtituted Iohn the Cardinall his Vicar generall, and regranted liberty to the Romanes to chuſe their owne Conſuls; prouided that they were ſuch as were fauorites of his faction. Then departeth he from France into Sicil, foorthwith returneth to Rome, and is willingly receiued of the Romanes, and

                  Guido reiected. Whereupon the cities of Italie, incouraged by the comming of Alexander to hope after liberty, contrary to their oathes ſworne before vnto the Emperor, they reedified Millan, but lately razed and ſubuerted by Caeſar. Then at the inſtigation of Alexander, they enter into actuall rebellion; they inuade the Emperors miniſters and fauorits,Nauc. gen. 40. Vrſpergenſ. ſome of whom they expell, and ſome they murder. Then vſing his further councell and aſſiſtance, they proceed to the building of a new City, called Alexandria, in honor of Alexander and contempt of Frederick, culling out of euery City, fifteen thouſand men for inhabitation; vnto whome they deuide the territory, and aſſigne portions whereupon to build their dwellings.
               Vpon intelligence of theſe rebellious combinations, Caeſar leuieth an armie, and prepareth for Italie: where inforcing certaine of the rebels to compoſition, he beſiegeth Alexandria; but this ſiege proued nothing honourable: for Alexandria being continually relieued from the intereſſed cities, defended it ſelfe valiantly. And more then that, Henry Leo Duke of Bauaria and Saxonie, corrupted with money contrarie to all imagination of the Emperour, neither regarding the bond of kindred, nor the memorie of fore-paſſed kindneſſes, moſt traiterouſly departed with his forces: ſo that Frederick finding himſelfe too weake to withſtand the Italian rebels, diſperſed his hoaſt, and with great difficultie in the habit of an Hoſtler fled into Burgundy by the way of Mount Iupiter. But Leo eſcaped not ſcot-free: for the Emperour hauing now recouered Germanie, and re-inforcing his armie, limiteth the Duke a day; appeacheth him of treaſon; and ouerthrowing his

forces, depriueth him of his Lordſhips & Dukedome.
               
                  Nau gen. 40. Abbas vrſpergenſis.Some Princes fauouring Henrie, gaue out, that the Emperor could not condemne him, vnleſſe the ſentence had beene giuen within his owne dominions. Which Frederick, who before times had ſhewen himſelfe a ſeuere cenſurer in inflicting exemplary puniſhment againſt rebells and outlawes, little eſteemed; but beſtowed the Dutchy of Noricum vpon Otto of Wittelſpach, that of Saxony vpon Bernard Anhaldin, and the reſidue, vpon other of his ſeruants. Who being re-enforced by the aſſiſtance of their friends within the ſpace of one moneth, expulſed Leo almoſt out of all his liuelyhoods; which of any ſubiect of the Empire, were the greateſt and goodlieſt; inſomuch that nothing was left him, ſaue only the Dutchy of Brunſwicke: An excellent preſident for gentlemen to looke vnto, and to learne; that the authority of ſoueraignty lawfully warranted by Gods owne mouth, is not raſhly to bee vilified, but to be reuerenced with fidelity, obedience, and honor, and that for conſcience ſake.
               And becauſe I make no queſtion, but that the review of this example, may be a motiue to bring many a raſh ſpirit into the due conſideration of authority, I will bee bold here to relate certaine other exemplary puniſhments inflicted by this Emperor vpon others of his rebellious ſubiects.
               
                  Tritemius in Cronico Hierſaug. ſub abbate volmaro. ſo. 175. Nau. ge. 39. fol. 765.
                  
                  Herman Earle Palatin of the Rhene, and his complices, for that in his Italian abſence, hee had violated the publique peace, by raiſing armes againſt Arnold Archbiſhop of Mogunce, he compelled publiquely for ſatisfaction to lead a dog vpon the birth day of the Lord of Wormes.
               
               
                  
                  Gualfag Earle of Angleria, and Prince of Millan, for that after the promulgation of the Curſe by the Pope he ſided with Alexander, and in his quarrell committed many inſolencies in the City, to the derogation of the honor of the Empire; hauing taken him, three daies he tied him as a dog vnder his table; whipt him with ſcurges, and at laſt in chaines ſent him into Germany. Theſe were the puniſhments of thoſe daies; the like whereof if tranſgreſſors in like caſes ſhould vndergoe in theſe times, there were no doubt, but to find greater tranquility, and better obedience to the lawes through out the Empire. But to our pupoſe.
               
                  Frederick hauing thus abated the greatneſſe of Henrie, leuied a new army in Germany,
                  Platin. in vitae Alex. Nau. gen. 41. Blondus & alij. and again marcheth towards Italie.
               
               Variable I know, is the opinion of writers about the geſts done in Italie in this iourney.
               Some report that he fought in ſuch great danger againſt the Millanois, that his horſe being ſlayn, himſelf had almoſt miſcaried: and that vpon the compulſatory threats of the Biſhops, he was fain to treat a peace with the Church. Others write,Io. Cremonenſis. Barnus Author vitae Frederici Germanice ſcriptae. that by the perſwaſiō of the Biſhop of Brixia, he went into the Holy-land, and that there, after the atchiuement of many famous victories, hee was betraied by Alexander to the Soldan, yet at length again reſtored to liberty by the Popes liberality.
               Albeit I know that theſe reports are heaued at by many: notwithſtāding ſithence they are vouched with the authority of ſuch authors, whoſe diligence in reporting the life of ſo worthy an Emperour, may deſeruedly bee tollerated: I am onely diſpoſed to relate them as I finde them, eſpecially, beeing ſuch as in

likelihood held correſpondencie, with the papall diſpoſition againſt Emperours, not altogether impertinent to our Argument: for beliefe, I leaue it to euery mans iudgement. Then thus at large.
               
                  Frederick being arriued at Brixia, Hartmannus Biſhop of the place, and the Emperours Secretarie, by the ſecret inſtructions of the Pope, dealeth with his Maieſtie rather to turne theſe armes againſt Turks and Indels,Did not the Biſhops of England ſo by Henrie the fift. then againſt the moſt Holy father and the Chriſtian people. The Holie land (quoth hee) which your Grandfather Conrade to his infinite expence recouered from the Turks, is now reconquered by the Egyptian Soldan. I beſeech your Maiestie euen in the name and behalfe of the publique welfare, that vnto the glorious recouerie of theſe Kingdomes, you would diuert your whole cogitations. This if you pleaſe to entertaine, you may aſſure your ſelfe, that the French King will noblie aſsist you to expell this Sacracen. This honeſt-ſeeming oration (ſaith the Hiſtorie) the Emperour well liked, and tranſporteth into Turkie this armie, firſt leuied againſt the Pope, and the Italian rebels. Taking his iourney by Hungarie, he commeth to Constantinople, tranſporteth his army, and taketh many cities from the Soldan. He inuadeth the leſſer Armenia, and comming to Ieruſalem, hee winneth the Citie, and caſteth out the Pagans. But whilſt the world goeth thus proſperouſly forward in the Eaſt, Pope Alexander, that moſt wicked Traytour, imagining it would not be ſo with him and his complices, if his Maieſtie ſhould returne ſo powrefull into Italy, reſolueth to ſeeke his deſtruction by villany. He cauſeth an excellent Painter to draw the protraiture of Frederick, and ſendeth it to the Soldan, with this Item; That if he

deſired to liue in peace, There was the Emperours counterfait; make meanes to destroy him. The Soldan hauing receaued the Breue, and the Picture, meditateth how he might gratifie the Biſhop, pleaſure himſelfe, and be reuenged on his enemie. Opportunity in the Camp, or in conflict is ſeldome, or neuer offered. But as Caeſar led back his troupes ſecurely from the conqueſt of Ieruſalem, he deuideth them into Companies, for the better commodiouſneſſe in their retreat to prouide them of neceſſaries. In Armenia, what by the heat of the ſunne, & the tediouſnes of the iourney (imagining that no danger could proceed frō thoſe ſolitary woods) with a few horſmen, & his Chaplin he departeth from the Army. Being a little remoued, and the horſemen commanded to depart, he prepareth to put off his garments, to waſh himſelf in the riuer, to aſſwage the heat of his body. There with his Chaplin he is taken, and throgh the woods brought priſoner to the Soldan. The horſmen in vain expect the returne of their Maſter, yet diligently ſcourd vp and down the country, both that and next day to heare what newes. The report goeth that he is drowned. Great is the griefe of the Camp, & for a moneths ſpace they drag for him in the riuer. But not finding him, they choſe new Captaines & depart.
               The Emperor being brought before the Soldan, faineth that he is his Chamberlaine. The Soldan by the protracture knoweth him to be the Emperour, and commandeth the picture to be ſhewed, and the Popes letters to be read. Whereat his Maieſtie being aſtoniſhed, and perceiuing that there was no further time of denial, cōfeſſeth the truth, & asketh honorable vſage. The Soldan after many diſcourſes with his Maieſtie,

incloſeth him & his Chaplin in priſon, and according to his calling, entreateth him accordingly. At three moneths end, they inter-parly againe: when the Soldan perceiuing by conference, that Fredericke was an vpright man, in whom no vertue requiſite in ſo great a perſonage was wanting; admiring his wiſdom, his cariage his faith and integrity; hee fell into imagination with himſelfe, that it would be much for his honor and glory to ſet at liberty ſo great & ſo magnificent a Monarch. Whereupon he ſendeth for the Emperour, and propoſeth his conditionall liberty, viz. That hee ſhould giue him hostages, and pay for his ranſome three hundred thouſand ſicles. The Emperor anſwereth, that he is able to do neither; firſt, that he had no man there to be his pledge, and ſecondly, that his treaſure being exhauſted by this long war, he could not pay ſo exceſſiue a maſſe of mony. The Soldan, well knowing that he ſpake nothing but truth, deliuered him on condition; That hee ſhould euer during his life keepe firme peace: pay one hundreth thouſand duckets, and leaue his Chaplin behinde him vntil the mony were paid. The couenants are drawn: the Emperor prepareth for his iourney: willeth his Chaplin to be of good courage: and promiſeth him neuer to giue ouer, vntill the mony were procured, & himſelf ſafe returned into Germany. The Soldan bountifully honoreth the Emperour; prouideth for his iourney, and conducteth him to Brixia by the ſeruice of 34. horſe, and certaine companies of foot.
               The Princes vnderſtanding of the Emperors returne, in frequent aſſemblies congratulate his ſafety. Caeſar requiteth his conuoy with an honorable larges, and adioyeth ſome troupes vnto them to ſafe conduct

them to the frontiers of the Empire. Then proclaimeth he a Diet at Norimberg, and before all the Princes of the Empire he vnfoldeth the treaſon of Alexander; readeth the letter; and declareth in what maner hee was taken, and vpon what conditions deliuered. The Nobility promiſe to aſſiſt him, ſo that hee ſhould keepe his day of payment with the Soldan;Haec ſubſequentia Naucl. gen. 40. narrat. vt et alij pontiſicij, praecedentibus tamen omiſsis. and in anger advow, that they will neuer forſake him, vntill they ſee him reuenged on the Traytour Alexander. An Armie is inrolled in Italie, no man repining; and Rome approached. Thether hee ſendeth his Embaſſadors, and requireth of the Romanes (concealing yet a while his priuate wrongs) that vpon hearing of either Biſhops cauſe, they would reſtore concorde to the Church, by determining the right of the Papacie to one of the Elected. If thus they would doe, he promiſed to giue them peace, as alſo to reſtore, what in right they could challenge.
               The Pope perceauing, that by theſe good courſes, the Emperour was become Lord of his deſires; by night he flieth to Caietta, afterward to Beneuent, and laſtly, in the habite of his Cooke to Venice. Where, after he had lien hid certaine moneths in a Monaſterie, he is at length made knowne, and in Senatorial habite by the commandement of Duke Sebastian, honorably receiued, and in his Pontificalibus accompanied to the temple of Saint Mark.
               
               
                  Frederick being giuē to vnderſtand of this reception, ſtormeth at the Venetians for receiuing their common aduerſarie. He deſireth them to ſend vnto him, the deſtroyer of the Cōmon wealth. The Venetians deny. Frederick ſendeth his Son with an Armada to demand the

man; but with prohibition at any hand to fight, before himſelfe was come in perſon. Otho a Prince yong, frolicke and aduenturous, deſirous of honour and glory, copeth with his enemies, is taken and made priſoner. Vpon whoſe captiuity, Alexander mounted vpon the wings of this proſperous ſucceſſe, vtterly denieth to treat with Caeſar, vnleſſe he would ſuppliantly come to Venice, and there accept the already written conditions of peace. Wherewith Caeſar being mooued not vpon any baſe conceit, or deſpaire of victory, but partly through his affectionate loue towards his child, but more for deſire to ſettle a firme peace in Europe, aſſented, and impawned his Honor to come vpon the day preſcribed.
               Where according to promiſe, appearing, and proceeding to capittulation, Alexander ſent him word, That he would not abſolue him from the cenſure of Excommunication vntill he come into the Temple of S. Marke.
                  Naucl. generat. allegata.
               
               Here is He now ariued, accoutred in humble and religious habiliment: The Pope, before a multitude of people, moſt papally commandeth him to lie agroofe on his belly, and ſuppliantly to aske forgiueneſſe. The Emperor, German-like, ſimply ſuſpecting, that a Biſhop, who ought to haue been the mirour of modeſty, would haue abuſed him with no groſſe or diſhonourable behauior, obeieth the Pope word, and ſo groueleth at his feet. At the ſight whereof: He not only inſulteth, but that worſe is; moſt tyrannically he treadeth vpon his proſtrated neck, and then blaſphemouſly yelleth foorth this miſapplied place of Scripture. Thou ſhalt tread vpon the Aſpe and the Boſiliskc, and thou ſhalt bruſe downe the Lyon and the Dragon.
               
               
                  Did euer Hiſtory record of ſo ſauage a demeanor? Surely ſome barbarous ſouldiers, who in battell haue taken Princes priſoners, haue intreated them more inhumanely, then ſtood with their eſtates: Sapores the Perſian vſed to ſet his foot vpon the neck of Valerianus the captiuated Emperor, as he mounted his Horſe: The Tartarian Tamerlan (the correlatiue tyranny to this of the Popes) incloſing Baiazeth Emperour of Turkes in an yron Cage, carried him ſo diſhonoured through all his iournies. But what is this to a Pope? By how much the diſproportion holdeth betwixt a ſouldier and a Churchman, betweene a Chriſtian and an Ethnique, by ſo much is the immatuity of the Pope the more damnable. They being Barbarians, might plead ſome probability of excuſe, in that they miſuſed but their enemies, and thoſe by the law of Nations captiuated for ſeruility: But the Pope is a Chriſtian, ſeruus ſeruorum, a peace-maker, and a Prieſt; whoſe office is only to pray and to preach: Wherefore I can not blame Bellarmine, if he could make vs beleeue; that this Hiſtory may be doubted of, when I ſhall relate vnto you in the word of truth; That this mirror of Chriſtian Humility) Cyclopica immanitate, firſt, with a Gyantlike rudeneſſe ſaith mine Author) moſt ignominiouſly with his beſtiall feet preſumed to touch (nay to tread) vpon the ſacred necke of a mighty Emperour, then (as I ſaid) in peaceable maner lying agroofe, and humbly deſiring abſolution of an vniuſt Excommunication.
               But why do I againſt the Precepts of hiſtory, thus laſh out, by aggreuating of ſo barbarous a cruelty, to mooue the mind of my Reader to compaſſion, ſithence

I can neuer do it, for that the preſident in it ſelfe goeth far beyond any delineation that humane wit can poſſibly poliſh it withall? Vox faucibus haeret, &c.
               
               Well, Caeſar knowing himſelfe, and recalling his generous ſpirits; to ſhew that he was not a little moued at the indignity, openly calleth vnto the Pope; ſaying, Non tibi, ſed Petro: meaning that he became ſo deuout a ſuppliant, not to this Tyrant, but his Apoſtolique Calling. But the tyrannicall Pope, once againe bowing downe his reuerend necke with his beare-like pawes; reclaimeth, Et Mihi & Petro.
               
               The good Emperor, that had neuer offended any man, no nor the Pope himſelfe, but his pride; albeit he could not but agrieue at this iniurious and baſe vſage, yet in regard of the common quiet (much preferred before his own dignity) held his peace: And after his abſolution, thus renued his grace with the Biſhop.
            
            
               
                  ❧Henricus VI.
               
                  He raigned in the yeere 1191. about the ſecond yeere of Richard the firſt.
               
               
                  Platina in the life of Celeſtin the third.
                  THe Romaniſts thinking it no ſafe policy, too much at one inſtant to irritate the reuengefull ſpirits of ſecular Princes, ſmothered a while their domineering humours, vntill the dayes of Celeſtine the third. Who although he had beſtowed vpon Henrie for wife, Conſtance the Nun, the daughter of Roger the fourth King of Sicil, taken forth from the Monaſtery of Panormo, vpon condition, that

Tancred the baſe Son of Roger now depoſed, (whome Clement the third had before to no purpoſe labored alſo to diſplant) ſhould hold both kingdoms in fee of the Church: Notwithſtanding ſome there are, who write,Bergomenſis in ſupplemento & eum ſequens Nau. gen. 40.
                   that becauſe this Henry puniſhed ſomewhat ſeuerely not only the Apulian and Sicilian Laickes, for entring into actuall rebellion againſt him, but alſo proceeded with like rigor againſt the Clerks and Biſhops, being guilty of the ſame conſpiracy; from ſome pulling their skins ouer their eares, from other their eies; impaling ſome vpon ſtakes, and incircling ſome of their heads with a flaming Garland; hee eſcaped not Celeſtines curſe, who by this time being weary of peace, intended nothing elſe but the diſpoſſeſſion of Henry, from the Crowne of both Sicils.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧Philip the Sweuian.
               
                  He raigned in the yeere of Chriſt 1199. about the laſt yeere of Richard the firſt.
               
               
                  HOweuer the world fared in this age, certaine it is, that preſently after the death of Henrie,
                  Nauel. gen. 40. Cuſpinian in vita Henrici & Philippi. the rage of the Biſhop grew fiery hot againſt his ſucceſſor. For Henrie now lying vpon his death bed, had inſtituted Innocent the 3 (the ſucceſſor of Celeſtine) guardian to his yong infant, fower yeeres of age, yet choſen to the ſucceſſion of the Empire by the Suffrage of the Princes; To him he alſo recommended his wife Conſtance and ordained his own brother Philip Duke of Hetruria and Sweuia (during

the minority of the child) to bee his Lieutenant, through the whole Empire and the Kingdome of Sicil. But the Biſhop falſifying his faith of Guardianſhip, turneth traitor, and by ſetting al Germany in combuſtion, ſideth with the Houſe of Sweuia.
               
               For as Philip poſting towards his ſick brother, by the way about Mount Flaſco, not far from Viterbium, vnderſtood that his brother was departed, tranported with a deſire of Soueraignty, hee haſtneth as faſt to Haganoa, the place of the Aſſembly of the Princes, and there worketh as many as he can, to fauour his proceedings.
               
                  Nocentius, who in ſhew deadly hated the Sweuians as perſecutors of the Church, but in truth ſorely thirſting after the reall poſſeſſion of Sicil, at firſt (to giue Philip to vnderſtand, that without his Holineſſe acted a part in all Princely policies, it were folly to vndertake great matters) he excepteth againſt him by an Excommunication, which ſtood on Record filed againſt him, in the daies of Celeſtine. Secondly to ſhew himſelfe a diſpleaſed Father, he ſendeth the Biſhop of Sutrium vnto him, to demand at his hand certaine Hoſtages, whoſe eyes not long agoe his brother Henry had cauſed to be put out. Thirdly, failing, againſt imagination of his will; for that Philip by confeſſing and repenting of his fault, had procured abſolution from the Legat, and remitted the Hoſtages: In odium Philippi he ſheweth the blind pledges to the people, and depriuing the Biſhop of Sutrium, for that without commiſſion hee had abſolued Philip, he confineth him into one of the Ilands: And finally, now to perfect his proiects, he recommendeth vnto the fauours of the Electors Berthold
                  
Duke of Zazingia, a Prince ſtrong and valiant, and whom he knew full well to be a deadly enemy to the Sweuians, becauſe he had before times beene moleſted by the wars of Conrade, the brother of Philip. The letters of his election written at large, are yet to bee ſeen. C. venerabilem. de Electi poteſtate.
               
               But Berthold, being a wiſe and an Honorable Prince, knowing himſelf far inferior to Philip, and that he had been already nominated for Emperor by the generall good-liking of the Sweuians, Saxons, the Bauarians, the Bohemians and the Princes of the Rhene, ſo affected the fauor of his lawfull king, that in aſſurance of obedience, he gaue him for pledges his own Nephewes Crinen and Berthold Earles of Vrach, together with his perſonall oath of Allegeance. Whereat Innocent tooke ſo great an indignation, that he could not refraine, but belched out: That either the Biſhop ſhould diſpoſſeſſe Philip of his Crown, or Philip diſpoſſeſſe the Biſhop of his Miter. And forthwith he calleth from England Otho the ſonne of Henry Leo, a proud and harebraind Prince, and by ſending him the Imperiall Diadem, he ſetteth him vp againſt Philip; And to withdraw his ſubiects, he interdicteth him of all honor and authority.
               Hereby aroſe a moſt peſtiferous diſ-vnion in the ſtate of Germany, but a maſſe of aduantages to the Pope and his Clergy. For as long as Philip and Otho by their inteſtine wars diſtracted the Empire, there ſcant fell void any Eccleſiaſticall dignity, yea almoſt ſcant no poore vicarage, but being made litigious by the cunning of Rome, the diceſion of the incumbency was remooued into the Popes Court, and there peraduenture compounded;

but not without the fleecing of both parties purſes. This the Abbat of Vrſperg in the end of one of his Orations doth ſet downe, for one of the trickes, wherby the Popedom is accuſtomed to trouble Chriſtendome, meane-while enriching their priuate coffers. Theſe be his words.
               
                  Reioyce (ſayeth he) our mother Rome: for cataracts of treaſure are opened vpon earth, that riuers and maſſes of money in great abundance may flowe into thy boſome. Reioyce for the iniquitie of the ſonnes of men, for that rewards are accumulated vpon thee to reconcile miſchiefes. Reioyce for thy Adiutreſſe, Diſcord; for ſhee is let looſe from the bottomleſſe pit, euen to breake thy backe with bagges of ſiluer. Now thou enioyest that, which thou haſt long thirsted for: Sing a merrie Song, for by the reciprocall malice of men, and not by thy religous workes, thou hast got victorie ouer the world. All men flock vnto thee, not for deuotions ſake, or in puritie of conſcience, but by rewards to compound their contentions, and to redeeme their treſpaſſes.
               
               And albeit that Odoacer King of Bohemia, Herman Lantgraue of Thuringe, the Biſhop of Argentine, and Adulph Archprelate of Colein, being terrified by the papal curſe, had ſided with Otho, aſſiſted with the forces of his Vncle Richard,
                  Naucl. gen. 41. Vrſperg. fo. 323.
                   King of England; yet being ſtrong with his Hetrurians leauied in Italie, and his Sweuians raiſed in Germanie, he beginneth with Alſatia, next neighbour to Sweuia, and waſteth it: then falling vpon the Thuringer, confederated with the Bohemian, hee inforceth him to ſubmiſſion, and routeth the Bohemian. This done, through the reconciliation

of the Colennois, at Confluence hee treateth a league with the Dukes of Brabant & Lotharinge: with whom and his aſſociates deſcending to Aquiſgran, with great ſolemnity he is there crowned by the fore-ſaid Colennois. Finally, meeting with Otho not farre from Colen, he put him to flight, and without his companions enforceth him to flie againe into England.
               
               When the Princes perceiued theſe proſperous ſucceſſes to attend Philip, being now throughly wearied with theſe ciuill combuſtions; by a generall conſent, they conclude to ſend an honourable Embaſſie to his Holineſſe; who vpon reſtitution of Philip into fauour, ſhould intreat his fatherhood to confirme him in the Rights of the Empire.
               He giueth audience, and returneth for aunſwere; that vnleſſe Philip will giue vnto Richard his brothers ſonne (newly created Earle of Thuſcanie) Spolet, and Marchia Anconitana, with the daughter of Philip, hee will neuer harken vnto the Emperours Ambaſſie. Behold here another trick of Popiſh diſcontent: By this match, hee onely meant and hoped to inueſt his Nephew in the perpetuall inheritance of theſe goodly Lordſhips.
               Thus haue theſe Holy fathers long ſince accuſtomed, vnder the habit of Saint Peter,
                  See Guicciardine. to fiſh rather to inrich their Nephewes, their kindred, and their Goſſips, then to be carefull ouer the Church and the common-weale; yea, in theſe reſpects they haue often moued warres; ſo that the meanes, by which God hath ordained to reconcile families, & to corroborat peace; they haue inuerted to maintaine factions, and to ſerue their owne purpoſes.
               
                  After the Embaſſadors had heard the propoſed condition, altogether impertinent to the buſineſſe, whereabout they had taken ſo much paines; they tooke it as a ſtrange motion; That the daughter of a King, ſhould be affianced to the baſe Nephew of a Pope: Howbeit, not to offend his Holineſſe, they anſwered, that they had no commiſſion to treat of any ſuch ouerture: but deſire, that by ſome people of his owne, hee would acquaint their Lord and Maſter with his Holineſſe requeſt.
               Whereupon, with more heat, then good diſcretion, he adioyneth vnto the Embaſſadors of Philip (now vpon their returne) Hugoline and Leo Cardinals of Hostia, and Saint Croſſes in Ieruſalem. Who arriuing at Augusta, were honourably receiued, and highly feaſted, but vpon notice of the proud and prepoſterous meſſage of their Maſter (nothing aſhamed to violate the Conſtitutions of his Lord Peramount) the King and his Counſell ſecretly laughing at the Legats diſcourſing vpon matters, nothing tending to Peace and Abſolution; from Augusta the Court remoued to Spiers and ſo to Northius. And there after long debatement, the peace was ratified, and the Biſhops Nephew reiected; vpon condition, that the daughter of Philip (whom the foole-Biſhop eagerlie instanced) ſhould be affianced to Otho; And that he liuing in priuate, during the life of Philip, after his death, ſhould ſucceed in the Empire.
               
               Not long after this treatie Philip died: for leauing Saxonie, and for recreation ſake retiring vnto Babenberg in Sweuia, he was traiterouſly ſlaine in his Chamber, there ſolely remaining, after the opening of a vain, by Otho of Wittelsback, Nephew vnto him vpon whom Frederick (as we told you before) had beſtowed Bauaria.
                  
The cauſe of his diſcontent aroſe, for that being a ſuter to his daughter, in regard of ſome imputation of diſloyaltie, he had beene repulſed, and the Lady, by the Emperour, her fathers good liking, affianced to Otho.
               
               After this lamentable regicide, Otho by the generall conſent of the Nobility, aſſembled at Francofurt, is ſaluted Emperour.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Otho the fourth.
               
                  
                     OTho,
                  Naucl. gen. 41. 
                     Ʋrſperg. in the life of Otho the 4.
                   by conſent of the Princes being thus inſtalled in the Imperial throne, ſetteth all things through Germany in good order; and then with a warlike Armie marching by the vally of Trent, hee paſſeth by Lombardie, and ſo commeth to Rome, to receiue the Imperiall diademe: where, by the Pope, the Clergie, and the people hee is heartely welcommed, and honourably receiued: And ſo much the rather, the Pope ſtudied to honour and gratifie his Maieſtie, for that hee had heretofore alwaies aſſiſted his partie, againſt Philip his predeceſſour.
               But this extraordinarie kindneſſe was of no long continuance betweene theſe new friends; but being ſoone ripe, ſoone vaniſhed, and turned into hatred. For vpon the very day of the Coronation, an affray began betweene the Dutch and the Romanes, about the donatiues which the Emperors accuſtomed to beſtow at this time amongſt the ſouldiers; ſo that (as report

went) about one thouſand and one hundred men were ſlaine, and as many wounded. Whereupon Otho being moued at ſo great an indignity; complained vnto the Romans for reparation of amends; which they promiſed, but performed ſo ſlowly, that the Emperor began to enter into ſuſpition, that the Pope himſelfe became a fautor of the tumult; whereupon hee departed, towards Millan, and there laying aſide his Imperiall enſignes, hee infeſted Tuſcanie, Mark Ancona, and Romandiola, vulgo, S. Peters patrimony. Moreouer in warlike manner he inuaded Apulia, ſubdued the Dutchy of Capua, and tooke from Frederick the ſecond many other Cities pertayning to the kingdome of Sicil, at that time miſtruſting no ſuch outrage.
               Vpon intelligence hereof Innocent admoniſheth Otho to reſtore the feodary poſſeſſions of the Church, and to abſtaine from further violence. But Caeſar not only reiecteth his admonitions, but infeſteth thoſe poſſeſſions, with more and more ſouldier-like depredations. Innocent flyeth to Excommunication, depriueth him of his Imperiall titles, and abſolueth the Princes of their oth of allegiance towards Otho. And that more is, prohibiteth vnder paine of damnation, that no man ſerue, account, or call Otho Lord or Emperor. It is reported, that he cauſed the Princes anew to ſweare vnto Frederick King of Sicil, being as yet an Infant; and him he made choice of to ſucceed in his place.
               
                  Naucl. gen.Whereupon Otho returned into Germany; where, albeit in the Aſſembly of Noremberg, vpon complaint of the Popiſh tyranny, and the cowardize of the Princes, he had entred a ſtrict bond of alliance with many; and had moreouer taken ſharpe reuenge vppon Herman

Lantgraue of Thuringe by waſting his territories, for that at the Popes commandement he had violated his faith: yet at laſt being forſaken of his people, hee was glad to retire into Saxonie, where the fourth day after his royall mariage at Northuis with the daughter of Philip, he fell ſick, and died.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Fredericke the ſecond.
               
                  He raigned 1212. About the thirteenth yeare of King IOHN.
                  
               
               
                  
                     FRederick the ſecond, by the vniuerſall conſent of all Writers, a Prince worthy all attributes of honour, as well for his gouernment in peace, as his cariage in warre; vpon the deiection of Otho, at the commandement of Innocent the third, tooke vpon him the Imperiall Crowne at Aquiſgran. And in the yeare next following (Otho departing at Peruſium) he was crowned at Rome, and honoured with the name of Augustus,
                  Cuſpinian in vita Frederici. Pandulphus Collomitius. by Honorius the third. With him hee brought many rich gifts into Italie, and amongſt the reſt, the Countie of Funda; which with manie notable donatiues he beſtowed vpon the Church; And then ſetting Germanie in order, he prepared himſelfe for the iourney of Ieruſalem, according to the cuſtome of his Aunceſtors: Who being deceaued by their falſe pretexts of Religion, imagined that they were not worthie to merit the Imperiall Diademes, but by vowes and donatiues;

Firſt, forgetting that no Pope, but the Princes, and the people, were intereſſed in the election of the Emperours: And ſecondly, not fore ſeeing, that the Prieſts, who had too ſharply felt the armes of the Princes to their extreame loſſe, were not ſo carefull to recouer Ieruſalem for the Chriſtian good, as they were prouident to direct, or diſtract the forces of ſtirring Potentates; That mean while they might liue at pleaſure, and prouide for their bellies. For the Princes being ſequeſtred into the fartheſt parts of the world (this pretext I confeſſe, caried a great ſhew of zeale & honeſty) who was left to hinder them, from making free vſe of their wits at home, and that without reſtraint or contradiction.
               Howeuer Frederick in the beginning caried himſelf bountifull and obedient towards Honorius; notwithſtanding, his vertues could neither ſafe conduct his life againſt their ſubtilties, impieties and clandeſtine councels; neither his bountie extenuate or lenifie their conceiued malices againſt his perſon. For, three moſt wicked Biſhops ſucceſſiuely ſucceeding one another, for almoſt thirtie yeares ſpace, ſo hardly kept him to it, that his moſt barbarous enemies, the Turks and Saracens, may be reported to haue made faire and gentle warres againſt this moſt warlike Emperour, in regard of thoſe trickes and tragedies, which the Romaniſts played him.
               
                  Pandulfus in vita Frederici. Ʋrſperg. & Alij.Firſt, Honorius immediatly after the receit of his Donatiues, without any pretence of receiued diſpleaſure, ſeditiouſly maintained and acquited from their oathes of allegeance the two Earles of Tuſcanie, Richard and Thomas, condemned of treaſon, & the Emperors publique

& dangerous enemies. Secondly, that with more facility they might make vſe of his fauour to purpoſe, and vſurpe vpon the Kingdomes of Sicil and Apulia, he branded the Emperor with the cenſure of excommunication, and (as far as lay in his power) depriued him of all Imperial ſoueraignty. After this, he prouoked the Lombards to rebellion; ſo that they repelled the Princes of Germany, approching to a diet to be held at Cremona by the Emperors direction: and had done more, had not God taken him out of this world, to accompanie his predeceſſours in the vale of death.
               
                  Gregorie the ninth ſucceedeth: He to ſeeme nothing inferiour to his predeceſſor, euen in the firſt ſtep to his Papacie, raged worſe then Honorius. He accuſeth him, that according to his vow, vndertaken in the time of Honorius, to paſſe vnto Ieruſalem, hee had not accompliſhed it within the prefixed time: and therefore renewing the excommunication, hee condemneth him without allowance of defence, vnſommoned and vnheard; yea, he vtterly denieth either to heare, or to admit vnto the preſence of his councell, the honourable Embaſſadors of his Maieſtie, bringing honeſt & lawful reaſons in excuſe of their Maſter; yea, petitioning to be admitted vnto ſatisfaction, in caſe their Lord had in any thing offended: But the Pope notwithſtanding all offer of ſubmiſſion, daily intimateth his fulminations; confirmeth in their rebellions, Iohn King of Ieruſalem, the Earls of Tuſcany, the Emperors rebels, & the Nobles of Lombardy; And forbiddeth the Emperors ſeruants to appeare at the day of the Aſſembly, proclaimed by the Emperor, to be held at Rauenna; And ſpoileth the croſſed ſouldiers, bound for the iourney of Ieruſalem, of all

their neceſſaries. The Emperor obſeruing this paſſage, to lenifie his papall anger, paſſeth the ſea, laieth ſiege to Acon, and finiſheth many glorious attempts to the honor of Chriſtendom and the Chriſtian religion. Meane time, the Pope (O the deepe abyſſe of Popiſh impiety) taketh his aduantage vpon the Emperours abſence, ſubdueth Apulia, prohibiteth the croſſed companies to paſſe the ſeas, & committeth infinit ſuch like maſteries, not only vnbeſeeming a Chriſtian Biſhop, but much more Chriſt his Vicar. For firſt, he ſlaieth thoſe Embaſſadors, whom the Emperor had ſent vnto him to congratulate his good ſucceſſe againſt the Soldan, & then to terrifie thoſe cities of Apulia, which refuſed his yoke of ſubiection, he giueth out publique rumors, that the Emperor was departed this world. Hee alſo maketh meanes vnto the Soldan (mean time to work his will in Apulia) that he ſhould not capitulate to ſurrender the Holy lād vnto Caeſar. Here behold the piety of this Holy father: Here behold his ſtudy, & conuerſion of leuies of prouiſions taken vp through chriſtendom to be imployed againſt Gods enemies. This is his perſecution of Infidels, this his Croiſado againſt Turks & Pagans, viz. To inuert chriſtian armes againſt chriſtians, to forſake a chriſtian Emperor warring in a forraine land againſt the enemies of the Chriſtian faith; and eſpecially (I dare auow) for the ſafety of Italie, as experience hath ſince made manifeſt. For mine own part in the behalfe of the whole chriſtian cōmon weale, I can but condole for the generall captiuity of Iſrael, but as for the Popes I ſay to them, as ſomtime mutata regione Taſſo prophetically ſaid of the Greeks vpō the very ſame Argument:

                     Tatine their guide, and except Tatine, none
                     
                        Of all the Greeks went with the Christian Hoſt:
                     O ſinne! O ſhame! O Greece acurst alone!
                     Did not this fatal war affront thy coast?O Rome.
                     
                     Yet ſateſt thou an idle looker on,
                     And glad attendedſt which ſide won or loſt;
                     Now if thou be a bondſlaue vile become,
                     No wrong is that, but Gods most righteous doome.
                  
But, as in another place the ſame Poet ſpake of the Grecian Emperor, ſo the German Monarch might at this time ſay of the Romiſh Prelate:

                     And for I doubt the Romiſh prelate ſlie,
                     Will vſe gainſt me ſome of his wonted craft
                     To ſtay their paſſage, or diuert awry
                     Elſewhere his promiſ'd forces, &c.
                  
Neceſſity will inforce me to returne; And ſo he did,Cuſpinian in the life of Fredericke. towards Italy. Where, albeit by the way he had intercepted the Popes letters directed to the Soldan, containing the aforeſaid inſtructions; yet hauing recouered the loſſes ſuffered in his abſence; moſt heroically for the loue of Chriſt he beareth & diſſembleth all forepaſſed greuances: And in pure deuotion to peace, of his own accord he beſeecheth his holineſſe to receiue him into fauour, & in requital therof, he proteſteth to becom his future true liegeman for the kingdome of Sicil. What ſay you vnto this, you hypocrites? Heere you ſee a king, humble, contrit, & ſtudious of peace; through this whole diſcourſe haue I yet read of no ſuch Pope. What are thē the ſigns of chriſtianity, and true religion? war or peace? Humility or pride? If you ſay peace & humility, where then muſt we ſeek them? In the breaſts commonly of chriſtian Princes. And no maruell, for both the written word of God, and conſcience, haue warranted their authorities: yours not ſo, at leaſtwiſe, in ſuch worldly maner, as you vſe it. For being nouell, and

conuerſant in pompeous habiliments, in Lordlie appellations, in rich patrimonies, in commerce, in treaties, inueſtiture of Princes, in maintaining of garriſons, in rigging of gallies, in entertaining of noble men and captaines for ſeruice, how can it chuſe but by plots and deuiſes, to maintaine theſe worldly charges, and titulary honors, cleane contrary to the example of Chriſt, the doctrine of the Apoſtles, and the modeſty of the Primitiue Church) you ſhall bee conſtrained to mingle the leuen of the Lord, with the abomination of Baal; and in ſtead of preaching and praier (your ſole function) to ſpend your times in perfecting and preuenting your own imaginations, and your enemies deſignements. For I know the kingdome of heauen is not of this world, neither will fleſh and blood reſpect you as they ought, if as you ſay, you ſhould carry lowly ſhewes, and truely practiſe Chriſtian humilitie: but you know, where your reward is laid vp; Imitate this good Emperor, and thinke with your ſelues, that in this he followed your ſayings, and not your doings. Imitate you your ſayings, but ſaie, and doe, and then will the world turne their bitter reprehenſions, to ſweeteſt Sonnets in praiſe and admiration of your liues & Embasſies. And here I craue pardon for digresſion.
               
               
                  Cuſpinian. Platina in the life of Gregory. Naucl. gen. 41. Platina citans.Againe to the Hiſtory: Albeit, moſt of the Princes of Germanie, Eccleſiaſticall and ſecular, namely, Eberhard of Salisburg, Seyfrid of Ratisbone, Sibot of Auguſta, Biſhops: Leopold of Auſtria, Otho of Merouia, and Barnard of Carinthia, Dukes with many other Nobles, did to their vtmoſt, labour with the Pope to reconcile his diſpleaſure againſt Caeſar then reſiding at Capua: yet could not his Maieſty obtaine promiſe of pardon, vntill he had giuen aſſurance to pay into the Churches exchequer by the hands of the Maſter of the Teutonick
                  
order, the ſumme of one hundred and twenty thouſand ounces of gold. Is this to forgiue thy brother ſeauenty times ſeuen? Or can ſinne and treſpaſſes be waſhed away by Maſſes of mony? O impudent merchant, Antichriſtian impoſtor! The price being made, pardon followeth, and the Emperor inuited to a riotous feaſt, where amongſt many diſhes, ſimulata Amicitia, I aſſure you, is carried vp for a ſeruice. For the Emperor was ſcarce vpon his way towards Germanie, to repreſſe the ſonne of Henrie, who with the Lombards and Thuſcians had rebelled againſt him, but he is openly giuen to vnderſtand by the Princes, that by meſſengers in the name of the Biſhop, they haue ſtrict commandement, not to acknowledge any man of the Emperors family for King: and moreouer, that hee had conſpired with the ſtates of Italie to diſgrade him of all imperiall iuriſdiction.
               Whereat Caeſar, being full of diſcontent, hauing tamed his rebells, hee plagueth the mutinous Cities of Hetruria and Lombardie. The Pope is now become more then mad, and to diſgorge melancholy (for otherwiſe it will ſtifle him) againe the third time he curſeth the Emperor with book, bell and candle. And to be ſure at this blow to tumble him quite downe from the height of all Imperiall dignity; firſt hee treateth a league with the Venetians: Then by the counſel of the Kings of France and England, hee ſummoneth a councell to be celebrated at Rome in the Lateran: wherein is a great diſpute about the vtter aboliſhment of the regall authority of Fredericke. Before the firſt ſitting the heads of the Apoſtles S. Peter and S. Paul, with due ſolemnity are carried round about the City. And

laſtly,Collomitius, quem prae caeteris, vide. Platina in vita Gregorij noni. in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Peter, he maketh a ſermon full of Commiſeration; proclaimeth the Croiſado, and promiſeth life euerlaſting to as many, as ſhall take vp armes againſt his Maieſtie.
               
                  Frederick being giuen to vnderſtand, that the Croiſado was now proclaimed againſt him, which was neuer from the daies of Adam heard of, to be divulged againſt any, but Turks and Infidels, waxeth exceeding angry, and directeth his forces to the walls of Rome; combatteth with the Romanes, rowteth them with a miſerable ſlaughter, and ſpareth not a man, marked with the Croſſe. To ſome croſſe-wayes he commanded foure words to be giuen. Others had their heads clouen a croſſe, and the Clergie-men hee willed to be ſhauen to the quick, and the ſigne of the croſſe to be imprinted vpon their bald pates; that ſo they, who were but ſaid to be ſigned with the Croſſe, might be ſo ſigned indeed.
               Afterward, by a long and tedious ſiege, hauing forced Furentia, and hearing that the Pope had ſent forth his Legats, to ſummon the Engliſh and French Prelats to the Councell; he ſhutteth vp by ſea and by land all paſſages: and by the ſeruice of the Piſans taketh ſome Cardinals, and many Prelates paſſing by ſea, and committeth them to priſon. Two Cardinals hee drowneth, and aſſigneth to the gallowes ſome Abbots and Biſhops, but eſpecially the Popes brother, for their vnpardonable treaſons.
               Whereupon, this good holy father, ſorrowing to ſee ſo many of the Lords annointed, for treaſon to be ſo ſharply vſed by Frederick, became ſo moued and diſtempered at the indignity, that falling into ſickneſſe,

through griefe of minde, hee departed the ſame way, which his beloued Sons, had but lately foregone.
               
                  Celeſtine the fourth ſucceedeth, and intendeth to proceed in the ſteps of his predeceſſor againſt Frederick, had not death ſummoned him to attend another buſineſſe in a fitter place. For hee ſate Biſhop but eighteene daies, and then was poiſoned in drinking.
               
                  Innocentius the third ſucceeded;Petrus de vineis li. 1. ep. 33.
                   whilom the Emperours deuoteſt friend, but now his moſt bitter enemy; perſecuting his Maieſty with more furie, then any of his deceaſed predeceſſors. And thus it fell out.
               
                  Baldwin the Grecian Emperor,Collenutius & Cuſpinian in vita Frederici. Hieron. Martius. hoping to play the part of a good Chriſtian, in ſupplying the office of him, who was vtterly degenerated from all remembraunce of his owne function and calling, laboured what hee could to ſet vnity betweene theſe two mighty monarchs: (for ſo is all Popery in truth, though not in ſhew.) But the Biſhop, hauing no mind to hearken to ſo Chriſtian-like a motion, dealeth with the Geneois (hauing a Nauie at that time riding at anchor in the Port of Centumcellae) to tranſport him vnto Lyons in France, and there illuding both Princes for their kindneſſe and paines-taking, proclaimeth a concionable; cauſeth Fredericke to bee cited, yea himſelfe in the end of his Homely, citeth him: and for default of appearance (although his ſufficient ſubſtitute, Thadeus Sueſſanus, a moſt famous Lawyer, humbly deſired his Furiouſneſſe but to allow him a ſufficient returne, whereby hee might haue conuenable time for his repaire to Lyons) he denieth him reſpit; accurſeth him; depriueth him of al Imperial honors; abſolueth his ſubiects, & abetteth them in deſpight of Frederick, to make

choice of ſome other. Moſt impudently alleadging (ſo did euer the Phariſies by Chriſt, becauſe otherwiſe they could not effect their wills) very vile, falſe and forged ſuggeſtions againſt him, as blaſphemies, periuries, ſacrilege, and ſuch like ſtuffe: which ſee in C. Apoſtol. de ſent. & re iudicata, lib. 6.
               The Emperor hearing hereof, ſetteth Italie in order, and with a compleat army marcheth towards Lyons, there face to face to bandy with this inſolent Prelate. But thinke you a Pope to be ſo ſilly an Aſſe, as to deale with his forewarned enemy? no beleeue it. His conſcience can not aſſure his heart to look him in the face: He muſt deale altogether vpon aduantage, ciuill diſſentions, alienations of obedience, trecheries, periuries, diſcontents of neighbour-Princes and ſubiects. At which weapons he now dealeth with the Emperour; and hauing his ſcouts, his eſpialls and Intelligencers in euery corner through the world, by their ſeruices, he worketh the baniſhed gentlemen of Parma, to returne to their country, and there to plot out myriads of rebellions againſt thoſe Cities, which as yet in Italie ſtood well affected to the Emperors ſeruice. Whereupon before his Maieſty could come to Taurinum,
                  Cuſp. in vita Frederici. Nauc. gen. 42. Epi. extat in epiſtolis Petri de Vineis. epiſt. 32.
                   in feare that the reſidue of the Italian people would one follow anothers example, he quitteth his Lyons-iourny; and by letters, directed both vnto the King of France, as alſo to the prelats there aſſembled, in moſt honeſt termes he refuteth his enemies obiections, diſcourſeth at large vpon the inſufficiency and nullity of a Popiſh curſe, and withall ſtrongly prepareth by ſea to reduce Parma to its former obedience.
               But good Emperour, the greater thy learning, the

more their griefe: the greater thy courage, the more vigilant is thy diuill-like enemy for thy ruine. Thou ſtaieſt at Groſſetum, about the ſea coaſt of Sienna, there to refreſh thy wearied and ouerwrought ſpirits, with ſome diſports of hauking; Thou wilt not get thee into Germanie, nor repaſſe the mountaines:De hac coniuratione vide ep. 10. & 52. li. 2. Rurſus epi. 19. & 62. li. 3.
                   Then will thy ghoſtly father meditate night and day to vndoe thee; then will he traiterouſly inueigle thy principall ſeruants, ſome by wreſted ſentences of Scripture, and ſome by corruption of mony, to worke thy downfall. Thus imitate they Chriſt in bleſſing their enemies; Thus honor they Kings according to Saint Peter; But (thanke thy God) the conſpiracie was detected, and the traytors worthely puniſhed.
               
                  Nocentius beeing fallen into a deſperate fury, for that he had failed in theſe his moſt nefarious proiects, in ſeeing the Emperor for this time fully cleered from his diueliſh intendments, grew yet reſolute, not to giue ouer, vntill hee had really diſpoſſeſt him of his crowne & life. Which to effect, by threats, exhortations, & promiſes he aweth the Princes of Germanie to depoſe Frederick, and in his place to ſet vp Henrie Lantgraue of Thuringe. But this gentleman following the ſeruice of his maſter at the ſiege of Vlmes, was deadly wounded the ſame yeere wherin he was nominated King. So alſo his ſucceſſor William, beeing imploied in other wars, performed nothing in fauour of his Furiouſneſſe.See D. B. 290.
                   Whereupon the Pope obſeruing his Anathems to be vilified, his rebellious hirelings in Italy to be throughly perſecuted, & his aduerſary to be reſolute and vndaunted, after long and manifold trecheries plotted, and fruſtrated, at laſt, he procureth him to be poiſoned in the

two and thirtith yeere of his raigne, and the fifty ſeauenth of his age, on the very ſame day wheron he was declared Emperor, Caeſar, Auguſtus.
               
               Thus, this moſt worthy Heros, this Frederick the ſecond, Emperor of Germany, king of both Sicils and Hieruſalem, Lord of Sardinia and Italie, & Duke of Sweuia, an excellent Prince, adorned with all good gifts dained by God vnto man, aſwell for the furniture of mind, as body; valiant, honorable, liberall; a great linguiſt, and excellent well learned, finiſhed his mortall race: who, had he not been diuerted, from turning his Chriſtian Armes againſt the Pagans, by the rebellions of Italy, and the Papall abetments thereto, verely he had merited more praiſe of the Chriſtian world, then Alexander in due could haue exacted of his Macedonian ſubiectes.
               Verely, If this our Age (miſerably ſhaken with this inueterate Papall tyranny) by this preſident would learne, what emolument, peace and plenty would accrue both to the Church and common-weale, by due ballancing the temporall and Eccleſiaſticall Authorities; then would I not doubt, but to behold the German Empire moſt great, moſt glorious, and the Papall vſurpation once again reduced to its pure and primitiue integrity. More in commendation of this good Emperor I can not ſay, but onely wiſh that the Motto, which was once vnderwritten Brutus his ſtatue, and now due to him (vtinam viueres) might at this day be reuiued in the hearts of all Chriſtian Potentates to reuindicate their priſtinate prerogatiues.
               But who ſhall recomfort the Laments of Sion? Albeit that this moſt worthy Generall was gathered in

peace to the bed of his fathers, yet Death had no priuiledge to giue period either to the extinguiſhment or ſatiation of theſe Popes neuer dying malice. For, againſt all humane beliefe, and the diuine precepts it raged with ſo inhumane a feruencie againſt this Emperors poſterity, that it neuer gaue ouer,So did it in the powder treaſon. vntil it had depriued his iſſue both of life and Empire.
               For forthwith from the deceaſe of Frederick, theſe (three Popiſh Sultans) Innocent the third, Alexander and Vrban the fourth, following the continual ſtreame of their proud fortunes, imployed the vtmoſt of their meanes to re-inueſt the Kingdome of Naples in the Church, and to ſtrip thereof the Houſe of Sweuia; but in vaine; for Manfred maintained and retained it valiantly as yet againſt all their violences; vntill Clement the fifth following the claime of his Predeceſſor Vrbans Intruſion,Platina in vita Clementis quarti. called Charles Earle of Prouince and Aniow out of France, to take poſſeſſion thereof: vpon condition, that Manfred being expulſed, Hee ſhould yearely pay vnto the Church of Rome in the Name of a Tenure thirtie thouſand Duckets; And for farther encouragement; Not to accept the inuestiture thereof,
                  Nauel. gen. 43.
                   
                  though freelie offered, from the Romane Emperour, hee cauſed him to be ſtiled, King of both Sicils. Which done, in the Lateran Church, hee is inaugurated with the Crowne of Sicil and Hieruſalem. And after manie and various conflicts, hee not onely ouerthroweth, and ſlayeth Manfred at Beneuent, betrayed by his people: but alſo, extinguiſheth the ſole heire of the noble houſe of Sweuia, the ſtem of many worthy Emperors, Conrade the ſon of Conrade, whō he got vnto his power by treaſō neer Naples; & there by the wicked

diſpenſatorie counſel of the Pope, with more then Phalarian cruelty ſtruck off his head, for going about to recouer his owne,So alwaies Pap. cauill. but indeed, vpon ſuggestion that hee perſecuted the Church.
               For Clement, after he had heard the opinion of manie wiſe men, perſwading him that Conrade, as being the onely branch of the moſt noble houſe of Sweuia, was to be preferred, and obliged to the Romane ſea by fauours and affinitie, turned himſelfe to Charles, and would needes know of him, what he alſo deemed: To whom the Traytor made this butcherly Reply. Vita Conradini, mors Caroli: Mors Conradini, vita Coroli. i. The life of Conrade will be death to Charles; The death of Conrade, life to Charles. By which his brutiſh opinion, hee thus whetted on a minde already prepared for murder; by manifeſt preſumptions fore-ſhewing, that hee was already acquainted with ſome plot of treaſon againſt Conrade. For after he vnderſtood, that Conrade with a puiſſant armie of Germanes, was paſſed Viterbium, where then his Holineſſe reſided, he was heard to propheſie, That he was led as a Lamb to the ſlaughter.
               
               Thus, the poſteritie of Frederick being for manie ages turmoiled by this ſucceſſion of Biſhops, after infinit practiſes at laſt was vtterly ruinated by theſe bloudie monſters: yea, the Princes of Germanie were ſo involued in theſe fatal oppoſitiōs, that none of thē either daring or willing to weare a Crowne at ſo deare a reckoning, Alphons of Spaine, and Richard of England, by mony and the Popes fauour (as the world ſaith) began to aſpire vnto that Dignity, which for ſo many ages paſt, the Germaines alone had enioyed, and honourably maintained.
               
                  But neither of them,Herein let all Chriſtians note the beginning, progreſſe and ſequell of all Popiſh practiſes. either in iealouſie one of another, or in feare of their predeceſſors harmes, euer came to the reall poſſeſſion thereof, ſo that for the ſpace almoſt of 22. yeares, the Empire became an Anarchy, and ſo continued, vntill by the generall ſuffrage of all the Princes, Rodulph of Haueſpurg was choſen Emperour.
            
            
               
                  ❧Rodulphus Habſpurgicus.
               
                  He raigned Anno 1273. About the ſecond yeare of Edward the first.
               
               
                  AFter theſe lamentable Tragedies acted vpon the perſon of Frederick & his iſſue, is Rodulph of Haueſpurg, elected King of Romanes. Who, albeit he had pleighted his faith to Gregorie the tenth, that hee would come to Rome, and there be crowned; as alſo, had ſtudied to deſerue the friendſhip of him, and other his ſucceſſours, with extraordinarie indeuours; For that, time had taught him, that euen againſt all humane reaſon, this viperous generation had clearely extinguiſhed the two moſt worthy and glorious families, of France and Sveuia; As alſo, for that, they had transferred the Kingdome of Naples from the race of Frederick, to the houſe of Aniow; and therfore thought with himſelfe, that ſuch Potentates, as they, were not raſhly to be prouoked, eſpecially being now ſhielded with the fauours of the French, and the peeuiſhneſſe of

the Germane Biſhops; As alſo, that it was worke enough, beſeeming the Maieſtie of a good and gracious Emperour, to tender the welfare of his natiue Country, now almoſt ruinated and rent by ciuill diſſentions: Notwithſtanding his godlineſſe, his clemencie, his deuotion, his humanity, his modeſtie, and his obſeruancie, yet could hee deſerue no other retribution from theſe vngratefull Politicians, but intruſions vpon his Crowne, and taunts againſt his perſon.
               
                  Mutius. li. 21. Naucl. gen. 44.
                  For Honorius the fourth, being Biſhop at that ſeaſon, arrogating vnto himſelfe all Regall authority, directly againſt the good will of Rodulph, conſtituted Priziualna Earle of Ianua, vicar Generall of the Empire throughout Italy. And after his Maieſtie for mony had quite claimed vnto many Cities their liberties, this Honorius moſt wickedly ſealed this ſcandalous tranſaction.
               
                  Naucl. vbi ſupra.After the deceaſe of Honorius, Nicholas the fourth had vtterly diſpoſſeſt this Emperour of Romandiola and Rauenna, vnder the falſe pretext of an expedition againſt the Turke, had not Death taken truce with his traiterous intents. By a new creation of two Kings in Italie, the one to gouerne Lumbardy, the other Tuſcanie, he had plotted, that by the commodiouſneſſe of their ſcituations all alongſt the Teutonick Alps, from hence by armes he might alwaies haue meanes to curb the French, who now hold Sicil, and the goodly Kingdome of Naples in full poſſeſſion.
               
                  Paralip. Ʋrſp.Wherof Rodulph taking notice, reſoluing with himſelfe neuer to be made a ſtale to an other mans deſpight, which by affectation of a titularie Crowne in Italie, publiquely at all times giueth forth, that at ſome

time or other, he would find ſufficient occaſions of diuerſion and redreſſe; but in plain termes he intimateth to his friends, that he was wholly deterd from iournying into Italy, for that he had formerly obſerued, That the entrance of the Caeſars thereinto was applauded, honoured, and full of hopes: but their returnes aukward, heauie, mournfull and miſerable. Not impertinently alluding vnto Eſops fable of the Wolfe; who told the Lyon lying ſick in his den, That in truth he had no reaſon to enter, conſidering that he could well obſerue the footing of euery beaſt in entrance, going forward, but not of one, returning backward.
            
            
               
                  ❧Albertus Primus.
               
                  He raigned 1298. About the ſix and twentieth yeare of Edward the first.
               
               
                  ALbeit Albert ſucceeding his father Rodulph,
                  Cuſpi. in vitae. Alberti. in the Empire, continued the ſame obſeruancy towards the Roman Monarchy,Paralip. V
                        •
                     
                     ſperg. as his father formerly had done: yet could he by no meanes eſcape the bitter quips & taunts of theſe cloiſtered aſſes. For, at what time by his Ambaſſadours according to cuſtome hee praied of Boneface the eight, the Confirmation of his Election, Boneface hauing a ſword by his ſide, and the Imperiall Crowne vppon his head, ſheweth himſelfe in publique to the aſſemblie, and with a high voice exclaymeth: Ego ſum Caeſar & Pontifex: Behold, here is Caeſar and the Pope: And in furie

(whereas it mought haue been done without his priuity or authority) hee reiecteth the Election as friuolous and of no force; denieth confirmation, and with a full-foule mouth, calleth him Homicide.
               
               Afterwards, vpon a bitter quarrell ariſing between this Maleface and Philip King of France, for that his Maieſty would not acknowledge him for his ſupreme Lord, he chāged his firſt opinion; aprooued Albert Emperor; by his Breues inueſted him with the Kingdom of France, and in a full Conſiſtorie Excommunicated Philip. Yet againe when Albert re-anſwered, that he would not ſtir one foote againſt the King of France, vnleſſe his Holyneſſe would confirme him and his heires in the Kingdome and Empire: The Pope, not able to conceale his impriſoned diſpleaſure, moſt arrogantly replied:Naucl. gen. 44.
                   
                  Non futurum id Iezabele viuente; That, that ſhould neuer come to paſſe, ſo long as Iezabel liued By which abuſiue name, he pointed at that moſt noble Dame Elizabeth, the wife of Albert, the daughter of Menihard, Earle of Tirol, and ſiſter by the mothers ſide to Conrade late Duke of Sweuia. In ſhew cauelling at this noble Lady, as an implacable perſecutrix of Clergy men againſt Gods commandements, but in truth, moſt barbarouſly enuying her in memory of her brother and her deceaſed Aunceſtors, for their claming and retaining of their hereditary royalties againſt the vſurpations of the former Biſhops. Let the world be Iudge, if they continue not the like, yea the very ſame ſtratagems, againſt all Princes at this day, if they but croſſe their ambitions. The man that feareth God would think, that a good and a vertuous life, eſpecially in a Prince, ſhould warrant his daies from vexation,

and his graue from infamy. But here you ſee the contrary: Albert followeth the ſteps of his father; he is humble, in offenſiue, glad to pleaſe, yet not well requited: His Lady neither medleth nor maketh with theſe contentious perſons, and yet in regard that her Aunceſters diſpleaſed the Roman prelacie, ſhee ſauoreth; and muſt be diſgraced in moſt opprobrious manner:Doct. B. fo. 68. S. E. H. fo. 48.
                   yea the depth of the graue can not ſecure her honorable friends from railing, ſo furious is the fire of a Popiſh conſcience.
               No maruell: for this is that Boniface the eight, who (like the Diuell in the Goſpell) cenſured all principalities and powers to bee in his donation; who vſurped vpon both ſwords, and would needs haue inforced the whole world, to haue acknowledged him their Lord Peramount: glorying that to him were committed the keies of Heauen gate: That he ought to be iudged of no man, no though hee carried a million of ſoules with him to hell for company.
            
            
               
                  ❧Henricus Septimus.
               
                  Hee raigned Anno 1308. About the ſecond yeere of Edward the ſecond.
               
               
                  AFter the deceaſe of Albert, Henrie of that name the ſeuenth,Mutius lib. 23.
                   of the Houſe of Lucelburge, by the lawfull ſuffrage of the Electors, is nominated Emperor. Clement the fift (then High-Prieſt) liuing at Auignion, (well fare the iarre betweene him and Philip the French King) in

odium Philippi, gaue ſo courteous and facil a way vnto this election, that ſending his Legats through all the quarters of Germanie and Italie, hee gaue ſtrict commandement, that Henry ſhould be acknowledged Emperor, and really confirmed in the election; prouided that, within the ſpace of two yeares, hee ſhould come to Rome to be crowned, and perſonally viſit Italy, which now by reaſon of ſixty yeares abſence of the Germane Emperours, was miſerably afflicted with inteſtine diſſenſions.
               But the Pope could not long be Maſter of his own breaſt, hee muſt needes follow the accuſtomed knauerie of his vafrous predeceſſours. For when Henrie, in ſatisfaction of his promiſes, had made his perambulation throughout euerie Prouince of Italie; had twice rowted Rupert King of Apulia with the Vrſins; approached Rome, and expected his Coronation in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Peter: The Pope, repenting him of his forwardneſſe, by calling to minde of Henries powerfulneſſe, and Ruperts friendſhip, at firſt commandeth the Cardinals not to proceede to Henries inauguration; and then againe vpon the Emperours ſerious expoſtulation, changing his interdiction; hee aſſenteth, conditionally, that hee take an oath of fidelity to the ſea of Saint Peter.
               
               Which when his Maieſtie refuſed, alleadging the preſident to be new, and but lately vſurped in the dayes of ſome fewe of his Predeceſſours, That the chiefest Prince of Christendome ſhould be obliged by an oath of fealtie to the ſeruant of ſeruants at laſt with much

a-doe, but vtterly againſt the Popes minde,Cuſpinian. by the loyall ſeruice of Steuen of Colonna, he was crowned by the Cardinals. For, Clement himſelfe in deadlie hatred againſt Him, reuolted to Rupert King of Apulia, by a lawfull triall condemned of high treaſon; and reuerſed his ſentence of condemnation,Vide C. paſtoralis, deſententia & re iudicat. in Clement. not ſo much for any defect in Law, but in extreame malice againſt his Maieſtie.
               Thus was the quarrell pickt againſt Henry; obſerue the cauſe thereof, I beſeech you, and tell me if the preſident hold not with their practiſes at this day. But by the ſuddaine and immature departure of this religious Emperor, nothing was effected.
               For, Henrie now being reſolued to take vpon him the Crowne of Sicilie,
                  Rhithmi de morte Henrici impreſſi hunc proditorem veneficum Paulinum vocant. being thereunto nominated by the Sicilians, vpon the vigil of the Aſſumption of our Lady was come as farre as Bonconuent: Where, by Bernard the falſe dominican Monke, who before times had giuen many hypocriticall teſtimonies of ſeruice towards his Maieſtie, by a new and neuer heard of example, at Maſſe mingled poiſon, and the powder of Adamant (which as men ſay bringeth ſpeedieſt death) into the communion cup, and ſo ſlew his Lord and ſoueraigne.
               All the wakes, Annals, records, ſongs, rithmes, verſes and Epigrams written in thoſe daies, doe make ample relation of this tragedy. But the whole Rabble (and blame them not) of the Dominicans do vtterlie deny it; giuing out, that in griefe of mind, for that he could not be fully reuenged vpon his enemies, hee gaue vp tho ghoſt, after he had receiued letters from his Holineſſe

in teſtimoniall of this afore-ſaid villaines innocencie. But howeuer; Theſe faire gloſſes could not ſo exempt their Order from the ſuſpition of this murder, but that many of their Couent, together with their houſes were burnt and deſtroyed by ſword and fire in manie places throughout Tuſcanie and Lombardy.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧Lodouicus Bauarus.
               
                  He raigned Anno 1314. About the ſeuenth yeare of Edward the ſecond.
               
               
                  
                     HEnry (laſt ſpoken of) being thus diſpatched, the tempeſt which in his life time lay ſmothered in embers, in hideous maner now breaketh out vpon the head of his ſucceſſors. For Frederick of Austria, and Lewes of Bauaria being both by the diſcordant ſuffrages of the Electors, named for Caeſars, Iohn the 22. findeth an occaſion to diſquiet them both; and firſt in very ignominious faſhion hee quarelleth with Frederick. And thus it fared: Conrade the Biſhop of Gurcia was ſent to Rome by the Austrians, to deſire his Holineſſe in fauour of Frederick, to giue aſſent to the election, and to repreſſe Lewes; where, in making his Oration, he chanced to diſcourſe, vpon the praiſes of Frederick his grandfathers and great-grandfathers, concluding, that the Chriſtian world was likely to reape nothing contrarie to expectation, conſidering, That it was alwaies ſeene, that from good and valiant Parents,

diſcended good and valiant children; yet by your fauour, moſt arrogantly and impertinently replied his Holineſſe; Of all men liuing without question Salomon was the wiſest, and yet he begot a ſonne most fooliſh. Not obſcurely intimating thereby, that Frederick was degenerated from the vertues of his aunceſtors, and therefore vnworthy of the Imperiall diademe.
               VVas this diſpleaſure, deeme yee, of continuance? no ſurely; for then had it not beene papall. But at that time Iohn had no neede of Fredericke: Lewes Iudas-like was ſaluted King, and the beloued ſonne: But now Mapheus with his ſonnes the Viſconti, are vp in Italy, and aſſaulting Genoa. And thereupon muſt a league of reconciliation be priuily contracted with Frederick to the expulſion of Lewes, and the re-ordering of Mapheus.
               
               Eight yeares after his election, Frederick was foiled in field, and taken priſoner: Howbeit,Cuſpin. in vita Ludouici Pulchri. Naucl. gen. 46.
                   the Pope proſecuteth Lewes with continuall malice; denounceth him an Enemie to the Church, a Schiſmatike, and an Heretike; Firſt, for that immediatly vpon his Election, without his Holineſſe permiſſion, hee had ſtiled himſelfe Emperour; ſecondly, for that hee preſumed to relieue certaine of his yonger bretheren being condemned of hereſie, and outlawed after excommunication; and thirdly, for his raſh aſſiſtance ſent to Galeas Viſconti of Millan againſt his holy forces.
               Whereupon Lewes,
                  Naucl. gen. 45.
                   vnderſtanding by the beſt Diuines and Lawyers of that age, that the acts and ſayings of Iohn were repugnant to Chriſt his Doctrine: That the Pope in truth ought to be ſubiect to the Emperor, and not the Emperor to him in temporall cauſes:

tooke thereat ſuch incouragement, that, he appealed from the Pope male informato (as the Lawyers ſpeake) to the Pope meliùs informando, at the next generall Councel to be held, when he ſate at Rome in Peters chaire. Meane time, valiantly and vigilantly hee preuenteth all iniuries, and diuulgeth the Tenor of the Appeale throughout all the Prouinces of Germany.
               
               During theſe verball and ſcribeling contentions, it came to paſſe, that the Romans being throughly tormented with their ciuill diſſentions, ſent their ſubmiſſiue Orators to Iohn, with humble ſupplications to intreat his Holineſſe; that leauing Auignion, he would re-uiſite Rome, and confer the Imperial Inueſtiture vpon the King of Romans: this if he refuſed, they certified him in plaine termes, that they would renue the ancient Lawes and gouernment of the Romane people. Iohn not only denieth their requeſts, but with threats and minaces, in moſt ignominious maner diſmiſſeth the Orators: At which his pride the Romans being not a little offended, by letters and Ambaſſies call Lewes to Rome as their lawfull Emperor.
               
                  Lewes granteth the motion, and with his army taketh his way towards Italy; and at Millan according to the accuſtomed manner is crowned by the Archbiſhop. After this, making choice rather by humility, then armes, to aſſwage the Biſhops wrath, he ſendeth meſſengers vnto him, humbly to deſire his fatherhood to confer the vſuall and Imperiall honours vpon his Maieſty. Which when the Biſhop not only gainſayd, but deſpighteouſly diſmiſſing his Ambaſſadors, peremptorily cited his Maieſty to Auignion; As report goeth: Caeſar as hauing full experience of the Papall

tyranny, yet willing to preſerue the Imperiall dignity (collated from aboue) holy and inuiolable, vtterly refuſeth ſlaue-like to proſtrate himſelfe before the Pope, or to appeare at Auignion. But to auoid the effuſion of blood, he is content in peaceable maner by proxy to become a ſutor for his collation. But herein finding the Pope as ſtiffe as himſelfe, and his friendes the Viſconti to his diſgrace alreadie accurſed, he maketh no more adoe; but ſetting Millane in order, he iournyeth to Rome, where with great applauſe by the commaundement of the people and the Clergie, together with his wife hee is Crowned by Cardinall Steuen Colonna, the whole Nobility aſſiſting, and crying, GOD ſaue Lodowicke Augustus Emperour of Romanes. And foorthwith by all their good liking, he createth Peter of Corbar, a Minorit, a man learned and in-ured to Gouernement, High Prieſt: Hee cauſeth the counterfet of Iohn to be made in wood, and in the preſence of Caeſar moſt ignominiouſly conſumeth it to aſhes; pronouncing him an Heretique, a deſtroier of the Church, and a publique enemy to the peace of Chriſtendome.
               
                  Iohn again, thundreth out cruell proceſſe againſt Lewes, depriueth him of all imperiall preheminence, and excommunicateth him as a Rebell and Arch-heritique againſt the Roman Church. Wherupon the Emperor, to whom Italy became diſpleaſāt, partly for that he had already determined to make no long abode therein, & partly in feare of poiſon, wherwith he knew the Romaniſts were better acquainted, then with arms, made his retrait into Germany. Whether (no ſooner ariued) but newes was ſpred abroad of Iohns departure, to the vniuerſall

ioy of all wel-minded Chriſtians, in hope that by the election of a new Biſhop, all old quarrels ſhould lie buried with their framer. But not ſo: For Benedict the twelfth ſucceeding in the Popedom,Plati. in vita Benedict. 12. Cuſp. in vita Ludouici. ſucceeded alſo in all Popiſh qualities againſt this Emperor; confirming all the cenſures, and depriuations which his predeceſſor Iohn had ſued out againſt him.
               
                  Apud. Na Decretum hoc extat gen. 45.
                  Whereupon, Caeſar perceiuing that theſe fiery ſpirits would neuer be at peace, vntill by the vtter ouerthrow and diſgrace of all temporall Authority, they had fully and forceably ſtrengthned their owne greatneſſe, at Franckford he aſſembleth the Princes, with the wiſe-men of his Kingdom; perſons of immatcheable dexterity in diuine and humane ſciences, and there, by the aduiſe of the moſt zealous and beſt learned, hee publiſheth a Decree vnder his ſeale againſt the iniurious proceſſe of the dead Biſhop: therein rendring a moſt Chriſtianlike account of his faith, plainly & ingenuouſly confeſſing, that as it became a true Catholike he beleeued all the Articles of the Chriſtian veritie.
               To theſe by ſolemne proclamation hee annexeth many notable edicts, to the ancient Conſtitutions he addeth ſome new, and corroborateth the old, viz. That the Electors of the Empire, and no man beſides, ſhould intermeddle in the election of the King of Romans: Whereunto the Princes and nobility gaue their full conſent: Ordaining moreouer, that who euer was nominated King or Emperor, ſhould be acknowledged for the true, ſupreme, and indubitate Soueraign of the Empire, being indeed though different in name, yet the ſame in effect. That without any confirmation or approbation from the Apoſtolique ſea, he might abſolutely gouerne and adminiſter iustice throughout

the Empire. And that after publication from the Princes, in caſe of lawfull proceeding in the election, the Pope is bound to anoint him: And in defalt of refuſall or denial, that any other catholique Biſhop is as capable as the Pope, to proclaime him Emperor, Caeſar, Augustus; Conſidering that theſe formal and ſolemne ceremonies, are but things indifferent deuiſed by the Popes, conferring only titles and names, but no matter of ſubſtance. For what Roman Biſhop conſecrated the Conſtantinopolitan Emperors? what Pope before Charles his time, the ancient Auguſti? or who before Conſtantine the Ethnike Caeſars? And then, the Emperor acknowledged no oth of fidelity, but of obſeruancy and of defending the faith.
               From this point, he proceedeth to prooue, that in caſe of vacancy, the Imperial election diuolueth not to the Papacy: and that, the preſcription is derogatory to the liberty, dignity, the rites and maieſty of the ſacred Empire, but in truth by long and aprooued cuſtome from Antiquity, and ſtl in vſe, that all Iudicature, fealties and priuiledges of conferring and diſpoſing of all rights, intereſts, & demands, belonged & do belong to the Houſe of the Count Palatine of the Rhene, during the vacancy, notwithſtanding the conſtitutions of the Clementines.
               
               What pen can be ſo partiall, as not to giue due commendation to the prudency of this good Emperor, being ſeaſoned with ſo plentifull a meaſure of diſcretion? who ſo modeſtly carried himſelfe between the Princes & the Pope, that the former admired his wiſedom, and the later celebrated his goodneſſe?Naucl. gen. 45.
                   For in Benedicts prime-entrance into the pontificacy, vpon occaſion of diſcontents between his holineſſe and the French king

his Maieſtie vnderſtanding therof, by meanes made for reconciliation and abſolution, vnto which the Biſhop, after hee had entered into a large field of diſcourſe in praiſe of Germany and this Emperour, condiſcended; promiſing to be mindfull of the motion; concluding, That that Noble branch of the Church (meaning Lewes) which now began to be ſeperated, ſhould again be re-ingrafted into the body of the tree.
               
               Vpō another occaſion, when the Embaſſadors of the kings of France and Apulia, had ſcandalized his Maieſtie for plotting of diuers indignities againſt the Court of Rome: his Holines excuſed him with great earneſtnes, openly anouching, that the Clergie had wronged him, and not he the Clergie.
               
               
                  Naucl. vbi ſupra.But howeuer, at this time he acknowledged the innocencie of Lewes, yet afterwards, when the king of France in deſpight of the Emperor & the Pope, had ſlily preuented the returne of certaine Cardinals into his kingdom; and that Iohn king of Bohemia, & Henry Duke of Bauaria, had traiterouſly cōſpired to elect a new Emperor, he ſuffered himſelfe with ſmall intreaty to be diſſwaded from his former reſolution of Abſolution: yea, after the king of France & his Maieſtie had capitulated a peace, full ſore againſt his mind; vpon requeſt to haue it ratified by his Holines, he flatly denied it; cauelling, that Lewes being now declared an heretike, ought not again to be accounted a Chriſtian at the kings pleſure.
               Thus may you ſee how the Popes were accuſtomed to play faſt and looſe with the German Emperors.
               
                  Cuſpin. Marius.Well, the Abſolution by this nicity being adiourned, and the Emperor well obſeruing wherunto theſe pontifical policies tended, ſummoneth the Princes and

Electors to a Diet at Renſium. There with eaſe, by his affability, liberality and clemency, he ſo deuoteth their loyalties to his ſeruice, that by ſolemne oath they not onely auow to maintaine and defend the honor of the Empire: but they alſo decreed, the Proceſſes of Iohn late Pope of Rome, returned againſt his Maieſtie, to be void and of no validity: yea, that a Biſhop ought not to entertaine any ſuch practiſes againſt an Emperour, for that their iuriſdictions were meerly of diſtinct natures.
               
                  Benedict dieth, & Clement the 6. ſucceedeth:Cuſpin. & Paralip. Ʋrſperg. an effeminat Prelat, extraordinarily ambitious of honor & potencie. Who had no ſooner ſeated his foot in the chair of Lucifer, but his furious Genius took ſuch hold of his hart, that in Latin & Dutch libels affixed vpon church dores, he ſummoneth his Maieſtie vnder the cenſure of extream penāce, within three daies ſpace to make ſatiſfaction, to God & the church (meaning himſelf) as alſo to deſiſt frō further medling in the affaires of the Empire; which limitation being expired, & no appearance recorded, he proceedeth to ſentence of cōtumacie. Afterwards, whē his Proctors craued forgiuenes, with an offer to performe all iniunctions to vtmoſt: he was not aſhamed to motion ſo foule an attonement, as neuer Pagan demanded of his Captiue ſlaue: viz. That hee ſhould confeſſe and acknowledge all his errors and hereſies. That he ſhould reſigne the Empire: and ſimply commit his children, and all his moueables into his tuition.
               
               Where is now become, O Lucifer, thy paſtoral humility? where thy fatherly aſpect? where thy repreſentatiue Holineſſe?
               Notwithſtanding, albeit the pooreſt refuſe of the world would not haue accepted of theſe baſeſt conditions,

yet this good Emperour, fore-ſeeing, that if he ſhould not bend; warre, ſlaughter & ſpoiles would enſue, he receiued the pontificall libell; ſigned it with his ſeale, and ſwore to obſerue it; ſo farre forth humiliating his deiection, that vpon relation thereof, the whole Colledge of the ſcarlet-roabed-fathers could not chuſe but receiue it with vnaccuſtomed admiratiō.
               But the Emperor vpon ſounder aduice, conſidering with himſelfe, that without the conſent of the Electors, and of the Princes & the eſtates of the Empire, it was againſt the fundamentall Law to accept of any ſuch Capitulation, in the next aſſembly at Frankford, hee cauſeth the tenor of the reconciliation to be read before the whole Aſſembly. They giue ſentence, that it tendeth in moſt points to the preiudice and deſtruction of the ſtate, and therefore reiect it: They promiſe to ſtand faſt vnto his Maieſtie; in caſe, as before, he would re-aſſume his courage, and reſolutely defend the honour of the Empire. And to conclude, they diſpatch an Embaſſie to the Pope, with intimation, that from thence-forth he ſhould ceaſe from ſuch friuolous conuentions, being purpoſely deuiſed to diſhonour the Maieſtie of the German Empire.
               They arriue before his Holineſſe; they expoſtulate the rigour of the Articles to the preiudice of the Empire: nothing elſe they inforce, nothing elſe they demand: But his Holineſſe inraged like an illuded Tigreſſe; layeth all the blame vpon Lewes, & with deeper hart-burning then before, falleth into treatie with Iohn and Charles Kings of Bohemia, heretofore ouerthrowne by Lewes, and with their vncle Baldwin, Archbiſhop of Treuers, to deſtoy Lewes and his whole poſterity.
               
                  The bargaine agreed vpon by theſe Pſeudo Chriſtians, in the yeare of our Sauiour 1346. vpon Maundy-Thurſday, hee is moſt irreligiouſly accurſed by Benedict; and by the renouation of the Proceſſe (ſent out by his predeceſſour Iohn) declared an Heretique and ſciſmatique.
               To aggrauate the deſpight, and by effects to ſhew the ſolidity of his religion, hee commandeth the Electors within a proportioned time, to make choiſe of another. Loe, the Emperor rather then he will be an inſtrument of ſlaughter and faction, diſgraceth his high calling by acceptance of baſeſt articles; but the Pope rather then he will want of his will, vnico ſtatu (as the prouerb is) will depoſe, ſet vp, commend, diſpraiſe, bleſſe and curſe; and without all reſpects, either of conſcience or humanity, ſet all Chriſtendome on outrage, to be reuenged on one creature. Were this the practiſe but of One, the imputation were excuſable, as a defect in manners, but through the whole Legend of euery Emperours life, you ſhall obſerue the one abſtinent, yea timorous, for conſcience ſake to defile euen his imaginations with humane blood: the other rigorous, wrathfull, impatient, and quarrelſome: ſomtime vpon donatiues, ſometime vpon iura imperij, and ſometimes vpon non augmenting of Saint Peters patrimonie. Which irreligious and Antichriſtian outrages, albeit they know them in their conſciences to be abſolutely diabolicall, repugnant to Chriſtian Doctrine, and pernicious to all ciuill ſociety, yet rather then any Pope or Popeling will let fall any one particle of vnlawfull vſurpation, gained by any the wickedeſt of his predeceſſours, words and workes ſhall flie at

randon vpon euery occaſion, ſo that it would amaze a very Turke to heare with what ſhifts, with what euaſions, and diſtinctions of ſpiritualia, they will ſtuffe whole volumes in iuſtifying of their falſifications, in wreſting and curtailing of Authors, in denying manifeſt Records, in railing on their oppoſites, and preſſing mens conſciences with miracles, policies, and impoſtures. Inſomuch, that if words will not worke, impoſtures ſhall ſeduce; if impoſtures prooue fruitleſſe, ſwords ſhall walke, if ſwords be preuented, then poiſons and treaſonable practiſes ſhall put end to the controuerſie. Blood muſt ſatiate, or the Church cannot be ſatisfied.
               But to our Hiſtory: The Electors haue a peremptory day giuen them, againſt which if they produce not their Anti-emperor, the Pope proteſteth by no irreligious reliques, that rather then the Church ſhall want a Lieuetenant, an Aduocate (Himſelfe muſt bee Captaine and chiefe Iuſtice) hee will ſet vp One of his ſole Election. Well, oaths muſt be kept inuiolable, eſpecially with traitors, and ſo doth his Holineſſe. And thus he beginneth his web. Henrie of Wittenberg Archbiſhop of Mogunce, and one of the electors, for his loiall adherency vnto his Lord and maſter, to curry fauour with the Bohemians, he depriueth of all his eccleſiaſticall and temporall capacities, and into his place he intrudeth Gerlace his Chaplein, the Nephew of Adolph of Naſſaw, once King of Romans. This new Papall Biſhop in ſatiſfaction of his Lord and maſters expectation, and in requitall of like office towards the Bohemians for their choice and election, vpon the aſſembly of the Princes at Renſium, for the nomination of a new

Emperor, worketh with Baldwin of Treuers, Walram of Colein, Rodulph Duke of Saxonie, and Iohn the father a Bohemian, to nominate and elect Charles King of Bohemia for ſupreme Lord of the Empire.
               But for all this;Paralip. V
                        •
                     ſp. albeit Charles in the life time of Lewes was crowned at Bonna, yet ſuch was his reputation, and ſuch the affection of all the good townes through the Empire towards his ſeruice, that vpon a conuocation of a Diet, and that after the coronation of Charles; No one of the Princes was found, either to ſecond the election, or to regard the Popes Breues, or to ſwarue from their promiſed fidelity.
               Had he beene a Popelike Prince; that is, If to worke his will, he would haue hazarded his Title vpon warre and bloodſhed, what could hee not haue performed. But beeing of a quite contrary diſpoſition, and guided by the beſt ſpirits of vnpartiall Prechers, he neuer began a warre againſt any man, though prouoked, but onely for the quiet and honour of his country; And in deteſtation of ſlaughter, reſolued with himſelfe neuer to determine a quarrel by warre, if any ſecondarie meanes might finiſh it by peace; and therefore betaking himſelfe to his quieteſt diſpoſitions, by the trechery of Clement (as ſome Authors report) he was poyſoned at a meriment, and after as he rode on hunting, as ſoon as by labor and the motion of his beaſt his blood heated, hee fell headlong from horſebacke. Thus, moſt vnworthyly was this Emperor to the griefe of all good Chriſtians made away, in the ſecond yeere after the election of Charles, the fift of the Ides of October, in the yeere of Grace 1347. after hee had ſo honourably gouerned the Empire for the ſpace of thirty and three

yeeres, that thoſe good ſpirits who all his life time had adminiſtred vnto him true and loyall ſeruice againſt al Papiſticall malediction, now after his death with like conſtancy and honeſty defended his neuer dying memory, againſt all Shemeis poſterity; as at this day it is apparantly ſeen, not only by record of hiſtory, but alſo by the particular letters of the Conſul of Baſil.
               
               
                  Parap. vrſp. Naucl. gen. 45.
                  And thus it is: the Biſhop of Bamberg (by vertue of a commiſſion directed vnto him from Auignion by the Popes authority, to abſolue as many as adhered vnto Lewes) the yeere following the death of Lewes, iournied with Charles towards Baſil: At his ariuall he made a very perſwaſiue ſpeech to induce the Inhabitants, ſithence they ſtood excommunicated in the behalfe of Lewes for aſſiſting his party, with all humility to demand abſolution: vnto whome Conradus of Bernsfield, the Maior of the City, in the preſence of Charles, and the reſt of the nobility, as well ſecular as eccleſiaſticall, made this reſolute reply: Lord of Bamberg, know, that we will neither confeſſe nor beleeue, that our Soueraigne Lord Lewes, Emperor of Romans, was euer an Heretique: But howeuer; whomſoeuer the Electors ſhall impoſe vpon vs for our Master, him onely wee acknowledge, without asking leaue of the Pope.
               
               Surely as this Heroique ſpeech of the Conſul, ſhewed the Chriſtianlike courage of the man, in attributing due obedience to his lawfull Soueraigne, and may to future ages be a teſtimony of innocency proteſted, and in meere loue and admiration of vertue: ſo without queſtion this noble and worthy Emperour deſerued no leſſe, if the whole impartiall world were to returne a Iury vpon the paſſage of his intire life:

being doubtleſſe an honeſt man, vnſpotted, ſtudious of his countries freedome, and onely a ſeuere opugner of the Romiſh tyranny: ſo far foorth, that without exception, he is to be remembred with all thoſe ſtiles of Honor, which are accuſtomed to be inſtiled vpon thoſe, who for the loue of their countries, haue refuſed to vndergoe no difficult perills.
            
            
               
                  ❧Charles the fourth.
               
                  He raigned in the yeere 1346. About the twentieth yeare of Edward the third.
               
               
                  
                     LEWES being dead, Charles after he had by diuerſe meanes appeaſed the competitors oppoſed againſt him by the electors of Mogunce, the Palatine, the Saxon, and the Brandeburgean, is at laſt vpon promiſe that he ſhould procure abſolution for the free Cities (yet ſtanding excommunicated for their adherence vnto Lewes) crowned Emperor, and on his iourny towards Italie; but there entertained with more diſgrace, then any of his predeceſſors. For as on foot he entred the City, Behold (quoth a certaine Senator) in his Oration before the people in the Capitol) thy King commeth towards thee in great humility; very bitterly taunting him with ſcoffes and reuilements. Inſomuch that the Cardinall of Hoſtia, ſent from Auignion by Innocent the ſixt, would not condiſcend to Crowne him, before he had giuen ſecurity to

remaine in Rome nor in Italy, no longer then the buſineſſe imported.
               How baſe and ignominious this limitation was to the Honour of the Empire, is apparantly to be diſcerned by the Epiſtles of Francis Petrarch, (that moſt learned and eloquent Poet) written vnto Charles himſelfe in theſe wordes. I knowe not what this promiſe made and ſworne to the Romane Biſhop meaneth, as if your Maiesties entrance into the Citie, had beene gaine-ſaid by ſome inexpugnable trench, or impaſſable mountaine: what manner of pride is this, that the Romane Prince, the life and fountaine of liberty, ſhould himſelfe be depriued of liberty; ſo farre forth, that he who ought to be Lord of all, can not be ſaid to be Lord of himſelfe?
               
               And in another place, Nerio of Friuli, in his writings, doth not much diſſent. All ſuperiority is impacient of corriualty: whereof, if antiquity can not giue vs preſidents, I feare that late examples will make the caſe frequent. For now (as fame goeth) the Pope of Rome hath forbidden the Romane Prince, Rome: whom hee not onely ſuffereth, but alſo commandeth, to be contented with the diadem, and ſole title of the Romane Empire. Him, whom he ſuffereth to be Emperour, at no hand will he ſuffer to enioy Emperie.
               As the cowardize of Charles, in diſſembling his greeuances againſt this propagating pride of the prelacie, is with iuſt cauſe to be complained of. No leſſe are the Popes worthy of eternall reprehenſion, who for their proper reſpects in depoſing of good & godly Emperors, ſubſtituted in their places ſuch Miniſters whoſe mindes they knew were alwaies prepared to ſatisfie their beheſts by warre and bloud-ſhed, moſt wickedly

& feloniouſly impoſing vpon the Empire thoſe loſſes and diſgraces, wherewith at this day wee ſee it weakned and generally taxed.
               For ſurely this Charles, to inable his proiects to appeaſe his Competitors; to diſpoſe of the reuenues of the Crowne at his pleaſure; and freely to beſtow them where he thought good, gaue vnto Gunther Earle of Swatzburg, a valiant and warlike Leader,Cuſpin. in vitae Guntheri. and by the Electors ſaluted for Emperor 22. thouſand markes of ſiluer, with two Imperiall Cities in Thuringe for the terme of his life.
               Vnto Frederick Marques of Miſnia,
                  Idem in vitae Caroli. elected in ſtead of Schwatzburge deceaſed, he gaue ten thouſand marks, to reſigne his nomination; and then prepared for his iourney towards Rome.
               
               From whence eſcaping,Auont. li. 7.
                   by an excuſe of going on hunting, in as diſhonorable a manner, as neuer any of his predeceſſors before, hee returned to Millan, and there created the Viſconti (a Potent family in that Citie) in receit of a wonderfull maſſe of mony, perpetuall Vicars of the Empire throughout Lombardy, to the euerlaſting diſhonor and preiudice of Germanie.
               
               For a ſumptuous banquet in Ville-noue neere Auignion, hee re-deliuered to the King of France, the Kingdome of Arles, acquired to the Empire by Otho the firſt.
               From Gerlace, Archbiſhop of Mogunce,
                  Theodor. de Nyem. though by his partiality hee gained his election, hee wreſted the priuiledge of inaugurating the King of Bohemia, in right belonging to the Church of Mogunce, and by cōfirmation of Clement the ſixt, inueſted it in the Archbiſhop of Prage.
               
               
                  
                  Zeigl. de viris illuſtribus Germaniae. ca. 91.
                  He ordained by law, that none but Bohemians ſhould be admitted into the Colledge of the Canons regular of Inglehame,
                  Krant. li. 1. c. 3. Tritemius in Cron. Hirſang. being of the Dioces of Mogunce. And preſently after to make quick and profitable returnes of the profits of the Empire, hee retailed vnto the adioyning Princes ſixteene free Cities of Sweuia, all held of the Crowne. To Cunon Archbiſhop of Treuers, he pawned Bopardia and Weſel (Imperiall Cities) by ſtatute.
               
                  Luſatia, which time out of minde, had beene held in fee of the Imperiall diademe by the Archbiſhops of Magdeburg,
                  Aeneas Siluius ca. 3. hiſt. Bohemic. by the corruption of the then Incumbent, he perpetuated vnto the kingdome of Bohemia.
               
               Againſt the fundamentall Lawes of the Country, and the cuſtome of Antiquity,De his & alijs quam plurimis prolixè vide Theod. de Nyem in nemore ſuo iam edito. c. 71.
                   by nouell and ſubordinate practiſe, he offered euery Elector (a part) one hundred thouſand Duckets to nominate for his ſucceſſor, his ſonne Winceslaus, a man giuen ouer to idleneſſe, cowardize, luxurie, all wantonneſſe and belly-cheere. For which, when this Phocas had not wherewith to keepe his dayes of payment, he morgaged for one hundred thouſand duckets, to ſome their Impoſts, and to the Palatine (as memory recordeth) Caeſarea Luthrea, Oppenham, Odenham, and Ingelham. Whereupon I may be bold to ſay, that by theſe diminutions, alienations, and mortgages, the Honourable entrados of the Crowne were ſo immeaſurably waſted, that from that day to this, it hath not beene of power to recouer or reſtore this terrible downefall.Zeigl. de viris illuſtribus Ger. ca. 83.
                   For by the ſale of theſe Impoſts (the true and eſſentiall Patrimonie of the Crowne) the glorious Eagle hath beene ſo deplumed, that euer ſince ſhee hath beene but a ſcorne and contemptible

to euery other liuing creatures. Which being true (as true it is) what Patriot can but accurſe the Romane Biſhops, as the ſole and prime-authors of all theſe miſchiefes, the children of deſolation, and the perpetuall diſturbers of all Chriſtian welfare?
            
            
               
                  ❧Wenceſlaus the Coward.
               
                  He raigned Anno Christ. 1379. about the ſecond yeare of Richard the ſecond.
               
               
                  AFter the demiſe of Charles, Wenceſlaus his ſonne, during the ſchiſme betwixt Vrban the ſixt, and Clement the ſeuenth (then the which a more fatall, beſtial, durable diſſention neuer befell the Church) gouerned the Empire, and tooke part with Vrban.
                  Naucl. gen. 47.
                   To Clement vpon occaſion he ſendeth his Embaſſadours; and amongſt them, are remembred certaine honeſt and indifferent Prelates to haue paſſed, whom by exquiſite tortures he ſlew moſt barbarouſly. And as for Vrban, for that the couetous King had deceiued the more couetous Romanes, gaping after the treaſure raiſed vpon eccleſiaſticall benefices, in not keeping promiſe with his perſonall preſence, after hee had granted his commiſſion for leuying the ſaide eccleſiaſticall tribute through the whole Empire, towards the defrayment of his charges for his Romane-iourney, he became vtterly alienated from his auncient friendſhip. But what Death preuented by the death of Vrban his ſucceſſour,

                  Boneface the ninth being ſure to haue had it, if God had giuen life, made good in higheſt meaſure. For he approouing the cenſure of deiection againſt Wenceſlaus, not ſo much for his euil and degenerate life, as for that he had beguiled the Romans of their pence, ratified and aduanced the Election of Rupert Earle Palatine, preferred vnto the Empire by the Biſhops of Mogunce,
                  Theod. de Nyem. li. 2. ca. 14.
                   
                  Golen, and Treuers.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧Rupertus Caeſar.
               
                  He raigned. 1400.
                  
               
               
                  AS Boneface the ninth, in deſpight of Wenceſlaus, with great facility and readineſſe approued his depoſition:Theod. de Nyem. li. 3. ca. 53.
                   ſo Rupert but now aloft in higheſt fauour of the Pope, at this preſent is ſo counterchecked by this wether-cocke, Alexander the fift, the third from Boneface (a moſt malicious Cretuſian) that he is very likely to feele the ſmart of as violent a diuiſion in the ſtate, as doth the Church in a preſent and terrible ſchiſme.
               For vpon his very inſtallment at Piſa in the Fiſhers chaire without any regard either of Ruperts right, or his preſent poſſeſſiō vpon a iuſt title, he nominateth by his miſſiues for King of Romanes, Wenceſlaus, the man, whom in a frequent aſſembly, with one conſent the Electors had heretofore remooued from imperiall gouernement.
               Which Indignity Rupert not being able to diſgeſt, hee made his grieuous complaints thereof vnto the

Lords of the ſtate; and exceedingly interrupted the obedience of the Church throughout the Empire. And without doubt, he had attempted far greater reformations, had not the ſparkles of theſe ſmoking ſubſtances together with the Prelate, to the general good of Chriſtendom been at one extincted by the Phyſick of Marſilius a phyſitian of Parma.
               
               And Rupert applying his labours to redreſſe what had been amiſſe by the auarice of Charles, and the cowardize of Winceſlaus, in the tenth yeere of his raigne departed this world. In whoſe place ſucceeded Sigiſmund, a Prince for his wiſedom, learning and integrity, moſt renowned.
            
            
               
                  ❧Sigiſmund.
               
                  He raigned 1411. About the twelfth yeere of Henry the fourth.
               
               
                  
                     SIGISMVND at his entrance vpon the Imperiall Diadem, finding the Romane Sea miſerably diſtracted by the wicked ſchiſme of three Antipopes (Iohn the foure and twentieth at Bononia, Gregory the twelfth at Ariminum, and Benedict the 12. in Spaine) tooke ſuch infinit paines to reſtore it vnto its priſtinate beauty,Naucl. gen. 48. Parap. vrſp. Cuspinian. as few or none of the auncient kings or Emperors euer vndertook the like, for the welfare of the Church. For albeit of his owne authoritie diueſted vpon himſelfe, and diuolued from his Anceſtors, he might, & ought to haue caſt out theſe boute-feaus of diuiſion; yet made

he choice in modeſty and trueneſſe of Chriſtian piety, rather to redreſſe theſe euils by a Generall Councel, then by the violent meanes of war and blood-ſhed. Which to effect, to his extreame trauaile, danger and expences, he viſited almoſt all the realmes of Chriſtendome, France, Spaine, and England, and there by his godlineſſe and good counſell ſo wrought with the Princes of thoſe kingdomes, that they commended his zeale, allowed his courſe, and promiſed their beſt aſſiſtance.
               
                  Platinan vita Martini quinti, praeter alios.This done, he tooke his iourny towards Italy, and dealt with Iohn at Mantua, to come vnto the Councel at Conſtance. The Aſſembly being ſet, ſuch were his feeling perſwaſiues, ſuch his important motiues, as the three Antipopes being condemned to depoſition, hee cauſed Otho of Colonna, a Roman patrician, by the name of Martin the fift, to be preferred to the place by the generall ſuffrage of all the nations there aſſembled. Yea, and to remoue all impediments from retardation of the peace, he ſuffered Iohn Huſſe and Ierome of Prage, men of exquiſit learning and ſingular piety, to be condemned and burned, againſt an oath of ſafe-conducte publiquely allowed them.
               But now, let vs go by examination to learne what thankes this godly, zealous, honourable and Chriſtian Emperour receiued at the hands of this Holy-ſeeming Sea, for theſe their ſo infinite benefits. Vpon which I will not ſtand to exemplifie, for that euery weake braine can conceiue, what are the bleſſings of peace, what the fruites of a quieted conſcience, what the rewardes of vnity in religion. But ſurely their retributions were ſuch, as would abſolutely diſhearten any

wiſe man, to inable ſuch ingratefull Canoniſts by benefits. Yet will wee take ſo much paine, as to decipher them to our Reader.
               No long time after (Eugenius the fourth,Plat. in vita Eugenij. 4.
                   then Poping it in Venice) the Emperour tooke occaſion to go into Italie to receiue his Inauguration: where by the way it happened that he countenanced ſomewhat aboue ordinary, Philip Duke of Millan, at that inſtant warring againſt the Venetians and Florentines. They partly fearing, and partly imagining, that their wills were halfe obtayned, if they might worke the Pope to their faſhion, aduentured, and without oppoſall gained his Fatherhoods good will, to deny the Emperor his lawfull requeſt; and more, adioyned his forces, to make good the paſſage of Aruo about Syenna againſt his Maieſties people. This, you muſt at any hand remember, was the Popes requitall, this their vſuall remunerations, not vnfitly beſeeming their double dealing conſciences.
               Yet departed his Maieſty not vncrowned, but obſerue I beſeech you, by what practiſes, by what cunning ſleights they proceeded in their ſtate-Houſe. Extraordinary Interceſſion muſt be made; Six months he muſt ſtay at Siena, to his infinit expence; who gained by that? And at laſt, muſt he leaue Rome, doubt you not, but to Eugenius his high content.
               And againe, this Neronian bloud-thirſting Biſhop, ſom ſhort time after being depoſed, for going about to fruſtrate the decree of the Councel of Conſtance (wherby it was inacted that euery ſeuenth yeare the Biſhops ſhould celebrate a Generall Councell) and to ratifie That of Baſil, which Martin had ſummoned, and

himſelfe authorized; in the daies of Frederick the third, he ſet all Auſtria,
                  Vuimphelinagus in Epit. rerum Germani carum. on a miſerable, woful & lamētable cō
                  buſtion, by prouoking Lewes the ſonne of Charles king of France, then called the Daulphin, to infeſt Germany with warre, fire, & famine. For this Prince, at the pleaſure of Eugenius, endeuoring to make void the Councel of Baſil, with his Armeniachs and ſouldiers, by cunning, treaſon, & proteſtations, poſſeſſed himſelfe of all the plaine Country, yea, and of ſome Cities of Alſatia, miſerably waſting that goodly Prouince, the moſt fertil mother of grain & wine. That done, he fell to burning the villages,Naucl. gen. 49.
                   the Mannors & Manſions of citizens, of orphanes and widowes, and therein ſpared neither Gods Churches nor Monaſteries. Hauing put period to waſt, but not to cruelty, he returned to Baſil with 30. thouſand Cumbatants, where by the valiancy of three thouſand Heluetians, charging for their Country, hee was finally ſlaine, the third part of his lame & maymed Army, ſcant returning with life into France. Such be the ſucceſſe of all papal entertainment.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Frederick the third.
               
                  Hee raigned Anno 1440. about the eighteenth yeare of Henry the ſixth.
               
               
                  
                     ALbert ſucceeded Sigiſmund; but hee departing this world within two yeares after his election, the Imperiall diaceme diuolued vpon Frederick of Austria; who being

by nature a Prince of a clement, milde & peaceable diſpoſition, ſet diligent watch and warde ouer his thoughts, his words, and his actions, not at all to offend theſe hereditarie diſturbers of peace, and perpetuall manaclers of Princes. Yet could hee not fully auoid their croſſings, abate their pride, nor eſcape their plots.
               For as in a publique Parliament held at Mogunce, he did what he could to corroborat the councell of Baſil, held in the yeare of our Lord 1441. which the Pope laboured tooth and naile to diſanul; as alſo, to diminiſh the exactions which by Popiſh iniunctions were leuied vpon the German Churches; which to effect, by his letters, hee deſired the king of France either to aſſiſt in perſon, or by ſome eminent perſons of his Kingdome:Epiſt. extat. infine clemangis in faſciculo rerum repetundarum ante aliquot annos Coloniae impreſſa. So the Pope, to countermine againſt this lawfull battery of publique triall (for theſe can no more abide it, then Owles can light) tampereth with the French, neither to goe himſelfe, nor to ſuffer any other (without his priuity) to appeare as his Deputie. Here behold one Popiſh tricke more for the preſent to fruſtrate the intended reformation of a noble & vertuous Emperour. And heereupon followed that wofull Alſatian de-population, whereof wee tolde you but now;VVork layd out on another frontier by the Court of Rome, when reformation is ſpoken of. There is an other tricke complotted, to buſie his head with-all, viz. Diuerſion. His owne houſe is on fire, how can hee then attend the quenching of his neighbours?
               And albeit, that hee outliued three ſucceſſiue Biſhops, & during their liues, caried himſelf ſo modeſtly and benignly towards them, that nothing was attempted by them againſt his Dignity; & yet hoped for greater

contentments by the riſing of Pius the ſecond to the Papacie, his auncient ſeruant and Miniſter: Notwithſtanding, this his truſty friend being once ſeated, without acquainting the Emperour, made no ſcruple to accurſe his kinſman, Sigiſmund Archduke of Austria, and to entangle Germanie with inteſtine diuiſions. As thus.
               
                  Sigiſmund, after long controuerſying, and nothing preuailing, being vnwilling that the people vnder his tuition, ſhould ſtill ſtand expoſed to the depraedations of the Romanists, in a bickering of Horſe-men, chanced to take priſoner, and impriſoned, Nicholas Cuſanus, by the Pope ſent into Tirol, to ranſack the Biſhoprick of Brixia: The Biſhop cenſuring him at no leſſe a crime then high treaſon, committed againſt one of his creatures, enioyneth him greeuous puniſhments, from which his truſtineſſe could not be wooed to abſolue him, no not at the interceſſion of Caeſar, vntill Pluto himſelfe came a meſſenger to releaſe him from his papall obſtinacie.
               His owne Creatures report, that neither the threats, nor the intreaties of Princes or communalties could any whit terrifie him, but in extreame and inſatiable prowling for mony, he was ready to accurſe and proſecute with warre, as many as any way offered to gainſay his intendments.
               
                  Vide Paralip. Ʋrſp. Munſter. in Coſmog. Naucl. in vlt. gen.
                  Theodorick Erbach, Archbiſhop of Mogunce being dead, Diether Erusburg was preferred to his place. This man, for that Annats and firſt fruites had beene aboliſhed and condemned in the Councel of Baſil, refuſed to pay to Saint Peter for beſtowing the Pall vpon him, thoſe twenty thouſand, ſixe hundred and fifty duckets

of the Rhene, which his Holineſſe by preſcription adiudged to be due vnto him. Pius was not a little moued at the refuſall; denieth him confirmation, and beſtowed the Incumbencie vpon Adolph of Naſſau (not for loue towards the one belieue it, nor for eſpeciall deſert in the other) but for that hee was honourably allied,Note. and able by friends to become maſter of the poſſeſſion.
               
                  Diether valiantly reſiſteth his Deiection, & amongſt many others, by large and bountifull entertainment draweth Henry the Palatine, and Frederick of Bamberg, to take part in his quarrell: All Germanie is vp in faction, and the principall perſonages therein ingaged, to their notable loſſe and conſumption. For, Charles Marques of Baden, George Biſhop of Meten, & Vlrich Earle of Wittemberg, of the faction of Adolph, in a notable incounter neere Sechenham, are rowted, ſlaine, captiuated, and impriſoned in the Caſtle of Heydelberge. From whence they could not be deliuered, before that Baden had payed one hundred thouſand Florins; Meten forty fiue thouſand, and Wittemberg as many, as the Marques. And for further gratuity, they were faine either to add, or to releaſe to the Palatine, other royalties of equall value vnto their ranſomes.
               At this misfortune of his friends, who maketh any doubt, but that Pius was exceedingly agreeued? whervpon, as the bruſed viper, hee addreſſeth his querimonious letters vnto Philip Duke of Burgundy, concerning the miſerable eſtate of his partakers; a Prince as truly wiſe, as valiant in armes.Note againe. Him hee nominateth Captaine of the Warre, and intreateth his aſſiſtance againſt the Palatine, Diether, the Earle of Catzenelboge,
                  
and their adherents. But Philip in his high wiſedom, either miſliking the burthē of this war, or by the temporizing awkwardnes of the Pope too-long deferring his reſolue; meane while, by the treaſon of two Citizens, Mogunce was ſurpriſed by Scaludo in the night & by Lodowic Niger Palatin, the Earle of Vold, and other of their complices in the behalfe of Adolph. Who put it to ſack, and fire; ſlew fiue hundred of the Citizens, and reduced it into perpetuall ſeruitude. So that this noble Dioceſſe, what by the ſales, the alienations, and the mortgages, of the dorps, villages and burroughs, euen to this very day feeleth, and ſmarteth for the outrages of this papall warre.
               This was one of Pius his good deeds; Rather then his auaricious Cofers would forbeare to in-exhauſt Germanie of her treaſure, hee cared not into what diſtreſſes he caſt the Princes, the people, and the Cities of the kingdom.
               But as this ſecond Impius dealt with the Princes; So did his ſucceſſor, a Venetian, Paulus the ſecond (and worſe) with his Maieſty. For after the taking of Conſtantinople, Frederick made his ſecond iourny to Rome, on purpoſe to deliberate with Paul about an expedition againſt the Turks, To the accelerating wherof, for that the Princes through their mutuall diſcontents were much deiected in courage, he praied his Holineſſe in perſon to beare him company into Germanie. But the Biſhop putting off the motion with Courtſhip and kind proteſtations,Hubertus Golt. & Hutenus. notwithſtanding laid wait for his life. Which he by his prouidence declining, and in future reſoluing, to take preciſe notice of Popiſh trecheries, firſt couragiouſly oppoſed in the Parliament at

                  Noremberg againſt the Legats of Innocent, deputed through Germany to collect his Holineſſes diſmes, but diſpatched them away againe to Rome as penileſſe, as from thence they departed.
               What man liueth ſo void of proficiency, that reading theſe Legends, will hereafter beleeue this traiterous ſociety; ſithence ſuch worthy Emperours, ſuch wiſe Princes, and ſuch great Potentates, could neither by their owne prouidences, nor the prudencie of their counſels, preſcribe themſelues an aſſured meanes, to be fully acquited from their ouer-reaching inuentions?
            
            
               
                  ❧ Maximilian the first.
               
                  Hee raigned 1494. About the ninth yeere of Henry the ſeuenth.
               
               
                  AFter the deceaſe of Frederick, Maximilian being by the generall ſuffrage of the Electors in the life time of his Father choſen for his Conſort in the Empire, was now acknowledged for Emperor. Who although with eaſe hee might haue purchaſed the accuſtomed ſolemnities of Caeſar, yet beeing a Prince moſt deepely in-ſeene into worldly practiſes; without queſtion, vpon recordation of ſuch inconueniences, which hee obſerued formerlie to haue fallen vppon the preceding Emperours, (allured vnto Rome, by the glittering reflex of a golden Crowne) hee ſet himſelfe downe, and quoted it in his Tables;

                  That the preſence of the Popes were euer to bee auoided, an infallible preſage of enſuing aduerſity to the Roman Emperors. Notwithſtanding his warieſt ſinceritie could not at all times auoide their wickedeſt couſenages.Naucl. gen. 49. Mutius li. 29. Cuſpinian in vita Maximil. & Zelemi Othomanni.
               
               For in the very infancie of his inſtallement, that moſt luxurious and couetous Tyrant Alexander the ſixt, for mony, to the eternall reproch of the Chriſtian name, ſold Zezimus heire of Turky, expulſed by his brother Baiazet, aliue and dead within the ſpace of one day. In like thirſt of treaſure, receiued from the French, he ratified the Rape of Anne of Britaine, before eſpouſed by Proxie vnto Maximilian. The ſolemnized and conſummated mariage of the daughter of the ſaid Emperor with Charles of France, he diſſolued againſt the will, intreaty, and reall commandement of Caeſar her father.
               By Cardinall Raymond he pillaged the chiefeſt Prouinces of Germany with nouell and vnheard off deuiſes of exaction.
               
                  Mut. li. 3.
                  By that irregular and incomprehenſible power of the keies, for many yeeres to come he gaue pardons to all rich-ſoules departed.
               After him, as ſecond in name, ſo ſecond in Papacie, Iulio circumuented this Emperor with as fine fetches, as did any of his predeceſſors the former Caeſars.
               
               For after he had ingaged his maieſty in the warre of Venice,
                  Hubertus Goltz. Paral. Vrſp. a warre of all other the moſt dangerous & troubleſom, and that he had forced the beſt of their Cities to the pinch of neceſſity: Iulius againſt his faith, moſt religiouſly ſworne before the ſtates of the Empire at Auguſta; and againſt common honeſty, not only receiued

the Venetians, vpon requeſt of peace, into fauour, but entring with them into League, this moſt wicked Senacherib turned his armes againſt his Maieſty. Yelling out a ſpeech rather ſhewing euident teſtimony of an Out-lawes humour, then of Peters ſucceſſor.
               For by records of memory it is certainly reported, that as he paſſed from the City by the bridge of Tiber, he threw the keies into the Riuer, exclaiming in fury: Sithence Peters keies will no longer ſtead vs, welcome Pauls ſword. Whereby, if a man would fall to ieſt, he might well argue, that by this mad tricke he depriued himſelfe and his ſucceſſors of this Clauian Tyranny, claimed from S. Peter, and now tranſferred to Saint Tiber.
               
               Vpon which tranſlation of Iulius his keies, one hath plaied no leſſe truly, then wittely in theſe verſes.
               
                  He that for many Ages long hath ſate
                  In Peters chaire, new doctrine doth inuent,
                  For ſinfull Soules he prayes not: but at that,
                  Which peacefull Peter him to follow ment,
                  He ieſts: Loues armes and bloody ſtreames of warre,
                  
                     Paul is his Saint, Peter inferiour farre.
                  
                     Paul hath a ſword, but ſmites not: He not ſo,
                  
                  For many ſoules haue died with his blow.
                  
                  A cruell Out-law ſprung from poyſo'nd woomb,
                  And neither followes Christ, nor Peters doome.
               
               But our great and eternall God,Hubert. Goltz. Mutius lib. 3. Paralip. Ʋrſp. the iuſt reuenger of iniquity, ſuffered not this his neuer-before-heard-of periury to die vnreuenged.
               For at what time Lewes king of France, according to the Conuentions of the League with Caeſar, perſecuted his Holineſſe, ſo far ouergone in pride through the aſſiſtance of the Venetians, as hee doubted not to

ſcorne all conditions of peace; yet after the battell of Rauenna, ſuch was the diſaſtrous fortune of him and his, that the peace, which but euen now, hee ſcorned, now hee humbly ſeeketh, to his coſt experimenting that for all his ieſting, Peters keyes at a pinch did him more ſeruice, then many thouſands of Pauls ſwords.
               After this ouerthrow, and ſome other croſſes, hee died, and left Leo the tenth, his ſucceſſour, as well in ſeat as in trecherous diſpoſition. For in the beginning of his pontificie, eſtranging himſelfe from the French King, he adhered to Caeſar & Sforza the Millanois, againſt the French, then in March vpon an inuaſion againſt Millan.
               
               Vpon the ſlaughter of the Heluetians at Marignan, Frederick and Sforza being reduced into order, he violated his league with Maximilian, and returned againe to the friendſhip of Francis.
                  Arnoldus Feronius in vita Franciſci Ʋaleſij. Vnto whom, after he had obtained a Graunt, that the pragmaticall Sanction ſhould be aboliſhed in France, and a new inſerted, hee conſerred the titles of the Constantinopolitan Empire.
               In this donation, whether ſhould a Chriſtian more admire his prepoſterous liberality, in giuing away an other mans right, or abhorre his trecherie in doing his vtmoſt, to croſſe Maximilian, ſo well-deſeruing an Emperor?
               
                  Catal. teſtium veritatis.But Caeſar finding himſelfe deceiued (whether in this confrontment, or in ſome other, I am not able to ſay) is reported to haue ſaid in Dutch: That hee could well auow, that none of the Popes had kept faith with him: And that Leo ſhould be the last of that ranke, vnto whom hee would giue credit. And that hee ſaid ſo, and did ſo,

the ſequel proued. For within a few yeares after falling into a laske, he yeelded vp his ghoſt, in the yeare of Saluation 1519. By whom, by the pleaſure of almighty God, it might haue come to paſſe, that hee, who had beene ſo often illuded by Popiſh practiſes, might haue taken ſome courſe in ſo great an alteration and bleſſed reformation of religion, to haue begun primitiue reſtauration to their finall deſtruction. But being preuented by immature death, what was in his minde, he bequeathed to be executed, by the potencie of his liuing ſucceſſor Charles, his brothers ſonne.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Charles the fift.
               
                  He raigned Anno 1519. about the eleuenth yeare of Henry the eighth.
               
               
                  BVt what Penne, as it ought, in ſuting ornament, is able to delineat to life, the treacheries which from time to time theſe Patrons of confuſion bounded out againſt this Charles, this potent and thrice honorable Emperour? In ſo wonderfull an alteration of religion, ſuch as ſince the corruption of the Primitiue, neuer befell the Chriſtian world, who can but wonder at the daring preſumption of the Popes, in prouoking ſo happy and ſo worthy a Potentate? who, taking into notice his ſingular affection in defending and vpholding the Papacie, can chuſe but accurſe the ingratitude of ſuch deſperat perſons?
               
                  
                  Jouius li. 4. de vita Leonis decimi. The Pope is now French.For vpon the deceaſe of Maximilian, the Electors being aſſembled at Frankfort, Charles and Francis king of France, became competitors for the diademe. Leo the tenth, being in bonds of ſtrict friendſhip with Francis, and according to the innated humours of the Church, hauing receiued his fee, fauoured and pleaded his beſt plea in barre of Charles, to the preferment of his bountifull client Francis.
               
               His cautions conſiſted of three principles; the firſt imported a conſideratiue feare of his Greatnes, being by inheritance a Prince indowed with many ſpacious and wealthy Kingdomes. The ſecond, was taken from his peculiar and figure-caſting imagination; In that, forſooth, this Charles by no obſcure and lineamentall predictions of face and diſpoſition, ſhould reſemble the man, fore-told in certaine verſes of an auncient Prophet;A truer Propheſie, then the Pope was aware of. 
                  Who ariſing in the North, ſhould be the motiue of greeuous alterations to fall vpon all Italy, but eſpecially vpon the Romiſh ſea: The third from pretence of equity, by letters ſignified vnto the Lords of the Election; That it ſtoode not with Law for Charles to aſpire vnto the Empire; for that the Kings of Naples were the Churches Liege-men, and time out of minde by oath had capitulated with the Biſhops, neuer to affect the Romane Empire, but to reſt contented with their inheritances.
               
               
                  Appendix ad Plati. Sleid. vbi ſupra.But by the integrity of Frederick Duke of Saxonie, in manifeſtation of his loyalty towards Maximilian his deceaſed Maſter, vnto whom all his life time hee ſtood moſt deuoted; Charles preuailed. Leo now turning Vulpes,
                  Now Imperial. followes the ſtreame; for the preſent, cleanly falleth off from the French: And finding Grace to attend Charles; there courts he; and thether hee diſpatcheth

his Commendatorie miſeries.
               
                  Charles requireth his Amen to the Election; as alſo his diſpenſation, to retaine with the Empire the Kingdome of Naples, the Law of Inueſtiture in no point gaine-ſaying it. But giue a Pope leaue, I pray you, to fly to his wits, he muſt, and doth plot out new deuiſes, to impeach the Greatnes of Charles. Hee ſendeth his Breues and meſſengers throughout Germanie,
                  Reſp. Caeſaris ad breue Apoſtolicum. to forbid the Diet at Wormes: of purpoſe to put off his Coronation at Aquiſgran. But when his pontifical improbity perceiued his poſitiue diuerſions to be illuded; and the reſolution of the Electors to be ſuch, as could not be daunted in their proceedings by force, feare, flattery, nor threats, hee then fell againe, to the renuing of his league, with the late-forſaken French: Amongſt other Articles inſerting this for one; That,Againe French. 
                  both the Sicils ſhould be taken from Charles; That the gouernment of Italie ſhould be altered, and the protection of the Cities ſhared, betweene the French and his Holines.
               
               Now the queſtion is, for how long time this Combination ſtood immutable: ſo long doubt you not, as it ſtood with the welfare of Leo, and the aduantage of his ſea. And this is an eſpecial note, to be alwaies obſerued through the whole diſcourſe of theſe liues.
               For, as ſoone as the French King, vpon confidence of this Popiſh League, had broken with Caeſar, & ſent Robert de la March, Charles his rebel, to infeſt Netherland; yea, and his men of warre into Italy, to aſſay the ſurpriſe of Rhegium, a towne late belonging to the Church; Leo fearing the potencie of the French, and calling their fidelities into ſuſpect: to make ſure work for the maintenance of his owne ſtake, and to reduce

a reſtitution to the Church of thoſe townes which the French had vſurped; Now againe the third time hee followeth the Fortunes of Caeſar:
                  And laſtly Imperiall. Deſiring of his Maieſty (after his moſt courteous reception) that Parma & Placentia might be reſtored to the Church; Francis Sforza to the Dutchy of Millan; the French expulſed Italy, and the Papacy being ſetled in a peaceable eſtate, might thenceforth be ſecured from all feare of the French.
               But Paul dying; By the ſucceſſion of Adrian the ſixt, a Germane borne, the Papall Anger for a while lay ſilenced.Gerardus Moringus in vita Hadriani vi. Iouius in vita eiuſdem. For during the ſhort time of his Papacy, As a good ſchoolemaſter, hee perſiſted conſtant in good will towards Caeſar; And againſt the French, he aſſiſted him with treaſure, and conioyned him in league with the Florentines, the Siennois, the Luquois, the Roytelets of Italy, the Apoſtolique ſea, with Henry of England, and Lewes of Hungary.
               
               But Adrian in the ſecond yeere of his Papacy being departed, not without ſuſpition of poyſon, the fatall practiſes of the Biſhops by ſo much the more eagerneſſe outflamed, by how much they had gathered materialls to worke vpon, during the time of the former reſpiration.
               
                  Feronius in vita regis Franciſci.For Iulius of Medices, otherwiſe Clement the ſeuenth, after much wrangling being elected Pope, before his inſtallation was, no man more, eſteemed of Caeſar. From the Church of Toledo, by his bounty he receiued an annuity of ten thouſand duckats.Reſp. Caeſaris ad breue Apoſtolicum. He reconciled him ſo throughly into the fauour of Adrian, from whence he was fallen, that in all affaires of importance, Adrian made him only of his counſell. But no ſooner Pope,

no ſooner traitor. Againſt his Lord hee complotteth league vpon league, diſcharging his bills of account with acquittances of this nature.
               For Francis the French king being in Italy,
                  Feronius. and after the taking of Millan diſperſing his forces throughout Lombardy, Clement worketh the diſ-union of the Hadrian confederacy, and forbiddeth the Florentins, the Syennois and the Luccois to pay the money, which by the conuention they ought to haue ſent vnto Caeſar.
               
               By Albert Pius Prince of Carpi,
                  
                     As Leo: So Iulius.
                     As Leo and Iulius, ſo the reſidue: viz. wethercocks, for aduantage. Sleyd. li. 4.
                     
                   he concluded a Clandeſtine league with king Francis, meane time cunningly treating with the Imperialiſts by way of ſequeſtration and Indifferency to impledge the territory of Millan into his diſcretion.
               But the deuiſe being vtterly diſliked, and fortune againſt all imagination ſo croſſing his deſignements, that in a memorable defeature, Francis was taken priſoner at Paruie, and carried captiue into Spaine;Feronius in vita Franciſci. Iouius li. 7. in vita F. Daui. then to his perpetuall reproch of leuity and inconſtancy (to flater with Caeſar) he parted with an infinit maſſe of mony for his ſouldiers arrerages: yet during theſe paſſages in iealouzy, that Charles would turne his thoughts to the conqueſt of Millan, which of all his Italian pretendācies was only left vnconquered, he goeth to counſel with Loyeſſe the Queen mother, Henry king of England, the Venetians and ſome other Potentates, how to expulſe the Imperialiſts out of Italie, and redeeme Francis. To ſet forward the execution whereof, he dealeth with Ferdinand Dauila, a man of eminent place & ſouldiery in Caeſars Campe: aſſaieth to draw him to the party, and for a bait offereth him the title of the kingdom of Naples. Dauila being of a ſubtill & cloſe diſpoſition,

accepteth, learneth the ſecrets of the enemies proiects, and acquainteth his maſter therewith. Caeſar laugheth at the mans periury; who being the principall architect of all iniurious & preiudiciall proceedings againſt him, had notwithſtanding himſelfe made his enemy priuy to counſels, giuen him very ſerious cautions in future, how to proceede in his affaires, and how to prouide for his owne ſecurity, with an intimation to become carefull to bind the loyalties of his men of warre with greater deuotion to his ſeruice.
               Wherby finding himſelfe ouer-reacht by Dauila, he giueth not ouer, but trieth another way to the wood: And thus it was: Francis being ſet at liberty by Caeſar, and vnwilling to make good theſe conuentions, wherunto by the treaty of Madril he ſtood obliged; he takes hold of the occaſion, abſolueth him of his oath; confederateth anew with the French and ſome others, and proclaimeth the confederacy by the name of the Moſt holy League. Inſerting amongſt the Articles, that Caeſar alſo might be cōprehended therin, So that, he would firſt re-deliuer vpon a competent ranſome the children of France, as yet in hoſtage for their father: reſtore Millan to Sforza, and enter Italie for his Coronation with no greater troops, then ſhould ſeeme requiſite to the diſcretions of the Pope and the Venetians.
               What indifferent Reader, weighing the originall of this league, the time wherein it was concluded: and the occaſions wherupon it was broched, can make any other conſtruction to his vprighteſt cenſure, but that his Holineſſe had ſmall intention by theſe iniurious breaches of concluded articles, to further the publique peace, but rather to adminiſter matter of implacable

heart-burnings and aſſured wars between the Princes. For by one Apoſtaticall Breue, firſt, the conditions of the peace are preſcribed to ſo high and mighty an Emperor, by his ſubiect and Vaſſall Sforza of Milan: ſecondly, the oath of the French King duely and ſolemnly taken, is pardoned and fruſtrated: thirdly Caeſar is commanded to re-deliuer the children of France, as if it were not enough by the releaſement of the fathers oath, to be once deluded. Fourthly, He is commanded, not to winke at, but to perpetuate the tyranny of the Italian Kinglings. Fiftly, he is commanded to forbeare to come vnto Italy, vnleſſe he proportioned his troops to the ſhape of the Papal and Venetian limitations. Sixtly, He is commanded to giue pardon to Traitors: and for concluſion, in caſe of not-performance, warre is denounced by ſea and by land.
               Amidſt which diſhonorable limitations, what could Caeſar doe, but in true acknowledgement of the vprightnes of his cauſe, reiect theſe baſe conditions with as great courage on the one ſide, as they were inſolently propounded by the other, repoſing more hope in his innocency, then in the multitude of Horſe or ſhipping?
               And ſurely, God almighty, the vnpartiall Iudge of humane actions, ſo moderated the execution of his diuine iuſtice, that whatſoeuer complots this architect of euill counſell, meant to haue throwne downe vpon the head of Caeſar, the very ſame befell his own perſon, euen when he thought himſelfe to ſtand vpon ſo ſure a ground, as to be an onely Spectator of the enſuing troubles.
               For Caeſar beeing awakened at the Report of ſo famous

a Confederacie,Sleyd. li. 6. Feronius vbi ſupra. diſpatched into Italy the Duke of Burbon & Fronſperg, Captaines of admirable reputation for their cariage in the laſt warres; with warrant to defend Naples, now by the tenor of the league giuen in prey to warre and diſ-vnion.
               Theſe Leaders pretending, as if they meant to paſſe by Florence, now growen proud by the continuance of peace, their mighty Citizen the Pope, and the late league; at laſt bending their courſe by the mountaines and rocks, vpon the ſixt day of May, they ſolemnly entred Rome: droue Clement into the Baſtil of Adrian; and vpon want of all neceſſaries (his Bulls, his Breues and execrations, thicke and threefold breathed out againſt the Germanes and Spaniards, ſtanding him in no ſtead) compelled him to yeeld; but with ſo ſeruile and baſe conditions, as vpon the like, neuer did Souldier to this day, giue vp his fort.
               The inſolency of the Spaniard, and the inhumanity of the Germane, I am not able in apt words to diſplay. See Guicoiardine, and the Hiſtories of thoſe times.
               For beſides their horrible pillagings, their ſpoiles, their rauiſhments, and their waſts, no kinde of ſcorne was left vnpractiſed againſt the Pope & his Cardinals: All without difference were alike made captiues, all alike tortured: He that was rāſomed to day by the Spaniſh, to morrow was again in durance to the Germans.
               
               
                  Caeſar writeth his letters to the Pope and the King of England, that all this happened beſides his priuity or command; yea, that he would not acknowledge ſuch tranſgreſſors for his ſouldiers,Like for like, by Caeſar to the Pope. who durſt attempt ſo wicked a ſeruice. Yet ſticketh hee not to attribute the miſhap to the ſecret iudgements of God, who would

not ſuffer ſo groſſe an indignity concluded againſt the Maieſty of the ſacred Empire, to eſcape without puniſhment. Bona verba.
               
               The Pope being reſtored to liberty, maketh ſhew of great friendſhip, but in ſecret worketh him all poſſible vexation.
               For either vpon hope to poſſeſſe the Kingdome of Naples (a preciſe condition in the articles) or elſe in deſire of reuenge; he ſo wrought with the French king to renue the warre, that at his direction Lautrick was ſent into Italy, for the conqueſt thereof. But ſuch was the euent, that Lautrick died; the peſtilence raged through the Camp; and nothing was effected. Wherupon, the French king for the loue of his children (as yet captiues in Spaine) was glad to accept of the proffered conditions. The Biſhop, alwaies accuſtomed to goe with the ſtreame, vpon the peace perfected at Cambray, betweene the Emperour, the French, and the other Princes, enſtalleth Charles at Bononia, with the Imperial diadem, and aydeth him in the ſiege and conqueſt of Florence; the people whereof hee ſaw puniſhed moſt ſeuerely. But his Holines had not forgotten to requite Charles with many like courteſies, if God had beſtowed longer life vpon him.
               For within three yeeres after, hee had complotted a league with Francis the French King at Marſellis, to take Millan from Caeſar, & to inuade Sauoy; beſtowing his niece Katherin vpon his ſonne Henry, if, to the good of the Chriſtian common-wealth, he had not beene by death preuented, and that, not without the ſuſpition of poiſon, as ſome ſuppoſe.
               Could a more treacherous man be found liuing

then this Clement,
                  If ſuch the men continually, thē what their Religion? who continually being taken into fauour and alliance with Caeſar, continually betrayed his faith, and of a diſſembling friend, euermore proued a profeſſed enemie.
               After the deceaſe of Clement, ſucceeded Alexander Farneſius, otherwiſe Paul the third, a man almoſt ſpent with age, yet of a farre more ſubtile diſpoſition.
               
                  Haec omnia expoſita exſtant apud Sleyd. li. 17. vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad lib. 23.
                  For vpon obſeruation, that the controuerſies in religion did daily more and more augment, and propagate, with ſingular affection he ſtudied Caeſars fauour; but to no other purpoſe, then in thirſt of the German bloud, to combine his Maieſtie and the other Princes, in ſtricter bonds of perſeuerance, to take armes againſt the Lutherans; hypocritically giuing out to all perſons, and in all places, and that vpon his faith, that hee would ſpeedily aſſemble the Generall counſell, ſo often petitioned, and promiſed to the Germane Nation. And ſurely ſo he did,To winne time. firſt proclaiming it to be held at Mantua, then at Verona, and laſtly after the expiration of many yeares at Trent: but not with any intention to ſalue the greeuances of the Chriſtian Common-weale, or the diſtemperature of the Church: but that by holding the Germanes in ſuſpence vpon the finall determinations of the Councel; meane time he might win time to effectuate his ſecret reſolutions; viz. the ſuppreſſion of the truth, and the reſtitution of Germanie, now through the light of the Goſpell beginning to ſhake off Babilonian tyrannie, to it priſtinat captiuity. So in the yeare of our Lord 1546. he celebrateth the Councell at Trent, and maketh all poſſible faire weather with the Germanes. But with what intent? ſurely to combine the nobility, & to inſtigate his Maieſtie

to begin the warre againſt the Protestant Princes, and the Euangelicall Cities. In the beginning whereof, good fortune prognoſticated a proſperous progreſſe vnto Caeſar (by the taking of Iohn Frederick Elector of Saxonie; the Lantgraue of Heſſen; the confiſcating of all Wittembergs eſtates, and the finacing of many confederat Cities) yet, in being too officious to giue his Holines content, in keeping his priſoners more ſtrictly then Honour could warrant, and in coyning new articles of religion to the Popes beſt liking; ſuch an alteration followed, vpon the riſing of Maurice Prince Elector, and Albert of Brandenburg, and other new confederates, that (diſmiſſing the captiuated Princes, and granting liberty of Conſcience through Germanie) ſo diſaduantageous were his proofes of papall countenance, that he often wiſhed, that he had preferred the loues of the Princes, before the Popes ſureſt alliance.
               For although (to confeſſe truth) the proceedings of Paul againſt his Maieſtie, were ſlower and better caried, then thoſe of his predeceſſors; in regard that hee was his Champion, to manage bloudy and difficult ſtratagems againſt the ſeruants of God: yet vpon the death of Peter Aloyſius duke of Parma & Placentia (murdered by treaſon for his tyrannie) when Ferdinand Gonzaga, Caeſars Generall, and Gouernour of Millan,
                  Mamb. Roſeus li. 4. appendicis ad Hiſtoriam Neapolita. Pā
                     dulphi Collenutij haec latè explicat. was inueſted in his ſtead: the Pope preſently miſtruſteth Caeſar for an author of the murder; and in vaine requeſting the Reſtitution of Placentia, he ſtrait ſtarteth from Caeſar, and bethinketh himſelfe how to ioyne with the French: And had ioyned in deed, if hee had longer liued; the time offering ſo fit an opportunity.
               
                  For now Henry vpon the defeature of the Princes, and the ſeizing on Placentia (aboue expectation) growing into iealouſie of the powerfulneſſe of Caeſar, renueth his league with the Switzers, and ſtrengthneth his party with friends on all hands.
               But in midſt of theſe reuengefull deuiſes, this miſer dyed, diſtracted more through griefe and anguiſh, then any infirmity of Age: the tenth day of Nouember. 1549.
               
                  Sleid. li. 21. l. 26.
                  After long wrangling in the Conclaue, 1550. Iulius the third is ſaluted Pope: being before his inſtallment, of the French faction, and after, ſo giuen ouer to belly-cheere and venery, that he died of a Lethargy, and wanted rather leiſure then will to attempt againſt Caeſar.
               
               But Paul the fourth a moſt diueliſh Hypocrite, and next ſucceeding Marcellus the ſecond, (a Pope alſo of a few daies ſtanding) by the packing of the Cardinalls wholly deuoted to the French ſeruice, was conſecrated High Prieſt: This man during his Cardinalſhip, was Caeſars moſt malitious enemy: Inſomuch that by his prouocation, Paul the third was perſwaded to inuade Naples,
                  M. Roſeus li. 4. append. ad Hiſt. Neopolit. Hiero. Roſellus de bello Romano. as an apourtenāt of the Church. But now enioying fuller meanes to worke fuller deſpights, hee maketh open profeſſion of his late concealed malice, and proſecuteth his followers with indignities of deepeſt fury. For no ſooner was he ſeated in the Chaire of the ſcarlet Beaſt, but he caſteth into durance Alexander Farneſius Cardinall of Sanflorian, Camillus Collonna, and Iulianus Caeſar with his brother the Archbiſhop, vpon ſuſpition of a conſpiracy complotted againſt him in fauour of the Imperialiſts. As many the Seruants and miniſters of Caeſar, here and there negotiating

his affaires through Italy, as he could lay hands on, he ſeazeth; and amongſt theſe, Taſcis maſter of the foreſts to his maieſty, and don Garzia Laſſus a Duke of no obſcure reputation amongſt the Spaniſh.
               
                  Marke Anthonie Colonna beeing abſent, he citeth to appeare before him within three daies ſpace; and in default of appearaunce, hee maketh prize of his goods.
               To Iohn Count of Montorian, he giueth the goods of Aſcanius Colonna, together with the titular Earledome of Pallianum.
               
               In deſpight of Caeſar he recalleth the Out-lawed gentlemen of Naples, and endoweth them with offices, and publique preheminences.
               At the inſtance of Peter Stroza, he fortifieth Pallianum, and prepareth it for the receit of the French to the infeſting of Naples.
               
               Finally, by ſending his kinſman Cardinall Caraffa into France, moſt impiouſly he diſturbeth the peace concluded in Belgia, betweene his moſt excellent Maieſty and the French Monarch.
               And to bee eſpecially carefull, that no one ſhot of Popiſh malice ſhould miſſe his Maieſty, he abſolutely denieth his ſonne Philip (vnto whom the father had reſigned the adminiſtration of all his kingdoms) the inueſtiture of the kingdomes of Naples and Sicil, being held of the Church. Wherupon followed ſuch furious and lamentable wars, managed between theſe mighty potentates of Chriſtendome, that Italy and France being chiefly ingaged therein, reeked againe in the bloody tragedies of their deereſt Citizens.Guil. Zenocarus de vita caroli. 5.
                  
               
               For not Rome only was almoſt brought vnto thoſe

extremities by the preſence of the Duke of Alua, which once it ſuffered in the daies of Clement, and for the preſent auoided by accepting of theſe conditions, which the now-ſomwhat-lenified Lord Generall propounded: but the French alſo in fauour of the Papacy, being ſent into Italy vnder the conduct of the Guiſe, to infeſt the peacefull eſtate of the Latian prouinces,At Saint Quintins. vnderwent the miſerable deſtiny of vnfortunate warfare, in their indeauours to thruſt in new forces into the chiefe City of Vermandois, againſt the ſquadrons of King Philip, marching out of Belgia to the reliefe of the ſaid place. In which conflict their whole army was routed by the Germane Horſe, the Conſtable, the Rhene-graue, and many noble men taken priſoners, and the City forced.
               And not long after being maſters of Calaies, they ſuffered a no leſſe diſaſterous defeature in their returne by Graueling at Count Egmonds hands: Termes and Villebon their two moſt famous leaders beeing taken priſoners, their armie routed, and their people ſlaine.
               Now, what vpright conſcience can ſauour a Religion ſo inſatiate of blood? or what Chriſtian can thinke that Man, who to perfect his owne reſpects, careth not what miſchiefe he worketh, to be the Vicar of Chriſt?
               Surely, Let them impudently affirme what they liſt, their workes ſo perſpicuouſly layde open to meaneſt capacities, may with ſufficiencie aſſure vs, that through the whole courſe of their ſucceſſions, they haue euer rather merited the Sir-names of Saule, then the leaſt title of Paul. And ſo to the worlds end will they

doe, rather then by the redeeming of one Chriſtian ſoule from ſpoile and blood ſhed, they will ſuffer one Acre of Saint Peters imaginary patrimony, to be wreſted from them, if poſſibility or trecherous pollicy can any way withſtand it.
            
            
               
                  ❧Ferdinand Caeſar.
               
                  Hee raigned 1558. About the fift yeere of Queene Mary.
                  
               
               
                  AS ſoone as Charles had betaken himſelfe to a ſolitarie life in Saint Iuſtus in Spaine, his brother Ferdinand long before elected King of the Romanes, now by the generall ſuffrage of the Electors aſſembled at Frankford, is preferred vnto the Empire. After the ceremonies whereof accompliſhed, to make manifeſt his obſeruancie towards the Romiſh Sea, he diſpatcheth to his Holineſſe Guzman, his chiefe chamberlaine; to ſignifie, that his Maieſties pleaſure was, vpon oportunity of firſt-offered-occaſion, to requeſt and receiue the imperiall Diadem at his Holineſſe Hands. But ſuch was his father-hoods arrogant and froward anſwer: that it may well argue the Relator, not onely not to be the ſucceſſor of Peter, who with the reſidue of the Apoſtles, reuerenced the authoritie of the higher powers, as the ordinance of

God, with due honour and obedience: no, nor a man willing to doe one good turne for another, according to the mutuall lawes of courteſie and humanity: but in truth, that very Antichriſt, whom the warrant of Holy writ doth point out, to be the perſon, who ſhould arrogate to himſelfe, to preſcribe aboue, and againſt any thing, that God himſelfe hath commanded to be holy and inuiolable.
               For this irregular Beast, would vppon no reaſon acknowledge Ferdinand for Emperour; cauilling that his predeceſſour Charles, had no ability or capacity to ſurrender the Empire to no liuing creature, but to the Romiſh Sea; Neither that it was lawfull for Ferdinand, to take vppon him the adminiſtration of the State, without the approbation thereof.
               His Maieſties Embaſſadour hee would at no hand ſuffer to approach his preſence; but hauing learnt out the tenour of his Embaſſie, hee propounded vnto the Cardinals and Lawyers certaine queſtions, neither ariſing from the rudiments of Gods word, nor enforced from the grounds of Nationall Lawes; but harried from the deepeſt Abyſſe, and there diſcuſſed by Lucifer the Prince of malice, pride and falſities. Which, as afterward they were libelled out, and diſperſed by the Romaniſts themſelues, you ſhall here receiue.
               1 If Guzman, who auerreth that Hee is ſent from his Lord Ferdinand, vnto the moſt Holy Lord the Pope, ought by Law to ſpeake what Charles the fifth hath done, about the reſignation of the Empire to his

brother Ferdinand.
               
               2 Which being ſufficiently vnderſtoode; whether they, wholy, or in part haue done rightfully and lawfully, ſithence the Approbation of the moſt Holy Lord the Pope, and the Apoſtolique ſea, was not interpoſed therein.
               3 Whether, theſe difficulties being cleared; nothing for the preſent may bee obiected againſt the perſon of the moſt excellent Lord Ferdinand. Whereby, hee may be adiudged incapable of the Imperiall dignity: As the euill education of his ſonne the king of Bohem, inclinable to manifest hereſie. It beeing promiſed, that within the Kingdomes ſubiect to his authority, hereſies are tollerated without puniſhment; Catholiques are oppreſſed, Monaſteries diſſolued, Churches auoided, and the Profeſſours of the Auguſtane reformation, ſuffered to conuerſe and inhabite promiſcuouſlie with Romiſh Catholiques.
               As alſo, that Ferdinand himſelfe did graunt a conference at Wormes, as touching controuerſies in Religion, without the conſent and good leaue of the Holy Apoſtolique Sea. That, Hee bound himſelfe by oath in the Dyet of Frankford, to obſerue all the Articles confirmed in the fore paſſed Seſſions; wherein manie damnable and Hereticall opinions were maintained and allowed. That, Hee vſurped the Name of Emperour by his owne Authority. That he ſuſpended the Decree, publiſhed againſt Communicants vnder both kindes; eſpecially at ſuch a time, wherein ſeuereſt execution was moſt requiſite: That

he had falſified his oath, taken vpon his firſt election of King of Romanes (wherein he had bound himſelfe, to be a defender of the Church, and the Catholique faith) ſchiſmes, hereſies, and the Proteſtant Religion. That he had faulted in many more points of like kind, againſt his oath, and the Holy Canons.
               4 What in like manner were to be determined concerning the perſons of many the Princes Electors, who being notoriouſly knowen to haue forſaken the Romiſh religion, haue agreed to this Reſignation: And how all theſe miſchiefes may be preuented and remedied with the leaſt diſturbance and breach of Tranquility to the Chriſtian Common-wealth.No true Popiſh motion: but in theſe dayes the Turk is growen too neere a neighbour. Theſe were the points to be queſtioned by the Cardinals.
               Now albeit the Method of the Narration doe binde me, to acquaint you with the Reſolutions of theſe Creatures the Cardinals (for ſurely I know it is a part of my task to diue into the cunning intendments of theſe propoſed queſtions:) Notwithſtanding, the incompatible pride of the Romaniſts; their tyrannizing ouer all Lawes, and the indignity of ſuch baſe, wicked, and malicious propoſitions, doe wholy diuert mee from my intended Method, forcibly compelling me againſt the Rules of Hiſtorie, to walke a long digreſſion from my intended Narration. For which, I beſeech thee (Reader) pardon and patience.
               For who vpon mature deliberation of ſuch ſcruples, knowing the Author by whom they were propounded, can refraine from accurſing this ſo fanatical an ambition of Soueraigntie in a Biſhop, accompanied with ſuch horrible impiety & contempt of his euerliuing Maſters commandement? What conſcience

can but bluſh at his impudencie, who hauing by Gods permiſſion for our manifold ſinnes tyranized ouer the Church of Chriſt for ſo many yeares, would yet at this day, in deſpight of light and truth, reduce Kings and Princes into the auncient eſtate of their Babilonical ſeruitude? Not once looking back vpon ſuch like narrations as theſe, (taken out from their owne Records) to conſider, how their predeceſſors to work their wils vpon mighty Potentates (for hic Aquila non captat muſcas, & quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achiui.) haue made no more conſcience by ſecret and cunning practiſes, to imbrue the whole Chriſtian world in bloud and deſolation;Muſtipha ac Famaguſta. then a Turkiſh Generall by falſifying his faith, hath done againſt conquered Chriſtians. Yea, I dare auow, (for experientia optima magistra) that by hooke or crooke, at this day they would as eagerly follow their Canonical preſidents, to reſtore their Entrados (hinc illae Lachrimae) as euer did any of their Luciferian predeceſſors. Were it not, but that they apprehend, how the Turkiſh forces,Tunc tua res agitur, &c. firſt by land affront the Empire from the Carpathie Mountaines to the Ardiatique: Secondly by ſea, how at diuers times, but eſpecially in the yeare of our Lord 1534. Barbaruſſa ſo ſcoured alongſt the coaſt of Italy, that if he had deſcended a little lower to Ostia, actum eſſet de Roma. His Holineſſe muſt haue reſorted to auncient deuiſes, viz. peraduenture haue ſought a new Auignion in Thule or China, whether his Ieſuites are already imployed to prepare his way. But this is not all the feare, wherewith theſe mercileſſe fellowes haue terrified his holy wiſedome.
               
               For the world doth know, that for a whole Winter

they haue ſet footing in Italy, and waſted Friuli. Which to preuent,Read the Turkiſh Hiſtorie for the bottome of their inforced lenities. by the beſt meanes, wherewith God hath truely inabled him, and the reſidue of the Chriſtian Princes, if they be not prouident, I can but pray, that his diuine Maieſty would be pleaſed, to reſume the welfare of his people into his owne protection. And ſo to the Reſponſe of the Cardinals.
               
               Who confeſſing the weightineſſe of the queſtions to be ſuch, as partly in regard of the nouelty, partly in regard of the qualitie of the perſons, and laſtlie in regard of the trouble of the times, and the power of the infidell enemy, they ought to be examined in a full counſell of the choiceſt and diſcreeteſt wiſedomes; yet either in wayward affectation to preſerue the Papall Authority, or in feare of his beſtiall furiouſneſſe, malitiouſly powred out on all ſorts without difference; they returned an anſwer rather teſtifying ſome ſuch imagination, then any way ſauouring of truth or integrity.
               And thus it was. That, it ought to bee prooued by publique Euidence, whether it appeared, that the Empire became voide by Charles his Reſignation, or by ſome other meanes. That, it ought to be ſifted how Ferdinand could pretend to ſucceed: meane time that his Embaſſador ſent to Proxy his obedience, or to negotiate any other publique Act, ought not to be admitted. That all things treated of and ratified at Frankford concerning Ferdinands election, were voide, fruſtrate and of no effect, for that the Scepter of the Apostolike Sea (vnto whome at firſt the keies of all heauenly and earthly power were giuen) was not first mediated. That thoſe worthy perſonages who were asſiſting and tainted of hereticall impiety, had forfeited all the rites and prerogatiues, of old granted them, concerning the

election of Emperors. As touching the points obiected againſt his Maiesty in the third article: That it was of greateſt conſequence; and had need of penance: which being performed, his Holineſſe was to proceed according to fatherlie clemency. Whereupon a Procurator was to be ſent from his Popiſhneſſe, to renounce all the ſanctions and decrees ratified at Frankford. After publication whereof, and the Empire now voide, a new mandat might bee made to petition Confirmation, for that it is apparant, that by virtue of the Election, adioyned to Clement his Confirmation, Ferdinand ought to ſucceede in the Empire.
               
               As concerning the impediment procured by his owne default, and ſomewhat hindering him; It ought to bee put to Examination: That after abſolution obtained, obedience performed, and the auncient oath of fidelity adminiſtred, he may fully enioy the confirmation of the Apoſtolique Court. Whoſe only and peculiar propertie it is, to wide open its Armes, louingly and halfe way (as it were) to imbrace euerie liuing ſoule comming to be receiued vpon repentance, and flying thereunto with a liuelie faith.
               
               O you Romaniſts! here let mee aske you, which of you dare preſume to ſay, that hee is more holie, or more religious, then Ferdinand? What is his ſinne ſo greatly to bee repented of? What manner of repentance is that, which you ſo much deſire? or how. ſhall he hope to ſpeede, if hee ſtand to your wauering and diſpenſatorie diſcretions? Here is no fault committed againſt God: his word doth warrant his proceedings. The fundamental lawes of the Empire do auouch that an Emperor being choſen by al the Electors, or

the more part of them,
                  Vide de hoc conſtit. Lodouici 4. apud Alberic. de Roſate L. Benè a Zenone C. de quadrien. praeſcript. 
                  vpon the very election, without approbation of Pope, or any other forraine Potentate, is to be receiued for true and indubitate Emperor. Cardinall Cuſanus ſaith:

                     Electores, qui communi conſenſu omnium Almanorum & aliorum qui imperio ſubiecti erant,Lib. de concord. Cathol. cap. 4.
                         tempore ſecundi Henrici conſtituti ſunt, radicalem vim habent ab ipſo communi omnium conſenſu, qui ſibi naturali iure Imperatorem constituere poterant: non ab ipſo Romano Pontifice, in cuius potestate non eſt, dare cuicunque prouinciae per mundum Regem vel Imperatorem; ipſa non conſentiente.
                     The Electors who were inſtituted by the common aſſent of all the Almanes, and others the ſubiects of the Empire, in the time of Henrie the ſecond: by the ſaid generall conſent haue a ſucceſſiue power, by their municipiall lawes to chuſe vnto themſelues an Emperour. Without depending vpon the Pope, in whoſe power it is not, to limit vnto any prouince vnder the cope of heauen, a King or gouernour, without its owne agreement.
                  
               
               But admit there were no ſuch law, is not the inauguration of all Princes meerly temporall? are not the ſetting on of a Crown, the girding of a ſword, and the deliuery of a Scepter, orders meerely ceremoniall? where are then your intereſſed claimes? I will leaue you to your wits, and proceede to your ſtarting-holes of ſpiritualia; Which I am ſure conſiſt in ſuffering the people to receiue the bleſſed Communion vnder both kinds. Here is a ſinne vnpardonable. Stay, I beſeech you. Did not Paul the third, and he a Pope, ſend

out his Bulls, wherby he gaue all the Biſhops throughout Germanie full authority to communicate vnto the people vnder both kinds? How ſay ye?Strange concluſions in Poperie. ſhall his Maieſty be exempted, and they priuiledged? will you tolerate an order of your owne inacting in euery pariſh, and not ſuffer the magiſtrate to ſee the ſame by peace and quietneſſe preſerued and executed through a whole kingdom? you know vpon what points of neceſſity, that Bull was granted, and now rather then you will faile to make odious his ſacred Maieſty to the fautours of your paſſions, you will quarrell him about an act of your owne allowance. Woe vnto you, you Hypocrits, who in words ſeeme Saints, but in your hearts retaine not a graine of piety. Woe vnto you, who offer your open breſts to penitentiaries, but hauing them in your clutches, you teare them in their conſciences with more then heatheniſh foppery. You inioine penance to others, and performe no ſuch matter your ſelues. Amongſt your ſelues, yee reueale all ſecrets, and are Iouiall thereat; but treaſons and maſſacres you conceale, and then your impudent wits muſt beare you out, (for your faces will not) that it was told vnder the vaile of confeſſion. Thus by impoſtures you liue, you raigne, and deceiue the world, neither caring to enter heauens gates themſelues nor ſuffering others to enter that would.
               Well, during the Interim of theſe ponderous machinations againſt his Maieſty by the college of Cardinalls, Guzman comming to the vnderſtanding thereof, day by day haſtneth his Audience before his Holineſſe. At laſt after three moneths attendance, and earneſt begging (but not before hee had receiued a more

ſtrict commandement from his Maſter) either vpon audience to execute his commiſſion, or without delay to returne from Rome, hee is admitted to ſpeake in the preſence of ſeuen Cardinals, from whom hee rereceiueth this aunſwere. Foraſmuch as his demaund required the most mature deliberation of the Cardinals, and ſuch like perſons learned in the Lawes, that, according to his Masters commaund hee might depart at pleaſure: meane time his Holineſſe would recall the whole matter vnto full examination.
               
               
                  Note the Euaſion.Good GOD, what other deliberation could be meant heereby, more then a meere cunning, and dilatorie illuſion? For the matter had beene againe and againe diſputed on, and the confirmation ſo long delayed, in expectation of ſome diſaſter, which Time might produce againſt Caeſar, that before any thing was determined, this politique Impostor was taken out of this world. After whom departed vnto the place of eternall bliſſe this worthy Emperour; but ſo, that the confirmation which Clement made litigious, Pius the fourth offered willingly, and Ferdinand reiected as conſtantly, after the examples of Radulph of Habſburge his progenitor, and Maximilian his Grandfather, contenting himſelfe with the orderly election of the German Princes.
               I haue heard report of as weighty a toleration as this, euen in matters of religion, if as vertuous a Princeſſe, as any of theſe afore-named, would haue condiſcended to haue accepted the approbation at his Holineſſes hand. And as the world now ſtandeth, who doubteth but the Pope would doe much to be reconciled to ſome Chriſtian Constantines.
               
               
                  And therefore to conclude, I hold it not fit to conceale theſe worthy remembrances of his godlineſſe and ſincerity; That in his raigne, in the yeare 1552. the ſecond day of Auguſt, an Edict was obtained, whereby peace was graunted to the profeſſors of the Augustan confeſſion.
               That, in the yeare 1555. that noble Decree followed, wherein it was ordained, that no force, nor offence, directly or indirectly, in caſe of Religion ſhould be thence-forth vſed against Prince, Earle, or any imperiall Citie.
               
               In the yeare 1559. at Augusta, in a full aſſembly of the States, the ſaid Decree was reuiued and confirmed.
               After which Conſtitutions confirmed by the tranſaction of Paſſauia, and confirmed by the Eſtates (as I ſaide at Ausburg) this good Emperour perſwading himſelfe, that mens mindes were wrought to Religion, more by preaching and teaching, then by force and bloud-ſhed; was willing, euen within his owne hereditarie poſſeſſions, That no ſubiect of his ſhould bee troubled for his conſcience. Wiſhing, that ſome abuſes (vſed by the Romaniſts) might by lawfull and moderate proceedings be reformed, and yet the Hierarchy and order of the Eccleſiaſtical policy, be decently maintained.
               Whereupon, when the Austrians deſired the publique vſe of the Lords ſupper in both kindes; as alſo other articles of religion, to be freely permitted them, which they had drawen forth in the confeſſion of Ausburg; Ferdinand, not onely tooke the articles, and the

reaſons of the abuſes (deſeruing reformation) into his owne conſideration: but alſo, when he heard the teſtimonie of the Greeke Church, concurring with the petition, hee ſent Vrban Biſhop of Gurcia for this cauſe principally to Venice, that there he ſhould procure inſtructions, how the Greekes accuſtomed to doe in diſtribution of this part of the Lords ſupper: as alſo what was their Opinion concerning this maine point of doctrine. And in the Synod of Trent by his Orators, he did moſt inſtantly inſiſt and vrge; That by leaue of the Pope, the people of Austria might vſe both the parts of the Sacrament.
               Somewhat before his death, he receaued the Breue, authorizing the Communion to be adminiſtred vnto the Laity vnder both kindes, which Pius the fourth ſent vnto the Archbiſhop of Salisburge; but interlaced with diuers limitation of conditiōs.Inſeruiendum eſt tempori. Wherat this good Emperor did exceedingly reioyce, and gaue thanks that it pleaſed God, that he had obtained that, which his ſubiects of Austria, had ſo often, and ſo earneſtly deſired of his Maieſtie.
               For his cariage towards the Counſell of Trent, which he referred wholy to his Holineſſe, I hold it not fit to ſpeake. For he adiudged, that hee had receiued an infinite pleaſure from the Pope, in that he had graunted him that, (though by much intreaty and many reſtrictions) which Chriſt commanded vnto all Chriſtians, plainly and effectually.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Maximilian the ſecond.
               
                  Hee began his raigne in the ſixt yeare of Queene Elizabeth.
                  
               
               
                  BEtter fortunes, then his father and vncle Charles, had not Maximilian the ſecond, from whom concerning the ample promiſes of Clement the ſeuenth, wee haue heard this ſaying to proceed: It is ſurely Iacobs voice; but his hands denote him to be Eſau: vehemently complaining, That euermore theſe people haue violated their faith, and broken their leagues: That againſt all right and equitie, their words are of no validity, nor their oathes of force. And therefore hereafter neuer to be captiuated with ſecurity.
               He was created Emperour in the yeare of our Lord 1564. A Prince of a ſincere diſpoſition, eſpecially in matters of religion: which when hee perceiued to be ſorely ſhaken and rent, with diuerſity of opinions; hee greeued in minde, but ſhewed himſelfe indifferent to the profeſſors thereof, neuer hindering the courſe with any ſeuere edict.
               Which his godly moderation, cauſed the Romaniſts to offer him ſome hard meaſure ſurely not to be ſaid, to haue vtterly waſht away the contagion of their ancient treacherie and malice, in eſſe diuolued vpon them from the ſucceſſiue diſcent of ſo many their predeceſſors. But this worthy Prince was nothing mooued

thereat, neither ſtarted one iot from his accuſtomed lenitie. Crato Craftheim his Councellor and Phyſition, a man beyond all exception, ſhall witneſſe it in his funerall Oration. The Emperor Maximilian neuer entred into iudgement of another mans Conſcience, but alwaies in controuerſie of Religion forbore by force to ſettle mens minds. For he confeſſed in the hearing of many men ten yeeres agoe, vnto William Prelate of Olomuch: That no ſinne was more greeuous, then the forcing of Conſciences, Many are alſo aliue who remember what hee ſaid to a Prince flying his kingdome, and in his flight reſorting vnto him for ſuccour: Surely thoſe that arrogate power ouer mens conſciences, inuade the bulwarkes of Heauen, and oftentimes looſe that Authority, which God here hath giuen them vpon earth.
               
               Such care and ſtudy as Father Ferdinand vſed in obſeruing the Pacification of Paſſania, the ſame the ſonne Maximilian emulated and defended, permitting vnto the Auſtrian Nobility the doctrine of the confeſſion of Ausburg by edict, dated the 18. Auguſt 1568.
               For when as many noble men of Auſtria vnder the gouernment of Ferdinand, had preſented vnto Charles the fift, certaine Euangelicall miniſters profeſſing the Confeſſion of Ausburg: and amongſt theſe, many turbulent ſpirits diſmiſſed vppon many occaſions from many parts of Germanie, had reſorted vnto his gouernment as to a place of ſecurity; And vnder blinde pretences of Euangelicall liberty had inconſiderately innouated and tumultuouſly preached many things concerning Church-gouernement: This Maximilian after the example of his father, thought it not meet to prohibit his ſubiects the confeſſion of Ausburg; and

yet forbore not to reſtraine that anarchiall temerity of ſuch hot ſpirits, throughout euery ſeuerall village of the Prouince, almoſt teaching and inſtituting a peculiar forme of Doctrine and Ceremonies.
               At laſt at the earneſt entreaty and humble petitions of the Auſtrian Nobility, he permitted them the free exerciſe of the Auguſtan confeſſion, both in Churches and families, ſo that they would aſſure him to obſerue that certaine order of doctrine and celebration of the Lords ſupper, throughout all their Churches, which as then was already vſed and imbraced by the reſidue of the Proteſtant Churches, according to the preſcript of order of the ſaid confeſſion. For reformation whereof he emploied Ioachim Camerarius and Dauid Chytreus: and the promiſe once granted, being afterwards Emperor he obſerued moſt religiouſly. Of whoſe faith and integrity, although to his neuer dying honour much may be ſpoken, yet here will we ceaſe, and fall to diſcourſe vpon the ſucceſſion of his Sonne Rodolph. What further matter the good and well minded Reader may expect, I will leaue to his own diſcretion to be exemplified, by the application of theſe old verſes:

                     Tempora mutantur, Papa & mutatur in illis:
                     Felix quem faciunt Romana pericula cautum.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  ❧Rodolph the ſecond.
               
                  
                     RODOLPH now onely remaineth. Here, whether I ſhould admire at the buſie, but now out-worne fury, tyranny and ambition of theſe ſelfe-wild Biſhops: or reioice at the reſtored magnanimity, fortitude, and conſtancy of our Emperour Rodolph, I confeſſe my ſelfe grauelled. But to affirme nothing of mine owne braine, here behold a witneſſe acting his own part; A man aboue exception, auouching—
               He is the ſame, who was Author of the Commentary vpon the Coloin Buſineſſe. Theſe are his words; What (ſaith hee) ſhould I ſpeake of the inuincible Emperour Rodolph, who now raigneth. I haue ſeene his Embaſſadours at Rome, the most noble and valiant Lord Flacchus, Prior of the Order of Saint Iohn of Ieruſalem in Germany, and Ierome Turner of his Maieſties Councell: A man of exquiſit learning, of high wiſedom, faithfull and honest. I ſoiourned with them in the ſame houſe; For they lodged with Cardinall Mandrutius (whome for honours ſake I name) my very honourable good Maſter, and a man of excellent vertues. He for acquaintance ſake intertained them kindly, and vſed them royally: they ſtayed with vs almoſt one whole ſummer: of which delay this was the cauſe.
               
               The Pope, Gregorie the thirteenth was wonderfull deſirous to haue the Emperour performe his obedience to his Popeſhip. For, that it ought ſo to be, he pleaded

                  preſcription. The Ambaſſadors, to doe more then their Commiſſion warranted, reſolutely refuſed. And their Commiſſion ſtretched no further, then to promiſe Obſequium, his humble ſeruice to the Pope, but obedience vnto the Church.
               Letters hereof were ſent vnto his Maieſty, and meane while Turner was eagerly aſſaulted by the Cardinals to change opinion; but he was conſtant. At laſt, vntill the Emperors Maieſty could be wrought, to relinquiſh that forme of words, which the worthy and laudable Caeſars, Ferdinand his grandfather and Maximilian his father had vſed, the Embaſſador was accepted to do what he was commanded. And ſo in a full aſſembly of the Cardinals, the Pope being mounted vpon an high Seig, Hee promiſed his Holineſſe his ſeruice, and the Church, his obedience. In action whereof he gaue good proofes of his learning, wiſedome, and admirable boldneſſe.
               To many in the City, this ſeemed a ridiculous contention, ſithence the words obſequium and obedientia doe ſo little differ in ſubſtance: but let them laugh; The Popes rites well vnderſtand the meaning thereof, otherwiſe, let them bee aſſured, that his wiſedome would not ſo ſtifly haue inſiſted vppon the bare word of obedience.
               As for the Emperour, the world knoweth, that here he made it manifeſt, that hee was not bound to giue obedience vnto a Biſhop, his ſubiect, from whome hee expected ſubiection and fealtie: At leaſtwiſe he layde an excellent foundation, towards the reſtitution of the decayed Honour of the Empire, by others to be perfected as God and time ſhall offer occaſion.

For what a greater bleſſing can a Chriſtian man wiſh, then to ſee a Biſhop praying and preaching, and abhorring to preſcribe lawes vnto a temporall Emperour? What other thing more neceſſarie for peace and humane ſociety can the Councel of State deuiſe, then to bridle ſeditious mindes, from taking aduantage to diſquiet the State, vpon euery ſiniſter ſeducement of an vnconſcionable Ieſuite? Which if they once effect, then ſhall the Emperours giue them their due fauours, that is, acknowledge the Lateran Biſhops to be venerable fathers. If theſe paſſages, I ſay, were reduced to their priſtinate forme and integrity, then no longer ſhould wee behold the Chriſtian people turmoyled in diſcords, no Princes murdered, no oaths of allegeance impugned, no equiuocation iuſtified, nor Turkiſh inuaſions ſo powerfully maintained.
               But of theſe abuſes, and many more mentioned by mine Author, and ſtill maintained, but not with auncient obſtinacie, for want of this implored reformation, let him that hath a ſtomach to bee informed, read the Apology, brought out of Spaine, and printed at Antwarp in the yeare 1527. There in order ſhall hee finde as much as followeth, the ſumme whereof drawen into heads, ſhall ſuffice for this preſent.
               1 The Breues of Clement the ſeuenth, wherein hee loadeth Caeſar with as many calumniations, as his witte could deuiſe, and thoſe moſt falſe and forged.
               2 The aunſwere of the Emperour Charles the fifth vnto theſe forgeries.
               
                  3 The ſecond Breues of the Pope, wherein vppon repentance that hee had falſly accuſed Caeſar, hee ſendeth vnto his Nuncio, to forbid him the deliuery of the former Breues.
               
               4 The anſwer of Caeſar to theſe ſecond Breues.
               
               5 An Epiſtle of Charles Caeſar vnto the Colledge of Cardinalls, deſiring them, that in caſe his Holineſſe did continue either to denie, or differ, a generall Councell, that they themſelues would proclaime it.
               Now that wee haue fully informed you how this halfe-deplumed Eſtritch hath notwithſtanding oppoſed againſt the two laſt Emperours, Ferdinand and Maximilian, and not at this day feareth not to bee troubleſome vnto their ſucceſſour Rodolph: As alſo, how his patience hath beene nettled by the tranſaction of Paſſauia, and the Edicts of peace deuiſed, ratified and proclaimed by theſe three late worthy Emperours: It ſhall not for a perclous vnto your wearied mindes, I hope, proue a loathing ſeruice, if I ſhall in order recite vnto you, at what warde his Holineſſe at this day lieth, conſidering that hee is not able any longer, to ſet father againſt ſonne, and ſonne againſt father in open action; Prince againſt Prince, and people againſt Prince, and Prince againſt people.
               Theſe practiſes are reuealed and abſolute, now muſt they erect (and but once erect) an order to purpoſe; An order that must commit all villanies, and his Popeſhip not ſeene therein: an order that muſt ſtudie Matchiauell, entertaine intelligence, and able in

it ſelfe to negotiat in Princes affaires, without poſting and repoſting, to the view of the world, for their diſpatches to Rome: an order of all orders that euer were deuiſed, the moſt cruell and truly beſtial; the bane of mankinde, and the fire-brands of Chriſtendome. Of whom, if any worthy pen would take the paines, to indict a Legend; the world ſhould ſoone perceiue, that they to the vnderpropping of this declining ſea, within theſe few yeares, haue committed as many forgeries, villanies,VVitneſſe France, Belgia, and Hungarie. and ſeducements to warre and murder, as their Maſters before them haue done in many Ages. So furious are their humours, ſo irregular their conſciences to worke, pleaſing ſeruices to their politique Monarch! Bound they are to auert, whatſoeuer they ſhall thinke or know preiudiciall to the Romiſh ſea. Bound they are (as much as in them lieth) to hinder the propagation of the Goſpel. Then, their calling being ſuch, their ſeruice ſuch, and ſuch their vowes, let vs learne amongſt many of their actions, by ſome few, what peace in religion is to be expected, from ſuch perſons, that hereafter we may be able to diſcerne the man by his ſpeech, as the Lion by his clawes.
            
            
               Notes of priuate paſsion.
               HE that playeth the Prologue, is Conradus Brunus, attired in his third booke. cap. 1. pag 305. oppugning,Onely becauſe it reformed Popery. railing and annihilating the Tranſaction of Paſſauia, and the peace granted thereupon; a peace ſo religiouſly ratified by ſuch and ſo many hand-writings, and ſo ſolemnly ſworne vnto by ſuch iuſt, honourable and worthy perſonages. At his firſt entrance you

ſhall know him by his brazen face, and now you ſhall heare him ſpeake. The Edict (ſaith hee) is friuolous, void, and at no hand to be obſerued: His reaſon, becauſe a Catholique ought not liue peaceably with ſuch Heretiques, for ſo ſhould they neuer be offended nor aboliſhed. Yea, ſo much the rather were the aſſociation ſo ordered to be abhorred and abominable, for that a Catholique meeting one of them, ſhould be adiudged to haue aſſented to the peace: But to offend them (with whom there is no communion) can be no breach of peace; as whom the Lawes of the Empire doe ſubiect vnder a curſe, and expoſe to offence, without puniſhment: Finally, whom all diuine and humane conſtitutions, would haue to be vtterly extirpated.
               The next that preſenteth himſelfe is Paul Windich, in his booke de Haereticis extirpandis pag. 324. And hee termeth this religious peace to be nothing but a breathing, a delay, or a toleration. pag. 327. He ſaith, that, in his minde, he can but wonder at the madneſſe of the Sectaries. For fooliſhly auouching, and ſo often babling out the Decrees of the Diets, for the free exerciſe of their religion. If I ſhould ſtand to preſent you with Melchion, Hoſius and Poſſerinus, who wrote whole diſcourſes vnto Henry and Stephan Kings of Polonia, to take into their ſerious cogitations, the extirpation of the Euangelicall profeſſors, I ſhould but weary you with words. Two lines ſhall ſuffice. With the Protestant (Polonians) the aſſurance giuen vpon Faith, is at no hand to be obſerued: for that an oath ought not to be the bond of iniquitie.
               
               
                  Iames Menochius the Lawyer, Conſil. 100. Num. 225.

excuſeth the Romane Emperor Sigiſmund, in that he violated his ſafe conduct. As concerning the which ouerſight, the impudent aſſertions of the Ieſuits of Treuers are worthy the relation, publiſhed in a certaine booke intituled, The Concertation of the Catholicke Church, Printed 1583. pag. 4. Huſſe did require ſafe conduct of Sigiſmund: Sigiſmund ſigned it: but the Chriſtian world, viz. the fathers of the Councel of Conſtance, being Sigiſmunds ſuperiors, did diſalow it.
               
                  Simanch a Biſhop of Pacia, that lying ſpirit, bluſhed not to affirme, in his Catholique Inſtitution Cap. 46. Num. 52. That at no hand, faith was to bee kept towards Heretiques, no not vpon oath. And therefore it was iuſtly decreed; That againſt the tenor of the oath, Huſſe and Ierome of Prage were burned, and a Canon prouided; That an oath made towards an Heretique, was not to be regarded. And at laſt concludeth, That as warning thereof, ought often to bee giuen, ſo is it very neceſſary, that it be often re-iterated, and at no time to be ſilenced, as often as any mention of this peace is obiected.
               O! Why ſhould I offend the chaſt cares of any good Chriſtian with ſuch infernall ſtuffe? Smally hath he profited in the ſchoole of Gods word, that in his owne conſcience is not able to decide controuerſies, of much more cunning cariage, then any of theſe. In regard whereof, I will here ceaſe, and affirme, That in knowing of one, you know all: ſuch is their malice in ſeruice of the Romiſh ſea, towards Emperor, Kings, Princes, and free States. Let him that hath a mind to bee further and fully ſatiſfied, peruſe the moſt excellent treatiſes printed this preſent yeere 1609.
               
                  For Concluſion vnto theſe plaine and pregnant preſidents of Popiſh tyranny by time and vſurpation practiſed vppon the ſacred Maieſties of mightie Princes, mine Authour, truely to aggrauate their immoderate pride, and further to encourage the aggreeued parties to haſten their Reformation, for warrantize out of diuers Authours, hee hath culled out many irreſiſtable teſtimonies to prooue, That Rome is Babylon, and the Biſhop thereof Antichrist. Which for that (in mine opinion) in few words they haue beene more liuelier repreſented vnto your conſideratiue conſciences, in his Maieſties moſt excellent Premonition, then which nothing can be ſpoken more fullie, truely, and indifferently, without ſpleene, or ambiguitie.
               I will heere craue pardon to ouerpaſſe them, and in lieu therof content you, with ſome few both theorique and practique notes, hatched vpon the ſame grounds, but practiſed vpon other ſtates, of later daies in diuers parts of Chriſtendome.
               And firſt of their Ieſuiticall Theoriques, thus collected into order, and eight times printed: as mine Authour affirmeth.
               
                  Regulae Iuris Romani.
                  1. The Biſhop of Rome hath in himſelfe all manner of power, both ſpiritual & temporall: Authority to commād, to forbid, to curſe, & to excōmunicat: al power of puniſhing, right of Election and conferring the lieutenancy of the Empire. Power, to create & depoſe magiſtrates, euen Emperors, Kings & Princes: ſo of al other Potentates, & their ſubiects. Theſe aphoriſms are to be receiued as an article of faith: He that alloweth not, or

beleeueth not ſo much, is to be reputed a moſt deteſtable Heretique.
                  2. On the contrary, all Eccleſiaſticall perſons, Biſhops, Prelates, Prieſts, Monks, Nuns, and all their temporall goods, their priuiledges and eſtates, are vtterly exempted and freed from all obedience of temporall Lords, from their commands, contributions, and ſuperiorities; and that aſwell in perſonall and reall impleadings, as in ciuill and criminall actions. Neither are they bound to obey Emperor, King, or any Lay Magiſtrate. Yea Caeſar, Kings and Princes, ought to inſtruct his fortreſſes rather to eccleſiaſticall perſons, then to Lay Captaines.
                  3. Albeit the Pope be a Man, yet for that he is Gods vicar on earth (a reaſon wherfore diuine honor is due to him) he can not erre in points concerning Chriſtian doctrine; no although all other eccleſiaſticall fathers, yea and the Councels themſelues ſhould fall into error. An argument, That from Councels we muſt appeale to the Pope; but not e contra, From the Pope, to the Councel.
                  4. The Validity, interpretations, and power of innouating the ſacred Scriptures, reſteth in the boſome of the Pope: but his Holineſſe decrees, as ſimply neceſſary to faith and ſaluation, are immutable, forcible, and obligatory.
                  5. The conſtitutions, Statutes, ordinances, parliaments, edicts, Confederacies, & al letters patents, of Emperors Kings, Princes, & other eſtates, which fauour any other religion, then the modern Roman ought to be reputed voide and of no force, no, although an oath be interpoſed.
                  
                     6. The Edict of religion concluded by the general conſent of the German Nation, is not obligatory; for that it was procured by force. That, it was granted, but to ſerue the time, as a Delay, or Toleration: viz. vntill the publication of the Councell of Trent, which followed in the yeere 1564.
                  7. That now the Romaniſts are to imploy their vtmoſt indeuours by fire, ſword, poiſon, powder, warre, or any other engine, to ſuppreſſe all heretiques, but eſpecially the Lutherans and Caluiniſts, with their fautors and the politique catholiques, who had rather maintaine peace, then adioyne their forces to the Catholique ſide in extirpation of hereſies.
                  8. But this rule is not without exceptiō: If they haue cauſe to feare that the proiect be not likely to ſecond imagination, or that danger or detriment be likely to ariſe thereof to the Catholique cauſe: In this caſe, ſome regard is to bee had to the time, and a better ſeaſon to be expected. Yet ſome are againe of opinion: That time is not to be reſpected. For what requitall ſhall a Ieſuit returne to ſo benigne a parent as the Pope, if hee ſtand tampering vpon the ſafetie of his conſcience, or the ſecurity of his life? And therefore without any longer temporizing, it were better that in all places theſe Lutherans and Caluiniſts were ſpeedily baniſhed, ſuppreſſed, or vtterly rooted out; ſo that hereafter not ſo much as one ſeed may be left, to reſtore ſo much as the remembrance of their Religion.
                  9. As ſoon as the Roman-Catholique ſubiects in their Conciliables haue decreed, That the Emperor, King or Prince vnder whom they ſerue, is to be accounted a Tyrant: then is it lawfull for them to renounce him, and to

hold themſelues free from their oath of allegeance. But if they be deemed to hold their aſſemblies; Then is it granted vnto euery priuate ſubiect, yea praiſe-worthie and meritorious, to murder ſuch a King or Prince: but with prouiſo, that hee proceede not before hee haue vſed the counſell of ſome Ieſuit, or ſuch like Theologian. Wherein, the Munke Iames Clement, who ſlew Henry the third with an inuenomed knife, made true vſe of this Rule. And in thoſe dayes, hee was adiudged to haue acted as meritorious an action, that ſhould haue played the like part by his ſucceſſour Henry the fourth.
                  10 If ſubiects haue a Lutheran or Caluinist to their King, or Prince, who indeuoreth to bring them into Hereſies, (you muſt alwaies vnderſtand what Hereſies they meane) they are thoſe ſubiects quitted of homage & fealty towards their ſoueraigne Maſters. To whom it is lawfull and granted to renounce, murder or impriſon ſuch an anointed and high Magiſtrate.
                  11 That, Emperors, Kings & Princes may be poyſoned by their vaſſals and ſeruants; in caſe the Theologians, or Ieſuits, being learned and graue men, doe account them for tyrants: prouided, that the concluded party to die, doe not amend, nor procure his owne voluntary deſtruction.
                  12 The Pope hath the free gift of all the kingdoms, principalities, and territories of all hereticall and infidel Princes: and ſuch donations ſhall be firme and auailable to all conſtructions and purpoſes.
                  13 It is lawfull and granted to Ieſuits, and all other Catholique Prieſts, in caſe they happen to be examined before heretique Magiſtrates, to vſe equiuocation,

mental reſeruation, falſe names, and counterfeit apparrell: the better to inſinuate, and diſpatch their treacheries.
                  14 That it is lawfull for Ieſuites and ſuch like Romaniſts to equiuocate to the demaunds of Magiſtrates: And that as well by oath, as without. But this is to be vnderſtoode, when the Reſpondent doth not account the Demaundant for a competent Iudge or Magiſtrate: Or when, the Reſpondent doth imagine, that the Iudge (though competent) hath no lawfull pretence of examination: Or when hee ſuppoſeth his Aduerſarie, hath no iuſt cauſe of queſtioning him.
                  15 That ſuch Catholiques are not bound to aunſwere priuate Catholiques from the heart, and with conſcience, but to equiuocate, and anſwer them with double meanings.
                  16 That this equiuocation is a profitable Arte, and good policy. Wherewith Martin Azpileneta, vnto whoſe doctrine Gregory the thirteenth gaue the attestation of vnanſwerable and Holy: And of whom the Ieſuit Horat. Turſellimus in the life of Lauerius affirmeth, That hee was a man excellent for his honestie and learning, congratulateth himſelfe, and boaſteth, that he commanded vnto a certaine great Prince the Apothegme; Qui neſcit diſsimulare, neſcit viuere; Whereof the ſayde Prince made afterwards great vſe and profite.
                  
               
               Theſe were the paſſions that troubled our forraigne Nouelliſts; In lieu of many, to auoid prolixity, now let vs proceed to examine at what marke, the Romaniſts on this ſide the ſea doe alſo leuell. And Saunders,
                  
for that hee will ſatisfie vs by Scripture; is traced by Bellarmine, and magnified by our aduerſaries to be a man of moſt eminent learning, ſhall bee ſpeaker for the whole factorie. But by the way you muſt note, that theſe had their priuate reſpects in their hearts, while they held their pens in their hands: So this our Country-man was not deſtitute of his priuate paſſion alſo, which was either an ouer-hard conceit againſt his deereſt Soueraigne Queen Elizabeth, out of whoſe Kingdome hee was baniſhed; or an ouer-weeing reſpect, deuoted vnto the ſeruice and gracious aſpect of Pope Pius the fift, vnto whom hee ſtood many wayes beholden. Otherwiſe your conſciences would aſſure you, that he would neuer haue broached ſo manifeſt a lye. The worke whereat hee aymed, and the greeuances which diſquieted his penne, your diſcretions may iudge of, by reuoking to minde, the daies wherein hee liued, and the perſonage that then reigned. Mutato nomine, the poſitions (you know) as yet are as peremptorily maintained, and therefore aboue the reſt fitteſt to be ſpoken vnto.
               With a liuely ſuke to corroborat a bad matter, hee groundeth his firſt authority (his reaſons & arguments as flowing from the bitterneſſe of his priuate braine I will ouer-paſſe) vpon the ſecond booke of Cronicles the 26. Chapter, where we read;

                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 For the more credit, you ſhall haue his owne words.Oziam regem, cùm ſacerdotum officium vſurpauit, á Pontifice fuiſſe de templo eiectum. Et cum propter idem peccatū, lepra a Deo percuſſus fuiſſet, coactùm etiam

fuiſſe ex vrbe diſcedere, & regnum filio renunciare.
                              Quod non ſponte ſua, ſed ex ſententia ſacerdotis, vrbe, & regni administratione priuatus fuerit, patet. Nā legimus Leuit. 13. Quicunque, inquit Lex, maculatus fuerit lepra, & ſeperatus est ad arbitrium ſacerdotis, ſolus habitabit extra castra.
                              Cum ergo, haec fuerit Lex in Iſrael, & ſimul legimus 2. Paralip. 26. Regem habitaſſe extra vrbem in domo ſolitaria; & filium eius in vrbe iudicaſſe populum terrae, cogimur dicere, fuiſſe cū ad arbitrium ſacerdotis ſeparatum, & conſequentèr regnandi authoritate priuatum.
                              Si ergo propter lepram corporalem poterat ſacerdos olim regem iudicare, & regno priuare: quare id non potest modo propter lepram ſpiritualem, id est, propter haereſim, quae per lepram figurabatur; vt Auguſt. decet in questionibus Euangelicis

lib. 2. quaest. 40. praeſertim cum 1. Cor. 10. Paulus dicat: Contigiſſe Iudeis omnia in figuris. Haec ille.
                           
                           
                              
                              That Ozias the King, when he vſurped vpon the office of the Prieſt-hood, was by the Prieſt caſt out of the temple. And when, for the ſame ſinne he was

ſtrucken by God with leaproſie, he was conſtrained to depart out of the City, & to reſigne the kingdom to his ſonne.
                              That not of his own accord, but by the ſentence of the high Prieſt, hee was baniſhed the City, and depriued of the gouernment of the kingdome. It appeareth, Leuit. 13. whoſoeuer (ſaith the Law) ſhall bee touched with the leaproſie, and is ſeperated by the iudgement of the Prieſt, he ſhall dwell by himſelfe without the tents.
                              Sithence then, this was the Law in Iſrael: as alſo that we read 2. Paralip. 26. That the King dwelled without the City in a ſolitary Manſion; and that his ſonne iudged the people of the land within the City: wee muſt of neceſſity confeſſe, that hee was ſequeſtred by the iudgment of the Prieſt, and conſequently depriued of all authority of gouernment.
                              
                                 If then, in reſpect of corporall leproſie, the Prieſt of old might diſpoſe of the King and diſpoſſeſſe him of his kingdome.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Wherefore now may not the Pope doe the like, in caſe of ſpirituall leproſie, viz. for hereſie, figured by Leproſie, as ſaith S. Augustin, in his Euangelicall queſtions lib. 2. quaeſt. 40. Eſpecially when in the firſt to the Cor. ca. 10. Paul ſaith: That all things were manifeſted vnto the Iewes in figures. Hitherto Saunders.
               
               Take him at his word, and heere were learning enough to deceiue millions of ſoules: but examine him by his owne authority, and you ſhall find him in a miſerable taking, vnleſſe God be mercifull.
               
                  
                     Lib. 5. cap. 11.For to prooue it moſt falſe, That Ozias was depriued of his regall Authority by the ſole iudgement of the high Priest: Nothing through the whole Hiſtory of the Kings is more liuely expreſſed, then that Ozias from the ſixteenth yeere of his age, when he began to raign, to the 60. yeere,See the text. wherein he died, was perpetuall King. Neither was he at any time during his naturall life depriued of his kingdome.
               Without queſtion he dwelled in an Houſe apart: And in that reſpect, for the nature of his Diſeaſe, hee could not diſpatch the office of a King, which is of fact. But that bereaued him not of the right of his kingdome, neither of his Kingly capacity; for ſo wee ſhould deny, that Children being crowned (as in times paſt Ioas and Ioſias were) and men of full age (if they had fallen into irrecouerable ſickneſſes,As Lewes the eleuenth in France. either of mind, or body) to be Kings; ſithence the one by nonage,

the other by ſickneſſe are neceſſarilie ſequeſtred from managing the State, which conſiſteth in action.
               2. But Ozias continued king as long as he liued.2. King. 15. 2. Paral. 26. For the ſcripture ſaith: In the ſeuen and twentith yeere of Ieroboam king of Iſrael, raigned Azarias (called alſo Ozias, and Zacharias) the ſonne of Amazias king of Iuda. Sixteen yeere old was he, when he began to raigne, and he raigned fifty two yeeres in Ieruſalem.
               
               Behold our Romaniſt here plainely detected of an vntrueth (as I promiſed gone before) and that by the trueſt teſtimony, that humane ſatiſfaction can vnder the concaue of the heauens demand.
               But to bewray the true genius of impudency, I will yet go farther, to his and his partakers finall confuſion. Witneſſe the 2. of Kings. v. 27.
               
                  In the two and fiftieth yeere of Azarias King of Iuda, Pekan the ſonne of Romeliah raigned ouer Iſrael in Samaria. Heere is plaine dealing, and matter vpon record. How ſhall we here beleeue this Romaniſt, when the ſpirit of trueth and Antiquity giueth vs aſſurance, that he continued King thirty ſix yeers after his Coronation.
               To the further verifying wherof (if it were poſſible) Ioſephus recordeth in his 9. book of Antiquities, cap. 11. That Azarias (or Ozias) dyed in the ſixty eight yeere of his age, and in the two and fiftith yeere of his raigne: which being moſt true, that he began his raigne at ſixteen yeeres, and dyed at ſixty eight; what teſtimony is obiected in the courſe of his life, whereby we may gather that he was either depoſed or depriued from his legall inheritance? That during the time of his viſitation,

his ſonne was but his deputy, we will prooue anon directly, as it is accuſtomed to be done vnto them, who in like caſes are not able to attend their affaires themſelues. For no leſſe doth the ſame Text auerre: Ioatham the Kings Sonne was Ouer-ſeer of the Kings Pallace, and gouerned the Kings Houſe, and iudged the people of the Land.
               
               Here obſerue, that Ioatham is ſtiled but the Kings ſonne in the life time, and ſickneſſe of his father; Gouernour of the Court, and as I may properly ſpeake, Lord ſteward of his Fathers houſe. And why did hee ſit in iudgement amongſt the people? becauſe their complaints could not with conueniency be brought vnto the kings iudicature, by reaſon of his infirmity, and his ſeparation thereupon by the preſcript commaundement of Gods Law. Leuit. 13.
               3. For confirmation of which laſt point, heare what the Text ſayth: And Ozias ſlept with his Fathers, and they buried him in the field of the Regall Sepulchres, becauſe he was a leaper. And Ioatham his ſonne raigned in his ſtead.
               
               Here again obſerue, how plainly the ſcripture leadeth vs in the way of truth: Euen now, It termes Ioatham the Kings ſonne, the kings ſteward, or ſeruant: But now, after the deceaſe of his father (and not before) It ſaith: Regnare caepit: He began to raigne.
               Yet Ozias was ſeparated by the commaund of the high Prieſt? True: but that was alſo commanded by the liuely voice of the Diuine Law▪ But that he was depoſed or depriued from his legall inheritance, his kingly authority, or inforced to reſigne his eſtate to his ſonne before his death: No man will auouch it, vnleſſe a

bloody and paſſionate Romaniſt. The ſimple know, that Soueraignety and Gouernement are of no leſſe difference then proprietas and poſſeſsion, or as I may ſpeake, an eſtate determinable, and an eſtate in Fee. Soueraignety is alwaies incorporated vnto the perſon of the King, is as it were the ſoule of a kingdome, and inſeparable from the right thereto: But Gouernment, Lieutenancy, or procuration may bee diueſted vppon deputies. As in the nonage of kings; or in times of daungerous ſickneſſes, thoſe who are aſſigned to take care of the waighty affaires of the kingdome, are ſtiled Deputies, Protectors, Tutors, Lieutenants, Viceroyes, or Gouernors, neither propounding, diſpatching, nor negotiating any publique buſineſſe in their owne names, but vnder the ſtile and ſeale of the yong, or diſeaſed Soueraigne.
               His ſecond authority is taken from the ſecond of Chronicles the 23. Chapter, which becauſe in truth it is but impertinent, though moſt maliciouſly framed▪ I will recite in our vulgar tongue only.
               
                  At what time Athalia gouerned the kingdome by tyranny, and maintained the worſhip of Baal,Saunders. Ioada the High Prieſt called vnto him the Centurions and ſouldiers, and commaunded them to ſlay Athalia, And in her ſtead they crowned Ioas king.
               
               
                  That the Priest perſwaded not, but commanded, it is apparant by thoſe words in the fourth of Kings, and eleuenth Chapter. And the men of warre did according vnto all that Ioada the High prieſt commanded them. Againe by thoſe in the ſecond of Chronicles the three and twentith Chapter. But Ioada the high Prieſt going out vnto the

Centurions & leaders of the Army, ſaid vnto them; Bring her forth (Athalia the Queene) from the precinct of the Temple, and let her be ſlaine without by the ſword.
               
               
                  That the cauſe of the depoſition and killing of Athalia, was not onely her tyrannie, but alſo her maintenance of the worſhip of Baal; It is proued by the words immediatly placed after her ſlaughter. Whereupon, ſaith the Scripture, All the people entred into the houſe of Baal, and destroyed it, and broke downe the Altars and the images thereof. They alſo ſlew Mathan the Priest of Baal before the Altar.
               
               That this example of Ioada and Athalia, do nothing concerne the marke, whereat they ſo prepoſterouſly and maliciouſly leuel: or the moderne controuerſie of Papal intruſion ouer Kings and Princes, we wil reſolue you forthwith.
               For the Example of Athalia, is of a party, who vſurped vpon a Kingdome without any lawfull pretenſion, ſaue meere and barbarous tyrannie; by force, by wickedneſſe, and the cruell murder of the royall Progenie. In which caſe, the Preſident was ſo abominable, that euen without the commandement of Ioada, it might haue beene lawfull for euery priuate Magiſtrate to haue iuſtified her death: but for that ſuch a deſignment ſeemed dangerous and difficult to be executed vpon her, who was mother to the deceaſed King Ahaziah; therefore was it needfull to haue vſed the counſell and aſſiſtance of Ioada the high Prieſt. Or at leaſt, of ſome ſuch eminent perſon, who for the Honour of his place, or the reputation of vprightneſſe, was of power to aſſemble and ſtirre vp the ſouldiers and people to ſo iuſtifiable an action.
               
                  But that the Act was executed as well by perſwaſion as commaund; It appeareth by that which was ſpoken: Ioada the high Priest ſent,
                  2. Kings 4. 
                  and tooke the Centurions and men of warre vnto him, and cauſed them to come into the Temple; Pepigitque cum eis faedus: And he couenanted with them. Now I hope that ſo abſolute a Commander, as our Romaniſts will make this high Prieſt to be, would haue ſcorned to haue capitulated, if hee could haue commanded. Beſides, the words, we will, or command, are accuſtomably vſed by thoſe, who in faction, or in any other publique buſineſſe obtaine the prime-place of imployment.
               What then may be found in this example to inforce Ioadas, or the Popes omnipotency, for innouation of States or Kingdoms? What is brought to proue ſo dangerous an aſſertion. This is a true preſident to be inforced againſt a Tiranneſſe or an vſurper. But there is a great diſſimilitude betweene legal Lords, or true proprietaries, and theeues; or the inuaders of another mans poſſeſſion.
               If there were any cauſe beſides tyrannie, materiall to depoſe, or ſley Athalia, what is that to vs. Let it be inforced againſt people guilty of like offences, viz. thoſe that worſhip, and defend the worſhip of Baal, and the hoaſt of Heauen. It is ſufficient, that ſhee was a Tyranneſſe, and an iniurious Vſurper vppon an other mans Kingdome; without that, that vpon her part there remained any obſtacle, or impediment of Lawe, but that ſhee might bee depoſed from her throane, and ſlaine. The like whereof, I hope, no good Chriſtian will affirme concerning any lawfull King; whoſe ſacred perſon (although blemiſhed by many

humane infirmities) the Right of Inheritance, the Maiestie of his Place, and the capacity of his calling, ought alwaies, and that for conſcience ſake, to protect & defend from iniurie, infamie, and humane controlement. To which, let all true Chriſtians ſay, Amen.
               
               
                  Now to their practique.
                  NOw that I haue epitomized vnto your conſiderations the theorems, rules, and policies of this inforced vſurpation: I will alſo make manifeſt vnto you by true booke caſes, how they haue practiſed vpon theſe Theorems, throughout all the kingdoms of Chriſtendome.
                  
                     Spaine. 1568. Chro. Belg.In Spaine, vpon ſuſpition of hereſie, they ſo ouerawed the conſcience of Philip the ſecond, that they cauſed the vncompaſſionate father, in a bath to open the veines of Charles his eldeſt ſonne, a Prince of admirable expectation; there to bleede out his deereſt life. Now to explane vnto you, what hereſie this noble yong Prince had committed, let me report vnto you (if fame ſay truth) that it aroſe forſooth vpon his hard vſage towards the Clergie; In diſmounting them riding vpon their pleaſures, from their excellent Ienets and ſtately Mules; and ſending them home to their ſtudies; beſtowing theſe beaſts vpon ſome of his more worthy followers. Or peraduenture vpon iealouſie, that manifeſting too much of the Grandfathers ſpirit, in future times, He might call them to account, as did Charles the fifth. Herman once Archbiſhop of Colein,
                     
to ſay for himſelfe what he could, againſt the accuſations libelled againſt Him, by his Clergie, and the Vniuerſitie. I aſſure you, farre leſſe ſinnes, then theſe, are able to caſt the beſt man liuing into the bottomleſſe pit of their fierie Inquiſition, Vnde nulla redemptio.
                  
                  Who were of Councell vnto Sebastian, the laſt of houſe of Portugal, to vndertake that wofull,Portugal. 1578. Chro. Bel. but as they termed it, that moſt meritorious iourney into Africa? To vnderſtand the true motiues whereof, I will ſay no more, but referre you ouer to the Ieſuits Cata. fo. 709.
                  Who but the ſame brood of Ieſuits made away Iohn of Albret, Queene Dowager of Nauarre,
                     France. 1572. Hiſt. Gal. the very eye of the French Proteſtants, by impoiſoned Pills; which an Italian, the Kings Apothecary at Paris, prepared for her?
                  Who but the brochets of ſuch impieties,Anno. 1572. Hiſt. G
                           ••
                        
                      were the inſtruments of that moſt infernall reſolution; vnder the colour of ſo ſolemne and Prince-like a marriage, to contriue the death of the Nauarrois, and the maſſacre of ſo many braue Princes and Gentlemen, of the Religion through the whole territories of Fraunce; And that without any regard or touch of conſcience, in abuſing and violating the oath of ſafe conduct, religiouſly ſwore vnto, by the King himſelfe.
                  By what ſort of men, I pray you, was Peter Barr. ſuborned, and obliged by Sacrament,Anno. 1589. Chro. Bel. trayterouſly to haue murdered Henry the fourth? And by whom, let me aſke you, is the Auditory at this day admoniſhed, but to make vſe of ſome ſmall patience, For within few dayes, God himſelfe is to make his perſonall appearance amongſt vs, to worke I know not what, miracles, to the confuſion of Heretiques.
                  
                     
                     Anno. 1594. Cat. Ieſ. 482. Chro. Belg.Was not Iohn Chastelius, a yong man of nineteene yeers of age, and a nouice in Claremount Colledge, fully ſatiſfied, thinke you, by the reſolutions and incouragements of theſe perſons, and vpon the foreſaid poſitions; before he would hazard his portion in heauen, to vndertake the ſlaughter of the ſaid king of France & Nauar? But as God would, he miſſed his throat, & by the wauering of his hand, ſtrooke out but one of his teeth: affirming that he was but as another Ehud, apointed to murder Eglon the wicked king of the Moabites.
                  
                     
                        Eug. 1588.1594.1597. Cat Ieſ. 436. & 448.By whome were ſo many and ſo often treacheries plotted not only to haue beene executed by ſtrangers againſt Queene Elizabeth, but alſo by her owne ſeruants, namely Parry, Squier, Lopez, Yorke, Williams, and Patrike Cullen: By whome was her ſacred Maieſty excommunicated, her peace diſturbed, her ſubiects aſſayled, her Realme betrayed, and her life ſet at ſale to bee taken away by any meanes; by poyſon, by maſſiue rewards, or any other kind of violence what euer? I will not ſtand to dilate hereupon. The world I hope is againe and againe ſatisfied with the proofe hereof. It yet freſhly remembreth, what ouertures were made, euen but yeſterday, and by whome, vnto the Spaniſh king for a ſecond Inuaſion. And as yet, Caelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt.
                  
                  
                     
                        Anno. 1607.For, it is as cleere as day, that none but men moulded and ſold ouer to the worſt of wickedneſſe, would euer haue imagined or conſented to haue blowen vp a State-houſe; And that vpon the firſt day, and firſt ſitting, when in certainty they knew, that of neceſſity the King and Prince would be preſent, the aſſembly fulleſt, and the maſſacre bloodieſt.
                  
                     Who were the inſtruments,
                        Sweueland. 1593. that Sigiſmund K. of Polonia and Sweland after the death of his father returned into Sweland, there againſt the tenor of his oath,Or Pol. b. 4. Praef. cat. Ieſ. to root out the Lutheran Religion as they terme it? who were the authors of the vnſeaſonable commotions in Liuonia? who accouncelled him by ſurpriſe to inuade the kingdome, and almoſt to haue loſt his life, as he hath now at laſt the kingdome?Polon. And by whoſe ſeducements hath hee attempted ſo many innouations in Polonia?
                  
                  To what ſhall we attribute,Moſcouia. but to their daungerous inſtigations, that Demetrius beeing returned out of Poland into Moſcouie, in attempting to alter the receiued Religion of the Moſcouits, was himſelf in one day depriued of life and Empire, with an infinit number of his nobles and followers?
                  Whom ſhould we accuſe, but theſe furies, for the murder of the worthy Prince of Orange,
                     Netherland. ſhot to death by Balthaſar Gonhard, before prepared for blood by the aſſurance of theſe cunning Garnets?
                  
                  What ſhould I dull your eares with theſe vnpleaſant diſcourſes? If you liſt, your ſelues may reade at leyſure the examinations of Peter de Pennes, Michael Renicher, and Peter de Four, againſt the life of Graue Maurice, the aforeſaid Prince his Son, for maintaining the cauſe of Religion?
                  I could alſo, bring you preſidents from Tranſiluania 1607. from Bohemia, 1608. from Auſtria 1609. Bauaria, 1592. Argentina 1698. Aquiſgran, 1607 Donauerd and Venice 1606. but that I am very vnwilling to tire your patience with the deſperate reſolutions of theſe irregular and faithleſſe men. Faithleſſe to God: for they vow

religion and humility, but worke treachery and affect ſuperiority. And irregular amongſt men, for they preach faith, and adminiſter oathes; and yet if any thing diſpleaſe them, they ſend ſoules to deſperation, and make port-ſale of periury. And therefore to conclude, I will for your perpetuall remembrance, in the perſon of one, deſcribe the very genius of the whole fraternity in theſe ſhort remembrances following.
                  
                     
                        Seductor Sweco: Gallo Sicarius: Anglo
                     Proditor: Imperio Explorator: Dauus Ibero:
                     
                     
                        Italo Adulator: Dixi teres ore ſuitam.
                     He that hath oft the Sweth-land-Pole ſeduced:
                     Murdred the French: And Englands-King abuſed:
                     A ſpie for Auſtria: A cunning knaue for Spaine,
                     
                     And ſooths th' Italian States to Popiſh gaine;
                     Is All one Man, and Ieſuit is his name.
                     And what yee read of Henry, Frederick,
                     
                     Of Otho Great: and their Succeſsion.
                     
                        Gainst 
                        By Boniface the eight. Philip Faire, and the 
                        By Iulius the ſecond. twelfe Lodowic,
                     French Kings: Gainſt By Clement the ſeuenth and Paul the third. 
                        Henry th' eight of Albion,
                     And his diuineſt child By Pius the fiſt. 
                        Eliza Queene:
                     With many more of Nations far and wide,
                     
                     Be bold to ſay: Like meaſure to haue beene
                     In high proportion meated from That ſide.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The Tables to this Booke:
            
               The firſt declaring how many Emperors haue beene either Excommunicated, or conſtrained to kiſſe his Holineſſe Feete.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Emperrours
                        
                        Excommunicated by
                     
                     
                        Otho the fourth.
                        Innocent the third.
                     
                     
                        Henry the fourth.
                        Gregorie the 7.
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry the fift.
                        Paſchal the ſecond.
                     
                     
                        Frederick the first
                        Adrian the fift.
                     
                     
                        Philip the ſonne of Frederick.
                        Alexander the 3.
                        
                     
                     
                        Frederick the ſecōd.
                        Innocent the third thrice by Gre. the 9.
                        
                     
                     
                        Conradus the fourth
                        Innocent the fourth
                     
                     
                        Lodowick the Bauarian.
                        Iohn the 22. Benedict the 12. and Clement the VI.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Emperours
                        Conſtrained to kiſſe the feet of
                     
                     
                          
                           
                              Charles the great.
                              Iuſtian Emperor of Conſtantinople.
                              Luit Prandus king of Lomb.
                              Creſcentius Conſul. &c.
                              Otho the firſt.
                              Frederick the first.
                              Henry the fift.
                              Sigiſmund.
                              Charles the fift.
                           
                        
                          
                           
                              Adrian the Pope.
                              Stephen the ſecond.
                              Iohn the xvij.
                              Iohn the xvij.
                              Alexander the third agroofe, &c.
                              Paſchal the ſecond.
                              Of Martin the fift, and Eugenius the fourth.
                              Of Clement the ſeuenth.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  The ſecond, deuided into Sections; ſeuerally epitomizing the liues of the Popes, with the vices whereunto euery one hath in particular beene addicted, viz. who haue beene,

                        
                           1 Atheists.
                        
                           2 Arrians.
                        
                           3 Magitians or Coniurers.
                        
                           4 Blaſphemers.
                        
                           5 Forſwearers and equiuocators.
                        
                           6 Turkiſh Pentioners.
                        
                           7 Mad-men and tyrants.
                        
                           8 Warriours and bloud-ſuccours.
                        
                           9 Traytours and mouers of ſeditions.
                        
                           10 Parricids and impoyſoners.
                        
                           11 Whoremasters.
                        
                           12 Adulterers.
                        
                           13 Incestuous perſons.
                        
                           14 Sodomites.
                        
                           15 Pandars.
                        
                           16 Bawdes.
                        
                           17 Bastards.
                        
                           18 Drunkards.
                        
                           19 Couetous perſons.
                        
                           20 Church-robbers.
                        
                           21 Simonianists.
                        
                           22 Ambitious perſons.
                        
                           23 Monsters.
                        
                           24 Vnlearned perſons.
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  ❧ Liues of the Popes.
               
                  
                     1. Atheists.
                  
                     
                        LEo the tenth: who hearing Cardinall Bembo ſpeaking to a point concerning, The ioyfull meſſage of our Lord, anſwered moſt diſſolutely; It is well knowen to the world through all ages, in how great ſtead that fable of Christ hath profited vs and our aſſociates. This man neither beleeued heauen, nor hell, after our departure out of this life.
                  And ſuch were Alexander the tenth, Siluester the ſecond, Paul the third, Benedict the nineteenth, Iohn the thirteenth, Clement the ſeuenth, & Gregory the ſeuenth.
               
               
                  
                     2. Arrians.
                  
                     Anastaſius, the eleuenth: Liberius and Felix.
                  
               
               
                  
                     3. Magitians and Coniurers.
                  
                     ALexander the ſixth: this man made a league with the diuell, vpon promiſe to procure him the Papacie.
                  
                     Paul the 3. obtained the garland in Aſtrology, and in that kind of ſpeculatiō, which is aſſiſted by the miniſtery of diuels. He altogether kept familiar acquaintance

with Negromancers, & ſuch like notable impoſtures, and ſtarre-gazers, to learne the faults of himſelfe and his children.
                  
                     Siluester the ſecond, as well ſeene in theſe diabolical Arts, as his Predeceſſors, gaue himſelfe wholly to the diuell, vpon condition to aduance him to the Papacie.
                  
                     Benedict the ninth, obtained the ſame ſea by charms, ſpels & inchantments. Before his inſtalment, in company of his aſſociates, in woods and remote places he was accuſtomed to inuoke euill ſpirits, and by Negromantike toyes to worke women to his filthy luſt.
                  
                     Iohn the thirteenth, at dice would call vpon the diuell, and in merriment carouſe a cup of wine to his diuelſhip.
                  Of Clement the ſeuenth, we read that he was a Geomantique and Simonianiſt.
                  
                     Gregory the ſeuenth, laboured the Papacie by the ſame Arts. He was the firſt that euer preſumed to excommunicate an Emperour. And that was Henry the fourth, vnto the end of whoſe legend, if you pleaſe, you may with pleaſure and to good purpoſe add theſe true and vncontrolable records.
                  With the forme of his Outlary vpon earth, we will not trouble you; but with his impudent preſumption in baniſhing his ſoule from heauen (a place wherein I feare) ſuch perſons haue ſmalleſt intereſt, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, I will not faile to informe you. Then thus.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Agite igitur Apostolorum ſanctiſsimi Principes, & quod dixi vestra authoritate

interpoſita, confirmate, vt omnes nunc demū intelligāt, ſi potestis in caelo ligare & ſoluere, in terra quoque imperia regna, principatus, & quicquid habere mortales poſſunt, auferre & dare vos poſſe. Ediſcant nunc Reges huius exemplo, & omnes ſeculi principes, quid in coelo poſsitis, quanti
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  apud Deum ſitis, ac deinceps timeant ſanctae Eccleſiae mandata contemnere. Hoc autem iudicium cito in Henricum exercete, vt intelligant omnes, iniquitatis ſilium non fortuito, ſed vestra opera è regno cadere. Hoc tamen à vobis optauerim, vt paenitentia ductus, in die iudicij vestro rogatu, gratiam à Domino conſequatur. Actum Romae Nonis Martij; indictione tertia.
                           
                           
                              
                              Courage then ye moſt choſen Princes of the Apoſtles: And what I haue

thundered by the deputation of your authorities, ratifie I beſeech you; that now at laſt all people may vnderſtand, that as ye are of power in heauen to binde and to looſe: ſo likewiſe that you are of no leſſe potencie on earth, to giue and to take Empires, Kingdomes and Honors, with whatſoeuer the inhabitants of this world may peculiarly challenge. By the example of this man let Kings and Princes of the earth now learn, what are your prerogatiues in heauen, & what your credits with God, that henceforth they may feare to contempe the awards of Holy Church. Execute I beſeech you, this ſentence with ſpeede vpon Henry, that all the world may perceiue, that this ſonne of iniquity was diſinthronized by your operation, and not by deſtinie. Yet thus much I requeſt of your clemencies, that after repentance, in the day of iudgement, he may obtaine pardon of our Lord at your interceſſion. Giuen at Rome the Nones of March the third indiction.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     to the rareneſſe and nouelty of which preſident, (to auoid exception) and to confound ſuch quarrelſome ſpirits, let them heare, what the wiſedome of that vpright Biſhop Friſingenſis, a man for diſcent, zeale and learning moſt eminent, reporteth: and the rather for that he was almoſt an eie-witneſſe vnto thoſe times.
                  
                     Lego & relego (ſaith he) Romanorum regum & Imperatorum geſta, & nuſquam inuenio quemquam eorum ante hunc a Romano Pontifice Excommunicatum vel regno priuatum.
                     I read and read againe the Chronicles of the Roman kings and Emperors, and in no age can find that euer a Romane Biſhop excommunicated or depriued any one of them from his kingdome before this man: meaning Hildebrand.
                  
                  And again in his firſt book of the geſts of Frederick:

                        Gregorius ſeptimus (ſaith hee) qui tunc vrbis Romae Pontificatum tenebat, eundem Imperatorem tanquam a ſuis deſtitutum, anathematis gladio feriendum decernit. Cuius rei nouitate eò vehementius indignatione motum ſuſcepit Imperium, quò nunquam ante haec tempora huiuſmodi ſententiam in Principem Romanorum promulgatam cognouerat.
                        
                           Gregory the ſeauenth ſaith he, at that time Pope of Rome reſolued to ſmite with the ſword of Excommunication the foreſaid Emperor as forſaken of his people. At the nouelty whereof the Empire was ſo much the rather mooued with indignation, for that before thoſe times, it neuer had known ſuch a ſentence to haue been pronounced againſt the Prince of the Romans.
                     
                  
                  Now with what ſequell this Hildebrand ſtriued maſteries to arrogate this temporal authority from Henry
                     
the fourth. Otto Friſingenſis alſo (whom Bellarmine, not vndeſeruedly, for his parentage, his learning and integrity of life, tearmeth Most noble) doth relate vnto you.
                  
                     But what miſchiefes, what warres, what hazarding of battailes followed hereupon? How often was miſerable Rome beſieged, taken, and ſacked? It greeueth mee to record how a Pope was ſet vp against a Pope, a King againſt a King. Finally the turmoyle of this tempeſtuous ſeaſon produced ſo many miſeries, ſo many ſchiſmes, ſo many ſhipwracks of ſoules and bodies, that thoſe times onely, what by the maſſacres of perſecution, and what by the perpetuity of miſchiefes, gaue ſufficient arguments to approoue the infelicity of humane miſery. So that, thoſe daies were compared by a certaine eccleſiaſticall writer to the palpable and darke miſts of Aegypt. For the foreſaid Biſhop Gregory was inforced from the Regall City, and Gibert of Rauenna was thruſt into his place.
                  Hereunto, ſaith one of the tender hearted Romaniſts, that it mought be that Gregory did this vpon a good intenſion of the heart, let God iudge; but it can not be defended, that he did it iuſtly, diſcreetly, or by warrant of his calling; but that he erred foully following the humours and counſels of men, in arrogating that vnto himſelfe which was none of his due. Where by the way our aduerſaries may learne in auoiding of ſhedding of Chriſtian bloud, that notwithſtanding all the Pope could do by his excommunications, and curſes, for fiue and twenty yeeres ſpace, a great faction of the Clergy and Laytie ſided with the Emperour, ſo that Gregories ouerſight could be no ſmall fault, in that he called not into his conſideration; That it was the office of ſo eminent a pastor to haue ſtudied all the points of chriſtianity,

peace and humility, by ſuffering the faults of one man rather to eſcape vnpuniſhed, then to haue ingaged the innocent and harmeleſſe people through his priuate deſire of reuenge, in an Ocean of misfortunes.
                  
                  For it is manifeſt that all which we go about in the feruour of zeale, and to good intents, is not alwayes done to good purpoſe. Moſes in zeale to his countryman ſlew the Egyptian, yet he ſinned. Oza in zeale to vphold the Arke of God touched it, and dyed. Peter in zeale to our Lord and his maſter ſtroke off Malchas his eare, and yet he was blamed. An inconſiderate zeale doth oftentimes produce miſchief and inconuenience.
                  In regard whereof, he ought not to haue excommunicated the Emperour,Lib. 3. cap. 2. cont. ep. parmeniani. in participation of whoſe offence ſuch multitudes of Chriſtian ſoules were intereſſed, that without apparant ſchiſme, and diſunion of vnity in the Church and common weale, it could not be remedied. This is but the ſame Councell which for many Ages paſt, that great light of the Church S. Augustine did religiouſly and aduiſedly admoniſh vs of, and prooued the warrant thereof out of the writings of S. Paul. Whoſe opinion the Church from thencefoorth held ſo forceable,Can. Non poteſt. 23. q. 4.
                      reaſonable, and acceptable, that it vouchſafed to auouch it in warrant of their Canons.
                  
                  For confirmation whereof let vs take notice how Hildebrand behaued himſelfe after the feeling-ſmart of theſe monſtrous miſeries, by his troubled conſcience, and the teſtimony of antiquity, with reiection of bare aſſertions, and cauills of dubiae fidei.
                  
                  Pope Hildebrand (ſaith our Authour) alias Gregorie the ſeuenth,In Cronograph. Anno. 1085.
                      died in baniſhment at Salerne. Of this man I find it thus recorded. Volumus vos ſcire, &c. We will

that you who are to be carefull ouer the Eccleſiaſticall flocke, take notice, that our Apoſtolicall Lord Hildebrand (called alſo Gregory) now vpon the point of death, called vnto him one of the twelue Cardinalls, whom hee best loued. And he confeſſed to God, to Saint Peter, and before the whole Church, that he had greeuouſly ſinned in his paſtorall Office, committed vnto his charge to gouerne; and that by the perſwaſion of the diuell hee had raiſed greate wrath and hatred amongst the ſonnes of Men. Then at laſt he ſent his foreſaide Confeſſor vnto the Emperor and the vniuerſall Church, that they would deigne to inuocate his pardon, for that he perceiued that his end drew nigh. And preſentlie he put on the Angelicall vestment, and releaſed and reuerſed vnto the Emperour, and all Chriſtian people aliue and dead, Clarkes and Laie, the Cenſures of all his Curſes. And commanded all his followers to depart from the houſe of Deodoricus, and the Emperors friends to aproach.
                  
                  Such were Iohn the nineteenth twentith,Sig. In Cronograph. Anno. 1085.
                      and one & twentith. Sergius the fourth. Benedict the eight. Silueſter the third. Gregory the ſixt. Clement the ſecond. Damaſus the ſecond. Leo the ninth. Victor the ſecond. Stephanus the ninth. Benedict the tenth. Nicholas the ſecond. Alexander the ſecond. For from Silueſter the ſecond to the time of that moſt infamous impoſtor Gregorie the ſeuenth. All the Roman Biſhops applied thoſe ſtudies, and therein far excelled the Aegiptian ſorcerers.
               
               
                  
                     4. Blaſphemers.
                  
                     LEO the tenth of whom before.
                  
                     Iulius the third. This man made it his common exerciſe to reaſon in contempt of the Deity. Was

eſpecially delighted in the fleſh of Pork and Peacocks: But when the Phyſitian admoniſhed him to refraine from Hogges-fleſh, for that it was an enemie to the gowty diſeaſe, wherewith his Holineſſe was at that time afflicted, and neuertheleſſe would not abſtaine. His Phyſitian, I ſay, forbad his Steward to ſerue vp any more Porke. Which when his Holineſſe obſerued, he demaunded for his diſh. His Steward made anſwere, that his Phyſitian had forbad it. The Biſhop replied, Al diſpetto didio, bring me my Pork.
                  Againe, when at dinner time, hee had eſpied a Peacock, which was not toucht. Keepe me (quoth he) this ſeruice colde for my ſupper, and let it be ready by an houre; for I meane to inuite certaine guests. But at ſupper perceiuing many hote ſmoaking Peacocks, but miſſing his colde one; all pale with anger hee belched out moſt horrible blaſphemy againſt the diuine Maieſty. Which when one of the gueſt-Cardinals obſerued; Let not your Holineſſe (quoth he) be ſo angry for ſo ſmall a trifle. Where to Iulius replied: If God were ſo farre forth angry about an Apple, that therefore he ſpared not to cast our first Parents out of Paradiſe, ſhall it not be lawfull for me (his Vicar) to be offended for being couſoned of my Peacock, ſithence a Peacock is of more worth then many Apples.
                  
               
               
                  
                     5. For ſwearers and equiuocators.
                  THe Papal Canons doe teach, that the Romane Biſhop, may abſolue frō oaths, diſpenſe with vowes, and releaſe a periured perſon. Whereupon, it is not to be wondred at, to finde ſo many periured and faithleſſe Papiſts, ſwarming in euery corner of the world.
                  The Councel of Constance ouer-awed the Emperor

                     Sigiſmond (to the violation of his oath) to deale with Iohn Hus, according to the fore-ſaid Canon, & by that law to burne him: vt ſupra.
                  
                  
                     Gregory the thirteenth, by the Breue wrote vnto the Papiſts of England, that Rebus ſic ſtantibus, they might yeeld their obedience to the Queene. Which intimateth nothing elſe; but that for the preſent they may ſweare, and vpon occaſion dally with their oathes as them beſt ſeemeth.
                  
                     Iulius the ſecond, according to the teſtimony of Guicciardine in his eight book, maintained, That the Romiſh Biſhop might violate his pleighted faith. And this Maxime he taught as well by example, as manner of life. For he not onely by falſifying his faith, couſoned the Cardinals of a huge maſſe of treaſure, but alſo by the treachery and equiuocation, ingaged the French and Venetians in manifold incumbrances.
                  
                     Siluerius, againſt his oath of allegeance ſworne vnto the Emperour, did his beſt to betray the City to the Gothes.
                  
                     Gregory the ſecond, hauing forgotten his oath giuen vnto the Emperor, cauſed Italy to reuolt, and confederated with his enemies.
                  
                     Gregory the ſeuenth, in a moment forgot what hee had religiouſly promiſed and ſworne to effect.
                  
                     Paſcal the ſecond, after a peace ſworn with the Emperor in ſpecial & preciſe termes, as ſoone as his Popeſhip had leuied his forces, he charged his Maieſtie.
                  
                     Formoſus, by breaking his oath, cauſed moſt cruell tragedies.
                  
                     Alexander the ſixth, for his falſe faith (more infamous then Punique) was moſt renowmed.
                  
                     
                     Leo the the tenth, againſt his ſworne promiſe, baniſhed the houſe of Ruver out of the Dutchy of Vrban.
                  
                  
                     Clement the ſeuenth, had ſmall regard of his faith.
                  
                     Paul the fourth, and Pius the fifth, excommunicated the Engliſh, for not reuolting from their oathes of alegeance.
                  
                     Gregory the fourteenth, threatens that he would doe the like againſt the ſubiects of France.
                  
                  Remember the battell of Varna.
                  
               
               
                  
                     6. Turkiſh Penſioners.
                  
                     CLement the ſixth, was euermore very carefull, to keepe the Chriſtian Princes at iarres, ſo that they could neuer intend to prepare their mindes to thinke vpon the Turk.
                  
                     Alexander the ſixth, being willing to make good his ſupremacy, called in the Turk to aſſiſt him againſt the King of Erance.
                  
                  
                     Alexander the third, betrayed Frederick to the Sultan.
                  
                  
                     Gregory the ninth, by his letters requeſted the Soldan, not to make reſtitution of the Holy land, but rather to ſlay the Emperour, then warring in the Eaſterne parts.
               
               
                  
                     7. Mad-men and Tyrants.
                  
                     IOhn the thirteenth, put out the eies of ſome of his Cardinals; ſome he depriued of their tongues; ſome of their fingers, hands, noſes and priuities.
                  
                     Boniface the ſeuenth, by an ambuſh tooke Iohn the

fifteenth priſoner; put out his eies; committed him to priſon, ſtarued him, and ſo became Maſter of the Popedome.
                  
                     Paſchal the ſecond, excommunicated Henry the fourth, being a moſt religious Prince: prouoked the Sonne to riſe in armes againſt the Father. And to put no period to his helliſh Nature, ſo infinite was his rage towards the dead carcaſſe, that he commanded it to be digged vp, to be caſt out of the Church, and to want Chriſtian buriall by the terme of fiue yeares.
                  Hiſtories record, that Nicholas the third was priuy, nay, author of that Sicilian maſſacre, from whence ſprung the prouerb: veſperae ſiculae.
                  
                  
                     Iohn the fourteenth: This man deliuered vnto the Hang-man, one Peter the Praefect of Rome: Who ſtripping him to the skinne, and ſhauing his beard, by his fatherhoods cōmandement, tied him vnto a Gallowes for a whole dayes ſpace by the haire of the head. Then ſetting him on an Aſſe, with his face reuerſed, and his hands faſtened vnto the beaſts taile, hee commanded him ſo to be ſhewed in ſpectacle round about the Citie; To be ſcourged, and afterwards baniſhed into Germanie.
                  
                  
                     Gregory the ninth, his fury againſt the Emperor was vnappeaſeable, and would as farre as in him lay, haue vtterly confounded him.
                  
                     Vrban the ſixth, vpon a creation of nine new Cardinals, caſt ſeuen of the olde into priſon; ſewed fiue in ſacks, and caſt them into the ſea.
                  
                     Boniface the eighth: ſuch (in partiality of his owne faction) was the vnquenchable flame of his rancour towards the Gibellins, that vpon report, how ſome of the

ſide had ſeated themſelues at Genoa; himſelfe made haſt to the place, finally to haue deſtroyed them, and rooted out their race from the memory of Man. Vpon Aſhwedneſday being according vnto cuſtome to miniſter Aſhes vnto the people, the Biſhop of the place (whom he knew to be a Gibelline) approached him, & vpon his knees deſired his Benediction. Vnto whom his Holineſſe (notwithſtanding the reuerence of the place, the frequency of the people, and his religious calling) where he ſhould haue ſprinkled the Aſhes vpon his bald pate, he caſt them wholly into his eies: Saying: Remember man that thou art a Gibelline, and with the Gibellines thou ſhalt be turned into Aſhes.
                  
                  
                     Innocent the 7. This man tooke ſuch delight in gouerning his affaires with tumult and diſorder, that when the Romane Citizens deſired him to reſtore vnto them their auncient priuiledges; to ſurrender the Capitol; to put an end to the Schiſme; to finiſh the warres, and to bury all memory of ſeditions. Hee in ſhew of friendſhip requeſted the petitioners to attend his Reſolue at his Nephew Lodowicks houſe (as good had they beene to haue gone to the hang man) then dwelling in the Hoſpitall of S. Eskerit. For foorthwith he murdred eleuen of them, and caſt their dead bodies out at the windowes, ſaying: That by any other counſell it was not posſible to finiſh the warre and the Schiſme.
                  
                  
                     Innocent the fourth. As full of fanaticall frenſie, accurſed Fredericke; depriued him of all Imperiall dignity; abſolued his people from their oaths of obedience; inſinuated with them to chooſe another: and to further his vile purpoſes, deuiſed infinit ſcandals to worke the Commons.
                  
                     
                     Clement the ſixt that vnmanerly presbyter, rather then he would giue ouer his furious and ſelfe-wild intendments againſt the ſacred maieſty of an annointed Emperor, faſtned his libells vpon euery Church dore. Proteſting that vnleſſe his maieſty would within three daies take order to ſatiſfie his pleaſure, he would impoſe vpon him his moſt grieuous cenſures. Againſt what poore groome could he proceed more baſely?
                  
                     Stephanus the ſixt. Such was his malice againſt the name of Formoſus, that preſently he abrogated his decrees; fruſtrated his acts, and continuated his rage ſo far forth againſt the dead Biſhop; that calling a Synod he cauſed the body to be digged vp, to be diſrobed of all Epiſcopall habit, and clothed in ſecular raiment, to be deliuered to lay buriall: From his right hand he cut off two of his fingers, and caſt them into Tiber.
                  
                  
                     Sergius the third. This man after eight yeeres reſt, cauſed the body of the ſaid Formoſus again to be digged vp: to be placed vpon a papall ſeig, & to be araigned & condemned to capitall puniſhment, as if he had beene liuing. From the foreſaide hand he cauſed the other three fingers to be chopt off, and together with the remainder of his body to be throwne into the Riuer, as vnworthy of common buriall. He condemned all his actions, ſo that they who by him had bin admitted vnto his holy orders, were again fain to be readmitted by his preſent Popeſhip.
               
               
                  
                     8. Warriors and Bloodſuckers.
                  
                     INnocent the ſecond after his inſtallment, accounted it his holieſt proiect to ſeaſon his New and high calling with the deſtruction of Roger Duke of Sicil. Whereupon he flyeth to Armes, marſhalleth his forces,

and ſpeedily vanquiſheth. But by the vnexpected comming in of Roger his ſonne, his Popeſhip is taken, and his Cardinals made priſoners.
                  
                     Iulius the ſecond, in ſeauen yeeres ſpace was the cauſe of the ſlaughter of two hundred thouſand Chriſtian ſoules. He limited a reward to any man that could kill a Frenchman. Marching out of the City accoutred with Pauls ſword, and other ſuch holy Furniture, to fight againſt the French and the confederate Princes: He vnſheathed the blade, and caſt the Keyes into Tiber ſaying: Sithence Peters keies can no longer ſtead vs, welcome the ſword of good S. Paul.
                  
                     Gregory the ninth, receiuing newes of the recouery of Ieruſalem, cauſed the Emperors Embaſſadors to be murdred.
                  
                     Clement the ſixt to effectuate his proper deſeignes, from time to time ſowed occaſions of warre & diſcord amongſt the Chriſtian Princes: and rather then to faile of his purpoſes, hee would not ſpare to ſet them on working by maſſiue promiſes, by entertainment, by trecheries and many cunning deuiſes.
                  
                     Clement the fourth without either formall proceeding or obiection of reaſon, conſented that the Noble Emperour Conradus, the laſt of the houſe of Sweuia, ſhould be publiquely beheaded.
                  
                     Sixtus the fourth managed many wars, and was the author of the Pactian league, wherein Iulian de Medices and many other gentlemen miſerably miſcaried.
                  
                     Innocent the third perſecuted Caeſar Philip. And is reported to haue boaſted: That either the Pope ſhould take the Diadem from Philip, or Philip the Apoſtolike Miter from Innocent.
                  
                     
                     Paul the third was prepared for great Innouations to be practiſed againſt the ſaints of God. For he raiſed the German warre. Like vnto him was Alexander the ſixt, whome the Papiſts affirme to bee moſt cruell. Of whom they vulgarly repeated theſe verſes.

                        If after death Borgia did ſpue vp blood,
                        Wonder t'is none: For his cold ſtomack could
                        Not well diſgeſt ſo great an ingorg'd flood.
                     
                     Onuphrius writeth, that euen a light word was with him a ſufficient colour to put any man to death.
                  Vpon what termes the tumults of France were firſt raiſed, the league inſtituted, the maſſacre contriued, and the warres continued, the cloſets of Pius the fift, and Gregory the thirteenth, can beſt teſtifie.
               
               
                  
                     9. Traitors and mouers of Seditions.
                  
                     ALexander the third, manifeſtly ingaged himſelfe in a plot of treaſon againſt Fredericke. For proofe whereof, Frederick ſummoned a Dyet at Norimberge, aſſembled the Princes of the Empire, and before them cauſed the Popes traiterous letter, directed to the Soldan, to be opened, with the meanes of his deliuery.
                  
                     Gregory the ſecond procured all Spaine, AEmylia, Liguria, Italy & other prouinces to reuolt from the Empire: Antichriſtian-like forbidding the people to pay thoſe tributs, which Chriſt himſelfe had formerly commanded.
                  
                     Sixtus the fourth by entertainement of murdring raſcals hauing ſlaine Iulius of Medices, was the occaſion of great tumults in Florence.
                  
                  
                     Gregory the ſeuenth by plotting of infinit practiſes, ſtudied to take away the life of Henry the fourth, ſo far

forth that hee would haue murdred him in S. Maries Church, being at his praiers. He ſoundly buffeted Alexander the ſecond Emperour of the Eaſt, and barbarouſly ſlew Cincius. Againſt him (ſaith Bembo) crieth the Bloud of the Church, poured out by his miſerable trecheries.
                  
                  
                     Paſchal the eleuent, ſpent the whole courſe of his life in warre and commotions.
                  
                     Gregory the ninth, by his Legats publiquely commanded the Princes of Germany to depoſe Fredericke. Guilty of the ſame treaſon were Iulius the ſecond. Hadrian the fourth, and Gregory the third.
                  
                     Gregory the thirteenth, the ſucceſſor of Pius Quintus in impiety and tyrannie was the Author, approuer and commender of the Pariſien maſſacre: then the which the ſunne neuer beheld a more Satanical ſtratagem, whence roſe the prouerb; Nuptiae Gallicae.
                  
                  By the conniuance of Sixtus the fifth, Henry the third, was ſtabbed to death by a trayterous Monke, and by him the ſaid Murder was exceeding well allowed.
               
               
                  
                     10. Parricids and impoyſoners.
                  
                     PAul the 3. impoyſoned his mother and Niece, that the whole inheritance of the Farneſian family, might accrue vnto himſelfe. His other ſiſter alſo, whō he carnally knew, vpō fancying of others, he ſlew by poiſon.
                  
                     Alexander the ſixth, by poiſon made away Gemen the brother and competitor of Baiazet, for the hire of 200. thouſand crownes. And by the like medicine he purged away the life of many Senators & Cardinals. But preparing the like ſauce at a ſupper for ſome other, by miſtaking of the Bottle, himſelfe drunk off the prepared cup, and died.
                  
                     
                     Innocent the fourth, being corrupted by rewards, offered a bole of the like liquor to the Emperour Conrade. This the ſaid Emperour verified by his publique letters.
                  
                     Gregory the ſeuenth, by the miniſterie of his companion Brazatus, ſlew Nicholas the eleuenth with poiſon. And againe, ſome Authors affirme, that by the ſeruice of this wicked villaine, he impoiſoned ſix or eight Cardinals, obſtacles in his preferment to the Papacie.
                  
                     Paul the third, did his beſt, not onely to raiſe the Chriſtian Princes, againſt Henry the eight king of England, but alſo plotted againſt him ſome practiſes of conſpiracie.
                  
                     Gregory the thirteenth, loaded with his Indulgences, Parry, and others, to haue laid violent hands vpon Queene Elizabeth.
                  
               
               
                  
                     11. Whoremongers.
                  
                     IOhn the eleuenth. This man, Theodora (with the more ſtate and pomp to inioy her fractique pleaſure) made firſt Biſhop of Bononia, ſecondly, Archbiſhop of Rauenna, and thirdly, Pope of Rome.
                  
                  
                     Christopher the firſt, who vpon the depoſition of Leo, had by the aſſiſtance of his female acquaintance, inuaded the Papacie, was againe himſelfe, by one Sergius the Amorite of a gallant whore, named Marozia, depoſed and ſhamefully diſgraced.
                  
                     Iohn the thirteenth, who liued player-like, not Pope-like, was addicted to all kinde of voluptuous pleaſure.
                  
                     Gregory the ſeuenth, had ſecret commerce with the Counteſſe Matilda.
                  
                  
                     
                     Clement the fifth, was a publique fornicator, and kept for his Leman the Counteſſe of Perigord, a moſt beautifull Lady, and the daughter of the Earle of Foix.
                  
               
               
                  
                     12. Adulterers.
                  
                     SErgius the third begat Iohn the twelfth, vpon that moſt impudent whore Marozia: and in his Papacie committed infinite abominations amongſt light women, as writeth Luitprandus Ticinenſis in his third book and 12. chapter de Imperatorum geſtis.
                  
                  
                     Lando the firſt: This man in faſhion of an annointed Batchelor, according to the cuſtome of thoſe daies, conſumed the greateſt part of his life amongſt women; and was himſelfe at laſt conſumed, when he had reigned ſeuen moneths.
                  
                     Iohn the eleuenth. Theodora, a famous whore and Lady of Rome, was ſo vehemently in loue with this Iohn (the baſtard of Lando, at his comming to Rome) that ſhee not onely deſired, but inforced him to keepe her company. And the freer to inioy his company, ſhe cauſed him to tranſlate the Biſhops ſea from Rome to Rauenna, as writeth Ticinenſis in his ſecond booke. Cap. 13.
                  
                     Iohn the twelfth, the baſtard of that famous whore Marozia, ſpent the time of his whole Papacie, in moſt beſtial ſenſuality, of him thus writeth Theodorick Niemenſis. Being mounted into the Papacie, he was ſomtime preſent at the huntings of wilde beaſts: the reſt of his time hee ſpent wantonly and pleaſantly, and kept company with ſuſpitious women.
                  
                     Iohn the thirteenth. None would ſerue his turne

but virgins, & votareſſes. The Lateran Pallace he made his ſtewes. He defiled Stephana his fathers concubine, the widdow Rayner; another widdow Hanna; and his owne Niece.
                  
                     Alexander the ſixth, was a moſt luxurious tyrant: No penne is able to regiſter the rare, beaſtly and obſcene qualities of this moſt impious Knaue. And ſuch were Iohn the 14.15.21.24. Benedist the ſixt and ninth. Stephan the eighth.
               
               
                  
                     13. Incestuous perſons.
                  
                     PAul the third: He, to be made Cardinal & Biſhop of Ostia, gaue vnto Alexander the ſixth, his ſiſter Iulia Farneſe, to be deflowred. Another of his ſiſters, whom hee kept for his owne ſtore, for playing falſe with others, he poyſoned. Nicholas Quercaeus taking him and his wife Laura Farneſe (though his Niece) together in company, gaue him ſuch a ſtab with his dagger, that the ſcar remained with him to his dying day. Another of his Nieces (a delicat wench, no leſſe admired for her mayden-like modeſty, then her choiſe beauty) this Goat-like olde Knaue ſolicited to inceſt & vnnaturall whoredome. And to inioy his owne daughter Constantia, with more liberty, whom he had often heretofore knowne, he impoyſoned her husband Boſius Sfortia.
                  
                  
                     Alexander the ſixth, was more familiar with his impudent daughter Lucretia, then ſtoode with his honeſtie.
                  
                     Iohn the thirteenth, often times defiled Stephana his fathers concubine. Such an other was Benedict the 3.
               
               
                  
                  
                     14. Sodomits.
                  
                     IVLIVS the ſecond. This man, as we read in a certaine Commentary of the Maſters of Paris, abuſed himſelfe with two young gentlemen (beſides others) whom Anne Queene of France had ſent vnto Robert Cardinall of Nantes, to be brought vp and inſtructed.
                  
                     Iulius the third. Being Legat of Bononia, he vſed one Innocent, his ancient Minion ouer familiarly. Being Biſhop, againſt the mind of the Colledge, he admitteth him his houſhold ſeruant, and createth him one of the Cardinals. The report went at Rome, and diſperſed by libells, that Ioue kept Ganimed, but an ill fauoured one. At what time his Holineſſe preſented this his darling to the Colledge, and euery man denied his conſent: for that his preſented had neither vertue nor good manners to aduance him: It is reported that he ſhould ſay: What more ſaw you in me, I beſeech you, when you preferred me to this Papacie? Wherefore ſithence we are all but fortunes tennis-balls, and by her good fauour you haue asſiſted me: ſo in like maner be you fauour able to this my boy, and I will create him a Cardinall. But after that ſome writers had brandiſhed this Catife for his blaſphemies and villanies, he procured a fellow as wicked as himſelfe, viz. Ierome Mutius, to defend his actions, and thereto he put his approbation. Virgerius writeth, that he abſtained not from the Cardinalls themſelues. In the time of this incarnate diuill liued, and iſſued from his priuate cloſet, that Apoſtaticall Legat Iohannes à Caſa, Archbiſhop of Beneuent, who in Italian rithmes writ a Poeme in commendation of the ſinne

of Sodomy; and Intitled it, Opus diuinum: affirming that he tooke great delight therein, and neuer knew any other venery.
                  
                     Leo the tenth made alwaies very much of his carkaſſe, and gaue his mind to all variety of pleaſure, but eſpecially to the loue of boies.
                  
                     Sixtus the fourth built a famous brothell houſe at Rome, and dedicated it to both Sexes. Weſſell of groning reporteth in his treatiſe of Popiſh Indulgences, that at the requeſtes of Peter Ruerius (his Fatherhoods Catanut) as alſo at the inſtance of S. Sixtus Cardinall and Patriarch of Conſtantinople, and Ierome his brother; his Holineſſe graunted his faculty to all the houſhold ſeruants of the Cardinall of S, Luce, chiefe huntſ-man vnto Paul the eleuenth (a fearefull thing to be ſpoken) in the hot months of Iune, Iulie, and Auguſt, to vſe the maſculine ſinne; ſigning the Bull with this clauſe: Fiat quod petitur.
                  
                  
                     Petrus Mendoza called Cardinall Valentinian, not contented with a troope of euill women, nor ſatisfied with the Queene her ſelfe; deſired and oft obtained of Alexander the ſixt to vſe in holy ſingle-life, as his beſt beloued ſpouſe, his baſtard Sonne the Marqueſſe of Zaneth.
                  
                  
                     Iohn the four and twentith was accuſed in the Counſell of Constance, to haue been a Sodomit, an adulterer, and a whoremonger.
                  
                     Clement the ſeuenth. Of him it is recorded in a certaine Commentary vppon the Articles of the Maſters of Paris, that hee was, a baſtard, a poyſoner, a Man-ſlayer, a Pandar, a Symonianiſt, a Sodomit, a Periurer, a deflowrer, a Rauiſher, a Geomancer, a

Church-robber, and a plotter of all villanies. Such like were Benedict the third, Iohn the thirteenth, fourteenth and Paul the third.
                  Hence complaineth Luit prandus, that the Lateran pallace became by time and ſufferance to be a receptacle of vncleane perſons.
               
               
                  
                     15. The Fauorites of Whores.
                  
                     VICTOR the third obtained the Papacy, neither by the choice of the Cardinals, nor by the ſuffrages of the people, but was thereunto hoyſted by his Miſtriſſe Matilda with the aſſiſtance of the Normans.
                  
                     Vrban the ſecond, and Victor, by the ſame party and like meanes, obtained the like preferment.
                  
                     Iohn the eleuenth, by the wealth of Theodora an impudent gameſter, ran the ſame fortune.
                  
                     Paul the third had a roll of forty fiue thouſand whores, of whom he exacted a monthly tribut. And no wonder, for if fame deceiue not, I haue heard it reported by men of good experience, that Rome is a City conſiſting of about fiue thouſand ſoules, whereof a third part were accounted to bee light weomen and Church-men.
                  
                     Sextus the fourth was very bountifull towards their maintenance, and had to ſpare for his friends and ſeruants. It ſhould ſeeme hee augmented their numbers; for their hyer prooued very aduantagious to his Exchequer, euery whore being rated to pay weekly to his Holineſſe behoofe, a peece of their Coine, termed a Iulius. The yeerely Entrado whereof many

times amounteth to the yeerly value of foure hundred thouſand dukats. And the Officers of the Church doe as duely make their accounts for this Entrado, as for any other of the Churches reuenues.
                  
                     Lucius the third ratified the ſacring of whooremongers.
                  
                     Iohn the thirteenth being depoſed for his enormious villanies, the weomen of his old acquaintance by promiſing the Romane nobility their rewards out of the Churches treaſure, inuited them to Armes, and wrought his reſtitution.
                  
                     Iohn the eight. Shee was at firſt called Gilberta; but counterfaiting the virill Sex, and the habit of a young man, went firſt to Athens with a Monke her ſweete heart. Where after her great proficiency in the Arts, and the death of her friend, Shee returned alone to Rome, but alwayes in her late diſguiſe. Where in all diſputations, behauing her ſelfe for eloquence and readineſſe of acute anſwers with admiration, ſhee ſo gayned the good eſteemes of all her Auditorie, that Leo beeing dead, ſhee was choſen Pope, and ſate in Peters Chayre two yeeres and ſixe moneths.
                  During her Popedome ſhe was gotten with child by a familiar friend, her Chapleine, and in a ſolemne Proceſſion, betweene the Coloſſe and Saint Clements Church ſhee fell in trauaile, and in the middeſt of the City, in the ſtreetes, and before all the people, ſhe brought foorth a Sonne, and through paine died in the place. Certainlie it can not bee doubted, but that God ſuffered this whore to bee Pope, to repreſent in plaine termes that Babylonian creature,

ſpoken of in the 17. of the Apocalips, to the end that of her ſelfe, and her inchantments, the Elect might beware.
               
               
                  
                     16. Bawdes.
                  
                     PAul the third, ſurrendred his ſiſter Iulia Ferneſe vnto Alexander the ſixth, to be defloured.
                  
                     Sixtus the fourth, by the teſtimony of Agrippa, amongſt the moderne Pandors, was the moſt eminent; As the man who excelled all other builders in the edifying of that moſt ſtately brothel-houſe, which he dedicated to both ſexes.
               
               
                  
                     17. Bastards.
                  
                     MArtin the eleuenth, by a common woman, was the ſonne of a Negromantique Prieſt.
                  So was Iohn the eleuenth, begotten by Pope Lando.
                  
                  Item, Iohn the twelfth, begotten by Sergius the third vpon Marozia.
                  
                  Item, Iohn the fourteenth, then ſonne of Iohn the twelfth.
                  Item, Iohn the ſixteenth, the ſonne of Leo a Prieſt.
                  Item, Benedict the eighth, the ſonne of Biſhop Gregorie.
                  
                  Item, Iohn the ſeuenteenth, another ſonne of the ſame Gregory.
                  
                  Item, Siluester the third, the ſonne of the Arch-prieſt Lawrance.
                  
                  Item, Adrian the fourth, the ſonne of Monk Robert.
                  
                  Item, Eugenius the fourth, the ſonne of Gregory the twelfth, Pope.
                  Item, Clement the ſeuenth, the ſon of Leo the tenth.
                  
                     Item, Gregory the ninth, the ſonne of Innocent the third.
                  Item, Adrian the fifth, the ſon of Innocent the fourth.
                  Item, Gregory the eleuenth, the ſonne of Clement the ſixth.
               
               
                  
                     18. Drunkards.
                  
                     LEo the tenth, and Nicholas the fifth were famous for the loue of their liquor.
               
               
                  
                     19. Couetous perſons.
                  
                     THeodore of Niem, did long agoe delineat the Auarice of the Romane Biſhops. For hee compared the Popes Exchequer to the Ocean, whereunto all Riuers paid tribute, and yet was it neuer ſatisfied.
                  
                     Histories do affirme, that at one gleaning the Popes had out of France ninety hundred thouſand crownes. Whereupon Lewes the ninth complained, that his Kingdome was miſerably exhauſted by theſe Harpies.
                  The wealthy Kingdome of England to be miſerably impoueriſhed, partly by tithes, partly by procurations of the Apoſtolique Legats, partly by donatiues, and partly by the ſale of Benefices, Mathew Paris in his time did much complaine. In thoſe daies, ſayeth hee, Pope Gregory either ſo permitting or procuring; the inſatiable auarice of the Romane Clergy, grew to be ſo feruent, that without any ſparke of modeſty (confounding all law and equity, as a common and braſen-faced-Harlot) ſet all to ſale to all ſorts of perſons, and reputed Vſury as a trifle, and Simony as a matter of no inconuenience.
                  
                     
                     Germany was pillaged after the ſame faſhion.
                  By warre and cunning, the Pope wreſted from the Emperour his lawfull Patrimonies, ſome after ſome, throughout Italy.
                  
                  By harlots they make alſo rich purchaſes; they put out their mony to Intereſt, and account no gaine, baſe or vnlawfull
               
               
                  
                     20. Church-robbers.
                  
                     BOniface the ſeuenth, when he ſaw that it was no longer ſafe for him to reſide at Rome, priuily and feloniouſly he purloyned certaine rich treſurers out of the Church of Saint Peter, and fled to Constantinople.
                  
                  
                     Clement the ſeuenth, was accuſed for periurie, ſacriledge, and impoyſoning, &c.
               
               
                  
                     21. Simonianists.
                  FRom Gregory the ninth, Caeſar obtained his abſolution for the price of one hundred thouſand ounces of gold.
                  
                     Benedict the ninth, being ſtrucken with feare; for one thouſand and fiue hundred pounds, ſolde the Papacie to his Chapman Iohn Gratian, afterward called Gregory the ſixth. Hereupon Iohn the Monk complained, that Rome was founded by theeues, and ſo continued vntill this day, to liue by ſpoiles. And Alan Chartierius, ſaith, you haue made the diuine ſanctuary a banke of Exchange.
                  
                  Alike in conſcience were Leo the tenth. Innocent the eighth, Siluester the third, Gregory the ſixth, Gregorie
                     
the twelfth, Iohn the eighteenth, &c. So that Bernhard alſo complained, That the Holy offices of the Church were become meerely questuarie.
                  
               
               
                  
                     22. Ambitious perſons.
                  
                     IOhn the foure and twentieth, by ambition onely affected the Papacie. For by the teſtimony of Stella, when he liued at Bononia, he carried himſelfe more like a Lord then a Legat; He was gouernour of a great Armie, and vnto him the fathers were glad to reſort to elect a new Pope; he gaue out many vnder hand-threats, that vnleſſe they would preſent one to the Papacie, whō without exception, himſelfe ſhould very well like of, he ſhould not preuaile. Whereupon, many were nominated, of whom he meant neuer to approue one. Whereupon, the Fathers beſeeched him to name the man whom he beſt fancied. Then giue me Peters cloake (quoth he) and I will bestow it on him that ſhall be Pope. Which being done, he caſt the cloake vpon his owne ſhoulders, ſaying, Behold your Pope. Which ſtratagem, though it diſpleaſed the Fathers, yet they thought it fitter to be ſilent, then to aggrauate diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Iohn the three & twentith, was a man moſt ambitious, writing vnto the Greekes, That hee onely was head of the Church, and Christ his Vicar. Vnto whom the Grecians re-anſwered in as many words. We conſtantly acknowledge thy high authority ouer thy ſubiects: thy high pride we can not indure; thy auarice wee are not able to ſatisfie. The diuell be with thee; the Lord is with vs.
                  
                  So Iohn the two and twenteth, after a long vacation, being made Cardinall by the Councel of Naples; being

intruſted with the election, elected himſelfe: which by the Canons he could not doe.
                  So Boniface the third that ambitious beaſt, in the midſt of a tumultuous number, (yet many gaineſaying it) was heaued into the Papacy; confirmed, worſhipped, and ſaluted Lord and Prince of all Biſhops by that adulterous Emperor, parricide and tyrant, Phocas.
                  
                  Afterward by ardent importunity, or rather by his immoderate bribery, he obtained, that Rome ſhould be called the Head of all the chriſtian Churches, vppon theſe idle reaſons forſooth: That the Empire firſt took his origen from Rome, and ſo Peter gaue vnto his ſucceſſors of Rome the Keies, &c. Read the hiſtory of Phocas and this Boniface,
                     One of the Popes beſt benefactors. to be further ſatisfied of their mutuall knaueries.
                  Let Paſchal the eleuenth ranke with theſe fellowes. For when William procurator and Clarke to king Henry, ſpeaking in his maſters right, amongſt other reaſons conſtantly affirmed: That the King had rather looſe his kingdome, then the Inuestiture of Prelats: the Pope made this proud reply. If as thou ſaieſt, thy maſter will not ſuffer the Eccleſiaſticall preſentations to bee alienated from him, for the loſſe of his kingdome; then take thou notice preciſely, I ſpeake it before God, that neither I without the price of his head will ſuffer him to inioy them quietly.
                  
                  
                     A good Pope, that would not in thoſe daies touch an Emperor before he had become a priuate perſon. A Popiſh miracle.
                     Clement the ſixt anſwered the Embaſſadors of Lewes the Emperor as arrogantly: That he would neuer pardon his Maiesty, before he had reſigned his Imperiall right, ſequeſtred himſelfe, his children, and all his goods into his custody, and promiſed neuer to retake them but by the Biſhops grace and good liking.
                  
                  So great was the ſpirit of Boniface the eight, that almoſt

he diſdained all men. For ſuch was his ambition, that he ſuborned certaine companions in lieu of Angels with a ſoft voice by night, to ſound in the chamber of Pope Celeſtine, that he ſhould voluntarily reſigne the Popedome, if hee meant to ſaue his life. Which the ſimple man performed accordingly. But Boniface contrary to Law and equitie, ſtepping into the Popedome, layd violent hands vpon Celeſtine trauelling out of Rome, to lead his life in ſome ſolitary manſion, and caſt him into perpetuall priſon.
                  The ſame Boniface inſtituted the Iubile, and celebrated it, in the yeere of our Lord 1300. promiſing to all people that would viſit rhe City, full remiſſion of their ſinnes. He reiected an Embaſſie ſent from the Emperor Albert. Vpon the firſt day of the ſolemnity, he appeared in his Pontificalibus, and beſtowed his benedictions vpon the people. The next day he came foorth accoutred like an Emperor, and commanded a naked ſword to be borne before him, with this acclamation: Behold here two ſwords. This is the right I haue to kingdomes and Empire; they are all in my diſpoſition. The kings of the earth, vnleſſe they will receiue their kingdome from this holy Sea, are to be accurſed and depoſed▪
                      Finally hee gloried in his pride, that he was the porter of Heauen, and ought to be adiudged by no man.
                  
                  
                     Adrian the fourth did grieuouſly chide Fredericke the Emperor for holding his left ſtirrope, as he came from horſe. vt ſupra. fo.
                  
                  
                     Alexander the third in more baſe manner vſed an other Emperor as before. fo.
                  
                  
                     Stephen the ſecond depoſed Childerick, and preferred

                     Pipin to his place. He ſhaued Childericks crowne, and thruſt him into a monaſtery. Pipin lay agroofe vpon the earth, kiſſed the Popes toe, held his horſe by the bridle,Note what perſons the Pope bindeth to his ſeruice. performed the office of a footman, and gaue him his oath of perpetuall fidelity.
                  
                  
                     Damaſus the ſecond. This man was Chancellour to his predeceſſor; but his ambition not able to ſtay the death of his maſter, it is reported, that he gaue him a dram to diſpatch him.
                  
                     Note.
                     Conſtantine the firſt. This man was the firſt that put his foot to be kiſſed by an Emperor.
                  
                     Benedict the third followed the preſident, and ſuffered himſelfe to be worſhipped as a moſt holy Father, or rather like a terrene Idoll.
                  
                     Iohn the ſeuen and twentith did the like to Creſcentius the Roman Conſul.
                  
                     Martin the fift to Sigiſmund Caeſar.
                  
                  
                     Leo the fourth gaue his foot to all commers, and againſt the Canons of the Aquiſgran Councel, firſt aduanced a Papall croſſe, and adorned it with pretious ſtones, commanding it to be caried before him. Of the like ſtampe were Boniface the firſt, Symmachus, Boniface the ſecond, Siluerius, Martin the ſecond, Formoſus the firſt, Theodorus the ſecond, Benedict the fourth, Sergius the third, Iohn the tenth, Gregory the ſixt, &c.
               
               
                  
                     23. Monſters.
                  
                     BEnedict the ninth. Hiſtoriographers doe write that this Benedict was ſeene neere a certaine Mill by an Hermit in a moſt horrible ſhape. His body was like a

Beare, adioyned thereto the head and taile of an Aſſe. And being asked by him, how he came to be thus metamorphoſed: It is reported, that he anſwered: In this ſhape doe I wander, for that in my Popedome I liued without reaſon, without God, and without limitation.
                  
                  
                     Nicholas the third begat a ſonne on his Concubin, who had hayre and clawes like vnto a Beare. Vide Iohannem Nouiomagum.
                  
               
               
                  
                     24. Illiterate perſons.
                  
                     BEnedict the eleuenth was a meere Laique. And ſo were Benedict the ninth, Sergius the third, Eugenius the fourth, Iohn the ninth, Iohn the one and twentith, &c.
               
            
         
         
            OF THE FALL AND DEATH OF certaine Romane Biſhops.
            
               
                  ADrian the third flying from Rome, came vnto Venice in the Habit of his Cooke: where he lurked in a certaine monaſtery, and was made the Gardiner of the garden thereof.
            
               Iohn the fiue and twentith trauelling towards Conſtance fell headlong from his litter: a preſage of his future depoſition. For many faults beeing obiected againſt him in the Councell, he began to flie: but being taken and preuented; he was caſt into priſon, and there remained for three yeeres.
            
               
               Siluerius Campanus was baniſhed into Pontus by Theodora the wife of the Emperor Iustinian. The ſame Theodora her ſelfe impleaded Vigilius for not perfourming his word: arreſted him to Constantinople; there contumeliouſly diſgraced him, whipped him, caſt an halter about his neck; cauſed him to be haled through all the ſtreets of the City, and finally baniſhed him.
            
               Constantinus the ſecond, was eiected by a Councel: and beeing depriued aſwell of his eies as of his Popedome, he was caſt into a monaſtery, and after into a perpetuall priſon.
            
               Benedict the fift was depriued of his papall dignity, and ſent into baniſhment.
            
               Stephen the eight was ſo ſorely wounded in a popular tumult, that for the deformity of his wound, hee was neuer after willing to ſhew himſelfe in publique.
            
               Innocent the fourth died miſerably. Robert of Lincoln reproued his vile behauiour, his auarice, his pride, and his tyranny, and that as well by word of mouth, as by writing. For which the Pope citeth him to Rome, and iniuriouſly condemneth him. From him Robert appealeth vnto Chriſt as his Iudge. Vpon the death of Lincolne (as writeth Ceſtrienſis lib. 7.) a voice is heard in the Court of Rome, crying; Miſerable man, make ready to come to the tribunall of God. Vpon the day following the Pope is found dead in his bed, and vpon his body appeared a blewiſh blow, as if he had been ſtrucken with a cudgell.
            
               Silueſter the ſecond beeing at Maſſe was attached with a ſuddain feuer; and by the noiſe of ſpirits (witneſſe

               Peter Praemonſtratenſis) he perceiued that his end drew nigh, to pay the diuell his due vpon compoſition. He confeſſed his errors, and (as ſaith Benno) preuented a miſerable and fearefull deſtruction.If it were a true confesſion, no doubt. Yet in the anguiſh of death, he deſired that his hands, his tongue, and his priuities, wherewith euen in his ſingle life, he had blaſphemed God, by ſacrificing to diuels, might be cut off.
            
               Nicholas the third in midſt of his greateſt imaginations, was taken with an apoplexy, and without one word ſpeaking breathed his laſt.
            
               Paul the ſecond hauing merrily ſupped, was alſo taken with the apoplexy, and departed, without ſight of any man.
            
               Paſchal the ſecond was taken by the Emperour, and thruſt into priſon.
            
               Gelaſius the eleuenth. One Cinthius a powerfull patrician of the City made an aſſault vpon him, tooke him by the throat, caſt him to the earth, ſpurnd him with his feet, and caſt him into priſon.
            
               Boniface the eight, Grown deſperate with the ouerwaight of fury, gaue vp his vnhappy ghoſt loden with an infinit heape of miſchieuous actions. This is that Pope, of whom it is recorded, That he entred as a wolfe, liued as a Lyon, and dyed as a Dog.
            
            
               Gregory the ſixt was taken priſoner, and ſent into baniſhment.
            
               Gregory the ſeuenth for his innumerable wickedneſſes was depoſed by the Emperor Henry, and in baniſhment ended his daies.
            
               Eugenius the fourth priuily flying in a monaſticall

coole, together with his friend Arſenius, entred a fiſher-boat. Vpon report whereof, his enemies followed to ſeeke him with ſtones and ſhot.
            
               Clement the ſeuenth, for his conſpiring with the French King againſt the Emperour, was made priſoner by Charles his Captaines, and wonderfully derided by the Germane ſouldiers.
            
               Iohn the eleuenth, was taken by the ſouldiers of Guido, committed to priſon, & ſtifled with a ſirplice thruſt into his mouth.
            
               Boniface the eleuenth died ſuddenly.
            
               Iohn the eighth, not that teeming woman, but a man, died together with his Creſcentius, hauing his eies firſt put out, and his whole body mangled.
            
               Benedict the eleuenth, was poiſoned at an Abbeſſes banquet with a diſh of figges.
            
               Benedict the ſixth, no doubt for ſuch like malapert practiſes, as in theſe dayes Popes play with mightie Princes, was taken by one Cinthius, a powerfull Roman Citizen, thruſt into the Mole of Hadrian, now Saint Angelo, the priſon of the baſeſt offendours, and there miſerably ſtrangled.
            
               Hadrian the fourth: Into his mouth ſlew a flie, which could not be taken out, nor thruſt downe, by any Art of the Phyſitian: ſo that it ſtopped his breath, and choked him.
            
               Lucius the ſecond, with an armed band, aſſaulted the Citizens in the Capitol, of purpoſe vtterly to deſtroy the whole Senate. The newes runneth through the City: the people fly to Armes: and a ſtrong fight is managed. Lucius ingaging himſelfe in the hotteſt of

his armed troupes, is ſo mauled with ſtones and ſhot, that a little while after he ſurrendred his life.
            
               Iohn the two and twentith. At the inſtant wherein he promiſed vnto himſelfe a long continuance of his life, was ſuddenly taken away, and was alone found buried amongſt timber and rubbiſh, by the fall of a chamber.
            
               Clement the ſixt was ſuddenly taken with an Apoſtume, and died.
            
               Leo the tenth ſuddenly died with an aſtoniſhing diſeaſe.
            
               Leo the third was ſo odious vnto the people, that in a certaine Proceſſion being caſt from his horſe; they diſpoyled him of his pontificall ornaments; buffeted him well fauouredly, and committed him to priſon. And as ſome report, they depriued him both of his eies and his tongue.
            
               Chriſtopher the firſt being depoſed from the Papacy, was conſtrained to lead a monaſticall life. Not long after he was taken from the ſaid monaſtery by Sergius his ſucceſſor, and committed to a moſt ſeuere priſon, and there ended his daies in great miſery.
            
               ¶ Theſe vnder written were poiſoned.
               
                  IOHN the ſixteenth, nineteenth, & twentith. Clement the ſecond. Damaſus the ſecond. Leo the ninth. Victorinus the ſecond. Nicholas the ſecond. Alexander the ſecond. Victorinus the third. Gregory the eight. Celeſtine the fourth. Vrban the ſixt. Alexander the fift. Clement the ſeuenth.
               
                  Thus much for their manners: and now to ſtop the mouthes of thoſe who cry out; what is this to Religion? Behold here for a concluſion, not the fruits, but the very points, ſome few for a taste of theſe their irreligious documents.
               
            
         
         
            BLASPHEMIES OF THE CANONISTES.
            
            
               THE Biſhop of Rome is God. Dist. 96. ca. Satis euidenter.
            
            2. The Pope is not man. Lib. 1. Sexti de electione. tit. 6. ca. Fundamenta in Gloſſatore.
            
            3. The Pope is neither God, nor man. In prologo clementinarum in gloſſatore.
            
            4. It is lawfull for no man to imagine or practiſe to tranſgreſſe the precepts of the Apoſtolicall Sea. Dist. 20. ca. Nulli. Item diſt. 12. & 22.
            5. An Heretique is hee who is not obedient to the Popes decrees. ibid. in gloſſ.
            
            6. He is guilty of Sacriledge, that belieth the Pope: For he ſupplieth the place of the liuing God on earth. De paenit. diſt. 1. ca. libenter ignoſco.
            
            7. The Pope is the vniuerſall Biſhop through al parts of the earth. Lib. 5. Sexti. ca. faelicis. in gloſſ.
            
            8. The Pope is Lord of all principalities vpon earth. Li. 3. Sexti. tit. 16. cap. Periculoſo.
            
            9. Let no man dare to ſay vnto the Pope, Lord why

doſt thou doe thus, or thus? In extrau. tom. 22. tit. 5. ca. ad Apoſtolatus in gloſſ. 2. li. 1. Decretal. tit. 7. ca. 5. vide gloſſ.
            
            10. The Pope by vertue of theſe words, Thou art Peter: or, feede my ſheepe, obtaineth primacy. In praemio Sexti in gloſſ.
            
            11. No mortall man may ſit in iudgement vpon the Pope. Cauſ. 9. quaeſt. 3. c. nemo. Item aliorum. & diſt. 40. ca. ſt Papa. Cauſ. 12. quaest. 2. ca. quiſquis. in gl. diſt. 40. ca. non nos. in gloſſ.
            
            12. It is lawfull for no creature to call into queſtion the iudgement of the Apoſtolique Sea, or to delay the ſentence thereof. Cauſ. 17. quaeſt. 4. c. nemini.
            
            13. The Pope may diſpence againſt the Apoſtles. diſt. 34. collector in gloſſ. dist. 82. ca. presbiter. in gloſſ. cauſ. 15. quaeſt. 6. ca. Authoritatem. in gloſſ.
            
            14. The Pope hath celeſtiall arbitrement. Li. 1. decr. Greg. tit. 1. ca. 5.
            15. The Pope may change the Nature of things. ibid.
            
            16. The Pope of nothing can make ſomething ibid.
            
            17. The Popes will is a Law. ibid.
            
            18. The Pope may diſpenſe aboue the law. ibid.
            
            19. The Pope may cauſe an vniuſt decree to be receiued for iuſt. ibid.
            
            20. The Pope hath fulneſſe of power. ibid.
            
            21. As is the difference betweene the Sunne and the Moone. ſuch is the difference between the Pope and a King. Li. 1. decre. Greg. tit. 33. ſolitae.
            
            22. Perſons vniuſtlie condemned and oppreſſed ought to ſeeke redreſſe and amends from the Church of Rome. Cauſ. 2. quaeſt. 6. c. ideo.
            
            
               Laſt of all,
            
               By theſe Mens Liues, Manners, and Doctrine new,
               Pen'd by the trauaile of my Pen; O you,
               Who read the leazings of this falſe-mouth'd crue,
               Learne theſe their Liues, Words, Maners to eſchue.
            
         
         
            CONTRADICTIONS MORE REAſonable, then Canoniſticall.
            
               B. De poteſt. pa pae. ſo. 6.
               
               A Learned and noble preacher (if any ſuch be amongſt the Ieſuits) being demaunded his iudgement concerning the opinion of Bozius (a more peremptory Champian for the Canoniſts then any of his fellowes) Eum vocabat Papalem paraſitum, viz. termed him a Papall paraſite.
            
               Li. 10. Hiſt. Fr. in vita Caroli vij.
               Gaguin a learned and religious hiſtoriographer, in his time, thus taxeth this their irregular vſurpation: Such is (ſaith he) at this day their haughtineſſe and Lordſhip, that hauing ſmall reſpect vnto Princes, they boaſt that all things are lawfull vnto themſelues ſoly. Neither in my Age did any of them aſcend the Papacy, but forthwith hee enriched his nephewes with infinit wealth, and honours.
            
               Lib. 3. de Conſid. ad Eug. In vita Boniſacij.
               S. Bernard long before Gaguin: Doth not now ambition more then deuotion, poſſeſſe the Apoſtolicall ſucceſsion?
            
            Hereupon ſaid Platina: In this maner dyed that Boniface, who ſtudied more to terrifie, then to teache Kings, Princes, and nations. Who for his pleaſure made it a matter of paſtime, to giue and retake kingdomes, to interdict Nations, and abſolue them afterwards. Gaguin againe; Such was the end of Boniface,
               
the ſcorner of all men:Li. 7. hiſt. in vita Philippi Pulchri. who hauing no remembrance of his Maſter Chriſt, did his vtmoſt, according to his priuate fancy, to take and to giue kingdomes. When meane time, he was not ignorant, that he was his vicegerent vpon earth, whoſe kingdome was not of this world, nether compounded of earthly, but of heauenly perquiſits, &c.
            
               Pius the fift ſaid vnto Martin Aſpibeneta;Nauar. in Com. Can. Non liceat Papae. 12. q. 2.
                That the Lawyers (meaning the Canoniſts) accuſtomed to attribute plus ſatis poteſtatis, more then reaſonable ſupereminency to the Papacy.
            No wonder then, if I. Gerſ. termed them puſillos, that is, weake and ſimple Chriſtians, who being deceiued (his own words) by vnlearned Gloſſors, doe eſteeme the Pope onely to bee God, hauing all power in heauen and in earth. Certainly, tales adulatores, ſuch Paraſites haue corrupted the iudgement and diſpoſitions of many Popes. As concerning whome,In Cano. Coniunctio. 35. q. 2.
                
               Iohan. de turre-cremata thus cenſureth. It is a wonder (ſaith he) that the Popes doe treat ſo modeſtly of their Patent of Power, and yet certaine Doctorculi, vpstart Doctors without any true ground will, to flatter them, euen equalize them to God himſelfe.
            
            In the ſame liſt doth Cardinall Cuſanus ranke certaine other Authors; Who (ſaith he) indeauouring more then befitteth, or beſeemeth holy Church, to make famous the Roman Sea (in truth worthy all commendation) ſpare not to ground themſelues vpon Apocriphall writings. Verbum ſapienti.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   