
      
         
            
            THE Honourable Prentice: OR, This Taylor is a man.
            
               Shewed in the life and death of Sir John Hawkewood, sometime Prentice of London: interlaced with the famous History of the noble Fitzwalter, Lord of Woodham in Essex, and of the poisoning of his faire Daughter: Also of the merry customes of Dunmow, where any one may freely haue a Gammon of Bacon, that repents not mariage in a yeere and a day.
            VVhereunto is annexed the most lamentable murther of Robert Hall at the High Altar in Westminster Abbey.
            ¶ Printed at London for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in Pannier alley. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO MY MOST louing and respected friend Master Robert Valens, health, and all happines.
            
               SVch is now, and euermore hath been, the inconstant, and interchangeable estate of humane affaires (good Sir) that nothing hath beē which hath not had his increase, his hight, as also his declining: and albeit, it may bee said that among the rest, martiall discipline was neuer in any age neglected, or vnregarded: Yet can it not be denyed, but that in former ages the same hath been mannaged with much more honourable regard and reward, then now it is. Witnesse the many honoures, which the Greekes, and Romans allowed to Souldiers, and men of high desert. And in especiall, the stately and costly Triumphs which were allowed to their Consuls

or Generalls, that were Victors; and had conquered, or subdued any Nation or Countrey to their obeysence. Neyther haue writers left their atchiuements or worthy designes vnrecouered, and smothered in obliuion: which benefit many worthy Commanders of our Nation haue wanted. Among which, Iohn Hawkewood, whose honour and memoriable exploits, acted in Forraine Countries had been forgotten, had not Paulus Iouius, and some few others rather remembred them, then expressed them according to their worth. This moued me some few yeeres since, for my owne recreation, to collect these Histories ensuing: hoping that some one or other, better furnished then my selfe, would haue vndertaken to deliuer them to the world in more ample manner, and more plausible termes: which not falling out according to my expectation, but being put to the Presse, I being most assured of your generous and worthy disposition, haue imbouldened my selfe in this to make tender of that loue which I beare and owe to your vertues: wishing to you all that happinesse which may equall your godly and vertuous intendments,
            
               Yours in all W. U.
            
         
         
            
            The Introduction
            
               IT is obserued that the Almighty Creator and Gouernour of this great & large vniuerse, the world; without diminishing his owne ininfinite, & vncircumscribed power, or neglect of his protection and gouernement: hath yet appointed the supe-, rior seauen planets, by termes to gouerne the world vnder him: each for the space of three hundred fifty and odde yeeres: who according to their seuerall honoures and influences, impart their seuerall natures and properties to mortall men. Which is the cause that some ages are giuen to peace and quiet, some to war, some to studie, and inuention of sciences, some to trauaile, and search strange and vnknowne lands to plant inhabitants, some to propagate religion, &c. But if any age or time hath had Mars for gouernor, I doubt not but about the daies of King Edward the third, and his Father, and his sonne, this Gouernment must bee. All Christian Princes, yea,

and the heathen intending nothing but warres, bloodshed, stratagems, and conquests. In these times valor, and magnanimity was esteemed, had in price, and bountifully rewarded. Honour, and promotion attending on such as could, and had meanes to deserue it. In these times men from meane estates arise to high promotion, and dignities: honour, fame, and renoune attending on such, as could with wisedome and courage follow the warres.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               THE Famous History of Sir Iohn Hawkewood: sometimes PRENTICE of LONDON.
               
                  ABout the beginning of the raigne of King Edward the third, there liued in the countie of Essex, in the towne of Henningham Syble, a man of honest report & reputation; named, Gilbert Hawkewood, by his trade and profession, a Tanner, who among other childrē had a son named Iohn, a youth forward, and apt for any good impression, or matter which might be imposed on him: Him hee brought vp, in such learning, as might after stand him in steed, and such as those times affoorded, which he diligently applyed, insomuch as in writing, reading, and casting accounts, and other rudiments of great scollership he exceeded his equalls. So soone as hee came to reasonable yeers, and was fit for the Cittie, his Father brought him to London, and bound him apprentize to a Taylor, who were not then called Marchant Taylors, but Taylors, and linnen Armorers:

with this Taylor he remained, performing all such duties as others that were his fellow prentises vsed to doe vnto, and for their Masters, vntill the King hauing imployed many thousands of men in his conquest of France, and forced to plant and man many Garrisons, in Citties, Castles, & towns, which he had wonne and taken, sent yet againe into England, for new supplie of Souldiers, pressing many house-holders, & seruants to supplie his Armies, and to mannage his intended conquest of France. Then was Iohn Hawkhood, albeit yong, thought meet and able to serue. Himselfe rather willing to be so imployed, then to sit all day on a shoppe boord making trusses, sowing stockins, or fashioning, or shaping of Garments. His spirit & Genius leading him rather to follow Arms after the sound of trumpet and drumme, then be at the hand, at the call of his master or mistres. To France he went, as also many other prentises of his acquaintance and familiars, He serued an Archer, with his bowe & shafts, in no better place then a common Sentinell, or of the still watch, as it then was termed, and in short space, (such was his cariage, valour, and courage) that he was promoted to be a commaunder, or Corporall, after a Sergeant, then Ancient, after that Liuetenaunt, and last of all Captain, and serued with his company of two hundred and fifty men, all Archers, with such good and happy successe, as that he was euermore preferred to the best and most dangerous oppositions of the enemy. The black Prince his generall, hauing a watchfull eie of his behauiour, and his valour, louing him, and esteeming him more then ordinary, oftentimes called him to councell in weighty affaires, and found him to bee of an excellent sharp, and deep iudgement; and often preferred his aduise before others, who were esteemed

much more worthy, and were become famous for their councell: neither was his estimation only for councell, but for execution, he surpassed in speede & forwardnesse his fellow Captaines. The particulars of his seruices are not recorded, but lie vnknowne, and couered in the names of chief Commannders and Generalls. Let this sufice, that for his valiant exploits and hardinesse hee was dignified with the honour of Knighthood. Albeit hee was thought the poorest Knight in the Army. He was in possibility of great preferment, and of great riches, if those wars of France had continued: but the French ouerwearied, & driuen to narrow straights, were right glad to conclude a peace, which was concluded and made in Brittaine, at or neer▪ 
                  Chartires, in thee yeer of our Lord 1360.
               The black Prince with the chiefest of his Souldiers, were after imployed in the warres of Spaine, many returned for England, and others could not by any meanes be drawne from out of France: and from such places and preferments, as with their swords they had purchased. But Iohn Hawkewood ioyning himselfe and his company with such as were called the new men, or late commers, determined, to séek better fortunes, and raise his estate with the spoile of his enemies, and so with a setled resolution to passe through the East parts of France vnto Italy, to follow the warres there. Hee tooke his iorney in despight of any powres that could be made to resist him, through Champaigne, Burgundy, and Daulphine, and came into Prouince, euen to the very gates of Auignion, where the Pope kéepes his Court, & residence of Cardinalls: Great and exceeding rich were the spoiles which hee and his Followers gat in this iorney: but much more was the honour, fame, and renoune which he purchased.

Hee neuer attempted, but he conquered, nor neuer skermished, or fought battaile, but euermore hée bare away the victory. Hée was the sole and generall Commander of all which followed him, which of their apparrell, which hée newly made for them, were called the white band, which consisted of fiue thousand horse, and one thousand and fiue hundred foote, whereof the most part were Englishe, and Archers.
               Thus entred he into Lumberdy, and was entertained by the Marques of Mountferratto, a great Prince, who made vnto him large payment, and royall pay, to the full content of himselfe, his Captaines, and Souldiers: besides, rich spoiles, which they obtained and gat of the Marques enemies. In these wars he spent some time, to the great honour and fame of our English Nation.
               At this time Lionell the Duke of Clarence, third sonne to King Edward, arriued in Italy, with an honourable company, to marry the Lady Violetta, daughter to Uicount Galeasius, Duke of Millan, which gaue vnto Sir Iohn Hawkewood occasion to take leaue of the Marques, and become a follower of the Duke of Clarence to the marriage: where, morē like a Courtier, then a Souldier (trained vp as he was) he behaued himselfe with such commendable and heroyicke carriage, as that hée deserued to bée beloued both of the Duke, and of his Father-in lawe Galeasius: but most of all, Barnabe, brother of Galeasius, a warlike Prince, admired his vertues, and knowing of his valor and resolution, neuer rested to intreate the Duke of Clarence, till he had obtained licence of him that Sir Iohn Hawkewood might with his companies serue him in his warres against the state of Mantua, which warres hée mannaged in behalfe of Barnaby, in such sort, as that he

in sundry 
                     •
                  ighte, and skirmishes ouerthrew his enemies, making himselfe, and the English men so famous▪ and renowned, that all Italy seared them, and accounted Barnaby happy in his entertainement, who on the other side, admired the discipline, and valiant demeanour of our Nation: and so entirely loued and honoured this Giouanno Acutho, for so the Italians called him, that hee gaue vnto him in marriage his daughter Dominia, which hée had by a Lady of high birth and nobility, named, Porra, and with her 10000 Florences of yéeraly reuenue. Thus was his glory, honour, and name more spread, and admired, his riches increased, and the more for that Barnaby was esteemed and accounted the most valiant and the worthyest Souldier of his time.
               But to the great wonder of all men, when the Duke of Clarence died at Alba, the English men reuolted from the friendship of Galesius, and Barnaby, and Sir Iohn Hawkewood with his Army, ioyned with their enemies. By meanes of such alteration and change of affections (grounded vpon what occasions I doe not reade) I finde that many townes and Citties of Lumbardy, were spoiled and wasted by his powre: all Italy feared him, and well was that Prince which might giue him entertainement. But being yet out of pay, his order was to take one Citty or other, and with the spoile thereof pay his Souldiers, and men of warre. But if they would saue themseluos from spoile and ruine he ransomed them, and would somtimes sell them to such as were enemies to the owners of them. At these times hée tooke the Townes of Faensa, and Bagnacauallo: the one hee sould to the Marques of East, for two hundred thousand Crownes. That of Bagnacauallo, he kept and held as his owne a long time; yet at last, Astrogian Manfredy gat it from him by treason. Being

weary of being out of pay & wages, hee was sent vnto Pope Gregory the twelueth, whose Citties in Prouince reuolted from him, whereupon hee entertained Sir Iohn Hawkewood, and made him his Generall: For whom he recouered all those Citties & townes, which refused his obedience. For which seruice hee was besides his ordinary pay, well rewarded, and by the Popes appointment, made Gouernour of fiue great townes. In these warres I reade that he by mischance was once taken prisoner, but by the great valour and worthines of his Captaines and Souldiers, recouered from out the handes of his enemies, with whom he was most honourably vsed and intreated. Hauing ended the warres for the B. of Rome, and vtterly refusing to be idle and out of pay, he was solicited by many frée Citties, and states of Italy to serue. Amongst whom the Citty & State of Florence proffered him most, and them he serued, with great commendation and honour. From them hee went to the Pysans, with whom when he had serued a space, hee was againe solicited by the Florentines, who increasing his pay, and allowing better meanes to his Souldiers, and followers, obtained his good will againe: with whom hee serued a long time after, with such successe, and increase of his commendation, & glorious renowne, that hee was held and estéemed to bee the onely, absolute, and the best Souldier that then liued: For hauing an excéeding sharp. ripe, and quick conceipt, hee had learned by long experience in the warres. hee had learned to force occasions, and politiquely to frame his resolutions. He was also speedy in execution, and whensoeuer occasion required, hée was as hot in fight, as notable in delaies. So that sundry great Captaines who after were most highly renouned, procéeded from his schoole, as from an

exact Master of martiall discipline. The exploits which he atchieued with good successe, were accounted as sure grounds and principles of warlike discipline, as well amongst his enemies, as amongst his owne followers. Thus waxed he old in the warres, and after an incomparable renowne amongst all men for his vertues and true valour, hée departed this mortall life at Florence, and like a souldier was most honourably buried in their Cathedrall Church: and in regard that he had in his life been a notable defender of their Common wealth. The Senate and Citizens in reward thereof, erected a stately Tombe and Monument, with the image of a man on horsebacke, as great as a mighty pillar, for a Monument and testimony of his prowes in warre, and his fidelity to them and their state.
               A great part of his riches and wealth was conuerted into England, where also his executors, or otherwise his friends at Hunningham Syble where he was borne, erected for him a tombe or Monument, arched ouer, and engraued the likenes of Hawkes in a wood flying. This was done in the Parish Church by Robert Rokeden Senior, and Robert Rokeden Iunior, & Iohn Cooe: and to the memory of so worthy a man they builded and founded a Chauntry, whith with the rest is dissolued.
               Hée was by some called Gyouanno Agutho, by some Acutho: for that the Italians could not well pronounce his name in English. I haue read him called in English Sir Iohn Sharpe, Sir Iohn Acton: and Sir Iohn Hawkewood, which was indéed his name.
               The Chronicles of Italy doe make often and honorable mention of him, and our Histories doe also re member him: amongst which I haue thought good to set downe the words of Thomas of Walsingham
                  
in Lattin as I find them, as also of Paulus Iouius and others.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Thomas Walsingham.
                           Per idem tempus Papa fouebat Guerram contra dominos mediolanenses quia ipsi tirannice & iniuste, 
                                 •
                              erras, redditus, & castella de patrimonio beati Petri longo tempore detinebant. Pro papa vero militabat dominus de Spencer qui laudabiliter se gessit ibidem post mortem ducis Clarentiae cum quo peruenit ad partes illas.
                           Eodem tempore Floriut miles ille egregius & famosus Iohannes Hawkewood, Anglicus natione, habens secum albam illam comitiuam pertactam superius qui nunc contra papam▪ nunc contra dominos, mediolanenses bella gerebat, cuius pars quocun
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vertebat semper vincebat. Multa ita
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               facta egregia ibidem operatus est cum suis Imo mirabilia, & Inauditasi quis vellet singula eius gesta enarrare.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Paulus Iouius,
                           
                              Anglorum egressus patrijs Acuthus ab oris
                              Italiae primum climata laetus adit
                              Militiae fuerat, quascun
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  edoctus & artes
                              Ausonia exeruit non semel ipse plagas,
                              Vt donaretur Statuae defunctus equestri
                              Debita nam virtus praemia semper habet.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Nicholaus Machiavell.
                           Quo vero ab externis insidijs munitiores essent Ioannem

Aguthu
                                 ••
                               Anglum belli ducem celeberrimum, quod antea papa aliisque Italis egregie operam suam nauasset, ad stipendia sera vocarunt.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Iulius Feroldus.
                           
                              Hawkewood Anglorum decus, & decus addite genti
                              Italicae, Italico praesidium
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  solo
                              Vt tumuli quondam Florentia sic simulacrì,
                              Virtutem Iouius donat Honore tuam.
                           
                           His Picture may be seene in the Booke of Paulus Iouius de Eulogiis.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
               The Preface or Introduction.
               
                  IT hath euer beene held a most commendable thing to recount the Acts of auncient Nobility: but much more laudable to recouer them from the deuouring iawes of all-eating time, which commonly doth swallow the best actions, and aduentures of elder ages, and retaines onely the memory of such exploits and aduentures as the later age▪ namely what their Grandfathers haue by hand deliuered, and by tradition left to posterity. The auncient Brittaines or the Welshmen, had their Barths or Bardi; as also their Druydes, the last attentiue on their religion and sacrifices: the first, wholly busied and respectiue about the recording and repeating, or rather singing the aduentures of their Auncestors, deliuering from one to another, as it were an exact Chronicle, of the most notable aduentures of their Nobilitie; and haue not onely amongst them, but the like amongst the Galles and Cimbrians (from whom the best learned suppose the Brittaines doe proceed)

beene had in reuerend estimation and credit: but as concerning the ensuing historie, which I purpose to write; we need no tradition to helpe vs, since there yet remaines large and ample records: both Chronicles and histories printed, and written manuscripts which beare testimonie of that which is hereafter deliuered: Records in the Towne, and seuerall Stories and Registers belonging to such houses as were by them builded; or such as they haue new founded: And these remaine in the hands and priuat custody of particular men: but what I shall here deliuer, I haue found both in old written histories, in common Chronicles, as also out of Records remaining, as I said in the Towre of London: being the aduentures of Robert Fitzwalter, who liued in the daies of King Iohn, and suffred the variable changes of his fortunes, as by that which followeth shall appeare. Whatsoeuer error I shall commit, shall not be of purpose, but for want of sufficient instructions, which whosoeuer can or will take paines to correct and amend, I will hold my selfe exceedingly well pleased, and be content that first I haue aduentured to entreat of them. So read and vse them at your pleasure.
               
                  W. V.
               
            
            
               
               The famous history of Robert Fitz-walter.
               
               
                  Of Robert Fitz-walter his Auncestors.
                  
                     THat this Family of Fitzwalters, hath of long time beene of honourable reputation and account, need not many proofes: the same not contradicted but by a general consent, known to discend from Gislebert, or Gilbert Lord of Clare and Tonbridge, and also from Waltheof Earle of Northumberland which liued in William the Conquerors time, and Iudith Countesse of Huntington, who was neece to the Conqueror.
                  It is not amisse to note that our English nation vsed no Surnames till after the conquest, but tooke names either of the Christian name of their parents or of the place where they were borne, or of some other accident, as their trade, occupation, or of some quality of body or mind, wherewith they were endowed.
                  The first of this family of Fitzwalters that descended from the house of Clare, was Robert Fitz Richard being indeed one of the younger sonnes of Richard Fitz-Gilbert Lord of Clare. This Robert had a son

called Walter, surnamed after his fathers Christian name: Fitz-Robert and he had a sonne called Robert Fitz walter being the sonne of Walter, after whom this name of Fitz-walter was setled in this family, whereof I entreat: This Robert liued in the time of King Iohn, and died Anno 1
                        •
                      34. 19. H 3 and that Robert who is mentioned in this Booke, was his grandchild, and liued long after in the time of K. Edw. 1.
                  
                     Walter Fitz-walter, father of this Robert was first married to Matild or Maud de Beecham, and secondly to Mauld de 
                           •
                        ucy, mother to Robert of whom I entreat, whose father died An. Dom. 1198. and was buried at Dunmow, where he founded a priory, leauing Robert his sonne to succe
                        •
                     d him, called Robert Fitz-walter Lord of Woodham, a Towne in Essex, of which name there are also two other Townes, namely Woodham Ferrers, and Woodham Mortimer as also this Woodham Walters, whereof the Fitz walters were Lords.
               
               
                  Of his marriage, and of his faire daughter Mauld or Matild.
                  
                  
                     I Wishingly omit his bringing vp, which could not bée but according to the estate of his nobility, and birth: but his forwardnes and readines to conceiue and learne whatsoeuer was taught him, ercéeded the common sort of his equals: but chiefly hée excelled in exercise of Armes, wherein he wholly delighted and ouer went the rest of his familiars, and such as were brought vp with him. When he came to mans estate, he betooke himselfe to marriage, and by his wife, who liued not long with him, who also may séeme not to haue liued

with him so contentedly as was to bée required, hée had one onely daughter whom he loued most entirely, and caused her to be brought vp in vertue and learning, wherein shée prospered to the great contentment and ioy of her Father, and comfort of her mother, who notwithstanding shortly after died, and left her sole gouernor of her Fathers house, which was great consisting of many people, seruingmen, and houshold seruants: all which shée gouerned, and vnder her father ruled, with such discréet and modest behauiour, as was of all people wondred at, in respect of her tender age and youth: besides shée was of such excellent and surpassing beauty, as allured the eyes of all sorts of people to gaze and wonder at it, nature hauing wrought in her mind an example of all womanhood, and in her body and countenance, a patterne and moddell of all perfection, which being knowne at the Court, as also throughout the land: shée was commanded to attend the Court amongst Ladies of her regard and equall estimation: being at Court and daily attendant on the Queene. The King himselfe (I meane King Iohn) still respecting and gazing at her exquisite carriage, and the perfection of her bewty, fell so farre from himselfe, and that which became his person and estate, that he bent all his ende
                        •
                     ors to sollicite her of loue, which shee as fully resolute most constantly denied. The repulsed King left not so his vnlawfull sute for all her deniall, but practised to procure her father to be a meanes for his vnlawfull and vngodly request: a matter so farre from Kingly dignity, a thing so dishonorable for him to attempt or vndergoe, as that for it, he euer after (how euer for the time he bare faire weather) persecuted and hated the King most deadly: and it seemed to him being a man of high courage and resolution, so prophane and so hainous a request, as was from

his very soule to be abhorred and detested: nature not brooking the father to become a Pandor to his child: but such was the loue or rather lust of this lasciuious King, that the poore virgine not other wise able to auoid his importunate cute, besough her father that shee might be professed a Nun or votary at Dunmow, whereunto her father consented, trusting that her absence would alay and asswage his lust, and cause him to leaue his vnhallowed sute: but it preuailed not, but as a Lyon bereft of his pray grew more curaged then before, appointing a messenger which he procured and hired of purpose, whose arrand was either to perswade her to consent to the Kings request, or by poison to take away her life: in the end when nothing could perswade her▪ he according to his direction poisoned her. I haue read that it was secretly done with a poatched egge, the sault being poisoned which was for her sauce: Others say with
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         mat 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Mi
                           
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           raiton 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        ers 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        tten a cup of poison which he enforced her to drinke: but howsoeuer great mischiefe befell after this lamentable Tragedy, which wel neere had ouerthrowne the Kingdome and Country. This was about the yeere of our Lord 1213.
               
               
                  Of the Barrons warre, and the banishment of this Robert Fitz-walter.
                  
                  FOr this occasion and many other grieuances, the Barrons together with this Robert arose, and made warre against the King, driuing him to such extremity, that he was forced to deliuer the City to the Barons, and the Towre of London to the Archbishop of Canterbury on certaine conditions, whereof I haue seene the coppie of a Charter or deed remaining in the Towre of London to this purpose.
                  
                     The agreement betweene King Iohn of the one part, and Robert Fitz-walter, Marshall for the armie of God and the Church of England, Richard Earle of Clare, Geffrey Earle of Essex, and Glocester Roger Bygot, Earle of N
                           •
                        rfolke and Suffolke, Sa
                           •
                        r Earle of Winchester, Robert Earle of Oxford, Henry Earle of Hereford, and the Barrons vnderwritten, that is to say William Marshall the younger, Eustace de vescie, William de Mowbray, Iohn Fitz-roberts, Roger de Mountbegon, William de Lannauaile, and other Earles and Barrons with those aboue wr
                        •
                     tten together, with the fréemen of the whole kingdome, that they aforesaid shall hold the Citty of London, of the Kings deliuerance, sauing to the King, in the meane time, all farmes, rents, and his cléere debts, vntill the ascention of the Uirgin Marie, which shall be in the 17. yéere of his raigne: and the Lord of Canterbury shall likewise hold of the Kings deliuerance the towre of London, vnto the foresaid terme, sauing to the City of London, their liberties and the customes, and to euery man his right in the custody or kéeping of the Towre of London: and if so bée that some things named in that Graunt bee performed by the King: or that they be not hindred to be by him performed within the said terme: that then the said City shall be deliuered to the King, within the said terme, sauing the liberty and customes of the said Citty: and if they be not performed, but hindered by the King: Then the said Barrons to hold the said Citty, and the Lord Archbishop the Towre vntill they be performed. And in the meane time all men on either side, to receiue the Lands, Castles, and Townes which they had, the beginning of the warre betwéene the King and the Barons, &c.
                  Hereby appeareth that the people of England had great affiance in the wisdome and valour of this Robert:
                     
for they chose him for their chiefe commander, and Generall of their Hoste, by the name of Marshall.
                  The King after this agréement found meanes to banish Robert, and diuers others of the Barons, whereof some fled into Scotland, some into France: Thither also fled Robert Fitz-walter: The king considering what dammage his owne subiects and people might doe vnto him in France: prepared an Army and sailed ouer and met the French king, where each armie being prepared, and articles of peace and truce proposed, they agréed vpon a truce for fiue yéeres. Whilst both the hosts lay still about this composition. There was an English knight which made offer to Iust with any knight of the French host, which challenge Robert Fitz-walter, obtained to answere on behalfe of the French: So he ferryed ouer on horsebarke to the English Host, there being a small Riuer betwixt them, and in fight of both kings and armies Robert ouer threw and vnhorsed the English challenger or champion, whereat king Iohn was wroth, and swore by Gods tooth which was his vsuall oath, that he were a king indeed that had such a knight: Some of Roberrs friends enformed him and said it is your owne knight Robert Fitz-walter, and humbly be sought his pardon, which the king graunted, and so his lands were restored: and his Castle at London which was defaced and taken from him, called Bainards Castle, was with licence of the king repaired and réedified, of which Castle and the custome belonging thereunto, I haue read in a very auncient written Booke of the customes of London, that which followeth, which also is remembred by Iohn Stow in his Annales.
               
            
            
               
               The ceremonys and rights which belong to Robert Fitzwalter, Chasteline of London, and Lord of Woodham; that is, hee ought to be chiefe Bannerer, or Bauner-bearer of London, as in fee, which belongeth to his Castle Bainard, which seruices he ought to performe in time of warre.
               THe said Robert as his Ancestors haue done, and
                     Vide Io. St
                           •
                        w in Sutuay of London. his heires ought to doe, when there is preparation for warre, he ought to come vpon his steed, couered, he being the twentieth man of Armes, his caparisons of cloath, or iron, vnto the great dore of the Minster, or Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, with his Banner displaid, with his Armes in it; and when he is come to the great dore of the Church, mounted, and apparrelled as before. The Maior with the Shereffes and Aldermen armed, shall come foorth to the dore of the said Church or Minster on foot, the Maior hauing a Banner of Saint Paul in his hands, which Banner shall be of vermaile, with an Image of Saint Paul of gold, with feet, head, and handes of siluer; with a sword of siluer in the hand of the said Image: and whē the said Robert shal sée him come forthwith such a banner, hee shall alight from his horse, and salute the Maior as his fellow and compauion, and shall say, Sir Maior I am come to doe my seruice which I owe vnto the Citty▪ and they shall say, we giue to you as to our Bannerer, in sée, this Banner of this towne, to beare and gouerne to the honour and profit of this Citty to your power. And the said Robert and his heires shall receiue the said Banner in his hands. and goe on foot out of

the gate or dore, with the Banner in his hands, and be Maior and Sheriffes shall fellow him to the dore, and present vnto him twenty pound sterling in money, and deliuer it to his Chamberlaine for his expences that day: Also a horse worth twenty pounds, with a Saddle with the Armes of the said Robert on it engrauen, the saddle shall bee couered with Sl
                     •
                  ndall, and his Armes also embrothered. And the said Robert shall mount vpon the said horse, with the Banner in his hand, and when he is vp, he shall say to the Maior, that he cause a Marshall to be chosen for the host, one of the Citty; and when the Marshall is chosen, the said Robert shall commaund the Maior that hee assemble the Burgeses, and Commoners of the Citty, and they shall all goe vnder the Banner of Saint Paul; and the said Robert shall bere it himself vnto Algate: being com there, the said Kobert and the Maior shall deliuer it ouer to whom they shall thinke good, and if they haue cause to goe foorth, Robert shall cause them to meet at the Priory of the Trinity: and the said Robert shall chose two foorth of euery ward, the most sage persons, to foresee that the Citty bee safely kept, if the Host of London doe besiedge any towne, or Castle. If the siedge continue long, as a whole yéer, he is to receiue for euery siedge of the Comminalty of London fiue pounds for his trauaile and no more.
               
                  His Rights in time of Peace.
                  THe said Robert hath a Sokne in the Citty, that is a wall in the Channonry of Saint Paul, as a man goeth downe the stréet, before the brame of S. Paul, vnto the Thames, and so to the side of the mill which is in the water, which commeth downe from Fleet bridge, and goeth so by London wall, betwixt

the Fryers Preachers, and Ludgate, and so returning backe to the house of the said Fryers, vntill the said comen of the wall of the said Channonry of S. Paul that is, all the parish of Saint Andrew, which is in the guift of his Ancestors, by the said signiortty and so the said Robert hath Appendant to the said Sokue, all these things héere vnder written, videlicet.
                  That hee ought to haue Sokeman, and to place what Sokeman he will, so that he be of Sokemanrie.
                  And if any of the Sokemanry bee impleaded in the Guild Hall of any thing which toucheth not the body of the Maior for the time being, or that toucheth not the body of no Sheriffe; it is lawfull for the Sokeman of the said Robert Fitswalter, to demaund a Court of the said Fitzwalter; and the Maior, and Cittizens ought to graunt him to haue his Court, and in that Court, hee ought to bring his Iudgement, as it is assented, and giuen in the Guild Hall.
                  If any therefore be taken in his Sokne he ought to haue his stockes, and his imprisonment in his Sokne, and hee shall bée brought from thence to the Guyld Hall before the Maior, and there they shall prouide him his iudgement, such as ought to bee giuen him, but his iudgement shall not bee published, vntill he come in to the Court of the said Robert, and in his Fraunchéese, And the Iudgement shall bee such.
                  If he hath deserued death by treason, then to bee tyed to a pillar, which standeth in the Thames at Wood wharfe, where Boates are fastened, two ebbings, and two flowings of the water. And if hee be condemned for a common thiefe, he ought to bee led to the Elmes, & there suffer his iudgement, as other common thieues.
                  
                     And thus the said Robert, and his heires haue agrert honour, which he holdeth for a great Frauncheese within the Citty, that the Maior and the Cittizens are bound to doe him of right; that is to say, when the Maior will hold a great Councell, he ought to call the said Robert and his heires to be with him in Councell, and of Councell with the Citty, And he ought to be sworne to be of Councell to the Citty, against all people, sauing the King, and his heires. And when hee commeth to the Hustings in Guild Hall, the Maior, or his Liuetenaunt ought to rise against him, and set him downe neere vnto him, and so long as he is in Guild Hall, all the iudgements ought to be giuen by his mouth, according to the record of y• Records of the same Guild Hal. And so many weyfes as come so long as he is there, hee ought to giue them to the Bayliues of the Citty, or to whō he will, by the Counce l of the Maior for the time be
                  How this custome tooke b
                        •
                     ginning, or how it ended, I haue not yet read, yet I thought good to repeat it, for that it belonged to his Castle, which honours were againe restored and possessed by his successors. For I reade that in Anno Dom. 1303. vpon Saint Gregories day, or the twelueth of March the thirty one yeer of King Edward, before Iohn Le-Bloud then Maior, William de Leyr, Thomas Romain, William de Bleton, Walter de Finchingfield, Henry de Glocester, Salamon de Coetellier, Iohn de Wengraue, Iohn Darments, Hugh Pourt, & Simon de Paris, the Sheriffes, & Aldermen of London, and before six men euery ward of London, Robert Fitzwalter came, and acknowledged seruice, and sware vpon the Euangelist to be true to the Citty, and that he would vphold and maintain them to his power, and that he shall keepe the counsell of the said Cittie of London.
                  
                     The King notwithstanding these compositions, and agréements with his Barons, when all was thought to haue been amended, did yet againe vrge his Nobles & Barons to rise in Arms against him. Insomuch as they sent for Lewis the French Kings sonne, promising to deliuer the Crowne and Kingdome vnto him. Of those which sent for him, I haue read the chiefest were Robert Fitzwalter, and Fulke Fitzwarrine, which two men hee most had wronged and endamaged, the one for his daughters death: the other for taking from him his Lordship of Whittington in Shropshire, and giuing it away to the Prince of Wales, then called Lewis. Also Roger Bigot, and many others, who after King Iohn his death, compounded with the French Kings sonne, and sent him away out of England, as onè that without their aide could not haue what hee desired.
               
               
                  Of the Bacon at Dunmow Pryory.
                  
                     RObert Fitzwalter liued long after this beloued of King Henry, the sonne of King Iohn, as also of all the Realme: He betooke himselfe at his latter time to prayer, gaue great and bountifull almes to tht poore, kept great hospitallity, and reedified the decayed Priory of Dunmow, which one Iuga, a most deuout and religious woman (in her kinde) being his Ancestor, had builded. In which Priory arose a custome, began, and instituted eyther by him, or some of his successors, which is verified by a common prouerb or saying, videl. That hee which repents him not of his marriage in a yeere and a day eyther sleeping, or waking, may lawiully goe to Dunmowe, and fetch a Gammon of Bacon.
                  It is most assured that such a custome there was,

and that this Bacon was deliuerd with such solemnity, and triumph, as they or the Pryorie, and the Townesmen could make. I haue enquired of the manner of it, and can learne no more, but that it continued vntill the dissolution of the house, as also all the Abbeyes.
                  That the party or Pilgrim for Bacon, was to take his oath before the Prior, the Couent, and the whole town, humbly acknowledging in the Churchyard, vpon two hard pointed stones: which s
                        •
                     ones som say are yet to bee seene in the Priory Churchyard. His oath was ministred with such long proces, and such solemne s
                        •
                     nging ouer him, as doubtles must make his pilgrimage, as I may terme it, painfull: after he was taken vp, vpon mens shoulders, and carried,
                  First, about the Priory Church-yard, and after through the towne, with all the Fryers and bretheren, and all the townes folke, young, and old, following him with shouts and acclamations, with his Bacon borne before him, and in such manner (as I haue heard) he was sent home with his Bacon: of which, I finde, some had a gammon, and others had a fléeke, or flych. For proofe whereof, I haue from out the Records of the house, found the names of thrée seuerall persons, that at seuerall times had it.
               
               
                  Memorandum quod quidam Stevanus Samuell de Aston parua, in Com. Essex, &c.
                  Which beeing in Lattin entred into the booke, which belongeth to the Howse, I haue thus Englished.
                  Be it remembred, that one Stephen Samuell of little As
                        •
                     on in the County of Essex husbandman, came to the Priory of Dunmow, on our Lady day in

Lent, in the seuenth yeer of King Edward the fourth▪ and required a Gammon of Bacon, and was sworne before Roger Rulcot then Pryor, and the Couent of this place, as also before a multitude of other neighbours: And there was deliuered vnto him a Gammon of Bacon.
                  Also, Be it remembred that one Richard Wright of Badeourgh, neere the Cittie of Norwich, in the County of Norfolke, came and required of the Bacon of Dunmow, namely, the seuentéenth day of Aprill, in the twenty thrée yéere of the raigne of Henry the siixth, and according to the forme of the Charter was sworne before Iohn Cannon, Pryor of this place, and the eduent, and many other neighbours, And there was deliuered vnto the said Richard, one sléech of Bacon.
                  Againe, Memorandum, that in the yeere of our Lord 1510. Thomas Le Fuller of Coggeshall, in the County of Essex, came to the Pryorie of Dunmowe, and required to haue som of the Bacon of Dunmow, and on the eighth day of September being Sunday, in the second yeere of King Henry the eighth, he was according to the forme of the Charter sworne before Iohn Taylor, then Pryor of the house, and the Couent: as also before a multitude of neighbours, and there was deliuered to the said Thomas a Gammon of Bacon.
                  Heereby appeareth that it was giuen according to a Charter, or donation, giuen by some conceipted Benefactor to the house: and it is not to be doubted but that at such a time, the bordering Townes and Uillages, would resort, and bee partakers of their pastime: and laugh to scorne the poore mans paines.
               
               
                  
                  The order of the Oath.
                  
                     YOu shall sweare by custome of confession,
                     If euer you made nuptiall transgression:
                     Be you eyther married man or wife,
                     By house hould brawles, or contentious strife,
                     Or otherwise in bed, or at boord,
                     Offend each other in deede, or word;
                     Or since the parish clarke said Amen,
                     You wisht your selues vnmarried agen:
                     Or in a tweluemoneths time and a day,
                     Repented not in thought any way:
                     But continued true, and iust in desire,
                     As when you ioind hands in the holy quire.
                     If to these conditions without all feare,
                     Of your owne accord, you will freely sweare,
                     A whole Gammon of Bacon you shall receiue,
                     And beare it hence with loue and good leaue.
                     For this is our custome a Dunmow well knowne;
                     Though the pleasure be ours, the Bacons your own.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The manner of the murder of Robert Hall in the Abbey of Westminster at the High Alter.
               THe most renowned, valient, and victorious King Edward the third, making claime to the Kingdome and Crowne of France, as his proper right and inheritance lawfully descended vnto him, by right and title of the Queene his mother, made such hot and sharpe wars vpon the then liuing King of France: That being seconded by his thrice valient and worthy sonnes, especially his eldest, surnamed the blacke Prince, he draue the French into such a narrow strait and exigent, as that they feared the vtter conquest and ouerthrow of their Kingdome and State.
               Neuer was King more fortunate or happy in his children, nor neuer did age breede more valient captaines, and chiefe commanders then this, the ch
                     •
                  efest whereof, besides the King, and his valient sonnes and the Nobility, were Robert Knols, Hugh Cauerley, of Cheshire, Croker of Oxfordshire, Shandoys, &c. Besides Iohn Hawkewood, (neuer to be forgotten) who after the end of these warres in France, tooke with him his companies both horse and foot, which were at his commaund. And in Italy acted wonders, was most highly esteemed and honoured, of whose aduentures and worthy deedes, the Histories of Italys make large report, who at last there died, and in Pauia (as I remember hath a most worthy monument erected for him: of these captaines Hawkewood amongst the Italians was called Io. Acuth.
               
               These captaines as also many others (according to the vse of conquerors) had giuen vnto them lands, offices, and preferments, as keeping of Eastles, Cities, Townes, and countries, which in the behalfe and right of King Edward, they with great and stout

resolution held and maintained, in despight of all the French, or any powre they could make: who being wearied and outworne with the terror of these warres, (their estate still waxing worse and worse) solicited the Pope, and all the Princes of Christendome, to be a meanes vnto King Edward of their peace, which was at last graunted, and the English forces abated and withdrawne: But the chiefest could not so easily be with drawne from such places, as with their swords they had conquered: nor from those honors and preferments, which with expence of their blood, were in reward of their valour and seruice giuen vnto them, vntill occasion presented a fit meanes of pollicy, wherein the French excéed the English (as Comineus witnesseth) as in field or battaile the English excéed the French.
               It happened at the same very time, that Peter the lawfull King of Castile, or Spaine, was expulsed his kingdome by his bastard brother Henry, and in the yéere 1380. came to Burdeaux to the blacke Prince, crauing aid and succor against his vsurping brother. This matter was furthered by the French, who were most desirous of his absence▪ well knowing that the English Captaines and souldiers would follow him as the Flowre of Chiualry: and the honor and glory of his time.
               The Prince accepted of Peters request, and forthwith obtained licence of his Father, to transport or rather lead his Army into Spaine: where in a maine battaile fought at Nazers, Henry the Fastard was defeated, ouercome, his Army dispersed, and 6000: slaine, and 200. taken prisoners, amongst which the Earle of Deue and Bertrand Clakyn, were most remarkeable, and men of speciall note. By this means King Peter was restored, whose daughter and heire Iohn of Gaunt third son of King Edward, and brother

to the blacke Prince married, and in her right intituled and called himselfe King of Castile, Leon, and Aragon, which now is call
                     ••
                   
                  Spaine: of which matter the Chronicles make large report, and therefore néedlesse to be repeated and new written: but to our purpose.
               Amongst these prisonors the Earle of Dene, being (as I said) the most remarkeable and of chiefest note albeit he was challenged by sundry men, whereof some were of the Nobility: yet this iust and wise Prince, who neuer vsed to suffer vertue and valour vnrewarded, nor would not for either fauour or feare doe a meane and priuate souldier any wrong, adiudged the said Earle to be the lawfull prisoner of two valiant Esquires, Souldiers and men of worth and reputation, named Robert Hall and Iohn Shakerley, and thereof they obtained his Charter against all others that pretended claime or interest in him.
               The Earle not willing to go with them into England, made request to be ransomed, which was graū
                  ced vnto him, and the sum agréed vpon, which he affirmed hee was not able presently to pay: For that those warres had so impouerished both himself, and his countrey, and people that all their mony & goods were wasted and consumed: notwithstanding hée would giue vnto them his eldest sonne and heire as a pledge, and hostage of the performance of such paiment as hée promised, and they were contented to accept of. So remained he still in Spaine, and the youth who (as I can gather) was not then aboue 8. or nine yéeres of age came with these two Esquires into England, and in short space he learned the ready pronouncing of the English tongue or language; and likewise prospered in all vertue and good quallities, that he was so well beloued of his said Gaurdians or masters, as if he had béene their owne child: Hée on

the other part behaued himselfe houestly, louingly, and most kindly towards them, with such faith and fidelity in their manifold trobles, which for his cause they sustained as was most admirable, and hereafter shall be declared. His vnkind Father neither regard ng his promis, his oath, nor his bonds; nor hauing any care or father-like affection to his ingaged sonne, neuer sent the ran some, nor any part thereof, but most vnnaturally left him in their hands, at the will of his two masters, where I will leaue him, and returne to King Edward.
               
               The black Prince the comfort of his Father, and ioy of England, shortly after this, departed this life, The good King his Father not able to sustaine the burthen of so great sorrow, liued not long after, but left the son of Prince Edward his Nephew to succeed him in his Kingdomes and Crownes, by the name of King Richard the second. In which space, King Peter of Spaine was also slaine by his brother, and the bastard Henry again, repossessed the Crown, and dignity.
               
                  Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Earle of Darby, &c. after the death of King Peter, called himselfe▪ (in right of Beatrix his wife) King of Castile, Leon, & Aragon, and obtained licence of the King to transport an Army at his owne proper charge into Spain for the recouery of his Kingdome. And for that purpose made great and long prouision. And knowing well that the Earle of D
                     •
                  ane was in the hands of Hall, and Shakerley, solicited them to haue him: but they vtterly refused to part with him, without ready payment of the money for his ransome: whereupon he be sought the King to deale with them on his behalf. The king pretending y• his purpose was to make a marriage betweene the said Earle: and his sister, a gallant Lady, and rich widow, late wife to

                  Peter Cortney: But this deuise, nor nothing else prouailed to obtaine the Dukes▪ purpose: so that they were both cōmitted to the Tower of London, from whence (I know not by what meanes) they escaped: and after for their further safety, they betooke themselues to the Sanctuary at Westminster, & enrolled themselues and their goods in the protection and priuiledge of that place: which was at that time so strong and so reuerend, as it was not thought that any man how cruell, or tirannous so euer durst once infringe, violate, or breake it.
               The Duke hauing staid so long in making prouision for his iorney, that diuers of his chiefest, Followers grew weary of their charges and expences, and knowing that the matter of this Earle bred his discontent, and was a speciall let and hinderance to his further proceedings, determined to set aside all religion and conscience, and make hreach of the sanctuary, he wholy soeuer, and take from them their prisoner, or bring them back to the Tower: whereupon fifty or sixty chosen men were armed, and secretly placed to break into the Abbay at seruice time and if no perswasions could preuaile, then with violence to set vpon them. The chiefest of these were Raph de Ferres, the Lord Latimer, Alan Buxhull, and others, who at that time of Masse gat into the Church, and by craft drew Shakerley foorth of the libertyes of the Sanctuary, by a posterne, or small doore, leading to the Ducens bridge through the old Pailace. But as for Hall when they saw they could not intreat nor perswade him, they began to bend their weapons toward him: but hee hauing a short sword drew it, and valiantly defended their assaults, coursing about the Abbey, yet found no rescue, or helpe, but acompany of Monkes and Priests, naked as it were, and vnarmed, who cryed to God for

vengeance of this horrible sacriliedge. I haue béen shewed a great notch which remains in a marble piller. reported to bee made with a blow which one of them strook at him, and yet mist him▪ Also the stones where he was first deadly wounded, retaine yet (as is said) his blood, whether it be so or bée the naturall colour of the stone, let Philosophers dispute, hee feeling himselfe so wounded, ra
                     •
                   vp to the high Altar, where the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Priests stood amazed at this deathfull accident. Due of the Lay bretheren a seruant of the house, 
                     •••
                  osing himselfe for rescue was slaine, as also Hall himselfe. The murderers made away and fled.
               This being performed, and they nothing the néerer for their purpose of the Earle of Deane, it followed that the Church was suspended, the diuine seruices ceased: the Quiristers, Chorists, bells, and Organs became mute: the Church dores were dammed and 
                     〈◊〉
                   vp with thornes and bushes, at least sixty 
                     〈◊〉
                   (as I haue read) And the Authors and doers thereof cursed with Bell, Booke, and Candle: for they were all well knowne, this was not onely don in London, but in euery Cathedrall Church and parish Church throughout all England ānd Wales. This seuere censure of the Church, this curse or ban was denounced: ueyther did the Duke himselfe escape it, although he faine would haue excused it, as neither knowing of it, nor consenting to it: but hee preuayled not, and was also punished by this heauy curse. This continued for the space of certaine wéekes, in which time the King so wrought with the Duke, that hee fell to composition with Shakerley: who for the some of fiue hundred markes of present money, and a hundred markes by the yéere, was cont
                     •
                  nted to 
                     •
                  art with his prisoner. Also that the Duke at his owne charges should build a Chantrey,

and find fiue priests foreuer to sing for the soule of Robert Hall. The money being paid, and security put in for performance of the rest, the Church, the Bells and Church ornaments, were new hallowed, the seruices againe restored: But that which was most to be admirev, was, that when the prisoner, or Earle was demaunded, he deliuered his Page, who they all knew in all his troubles had most faithfully serued him and his companion. All sorts of people wondring at the great fidelity of this straunger, who albeit hee well knew that hee was sought for his preferment, that his Father was dead: yet detesting the vnkindnesse of his father and friends, chose rather to be pertaker of his masters troubles, than to falsifie the faith, oath, and promis which he had made vnto them. A most rare and memorable example.
               
                  Hall lyeth buried in the Abbey at Westminster, not far from Cha
                        •
                     sers Tombe, vnder a faire monument of a flat Marble stone, with his image of brasse in his armour: and about the same certaine verses in Lattin, which (though much defaced with treading, and neere worne out, may be found in a booke called the Remaines of a greater Worke. set foorth by Mr. Camden, al. Clareceaulx King at Armes.
               The Duke of Lancaster with a great Powre went into Spaine, where after sundry victories, and variable fortunes, a great sicknesse attached his people: by meanes whereof his successe was not answerable to his expectation, nor the height of his minde, whereby he yéelded to a composition with Henry the King, and receiued of him eight Charriots, laden with Gold and Siluer: and a yeerely tribute of a thousand Markes: with these conditions he departed out of Spaine, and returned into England: dyed, and lyeth buryed in Paules, with his wife and Daughter of King Peter, whose stile and titles of

Honour and Dignity, were written and set vppe by it, at the cost and charges of one master Robert Hare, late one of the Councell to Queene Mary, and late Treasurer, and writer of the Erchequer Rolles.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   