
      
         
            
            
            TWO TREATISES:
The firſt,
OF THE LIVES OF
THE POPES, AND
THEIR DOCTRINE.
            
               The ſecond,
OF THE MASSE: THE ONE
and the other collected of that, which the
Doctors, and ancient Councels, and
the ſacred Scripture do teach.
            
               Alſo,
A Swarme of falſe Miracles, wherewith Marie de
la Viſitacion, Prioreſſe de la Annuntiada of Liſbon,
deceiued very many: and how ſhe was diſcouered,
and condemned.
            Reuelation 17. 1.
            Come, and I will ſhew thee the condemnation af the great Whore, which fitteth
vpon many waters. And verſ. 15. The waters which thou ſaweſt, where
the Whore ſitteth, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.
            
               The ſecond edition in Spaniſh augmented by the
Author himſelfe, M. Cyprian Valera, and tranſlated
into Engliſh by Iohn Golburne. 1600.
            
               Printed at London by Iohn Hariſon, and are to be
ſold at the Grey-hound in Pater noſter row. 1600.
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
SIR THOMAS EGERTON,
KNIGHT, LORD KEEPER OF
the great Seale of England, Chamberlaine of the
Countie Palatine of Cheſter, and of her Maieſties
moſt honorable priuie Councell: I. G.
wiſheth all health, increaſe of honour,
and euerlaſting
happineſſe.
            
               
                  SOlons law to the Athenians (right
Honorable) adiuged him to die, &
vnworthy to liue, that in time of
ciuill garboyles, as careleſſe of the
weale publike, withdrew himſelfe
and became a neuter. Which
law, albeit proceeding from a Pagan,
yet holding affinitie with holy
writ, I cannot but approue, and wiſh the ſame were
alſo of force among Chriſtians. Profeſſed Chriſtians I
meane, which (in theſe factious broyles in the common
wealth of Iſrael, wherein Religion ſeemeth to be rent
(as it were) in two, each part challenging the truth as
his owne proper, whereas but one Truth there is, and
the ſame indiuiſible) are either careleſſe and negligent
in the Lords worke, and ſo accurſed: or els become
luke-warme, awaiting onely occaſion to runne with

the ſtreame, and cleaue to time and ſtronger part for
their better ſafetie. Both which, as abominable to God,
are to be ſpued out of his ſacred mouth: & to be ſhunned
of men as the Apoſtle willeth. Sith hated then of
God, and deteſted of men, I conculde with Solon, ſuch
Foxes not worthy to liue among Chriſtians, & would
God they were cut off from deſtroying the Lords vineyard.
The conſideration whereof, and that my ſelfe (albeit
ſimple and moſt vnworthy of many thouſands, ſecluded
from the world, and cut off from the ſocietie of
men, or meanes of imployment to benefit (as of right
it claimeth) my natiue country) am alſo a member of
this Chriſtian cōmon wealth: hath made me charie to
be taxed with the guilt of like crime: & careful to auoid
the note of both the one and the other, prickt therefore
with the ſpurre of dutie, zeale, and hartie deſire to
good the Region, wherein I firſt tooke breath (though
little carefull of my good) to the vtmoſt ſtretch of my
poor abilitie, I bring here my endeuour, and tranſlation
into our vulgar tongue, for the helpe and inſtruction
of the ſimple. The due commendations of the Author
and Subiect farre exceedeth my reach, and therefore
do leaue them to the cenſure of the learned. And
taught by long experience, your Lordſhips godly
zeale for the aduauncement of true religion and due
execution of iuſtice (the hauing or wanting whereof,
is the glorie and ſuretie, or maime and ruine of all
ſttates and kingdomes) and ſeeing your Lordſhip by
diuine goodneſſe placed, and by Regall power deputed
in this ſelfe ſame common-wealth, for a light vnto
others, and a Shepheard to feed the people with iuſtice
and iudgement. Theſe (my good Lord) with the worthineſſe

of the worke, beſt beſeeming ſo worthy a Patron,
together with humble acknowledgment of dutie
to your Lordſhip haue cauſed me make choiſe of your
honorable ſelfe, the better emboldened thereunto by
your good acceptance of my former booke. And ſo I
humbly commend this my trauel to your like view and
protection: not doubting but your Lordſhip, after your
wonted honorable diſpoſition will vouchſafe to take in
worth my ſimple preſent, and pardon my preſumption
proceeding from an affectionate deſire to do your honour
ſeruice, whereunto before all men, I acknowledge
my ſelfe bounden, and my dayly ſtudy ſhall be imployed:
I beſeech the eternall Deity, to increaſe his graces
in your Lordſhip, that his glory may more thereby appeare,
and multiply your dayes as the dayes of heauen,
to pull the pray frō the Spoylers iawes, and relieue the
oppreſſed. And ſo in all humilitie I take leaue. Fleete
my miſerable priſon this 24. of October. 1600,
            
               Your Lordſhips moſt bounden in all
affectionate dutie.
IOHN GOLBVRNE.
            
         
         
            
            The Tranſlator to the Reader.
            
               I Haue pained my ſelfe (gentle Reader) to doe thee
pleaſure, and therefore craue but that curteſie of
thee, which in common right is my due: namely,
thy good conceit and fauourable cenſure of
my trauell: which albeit not polliſhed with fineneſſe
of phraſe yet it is beautified with truth of matter,
as God gaue abilitie, my ſmall knowledge in
the tongue, and the miſery of the place aforded. If
any will charge me with folly and preſumption in
attempting this tranſlation, better beſeeming ſome
of riper iudgement. I graunt there is cauſe: yet thou forward taxer of faultes, in
others, why doeſt thou not rather iudge & condemne thy ſelf? that hauing a better
talent, haſt worſe imployed it, nay haſt buried the ſame: & in ten yeares ſpace
ſithens this worthy worke was firſt publiſhed, haſt not bettered thy country by thy
paines taking, nor benefited others by tranſlating it thy ſelfe. For my part, I hold
it fitter, that the body rather brooke a meane repaſt then ſtarue for want of foode:
And had rather my raſh ignorance ſhould be publiſhed in print, and ſo noted of
thee (for of better minds I expect better thoughts) then that ſo heauenly a light of
Chriſtian knowledge, ſhould reſt obſcured in the myſty darkneſſe of a ſtrange
language: and ſo precious a treaſure be buried in ruſtie ſilence, without comfort
or commoditie to my countrey. For among ſo many worthy labourers in the Lords
vineyard, raiſed vp by God in this latter age, there is none (pardon me good Reader
if my ſimple iudgement faile me) that hath exceeded, nay few or none that
hath equalled this Authour, in the matter and method of this booke. Wherein by
way of Antitheſis, are liuely ſet forth Chriſt and Antichriſt. To the end that two
contraries oppoſed, Chriſt the true light may appeare more glorious: and Antichriſt
the child of darkenes may be viewed in his proper colour, that the one may be
imbraced with all obedience, and the other abandoned with all deteſtation and
horror. For if thou wouldeſt know by the word of God, and be aſſured by the teſtimony
of his holy Spirit that Ancichriſt foretold by the Prophets and Apoſtles, is
already come, and the ſonne of perdition renealed, if thou wouldeſt know the certaine
time, the place, the maner and markes of his reuelation. If thou wouldeſt
know and be acertained by the ſame Spirit, that the Pope is a falſe Prieſt, & that
very ſame Antichriſt, ſo proued by his abominable life and doctrine, by the teſtimonie
of Gods ſacred word, and vnrefutable arguments drawne from the ſame. If
thou wouldeſt know and be aſſured likewiſe, that the Maſſe is a diueliſh prophanation
of the holy Supper of the Lord, a moſt blaſphemous, idolatrous, and falſe ſacrifice,
derogating from the moſt precious bloud, death & paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt. If thou
wouldeſt know & by the ſame Spirit be aſſured that the ſame Ieſus Chriſt, true God
& true man is the only Lord, Sauiour and redeemer of the world: the onlie aduocate,
Interceſſor & Mediator betweene God and man: the only & alone king Prophet,
and true high Prieſt, which entred into the holy place once for all, and found
eternall redemption. If thou wouldeſt know that his body and bloud once offred vpō
the altar of the croſſe, is the only & alone true ſacrifice of a ſweet ſmelling ſauor in

the noſethrils of God his Father, for the remiſſion of ſins: whereby onlie Gods wrath
is appeaſed, we obtaine pardon, peace & reconciliation with God, grace, fauor
and euerlaſting life. If thou wouldeſt know and be likewiſe aſſured, that this moſt
holy ſacrifice of Chriſt one only time offered is all ſufficient for the ſins of all men, &
that no place remaineth for any other reiteration of the ſame ſacrifice. If thou wouldeſt
know the true meaning, vſe & practiſe of the holy Supper of the Lord Ieſus, &
the benfit thereof to the Faithfull. If thou wouldeſt certainlie know, and be fully aſſured
by the ſame Spirit of Grace, which is the ancient doctrin of God, leading to all
bliſſe and true bleſſedneſſe, confirmed with his ſacred word, contained in the bookes
of the old & new Teſtament, and penned by the finger of the holy Ghoſt: and which
is the new doctrine of men, pointing the pathway to hell, death & deſtruction, confirmed
with vaine apparitions, dreames, falſe miracles, and illuſions of the diuell.
Come and ſee, & except the god of this world hath blinded thy mind, that the light
of Chriſtes glorious Goſpell ſhould not ſhine vnto thee: except thou liſt to grope
at noone day, and wilfully ſay, I will not ſee: except thou haſt ſhaken hands with
death, and made a couenant with hell: except God for thy wilfull obſtinacie, hath
giuen thee ouer vnto a reprobate ſence, to oppoſe thy ſelfe againſt him & his knowne
truth. In reading this booke without partiall preiudication, thou canſt not but ſee,
exactly perceiue and taſt to thine vnſpeakeable comfort, how ſweet are the mercies
of the Lord, in reuealing to thee (duſt and aſhes) the myſterie both of the one and
the other, which the wiſe of this world neither haue vnderſtood, nor can comprehend:
but is reuealed vnto babes, his Saints, to whom he would make knowne the
riches of his glorie to confound and make fooliſhnes the vviſdom of the wiſe. Which
if thou ſhalt find (as if in ſingleneſſe of heart thou ſeeke, thou canſt not but find.)
Then praiſe Iehouah, the author of all goodneſſe be thankefull to this Author, the
meanes of thy good, and take in worth my ſimple trauell, an inferiour furtherance
thereunto, who hartily wiſh thee no leſſe comfort and ioy in reading, then my miſerable
ſelfe receiued in tranſlating of this booke. And becauſe it ſeemeth a thing
difficult to tranſlate the Prouerbs, wherein not the letter, but the ſence is to be followed:
that courſe haue I obſerued, & ſet downe withall the proper phraſe of the Spaniſh
and Portugal tongues, both in them and ſome other hard & doubtfull words:
that thou (gentle Reader) indued with better gifts maiſt iudge, and curteouſly amend
by thy knowledge, what my vnskilfulneſſe hath miſſed: hoping that my deſire
herein to do well, may excuſe in thy Chiſtian conceit, whatſoeuer is (if any thing)
miſdone. And ſo I leaue thee to him that is able to keepe thee.
            
               Thine in the Lord,
I. G.
            
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE TO THE CHRIſtian
Reader.
            
               HAd it not bene for the great neceſſity, which our
country of Spaine hath to know the liues of the
Popes, that knowing them, it may beware them,
and nought eſteeme their authority, which againſt
all right diuine and humane, they haue vſurped
ouer the conſciences which Ieſus Chriſt
our redeemer, with his death & paſſion hath
freed, I ſhould neuer (Chriſtian Reader) haue
entred a labyrinth ſo confuſed, and rugged, as
is to write the liues of Popes. For thou muſt
know, that the Romiſts themſelues concord not
nor agree in the number of the Popes. Some ſet downe more, and others
leſſe. And hence it commeth that ſo little they agree, touching the time
that they poped (Let it be lawfull for me, as of a king, he is ſayd to raigne
to ſay of a Pope to Pope) Some of theſe ſelfe ſame alſo, that all confeſſe to
haue bene Popes of ſome of them ſay great Laudes and praiſes, extolling
them to the heauens. Of theſe ſelfe ſame, ſay others filthie things, caſting
them downe to hell. An example of the firſt S. Gregory (As ſaith Friar
Iohn de Pineda 3. part cap. 8. ¶1. of his Eccleſiaſticall Monarchie) was the
66. Pope, &c. And not the 63. As ſaith Mathew Palmer. Nor the 64. As ſaith
Panuinus. Nor the 65. As ſaith Marianus. nor leſſe. 62. As ſaith S. Antoninus,
This farre Pineda.
            
            
               Gelaſius 1. after Platina, is the 51. Pope. After Panuinus, the 50. And after
George Caſſander, and Carança the 49. Alſo Paule the ſecond, after Platina
is the 220. Carança counteth him for the 219. Pero Mexia for 218. and Panuinus:
For 215. fiue leſſe then Platina. According to this account. Siſtus 5.
which in the yeare 1588. tyrannizeth in the Church, ſhould be after Platina
the 236. Pope: after Carança 235. After Per
                     •
                   Mexia 234. and after Panuinus
231. Moſt Popiſh authors be all theſe. Some Spaniards, and others
Italians. And had we alleaged more authors, more diſagreement and contrariety
ſhould we haue found. Of this diuerſitie ſpringeth the diſorder,
which is in the time that ſome Popes Poped. For they which reckon leaſt
Popes put the yeares which they take from 4 or 5 Popes (whom they reckon
not) to other Popes. Carança in his Summa conciliorum, ſpeaking of Boniface 3.
(this was the firſt Pope as in his life ſhalbe ſhewed) ſaith theſe words. There
is diuerſitie among writers how long time Boniface 3. was Pope. For of Platina
is it gathered, that he was nine monthes. Others ſay 8 monethes and a
halfe: others a yeare, and 25 dayes: Others a yeare, 5 monthes, & 28 daies.
Others ſay, that he died, hauing bene Pope 8 moneths and 22 dayes. This
farre Carança. The ſame might we ſay of many other Popes. For example of
the ſecond, will we put Liberius and Formoſus, beſides many others that we
might ſet downe. Liberius and Formoſus ſome of the papiſts themſelues, do
cannonize, and others doe curſe them. Platina ſaith: that Liberius was an

Arian Panuinus ſaith: that he was holy. Read his life, which of diuerſe authors
we haue gathered. As touching Formoſus Stephen 6 or 7. condemned
him. So did alſo a Councell holden in the time of this Stephen condemne
him. But Romanus ſucceſſor of Stephen and Theodorus. And Iohn 10 or 9 condemned
Stephen, and iuſtified sn Formoſus. And this did not theſe 3 Popes
onely, but a generall Councell of 74. Biſhops, holden in the time of Iohn
10. did alſo the ſame. But all this notwithſtanding, the third time, that
Sergius was Pope, he tooke part with Stepben againſt Formoſus Condemding
that which 3 Popes, and the Councell had done, and was moſt cruell, againſt
the bodie of Formoſus, vntombing it, and doing that vnto it, which
vpon his life, we will declare. Read their liues (Chriſtian Reader) Dogges
ſhalt thou ſee that teare in peeces, and eate one another: Not men ſhalt
thou ſee: but diuels incarnate. Thou muſt alſo vnderſtand, that in the
names of ſome Popes, there is great diſagreement. Pope Iohn the laſt, Platina
calleth the 24. and in order 214. Carança calleth him 24. But the 213.
in order, Pero Mexia calleth him the 24. Another way carrieth Panuinus
22. he calleth him, or 23. and ſaith: that he is the 209. in order. Thus taketh
he from out the Catalogue. Fiue Popes: two whereof be Iohns: And
it is alſo to be noted, that from Iohn 8. which was a wicked woman. All the
Iohns almoſt, haue bene peſtilent fellowes Read their liues.
            Three cauſes there be, why ſome do number leſſe Popes. The firſt is, becauſe
ſome Popes a very ſmall time Poped. The 2. is, becauſe many reckon
not for Popes, all thoſe that were not cannonically elected. The 3. is, becauſe
ſome will not hold them for Popes, who albeit they were connonically
elected, yet in there Popedome wickedly gouerned. For the firſt reaſon,
many reckon not for Pope, Stephen 2. who but three, or as ſome ſay, 4
dayes Poped. For the 2. reaſon exclude they all thoſe, whom they call Antipopes,
choſen in the time of Schiſme. 30: Schiſmes counteth Panuinus to
haue bene, wherein at one time were 4 Popes, another time 3. another 2.
Herehence is it, that they count not Iohn 18. Whom others call 17. nor Clemēt
nor Clement 8. And therefore Clement 9. they call 7. nor Benedict 5 nor Benedict
7. called they 6. nor Benedict 13. For theſe 2 reaſons exclude they al thē
that by wicked artes, deceipt, force, gifts, or promiſes were made Popes.
Such doe the Councels and decrees of the Popes themſelues not hold for
Popes. Read that which the Councell of Lateran holden in the time of Nicholas
2. ordained touching this matter. And ſo many hold not for pope,
Conſtantine 2. Who being a lay-man and without any orders, was by force
made Pope. Should this decree be obſerued. neither Silueſter 2. the great inchaūter,
nor Boniface 8. nor Gregory 7 nor an infinit nomber of Popes, which
by wicked artes, &c. Were made Popes ſhuld be called Popes & ſo very few
ſhuld remaine in the catalogue of the Popes. The 3. reaſon why ſome be not
counted Popes, is that albeit they were cannonically choſen, yet, during
their Popedome, either in life, or in Doctrin, or both in life & Doctrin were
they abhominable. For this cauſe ſome count not Lando. Read his life. For
the ſame cauſe, ſome reckon not Iohn 8. a whore before, & when ſhe was
Pope. Were this reaſon ought worth, very few ſhould be counted
for Popes. For all the Popes ingenerall from Boniface 3. vntill

               Siſtus 5. who now tyrannizeth, haue either in life or Doctrine bene wicked.
And ſo, ought not to be connted. Boniface 8. Of whom ſay all, that he entred
like a Foxe, liued like a Lyon, and died like a Dogge. And alone was
not he, that did this: he had many companions. Theſe be the cauſes, why
ſome reckon leſſe Popes, then others. And in theſe names, Stephen, Iohn,
Clement, Benedict, Conſtantine, and Felix, ſhalbe found this abridgement
of Popes. There are no liues of kings nor Emperors, were they Chriſtians,
pagans, Iewes, Turkes, Scithians; or of whatſoeuer other nation, ſo confuſedly
and diuerſly written, as are the liues of the Popes. And that which is
more to be maruailed, written, imprinted, and approued by the papiſts
themſelues. The holy Ghoſt it ſeemeth, hath purpoſely caſt into the writing
of their liues, this confuſion. For the Popes being kings and Lords of
Rome. And Rome as ſay Saint Ierom, Petrark, Laurentius Valla, and many
others) is Babilon. And Babilon, as much to ſay, as confuſion, all whatſoeuer,
the Popes haue done, doe, and ſhall doe, is and ſhalbe confuſion:
And ſo can no order be held in counting of them. And with what more
proper name then Babilon, or confuſion, can that Church be called, wherein
they ſo pray and ſing in ſtraunge & confuſed Language, that one vnderſtandeth
not another. And that yet which is worſe he, him ſelfe that praieth
of ſingeth, vnderſtandeth not oft times that which is ſayd. My deſire is
(friendly Reader) to aduiſe thee of this confuſion: That if thou ſhalt read
in one author that Pope Iohn 24. for the great villanies and hereſies which
in his preſence, and to his face were proued, was condemned in the Councell
of Conſtance: and others ſay this happened to Pope Iohn 23. & others,
to Pope Iohn 22. then nothing maruaile: For theſe 3 Iohns 22. 23. and 24. be
one ſelfe ſame Pope Iohn. Concerning the concurrences of the kings of
Spaine, which I place with the Pope, I haue followed Don Alonſo de Carthagena
Biſhoppe of Burgos in his Latine Hiſtorie of the kings of Spaine,
which he calleth Anacephalaeoſis, as much to ſay, as a Recapitulation. No
other hath bene the purpoſe and motiue me mouing to write theſe 2. Treatiſes
of the Pope, and of the Maſſe. But the great deſire I haue that they of
my nation, might enioy the ſame mercies, which the Lord in theſe laſt
times hath ſhewed to many nations in Europe, giuing them liberty of
conſcience (& this not to let looſe the raynes to ſerue the luſts of the fleſh,
but in ſpirit and truth to ſerue the liuing God, whom to ſerue, is to raigne)
I very much ſorrow, that my nation to whom the Lord God, for the
things of this world, hath giuen ſo much wit, hability and vnderſtanding
(which other nations cannot deny) In things pertayning to God, in the
things concerning the ſaluation of their ſoules, or going to heauen
or hell, is ſo blockiſh and blind, that it ſuffereth it ſelfe to be carried by
the Maſſe, that it ſuffereth it ſelfe to be gouerned, troden vnder foote &
tyrannized of the Pope, of the man of ſinne, of the ſonne of perdition, of
Antichriſt, whom as God, ſitteth in the Temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe
that he is God. And that moreouer which S. Paul 2. Theſſ 2. ſaith. All the
euill of the Spaniards cōmeth vnto them of a falſe perſwaſion which they
haue conceiued of the authority of the Pope. The Pope, they beleeue to

be the ſucceſſor of Saint Peter, the Vicar of Chriſt, God vppon earth. They
beleeue, that all whatſoeuer the pope doth on earth, God doth it in heauen
and what ſoeuer he vndoeth in earth, God vndoeth in heauen. This firſt
Treatiſe, ſhall ſerue to open the deceipt vnto them: very palpably & plainely
will it ſhew the pope, not to be the ſucceſſor of S. Peter. But of Iudas. Not
to be the Vicar of Chriſt, but of Sathan (whom the holy ſcripture calleth
prince and God of this world) And that we therefore ought not to obey the
pope, nor make more reckoning of him, nor of that, hee ſhal commaund,
then we doe of that which our mortall enemy commaunds vs. Mine harts
deſire and prayer to God is, for my nation, that they may be ſaued: that
his Maieſtie deliuer them from the power of darkneſſe, and transfer them
into the kingdome of his beloued ſonne. I would if I might by any meanes
prouoke my nation. I would they had an holy enuie at other nations. Why
doe they (and not the Spaniards) read and heare the word of God, in their
owne Language, as in the holy Bible it is written? Why do they (& not the
Spaniards) receiue the holy ſacraments with the ſimplicity that Ieſus Chriſt
did inſtitute and celebrate them. Wherewith, without any humane inuentions,
ſuperſtitions, and Idolatries, he commaunded his Church to adminiſter
them? This teſtimony giue I of my nation, that they haue the zeale
of God: and ſo ſhall you ſee few Spaniards to be Atheiſts, which haue no
religion. But this their zeale, is not according to knowledge: for by the word
of God is it not ruled: but by that which Antichriſt of Rome commaundeth.
Who hath taken from them, and forbidden them the reading of holy
ſcripture. For well knoweth Antichriſt, that if the Spaniards ſhold read it,
then would they fall into account, and know the abhominable life of the
popes, and their wicked Doctrine: And ſo would forſake and deteſt them.
And ſhould Spaine once forſake the pope, the pope would reckon (as they
ſay) with the Oleados or annointed, of whom there is no hope of life: O that
if God pleaſe, I may ſee this day. And if the pope ſhould fall, then alſo in a
moment, would fall the Maſſe, and all the other Idolatries which the pope
hath inuented. This is the cauſe why our aduerſaries ſo greatly fight, to
intertaine, and mainetaine the authority of the Pope. For very well they
know that the Pope once fallen, the popiſh religion of neceſſity muſt fall
to the earth. Very well did Pedro de la Fuente (or Fontidonio, as others call
him) a diuine of Seuill vnderſtand this: who in a ſermon which he made,
the laſt day of September in the Councel of Trent, greatly inueied againſt
the proteſtants, calling them heretiques, ſaying: that they ſought to caſt
downe the 2 pillars of the Church. To wit, the ſacrifice of the Maſſe & the
Pope, This Diuine ſayd moreouer: that the Councell ought to employ all
it force, to ſuſtaine and vphold them. The pillar (ſaid he) of the ſeat papall
once pulled downe, that the whole Church would fal to the earth. The reaſon
which he gaue was, becauſe the funerals and obſequies of the Church
went iointly, and accompanied with thoſe of the Pope. There is nothing
(ſayd he) that the aduerſaries with deliberate purpoſe more endeuour to
doe, then to put downe the Pope, &c. Our aduerſaries haue fallen in the
reckoning, and this is the cauſe, why they maintaine and adore (and many

of them doe it, againſt their owne conſcience) The Pope, howſoeuer abhominable,
wicked, and great an Atheiſt he be. I humbly beſeech his maieſty
to ſend the true Sampſon, which is Chriſt, who with one pluck, may wholy
pull downe theſe two pillars, and ſo the houſe of Dagon may fall vtterly
to the earth. Iudg. 16. 29. I know that were the Pope, and his Maſſe pillars
built vpon the rock, vpon the cornerſtone Chriſt, that neither the gates
of hell, nor whatſoeuer men could imagine, ſhould euer preuaile againſt
them. But becauſe they be not founded vppon this firme foundation: but
rather vpon humane inuentions, any ſmall thing whatſoeuer, that carrieth
any reaſon, maketh them eaſily to ſtagger. The thing which wholy ouerthroweth
them, is the word of God. As by the Lordes aſſiſtaunce in theſe
two Treatiſes ſhalbe ſeene. His Maieſtie I hope, whoſe cauſe we here maintaine,
will draw ſome fruit out of this my trauaile. To him I commit the
charge therof. For as ſaith his Apoſtle 1. Cor. 3. 7. Neither he that plāteth is
any thing, nor he that watereth, but God, which giueth the encreaſe. His
cauſe it is, to him I commend it. That which in the meane time Chriſtian
Reader, I beſeech thee, for that which thou oweſt to the health of thy ſoule
(the which if thou looſeſt, what ſhal it profit thee to haue gained the whole
world) is that thou read, conſider and weigh the reaſons which we giue in
theſe two Treatiſes, for confirmation of that which we ſay▪ and ſee which
more agreeth with the word of God, with that which the ancient Doctors
and Councels, and which naturall reaſon, teach: that which we haue ſaid,
or that which our aduerſaries ſay. The holy, and true, who hath the key of
Dauid, which openeth, and no man ſhutteth, which ſhutteth, and no man
openeth; Open vnto thee the gate, that thou maieſt conſider and adore his
holy law. He euer bewith thee, Amen. The 25. of Iune 1588.
            
               Your moſt affectionate brother
in the Lord.
C. V.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt Treatiſe: of the Pope and his authoritie.
            
               Idolatry.
               IDolatrie (which is to giue the honour,
worſhip and ſeruice only due to God,
to a creature, whether good or bad, holy
or prophane) is the moſt grieuous ſin
that is, or cābe imagined. For the Idolater,
like a traitor to him that made him,
directly & manifeſtly committeth high
treaſon againſt his God. He endeuoureth,
what in him lieth, to caſt God frō
his throne, & therin to place that which himſelfe worſhippeth,
albeit the worke of his owne hand. To ſhew the grieuouſneſſe
of this ſinne, very ſeuerely hath God puniſhed it: as he plagued
the Iſraelites (we ſee) when they made the Calfe. For the which
the Lord had wholly deſtroyed them, had not Moſes ſtept in, a
very good Mediator. Notwithſtanding there died of them in
one day by the ſword about three thouſand men. And it is to be
noted,Exod. 32. that neither Aaron, nor the Iſraelits were ſo blockiſh, nor
fooliſh,Deut. 9. 14. to thinke the calfe which they had made to be God.
That which they ſuppoſed was this, that the honor done to the
calfe they did it vnto God. And ſo Aaron when he ſaw the calfe
he built an Altar before it: and proclaimed, ſaying: To morrow
ſhall be a feaſt vnto Iehouah, This he ſaid, for the repreſentation
of God, which he and they ſuppoſed they had made in the calf.
This maner of Idolatrie had the people of Iſraell ſeene in Egypt.
For the Egyptians,The cauſe why the Iſraelites worſhipped the molten calfe. beſides infinite other things, adored
the figure of Apis, which they alſo called Sirapis, being the
name of an Oxe. The Iſraelites applyed to their religion, the
manner of worſhip which they had ſeene in Egypt: and coueting
viſible things by which they might repreſent and worſhip
God, they made of ſet purpoſe, a Calfe of mettall, as is read in

Exod.. 32. 4. And Aaron formed it with the grauing toole, and
made thereof a Calfe of mettall, and they ſaid, Theſe be thy Gods ô
Iſrael, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, &c. The ſame
ſaith God in the eight verſe, complaining of the people to
Moſes. And Dauid, Pſal. 106. 19. They made (ſaith he) a Calfe
in Horeb, and worſhipped a molten Image. and turned their glorie to
the ſimilitude of a bullocke that eateth graſſe.
            
            And Ieroboam renewing this Idolatrie,1. king. 12. 28. made two calues of
gold, one whereof he placed in Bethel, the other in Dan, and
ſaid as his predeceſſors in the wilderneſſe had ſaid, Theſe be thy
Gods which brought thee, &c. Exod. 32. 4. And it is not to
be thought (as before we haue ſaid) that either Aaron, or the Iſraelites,
or after them Ieroboam, or his people were ſo ſenceleſſe
to thinke that the Calfe, or calues (which they themſelues
with their hands a little before had made) was God, whoſe being
is from euerlaſting. That which they thought was this: that
God which had brought them out of Egypt, repreſenting himſelfe
in the Calfe, had poured thereinto, a certaine diuinitie,
and therefore would be worſhipped in the ſame: as they did
worſhip him. This doing, they tooke quite away the worſhip
which they only owed to God, and gaue it to the creature. For
this cauſe (ſaith Dauid) that the Iſraelites turned the glorie of
God into the ſimilitude of a Bullocke, &c. &c. Pſal. 106. 20.
The ſame ſay we to our aduerſaries. They beleeue not (will
they ſay) that the image of our Ladie of Guadalupe, nor that of
Mountſerrat, is the ſame virgin Marie, which is in heauen.
They beleeue not (ſay they) that the woodden Crucifixe of
Burgos, is the ſame Chriſt, which ſitteth at the right hand of his
Father. That which they beleeue is this, that God hath infuſed
into theſe, and ſuch other Images, a certaine diuinitie, to
repreſent the Virgin Marie or Chriſt crucified, &c. And therupon
(ſay they) worke they miracles: and therefore doe they
reuerence and adore them. And ſo fixe they their eyes, and ſettle
their whole mindes to honour and worſhip theſe viſible Images:
that they take away the honour which is onely due to
God, and giue it to a woodden image that is made with mens
hands. And being in any affliction, in ſteede of ſeeking helpe
at God, by the meanes of his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus. One crieth

out, O my Ladie of Guadalupe, another: O my Ladie of Mountferrat,
another: O my Lady of Walſinhham, another: Lord Saint
Elmus, Lord Saint Blaſe, Lady ſaint Lucie, &c. Of God or his
ſonne Chriſt none hath remembrance, except here and there
one in a corner: and if the others heare him, they call him a
Lutherane heretike, that inuocateth not the Saints, but God
only and his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus. But God commands vs to call
vpon him in the time of trouble, and hath promiſed to heare vs,
Pſal. 50. 15. Chriſt ſaith, All whatſoeuer ye ſhall aske in my name
ſhall be done vnto you, Mat. 7. 7. Mar. 11. 24. Ioh. 14. 13. &. 16.
23. But of this will we ſpeake more at large, intreating of inuocation
of the Saints, in the Treatiſe of the Maſſe. Let vs now returne
to the Calfe.
            The Iewes endeuour what they can to excuſe their forefathers,
and ſo lay the fault of this ſin vpon the poore baſe people
of the Egyptians, which, together with the Iſraelits went out of
Egypt. But that which the Lord ſaith to Moſes, caſteth wholly
the fault vpon the Iſraelites, not once naming the poore people:
and ſaith alſo, that it is a ſti
                  •
               ffe-necked people, and as ſuch wold
conſume them, Exod. 32. 8. 9. 10. The Iewes cannot then excuſe
their forefathers: their owne Rabbins doe witneſſe that the ſin
of the Calfe is not wholly yet cleanſed. This ſaid Moſes Gerunden,
ſpeaking to the Iewes. No puniſhment hath happened to
thee, ô Iſrael, wherein there hath not bene ſome ounce of the
iniquitie of the calfe: But in crucifying their Meſſiah the Lord
of glorie (as in Eſa. 53. through the whole chap. Dan. 9. 20. and
other places was propheſied) the Iewes afterward committed
another no leſſe wickedneſſe. For which ſo enormious a ſinne,
God cut them off, being the naturall branches, from the euergreene
oliue tree, which is his Church, & in their place graffed
in vs Gentils, branches of the wild oliue tree. Rom. 11. And note
that the maner wherein we are ingraffed, is farre different from
the common & naturall graffing. For we are not ingraffed, the
the wild Oliue into the Oliue tree, nor the wilde peare into the
peare tree: but contrariwiſe, the oliue into the wild oliue tree, &
the peare into the wild peare tree: & ſo our ingraffing into the
Church and into Chriſt her head, ſupernatural. For which benefit
receiued he ſaith to the Gētils, Praiſe the Lord al ye Gētils, &c
            
            
               
Three great Captiuities (beſides others not ſo great) haue
the Iewes ſuffered.The firſt captiuity of 400. yeares. The firſt in Egypt: the ſecond in Babylon:
the third, that which now they ſuffer, ſcattered like chaffe,
or ſtraw through the world. Concerning the firſt & ſecōd, God
foretold them how long they ſhould be captiues. So he ſaid to
Abraham:
               Gen. 15. 13. Act. 7. 6. 
               Know thou for certaine, that thy ſeed ſhall be a ſtranger in
a land that is not theirs, and ſhall ſerue them, and ſhall be afflicted
foure hundred yeares. But the nation which they ſhall ſerue, will
I alſo iudge: and then ſhall they come forth with great riches, as in
Exod. 12. 36. 37. appeareth.
            
               As touching the ſecond captiuitie,
               2. Captiuitie of 70. yeares. Ierem. 25. 12. Ca. 29. 10.. 
               God ſayth by Ieremie,
And it ſhall come to paſſe that when ſeuentie yeares ſhall be fulfilled,
I will viſite the king of Babylon, &c. Againe, Thus ſaith the
Lord, vvhen ſeuentie yeares in Babylon ſhall be fulfilled, I vvill
viſite you, and performe my good promiſe towards you, and cauſe
you to returne to this place. Of the accompliſhment of theſe ſetie
yeares ſpeaketh Daniel, chap. 9. 2. 2. Chron. 36. 22. and
Ezra. ch. 1. 1.
            Concerning the third captiuitie,3. Captiuitie of infinite yeares. wherin aboue theſe fifteen
hundred yeares they haue bene, and yet are, and ſhall bee
ſcattered throughout the world, without king, without high-prieſt,
without ſacrifice, without Peſah (that is, the Paſchall
lambe) without Prophetes, and many other things by God
commanded, ſubiect to ſtrange nations, and not (in ſome ſort)
but as ſlaues, no word in the Scriptures mentioning how many
yeares this captiuitie ſhall endure. But contrariwiſe, ſaith
the Angell to Daniel, chap. 9. 27. that Ieruſalem ſhall be deſtroyed,
and that the Moyſaicall worſhip and Temple ſhould
neuer more returne. This third captiuitie for three reſpects is
worſe then the ſecond. Firſt, for the time: That endured ſeuentie
yeares: This hath endured aboue fifteene hundred yeares.
2. In the ſecond, the Iewes had Prophtes, and miracles, Ieremie,
Ezechiel, Daniel, &c. the three children were deliuered
from the fire, and Daniel from the Lyons: In this haue they
had neither Prophet nor miracle. The third reſpect: In the
ſecond they had great dignitie and riches: as Ioachin the king
Ieremie the laſt. Daniel and his three companions, Mardocheus,
Zerubbabel: but in this they are much deiected. True

it is, that this generall promiſe they haue made them by God:
That whenſoeuer they ſhall repent them of their wickedneſſe
committed, and turne vnto God, that he will pardon them, and
gather them from all partes of the world where they ſhall be
ſcattered and afflicted.
            And ſeeing that God doth not gather, nor deliuer them
from ſo long and painfull captiuitie, as is that which they ſuffer:
it followeth, that they are wholly obſtinate in their ſinnes,
and turne not truly vnto God. For if they would turne, God
being true in his promiſes, would gather them. But we ſee the
contrarie, that they ſtill be ſcattered, and abide in captiuitie,
therefore they repent not. And ſo it pleaſeth God to chaſtiſe
them, as he ſayd vnto Moſes, Deut. chap. 28. 63. 64. And
it ſhall come to paſſe (ſaith he, ſpeaking of the Iewes) that
as the Lord did reioyce ouer you to doe you good, and to
multiply you, ſo ſhall the Lord reioyce ouer you to confound
and deſtroy you: and ye ſhall be plucked out of the land, into
the which ye now enter to poſſeſſe it. And God will ſeatter
thee through all nations, from the one end of the earth to
the other. And there ſhalt thou ſerue ſtrange Gods wood and
ſtone,God for vnbeleefe puniſheth the Iewes vntill this day. &c. whom thou nor thy fathers haue not knowne. Their
obſtinacy, and vnbeleefe, not knowing the day of their viſitation,
and contemning and killing their Meſſias, is the
cauſe of this ſo miſerable captiuitie: wherein they ſhall continue,
vntill they ceaſe to be incredulous, and acknowledge
God, and Chriſt or Meſſias whom he hath ſent, and ſo they
ſhall be ſaued.
            Moreouer, concerning that which we haue ſayd,Iudges. 2. 19. 20 the booke
of Iudges is full of Gods puniſhments vpon the Iſraelities for
their idolatrie, whom he deliuered ouer into the hands of their
enemies. But as a good God, and mercifull father, when
they repented, he reſtored or deliuered them. And eftſones
they returned to idolatrie, and God eftſoones did puniſh
them. We read alſo that the Iſraelites turned away, and corrupted
themſelues more then their fathers, following ſtrange
gods, ſeruing them, and bowing downe before them, and
nothing diminiſhed their workes and wicked wayes. And
the wrath of the Lord was kindled againſt Iſrael. And Deborah

in her ſong conceiuing them ſaid:Iudges. 5. 8. In chooſing new Gods,
warre was at the gates. So greatly did God abhore Idolatrie,
that oftenne commaundementes which he gaue; the two firſt
be againſt Idolatrie. Firſt. Thou ſhalt not haue (ſaith he) any
ſtraunge Cod before me.
            
            Second. Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any Image, nor the likeneſſe
of any thing that is in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneath,
or in the water,
               Two kind of Idolatrie. 
               &c. And then, Thou ſhalt not bow downe to them,
nor worſhip them: for I am the Lord thy God, a iealous God, &c. In
the firſt commaundement, internall, and mentall, and in the
ſecond externall and viſible Idolatrie are forbidden. So horrible
and enormious is the ſinne of Idolatrie that God who is
a iuſt Iudge, doth puniſh it with moſt ſeuere puniſhment that
can be in this world. God giueth vp Idolaters into a reprobate
ſence; ſo that forſaken of God, and by his iuſt Iudgement,
deliuered ouer, and made ſlaues to Sathan, they may
doe that which is not conuenient, as ſaith Saint Paule, Romans
1. 25. concerning Idolaters, which turned the truth of God
into a lie, honoring and ſeruing the creature, before (or
more) then God. And in the twentie eight verſe, mentioning
the puniſhment, he ſaith; that God gaue them vp vnto
a peruerſe minde (which we call a reprobate ſence) to doe
that which is not conuenient: namely, the abohmination there
mentioned. The anſwere which the Romiſts make, in defence
of their Images, is friuolous, They adore not, nor honour (ſay
they) the Images, but that which they repreſent. Whereunto
I anſwere; that as little did the Pagans worſhip their Images,
but that which they repreſented. For they beleeued not the
Image of Iupiter to be Iupiter, but to preſent Iupiter. Much
more doe the Romiſts, not onely commaunde Images to be
made, but to be reuerenced, and which is more, worſhip
them themſelues. And in the ſecond Action alſo of the Neccen
Councell (not of that holy and good firſt Councell of
Neece) but of the ſecond, aſſembled by that ceuell Empreſſe
Hirena, it is ſaid: We doe worſhip the pictures of Images.
And in the third Action, The inuiſible diuine nature is not
permitted to be pictured, nor figured. For no man euer ſawe
God at any time: but we worſhip the Image of his humanitie

pictured with colours. So alſo doe we reuerence and
adore the Image of our Lady the mother of God, &c. See
here, how the Romiſts doe contradict themſelues, on the one
ſide, they ſay; they worſhip not Images. And on the other
parte, in their generall Councels, they commaund them to
be worſhipped. Anſwerable to this Doctrine of the Councell
doe they ſing in their hymne. O Crux aue, ſpes vnica hoc
paſſionis tempore: auge pijs Iuſtitiam, reiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   dona veniam. That is
to ſay. O Croſſe onely hope, in this time of paſſion, increaſe
righteouſneſſe in the Godly, and graunt pardon to offenders.
Alſo in ſhewing the Croſſe, they ſay: Ecce lignum Crucis, venite
adoremus. That is, Behold here the wood of the Croſſe:
Come and let vs worſhip it. Alſo Crucem tuam adoramus
domine. Thy Croſſe doe we worſhip, O Lord. Thomas Aquinus
in his Brieffes or partes, ſpeaking of Adoration, ſaith. That
the Croſſe ought to be worſhipped with the ſame Gods honour,
as God himſelfe. And ſo they doe: and vppon good
fryday chiefly, proſtrate on the ground, doe they adore the
Croſſe, and offer giftes vnto it: which adoration (ſay they)
Saint Gregorie ordeyned. But how can this be truth, which
they ſay of Saint Gregorie, when the ſayd Gregorie writing to
Seremus Biſhop of Marſella, who had cauſed Images to be
pulled downe, broken, and burned, vſeth theſe wordes, hadſt
thou forbidden to worſhip the Images, we ſhould haue prayſed
thee.S. Gregorie forbad the Image worſhip. And a little lower: Which were placed in the Temple,
not to be worſhipped, but for inſtruction onely of the ſimple.
See here how vntrue it is that they ſay, Saint Gregorie inſtituted
the adoration of the Croſſe. True it is, he ſaith, that Images
were the bookes of the ſimple and ignorant people. But
let him pardon vs, if in this we diſſent from him, to yeeld vnto
that,Habakuk. 2. 18. 19. which the word of God doth teach vs. Habakuk ſaith, what
profiteth the Image; for the maker thereof hath made it an
Image, and a teacher of lies, though he that made it,
truſt therein, when he maketh dumbe Idolls. woe vnto him,
that ſaith to the wood, awake, and to the dumbe ſtone, ariſe,
it ſhall teach thee: beholde it is layd ouer with gold and
ſiluer, and there is no breath in it. In like manner. The
ſtocke, ſaith Ieremie, is a doctrine of vanitie. Againe: Euery man

is a beaſt by his owne knowledge: Euery founder is confounded
by his grauen Image: for his melting is but falſhood, and
there is no breath therein. They are vanitie and the worke of
errors, &c. wherefore well ſaid Athanaſius: When a liuing
man cannot moue thee to knowe God, how ſhall a man made
of wood cauſe thee to know him?Epiphanius Epiſt. ad Hieron. 
               Epiphanius Biſhop of Cypres
comming into a Church, and ſeeing a veyle, wherein the Image
of Chriſt, or ſome other Saint was pictured, cōmanded
to take it thence, and that the veyle ſhould be imployed for
the buriall of ſome poore, vſing theſe wordes: To ſee in the
Temples of Chriſtians, the Image of Chriſt, or any Saint pictured,
is horrible abhomination. Of this moreouer wrote he to
Iohn Biſhop of Ieruſalem, vnder whoſe Iuriſdiction was that
people of Anablatha, where the veyle was, to prouide that no
ſuch veyles which be contrary to that which Religion permitteth,
ſhould thenceforth be had in the Church of Chriſt. So
greatly did this epiſtle pleaſe Saint Ierome, that he tranſlated the
ſame out of Greeke into Latine. The ſame Epiphanius ſaid, Remember
my beloued ſonnes, that you place no Images in the
Church, nor churchyardes, but carry God euer in your hearts;
and yet ſay I further, permit them not in your houſes: For to
be fixed by the eyes, but by meditation of the minde, &c. is
vnlawfull for a Chriſtian, &c. The moſt ancient Councell of
Eliberis holden in Spaine (as now we will declare) and many
other ancient Councels condemned Images: and manie
Chriſtian Emperours haue forbidden them. And for that
purpoſe wrote 
                  Ʋalens,
               Petrus Crinilib. 9. de hone. ſta diſciplina. and Thedoſius to the chiefe Gouernor
of the Councell houſe ſaying: As our care is in and by all
meanes to mainteine the religion of the moſt high God: ſo
permit wee none to purtrayt engraue, or picture in colours,
ſtone, or any other matter whatſoeuer, the Image of our
Sauiour: Moreouer we commaunde that whereſoeuer ſuch
an Image can bee founde, it be taken away; and all thoſe to
be chaſtiſed with moſt grieuous punſhment that attempt ought
againſt our decrees and commaund. Seeing then, the Chriſtian
Emperours, Doctors and ancient Councels, yea and that which
is all, the ſcripture it ſelfe to forbid Images; let not our Aduerſaries
be obſtinate. Let them not thinke it to be nowe, as in

time paſſed, when the blind led the blind, and ſo both fell
into the ditch. Bleſſed be God, we nowe ſee, and neede not
them which be more blind, to guide vs.
            Where or when (I demaund) hath God commaunded to
doe that which they doe? Let them giue me one only example
of the olde or newe Teſtament, that any of the Patriarches,
Propetes, Apoſtles, or Martyrs of Ieſus Chriſt did that
which they doe? adored or honored God, or his ſaints, in their
Images? They will not giue it. Then let them not be more
wiſe then they.Eſa. 1. 12. Let them take heede leaſt God ſay vnto them,
Who required theſe thinges at your handes? This is not the
worſhip by God appointed, but humane and diueliſh inuention.
And ſo ſhall God puniſh them as hee puniſhed Nadab
and Abihu Leuit.Exod. 20. 4. chap. 10. ver. 1. that offered ſtrange fire,
which he neuer commaunded them.Deut. 5. 8. Hold we faſt that which
God hath commaunded: Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any grauen
Image, &c. And ſo ſhall we not erre. The Church of Rome
hath taken away the ſecond commandment, and hath but nine
commaundements. But to fill vp the number of tenne; of the
tenth commandement which forbiddeth luſt in generall, and
afterward the chiefe kind and partes thereof,A true deuiſion of te ten Commandements. hath ſhee made
two. But the Hebrewes and ancient Doctors Greeke, and
Latine do not ſo; who place that of Images, for the ſecond
commaundement Some thinke (ſaith Origen hom. 8. vpon
Exod) that all this together (meaning the firſt and ſecond commandements)
is one commaundement: which, if it ſo ſhould
be taken, there wold want of the number of ten commaundements;
and where then ſhould be the tenth of the Decalog
of ten commaundments? but deuiding it, as afore we haue
diſtinguiſhed; the full number of the ten commaundements,
will appeare. So that the firſt commaundements is; Thou ſhallt
haue no other Gods but me. And the ſecond, Thou ſhalt not make
to thy ſelfe any grauen Image, &c. hitherto Origen. Chriſoſtome
hom. 49. vpon Saint Math. Expoſition. 2. Athanaſius in Synopſi
Seripturarum; Saint Ambroſe vpon the ſixt chapter of the epiſtle
to the Epheſians, and Saint Ierome vpon the ſame place, all theſe
Fathers place (as we doe) that againſt Images for the ſecond
commaundement. And for the third, Thou ſhalt not take the name

of the lord &c. For the 4. Remember thou keepe holy &c. for the
5. Honor thy father, and thy Mother, &c. and for the tenth, that we
ſhall not couet any thing of our neighbors, &c. Ieſephus in his 3. book
of Antiquites chap. 6. and Philo in his booke, which he made
of the tenne comandements, deuide them in like manner with
vs. If this be the true deuiſion of the Decalogue (as it is) and by
the expreſſe word of God, Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe
any grauen Image (as by the Hebrew, Greeke and Latin Doctors
we haue proued.The Church of Rome is accurſed of God, and the cauſe.) Hereupon it followeth, that the Church
of Rome is accurſed of God, becauſe ſhe hath dared to diminiſh,
and adde any thing to the moſt holy eternall, and inuiolable
lawe of God: whereunto (being perfect, full and
entire) no man ought to adde or take away: according to
that which the ſame God ſaith, Thou ſhalt adde nothing to the
word which I commaund thee, neyther ſhalt thou take ought therefro:
but keepe the commaundements of the Lord your god which I
commaunde you. Deut. 4. 2. Deut. 12. 32. Prouerb. 30. 6.
If the Church of Rome heere in a thing ſo cleere, ſo notable,
and of ſo great importance, hath ſo apparantly, and without
ſhame, dared to adde and diminiſh; what will they not dare?
Let vs looke more neerely. The belly (ſay they) hath no cares:
Theſe things will not the Romiſts heare. Images in the Popedome
fill the bellies, and the cheſts: Great is the treaſure that is
giuen to Images, Oyle, waxe, perfumes, ſilke, ſiluer, gold, cloth
of gold and precious ſtones: wherein Theeues, and wicked women
are moſt liberall. The Pireſtes and friers, doe clothe and
decke their Images with the giftes of ſtrumpets: wherein
they tranſgreſſe the commaundement of God,Deut. 23. 18. which commandeth;
that none ſhall bring the hier of an whore into the houſe
of the Lord, &c. becauſe God, who is iuſt and pure, abhorreth
robbery, and deteſteth that which with ſinne and filthineſſe is
euill gotten. And the Gloſſe in Decret. diſt. 90. Cap. Oblationis.
determineth; that no gaine of a whore be offered in
the Church. And that the ſupreſtitious vulgar ſort may giue
the more, they make them beleeue, that the Images do weepe,
laugh,Deut. 4. 12. ſweate, and doe other great Miracles. Moſes declareth,
that when God ſpake with his people, the people hard the voice
of his wordes, but they ſawe no figure, ſauing only a voice:

what God would haue vs to vnderſtand hereby, the ſame Moſes
there declareth. Take good heede then to your Soules: for ye ſawe
no figure, &c. and then: That ye corrupt not your ſelues nor make
you any grauē Image or repreſentation of any figure, whether
it be the likenes of Male or female. The common edition which
the Roman church alloweth ſaith: Ne fortè decepti, faciatis vobis
ſculptam ſimilitudinem aut Imaginem maſculi vel feminae: That is
to ſay, leaſt being deceaued, ye make to your ſelues a grauen
ſimilitude or Image of man or woman. Let our aduerſaries
behold if they make to themſelues Images of hee and ſhee
Saints, which be of men and women. And ſuppoſe, that the
making of Images were not againſt the expreſſe comanndement
of God;The dutie of a good magiſtrat to forbid idolatrie. but that to make thē or not to make them were a
thing indifferent: yet ought the good magiſtrate (ſeeing the
ſuperſtition and Idolatrie which the ignorant common people
commit) to forbid Images, and breake them notwithſtanding:
imitating therein the holy king Ezechiah,
               Numb. 21. 8. that brake
the braſen ſerpent which Moſes had made, when he ſawe the
Iſraelites to burne incenſe vnto it, as in the 2. Kings. 18. 4.
appeareth. Read the chapter. See if our aduerſaries adorne
their Images with flowers, with garlandes, with crownes,
decke them, cloth them, girde them, hang vpon them purſes,
light tapers, candles and lampes before them, perfume, incenſe,
carry them vpon mens ſhoulders in proceſſion, kneele before
them, and in their neceſſities craue helpe and ſuccor of them.
Reade for this purpoſe, the epiſtle of Ieremy recited to Baruc in
his 6. chap. and thou ſhalt fully ſee the ſame that nowe is done
in Spaine, Italy, and manie other places of the world beſides.
If this be not Idolatrie, and ſuperſtition, what ſhall be? If
that good king Ezechiah nowe liued, what would he doe to
theſe Images? That which he did to the braſen Serpent: breake
and bray them in peeces. Our Aduerſaries excuſe the matter.
The ſame might the Iſraelites alſo,The braſen ſerpent was the image and figure of Chriſt. and it may be they did ſo,
yet for all their excuſes, the good king brake it. And thinke not
that this Serpent, ſet vp on high, which Ezechias brake, was
of ſmall ſignification. Knowe thou, that it was a figure of the
ſame Chriſt, that was to be lift vp, and placed as an Enſigne,
which all thoſe might followe, that ſhould beleeue in him,

beleeuing in him might haue euerlaſting life: euen as thoſe
which beheld the Braſen ſerpent were cuted of their bodily infirmities.
So they which behold Chriſt, beleeue in him, and
follow him, are no leſſe healed of their ſpirituall infirmities.
This is not mine but Saint Iohns interpretation, whoſe words
be theſe: And as Moſes lift vp the ſerpent in the vvilderneſſe:
ſo muſt the Sonne of man be lifted vp, that all that beleeue in him,
&c. Ioh. 3. 14. Although this Serpent was made by Moſes, and
by the commandement of God, and with ſo high a ſignification
as Saint Iohn giues it, making it the image and figure of
Chriſt. And albeit it had ſo many yeares remained among
the people of God, from the Iſraelites being in the wilderneſſe,
vntill the reigne of Ezekiah: all this notwithſtanding,
this good king (ſeeing the ſuperſtition of the people that burned
incenſe to it) caſt it to the earth, and brake it. This good
zeale of his is commended in the Scripture. And in the ſecond
booke of Kings chap. 18. 3. theſe words are vſed. He did that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord, according to all that his
father Dauid had done. Hee tooke away the high places, and
brake the Images, and cut downe the groues, and brake in peeces
the braſen ſerpent which Moſes had made. For vntill that time,
the children of Iſraell burned incenſe vnto it, and he called
it Nehuſtan (as much to ſay) as a peece of braſſe. Would
God the Chriſtian and Catholike kings would imitate the holie
zeale of this good king. Would God they would ſeeke to
be truly informed, and ſee with their eyes, what be the relikes
and Images which they haue in their kingdomes, and
their miracles, and the truth or falſhood of them. But (ô
griefe) that the old prouerbe in our dayes is verified:

                  Seaſe Milagro, y hagado el diablo.
                  A miracle it is, and the diuell doth it.
               
Would God they would take count of the great riches that
is offered vnto images. Oh what ſhould be found.
            The Romiſtes excuſe them,A Popiſh diſtinction betweene Idol & Image. by a diſtinction which they
make: An idoll (ſay they) is one thing, and an image is another.
That the law of God forbideth Idols and permittteh images:
that the Idoll is an abomination, but not an image. That they

deteſt Idols, and honour Images. Let vs now proue this their
diſtinction of Idoles and Images, to be vaine. God, Exod. 20.
4.Peſel, what it ſignifieth. & Deut. 5, 8. ſaith; Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe Peſel. All the
difficulty is, to knowe what this word Peſel is. Peſel is an Hebrewe
word, deriued of the verbe Paſal, that is, to engraue,
carue & hew. And leſt we ſhould thinke (as thought the Grecians)
that onely Peſel, (which is, a carued picture, ſtatue or grauen
Image) is onely forbidden; God preſently addeth, Temuna:
that is, any figure, forme, ſhape, or painted Image. He then
forbiddeth, grauen, carued, hewed or painted Images. And
commandeth vs not to worſhip, nor do reuerence to them,
Call them as you wil, Idols or Images. Idoll is a Greeke word,
and is the ſame which in Latine is Simulachrum or Imago: Simulachrum
or Imago is that which in Spaniſh we called Imagen.
Theſe foure wordes, Peſel, Eidolon, Simulachrum and Imagen,
be all one thing, and of one ſelfe ſignification: but that the firſt
is Hebrewe, the ſecond Greeke, the third Latine, and the fourth
Spaniſh.Ambroſe. Eraſmus Lactancius Inſtit. lib. 2. cap. 19. And Saint Ambroſe (as noteth Eraſmus in his Annotations
vpon the 1. Cor. 8. chap.) for Idolum euer readeth Simulachrum.
Lactantius deriueth Simulachrū
                of Simulando, Eidolon of
Eidos, aſmuch to ſay, as apparance or ſhew. It appeareth to be
a perſon, & is none: It hath eyes, and ſeeth not: eares, and heareth
not: feete and walketh not. Dauid in the 115. Pſalme, doth
liuely depaint them, let our aduerſaries behold, if their Images
haue eyes and ſee not, eares and heare not, &c.
            
               Saint Auguſtin. lib. 4. de Ciuitate Dei. cap. 9. and 31. Origen.
lib. 8. contra Celſum. S. Ciprian Tract. contra Demetrianum, and
S. Epiphanius and S. Ambroſe make no difference betweene
an Idoll and an Image.Aquinus. 
               Thomas Aquinus that great captaine of
the Dominickes, putteth this difference betweene Idolum and
Simulachrum (as noteth Eraſmus in the place a little before
alleaged) Simulachrum (ſaith he) is a thing made to the likenes
of ſome naturall thing, but Idolum is, Si corpori humano addatur
caput equinum (to wit) If the head of an horſe be put to a
humane body. A diſtinction truly very rediculous. Conclude
we this matter with that, which was ordeyned in the Councell
of Eliberis in Spaine, holden about the yeare of the Lord. 335.
whoſe. 36. Cannō was (as Carranza noteth in his Summa Conciliariorum)

Placuit picturas in Eccleſia eſſe non debere: ne quod
colitur aut odoratur, in parietibus depingatur. It pleaſeth vs that
pictures ought not to be in the Church: leſt that be worſhipped
or adored which is painted on the walles, Eliberis, where
was celebrated this ancient Councell, was a Cittie neare vnto
that place where is now Granada. Eliberis was deſtroyed, and
of the ruines thereof, was Granada builded, or augmented.
            And there is one gate in Granada euen to this day, called the
gate Deluira, corrupting the worde in ſteed of Elibera, The
gate is ſo called, becauſe men goe that way to Elibera. Had
this Cannon, made in our countrie of Spaine, 1263. yeares paſt,
bene obſerued in Spaine, there had not bene ſuch Idolatrie in
Spaine, as now there is. Vp Lord, regard thine owne honour.
Conuert or confound (not being of thine elect) all ſuch
as worſhip Peſel, grauen or carued Images: or Temuna, picttures,
or patternes. All that whatſoeuer we haue ſayd againſt
Images, is meant of thoſe that are made for religion, ſeruice, &
worſhip, and to honour, ſerue and adore them. Such Images
are forbidden by the law of God. And ſo the Arte of caruing,
grauing, painting and patterne making, not done to this end,
is not forbidden, but lawfull. The ſuperſtition and Idolatrie
taken away, the Arte is good. If there be any people or nation
that haue, and doe commit inward, and outwarde Idolatrie
it is the Popiſh Church. For what elſe ſee we in their Temples,
houſes, ſtreetes and croſſe-ſtreetes, but Idolles, and Images
made, and worſhipped, againſt the expreſſe commaundement
of God. Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any grauen Image.
No nation hath bene ſo barbarous, to thinke, that which they
outwardly beheld with their eyes to be God. They ſuppoſed
as before we haue ſaid, their Iupiter, Iuno, Mars, & Venus to be in
Heauen, whom they worſhipped in the Images that did repreſent
them.
            Many of the Moores, Turkes, and Iewes, would conuert
vnto Chriſt, were it not for the offence and ſcandall of Images
in the Churches. Therefore ſaid Paulus Pricius a moſt learned
Hebrew, which became in a Chriſtian Paue, that it was very
meet Images ſhould be taken out of the Temple, for they were
the cauſe that many Iewes became not Chriſtians.
            
               
The Popiſh Church, doth not onely commit the Idolatrie
of the Gentiles, but farre exceed them alſo. One Idolatrie it
committeth, which neuer Pagan, nor Gentile euer committed.
It beleeueth, the bread and wine in the Maſſe (called a ſacrifice)
celebrated by her Pope,The argum
                     •
                   of both Tre
                     •
                  
                  tiſes. or a Prieſt made by the authoritie
of the Pope, to be no repreſentation, nor commemoration
of the Lordes death: but his very body and bloud, the ſame
Ieſus Chriſt, as bigge, and great as he was vpon the croſſe. And
ſo as very God doth worſhip it. We will then in this firſt Treatiſe
proue (by the Lords aſſiſtance, whoſe cauſe we now maintaine)
the Pope to be a falſe Prieſt, and very Antichriſt, & that
ſuch Idolatrie, and other much more, he hath inuented in the
Church.
            In the ſecond Treatiſe, we will alſo proue, by the ſame aſſiſtance,
the Maſſe to be a falſe Sacrifice, and great Idolatrie.
And becauſe our chiefe purpoſe is not ſo much to beat downe
falſhood,The argument of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. as to aduance the truth: after we haue ſhewed the
Pope to be a falſe Prieſt, And the Maſſe, a falſe Sacrifice, we
will ſhew alſo (which is the argument of the Apoſtle in the
Epiſtle written to the Hebrewes) Ieſus Chriſt, to be the true,
and onely Prieſt, and his moſt holy body and bloud which he
offered vnto his father vpon the Croſſe, to be the true, and only
ſacrifice, where with the eternall father is well pleaſed, and receiueth
vs into his fauour and friendſhip, iuſtifying vs by faith,
and giuing vs his holy ſpirit of Adoption, whereby we crie
Abba father, and liue in holineſſe and righteouſneſſe all the
dayes of our life. And ſo be glorified of him, to reigne 'with
him for euer.
            Many will wonder that we with ſo great conſtancie (or as
they call it) ſawſineſſe reiect, condemne, and abhore the Pope
and his Maſſe: And therefore doe ſlaunder, and defame vs,
not among the common people onely, but amongeſt the
Nobles alſo and great Lordes, Kinges, and Monarches that we
are: fantaſticke, heady, arrogant, ſedicious, rebellious, partiall,
and many other falſe reportes they raiſe againſt vs; wherewith
they fill, and breake the eares of the ignorant, and of all
thoſe, that take pleaſure to heare them.
            To ſhew them then, that it is no fooliſh opinion nor fantaſie,

which doth lead vs, neither any ambition, vaine glory, nor other
paſſion, that doth alter, moue, or tranſport our minds, but
a good zeale rather of the glory of God, and feruent deſire
of the health of our owne ſoules. A reaſon will we giue
in this firſt Treatiſe vnto all that deſire to heare & vnderſtand
it, of that which we beleeue & hold concerning the Pope, and
his authoritie. And chiefely, if we be asked, becauſe (as ſaith
Saint Peter) we ought to be ready with meekeneſſe and reuerence
to make anſwere to euery one that demaundeth a reaſon
of the hope which we hold. The reaſon then, which we giue
for reiecting, condemning, and abhorring the Pope, and flying
from him, as from the peſtilence, is his euill life, and wicked
doctrine. Note alſo what the Doctors and ancient Councels, &
the holy Scriptures, in three wonderfull places chiefly for that
purpoſe ſay concerning him. In the ſecond Treatiſe, we will
declare what wee thinke of the Maſſe, and the holineſſe thereof.
            The Pope and Maſſe, two pillers of the Popiſh church, be
very ancient, For it is now a thouſād yeares paſt, ſince they firſt
began to be buylded. Their beginnings were very ſmall: but
they dayly increaſed, adorning and decking themſelues, vntill
they attayned to the eſtate wherein we now ſee them; For aſwell
the Pope, as the Maſſe, is holden and called God. Without
are they made very beautifull, couered ouer with ſilke,
gold, ſiluer, cloth of gold, rich ſtones: but within is ſuperſtition,
hypocriſie, and Idolatrie. I haue often pondred with my
ſelfe, whether of theſe two pillers, the Pope, or the Maſſe, were
ſtrongeſt, and more eſteemed. The vertues, excellencie, holineſſe
and diuinitie, which they ſay, is in the Maſſe, who can
declare? How profitable it is for al things liuing, and not liuing,
quick & dead? By cōſideratiō hereof, the Maſſe I ſuppoſed was
chiefeſt,The reaſon prouing the Pope to be of greater authotie then the Maſſe. and therefore ought to begin with it. But the Pope
vpon better aduiſement, mee ſeemed notwithſtanding to be
the chiefeſt piller. The reaſons mouing me ſo to beleeue, are
theſe, that the cauſe in dignitie is before the effect, the creator
before the creature; the maiſter before the ſeruant, the Prieſt
before the ſacrifice which he offereth. The Pope is he that
made and created the Maſſe: as afterwardes (God willing) we

will proue.Read the booke Ceremon. Pontifie. 1. Sect. cap. 3. alſo Sect. 12. cap. 10. & 4. Therefore is the Pope of greater dignitie then the
Maſſe. This proueth the Pope to be maiſter, and the ſacrament
his ſeruant: becauſe, when the Pope goeth from one
people to another, he ſendeth before him, yea and ſome time
a day or two dayes Iourney, his ſacrament vpon a horſe
carying at his necke a little bell, accompained with the ſcumme
and baggage of the Romane court. Thither goe the diſhes and
ſpits, old ſhooes, caldrons and kettels, and all the ſculery of
the Courte of Rome, whores and Ieſters. Thus, the ſacrament
arriued with this honorable traine, at the place whither
the Pope is to come, it there awayeth his comming. And
when the maiſter is knowne to approach neere the people,
it goeth forth to receiue him. Open thine eyes O Spaine: or
which is better. God open them, and behold what account the
Pope maketh of the ſacrament, which he himſelfe (ſaying it is
thy God) for thy money, ſelleth vnto thee.
            Fryar Iohn de Pineda, in the third part of his Eccleſiaſticall
Monarchie, lib. 23. ¶2. ſaith. That the firſt Pope, which cauſed
the Sacrament to be carried before him, was Benedict. 13.
(a Spaniard) when for feare, he fled from France into Aragon:
& from that time remained it in cuſtome, that the Pope caried
the moſt holy Sacrament, for his gard before him.
            The Popes in this carrying of the Sacrament before them,
doe imitate the kinges of Perſia, before whom went a horſe,
carrying a little Altar vpon him: whereupon, among a few
aſhes ſhone a ſmall flame of holy fire: which they called Oriſmada.
This fire, as a certaine diuinitie, did the Perſians reuerence
and adore. So that the King, to ſeeme more then a man,
and to be ioyntly worſhipped with the diuinitie, which did accompany
him, with this pompe went he publikely. Read for
this purpoſe, the Embleme of Alciatus. Non tibi, ſed Religioni,
pag. 17. where he treateth of a little aſſe, that went laden with
myſteries.
            He alſo that ſacrificeth, is of more dignitie and eſtimation,
then the ſacrifice which he offereth. For God regardeth not
ſo much the gift, or ſacrifice to him offered and preſented, as
the perſon that offereth it. The Lord, ſaith the ſcripture, had reſpect
to Abell,
               Gen. 4. 4. and his preſent: and: to Caine and his preſent

he had no regard.Hebrew, 11. 4. The Apoſtle giueth a reaſon ſaying. By ſaith
Abell offered to God a better ſacrifice then Caine. The Pope is
the Prieſt, the Maſſe is the ſacrifice which he offereth; Therefore
is the Pope of more dignitie then the Maſſe. By theſe
reaſons, and others that may be drawne, I conclude, the Pope
to be chiefe piller that ſuſteyneth the Popiſh Church Of it
we will firſt take hold: not to ſupport it, but to caſt it downe:
and then we will after intreat of the Maſſe. And this by the
helpe of the almightie God, the Father ſonne, ond holy Ghoſt,
whoſe cauſe we here defend.
            To this name Papa,
               Pope. the like as to ſome other wordes hath
happened:Many wordes in old time taken in good part, which are now taken in euill. which in old time, were taken in good part, and
were honourable titles, but after, with the time, haue bene ill
taken. For example Tyrannis was in old time a King, and ſo
King Latinus (as ſaith Virgill Aeneid. 7.) called Aenaeas, whoſe
friendſhip he deſired. Tyrant Sophiſta, was taken for a man of
wiſedome; now for a deceiuer or a flatterer. Hoſtis did ſignifie
a ſtanger, now taken for an enemy. Euen ſo in old time,
was Papa taken in good parte, and giuen for a title to Biſhops,
or miniſters of Gods word: for in the Primitiue Church, the
Biſhop,Euery Biſhop or Miniſter in old time was called Pope. Miniſter and Paſtor were all one. Riches haue ſithens
made the difference, as now we ſee. Read to this purpoſe, the
Epiſtle of Saint Ierome to Euagr. tom. 2. That Papa was ſo taken
as a foreſaid, by the Epiſtle of the auncient Doctors as
namely, Ciprian, Dionyſius, Alexandrinus, Ierome, Ambroſe, Auguiſtine,
Sidonius, Appolinarius, and Gregory, and by the Actes
of the Councels is proued. The Grecians vntill this day, call
their Prieſtes, Papaous, the Germanies call them Pſaffen, and
Flemings call them Papen, names which be derined of this
name Papa,
               Tome 2. which in the Sicilian tongue (after Suidas ſignifieth
Father) Of all theſe authors, I will alleage here but onely two.
Ierome writing to Auguſtine, ſaith, Moſt hartily commend
me I pray thee, to our holy and venerable, brother Pope Alipius.
            
            And writing to Pamachius, he ſaith vnto him: hold Pope
Epiphanius: And writing to Auguſtine, calleth him Pope. In another
place he ſaith: Except Pope Athanaſius and Paulinus:
yet neither Alipius, nor Pamachius, nor Epiphanius, nor Aunor
               
nor Athanaſius nor Paulinus were euer Biſhops of the Church
of Rome.
            Among the Epiſtles of Saint Ciprian,
               Epiſt. 7. lib. 
                     •
                  
                there is one thus entituled:
The Presbiters and Deacons abiding at Rome, ſend
greeting to Pope Ciprian. And this is to be noted, that the
Church of Rome, giueth this title to Saint Ciprian, who was
Biſhop of Carthage, and neuer of Rome. But when the couetuouſneſſe
and ambition of the Biſhop of Rome had ſo increaſed,
that he made himſelfe a Prince,The Biſhop of Rome ſeeketh nothing more then to be called Pope. and vniuerſall Biſhop,
and therefore Antichriſt, as Saint Gregorie calleth him; then
toke he from other Biſhops, the title of Pope, and reſerued it
onely to himſelfe: So that none but the Biſhop of Rome is
now Pope: and being Biſhop of Rome, Antichriſt.
            Hence commeth it, that to all the Godly, the name of
Pope, is ſo horrible and wicked: becauſe it is onely giuen
to Antichriſt. That which hereafter we will ſay ſhall not be againſt
the anciēt & firſt taking of the name of Pope, but againſt
the ſecond.
            Which name, well agreeth with him: for the Pope Popely
all to himſelfe: that is to ſay, he deuonreth and glutteth it
vp: as he himſelfe ſaith, All power is giuen me in heauen and
in earth. And ſo the late writers take this name Papa, pro Ingluuie,
that is to ſay, gluttony, As Anthonie de Lebrixa in his
dictionary doth note it.
            Ieſus Chriſt, our Maiſter, whoſe voyce the Father commaundeth
vs to heare, and thereby, to gouerne our ſelues,
hath giuen vs a ſure marke, and infallible token, to diſcerne
the good tree from the bad, the true Chriſtian from the falſe,
the good ſhepheard from the hierling. A good tree (ſaith he)
bringeth foorth good fruite. Matth. chap. 7. 17. This he ſaith,
that we may knowe the hypocrites, by their fruites, or workes;
Speaking alſo of himſelfe, he ſaith, The workes which I doe
they beare witneſſe of me, Ioh. chap. 5. verſ. 30. The ſame
Lord ſaith, that the good ſhepheard giueth his life for his ſheep,
& not the hierling, but rather flyeth, Ioh. chap. 10. 11. Mē cannot
iudge but that which they ſee God onely knoweth the heart.
Following then the counſel which the Lord hath giuen vs, let vs
ſee what hath bin the life & doctrine of the Popes vntill this day:

and ſo will hold them, either for good or bad, for the true
miniſters of Chriſt,Diuiſion of the Biſhops of Rome into, 3. orders. or of the diuell. And to make that more
manifeſt whereof we intreat, let vs deuide into three partes
or orders all the Biſhops that haue bene in Rome. The firſt
ſhall conteyne, all thoſe, that from the beginning, were Biſhops,
vntill the time of Saint Silueſter. The ſecond, all thoſe
which were from Silueſter, vnto Boniface. 3. The third, all thoſe
that haue bene from Boniface. 3. vnto Clement. 8. who this
yeare of the Lord, 1600. doth tyrannize in the Church.
            Come we now to the firſt order.The firſt order. The common opinion hath
bene, that S. Peter was the firſt Biſhop of Rome, the which by
holy ſcripture can no way,Saint Peter was not Biſhop of Rome. but the contrary rather, be proued.
Many haue handled this argument: to whom I referre thoſe
that would knowe it. For my part, that which our aduerſaries
ſay, concerning this matter, to me ſeemeth impoſſible. Firſt
they ſoy, that S. Peter 
               
                  ••
               ued after after Chriſt paſſion, 38. yeares.
which they count in this maner. That he was for a time in Iudaea
& after at Antioch, where he was Biſhop, 7. yeares. So ſaith Bartholmew
Caranza, in his ſumma Conciliorum. But if that be true
which they ſay, that S. Peter liued but 38. yeares after Chriſt,
the Epiſtle of S. Paul to the Gal. ſheweth this to be impoſſible.
            Saint Paul alſo, in 1. chap. of his ſaid Epiſtle declareth, that
after his conuerſion, he went not to Ieruſalem: but into Arabia,
and thence turned to Damaſcus; and that, 3. yeares after he
came to Ieruſalem; where he found Peter, with whom he abode
15. dayes; not to learne ought of him, but to confer with
him. 14. yeares after this (as he ſaith in the chapter following)
he came againe to Ieruſalem: where thoſe that were pillers
of the Church, Iames Cephas, which is Peter, and Iohn gaue him
the right hand of fellowſhip. Theſe yeares were, 18. at the leaſt,
3. (ſaith he) and afterwards, 14. and the time which paſſed
from the Paſſion of Chriſt,Gal. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . vntill S. Paules going to Arabia.
After this, they both were at Antioch: where S. Paul reproued
S. Peter for his diſſimulation. If there he was ſeuen yeares, and
twenty fiue yeares afterwardes at Rome, ioyned with the
eighteene yeares, before mentioned, ſhall make fiftie yeares,
at the leaſt. Then ſhall it be vntrue which they ſay, that Saint
Peper liued thirty eight yeares after the death of Chriſt (as

ſaith Caranza in his ſumma Conciliorum) And much more vntrue
ſhal be that, which Humfridus Panuinus, in the Chronicle
of the Roman Biſhops, and in his annotation vpon Platina, in
the life of Saint Peter, ſaith, that Saint Peter was martyred 34.
yeares, 3. moueths and 4. dayes, after the paſſion of Chriſt.
Count thus the yeares the S. Peter liued after Chriſt.
            From the death of Chriſt, vntill the 2. yeare of the death of
Claudius, were 10. yeares, all which time, Saint Peter abode in
and departed not once from Iudea. This time paſſed, he came
to Rome, where he abode 4. yeares, from whence, by Claudius
Edict againſt the Iewes, he departed, and returned to Ieruſalem:
from Ieruſalem, he went to Antioch, and there abode,
7. yeares: in which time died Claudius, and Nero ſucceeded
him in the Empire. In the beginning of Neros reigne, S. Peter
returned to Rome: whence, after ſome time, he departed, and
trauelled almoſt throughout all Europe: which peregrination
being ended, he returned the third time to Rome. From Saint
Peters firſt enterance into Rome, vntill his death were, 24.
yeares, 5. monethes, and 12. dayes, which ioyned with the
10. yeares before paſſed in Iudea, make 34. yeares, three
moneths, and 4. dayes. All this ſaith Panuinus. Herein, he contraieth
his owne authors, which affirme Peter to haue bene
7. yeares in Antioch, and 25. after at Rome. And Gracian, in
a certaine decree ſaith, that Saint Peter by reuelation paſſed
(or tranſlated) his ſeate from Antioch to Rome. And ſo Fryar
Iohn de Pineda in the 3. part. booke 20. chap. 5. Sect. 1, following
this opinion, ſaith. In Antioch (before Rome) had S. Peter his
ſeate Papall. Caranza in his ſumma Conciliorum, ſpeaking of S.
Peter, counteth thus. He ſate (ſaith he) in the biſhops chaire at
Antioch 7. yeares: and departing thence, came to Rome in
the time of the Emperor Claudius; where he ſate in the Biſhops
chaire 25. yeares, 2. moneths, and 3. dayes. We ſee now the
count of Caranza and Panuinus to be falſe. In this they agree,
that he was crucified at Rome. Betweene the death of the Lord
and the death of Nero, were 37. yeares. The ſaid Panuinus ſaith,
that S. Peter was crucified in the the laſt yeare of Nero, then ſhal
it be 37. yeares, and not as he ſaith, 34. yeares, after the death
of Chriſt. The Legend, and Cannon ſay, that Saint Peter and

Saint Paul, were in one ſelfe ſame yeare, day, and hower beheaded
at Rome. Saint Ierome ſaith, that Paul was killed with
a ſword, and Peter crucified: Euſebius ſaith, that the one was
beheaded, and the other crucified. We demaund, and chiefly
of our Spaniardes, which ſo much beeleeue theſe thinges.
when came Saint Peter to Rome, how longe there ſtayed
he,This proueth S. Peter was nduep at Rome. when, and of what kinde of death, and where dyed he,
who was his ſucceſſor (for ſome ſay Linus, others Clement)
we ſhall finde great confuſion, and diſorder amongſt them:
as already we haue ſeene? and how deale they ſo with Chriſtians
whoſe faith is to be founded vpon the word of God. The
Popes Supremacie, to be Peters ſucceſſour, they ſell for an
Article of our faith, inſomuch (as ſaith Boniface. 8.) it was
de neceſſitate ſalutis neceſſarie to ſaluation, and who ſo beleeued
it not, could not be ſaued: behold vpon what holy ſcriptures
it is founded? vpon a legend of mens ſayinges diſagreeing
among themſelues. The cauſe taken away, the effect ceaſeth.
If Saint Peter were not Biſhop of Rome, it followeth, that
all whatſoeuer is ſayd touching the ſucceſſion, & Primacie of
the Pope, is meere lyes, and faſhood. Alſo Saint Peters Commiſſion
was to be Apoſtle of the circumciſion among the
Iewes, and that of Saint Paul of the vncircumciſion among
the Gentiles. Gal. 2. 7. Saint Paul to the Romans themſelues,
alſo ſaith,Rom. 15. 20. that he preached the Goſpell, where none had
once made mention thereof: and giueth a reaſon. Beaſt
he ſhould ſeeme to build vpon a ſtraunge foundation. Whereupon
it followeth, that Saint Peter was not at Rome. Alſo in
the Epiſtles which he wrote, being priſoner in Rome, he
ſent ſalutations from the faithfull, which were then in Rome,
without any mention made of Saint Peter. And had he bene in
Rome, it is to be thought, he would haue named him. Read the
4. chapter of the Epiſtle to the Coloſſians. from the 10. verſe
vnto the 14. where he ſaith. Salute Ariſtareus, and Marke, and
Ieſus, called Iuſtus, which be of the circumciſion. Theſe onely
be they, that aſſiſted me in the kingdome of God and were a
comfort vnto me. Whereupon it followeth, that Saint Peter was
not at Rome, ſeeing he neither did aſſiſt, nor comfort him.
This Epiſtle was written from Rome. And in the 2. to Timoth.

cap. 4. 1. 2 which ſome what before his martyrdome he wrote
the ſecond time being priſoner in Rome: and in the Epiſtle to
Philemon, verſe 23. and 24. Alſo in the Epiſtle which he wrote
to the Romanes, he not once maketh mention of Saint Peter,
to whom no doubt he would haue ſent ſalutations, had hee
bene in Rome: and which is more: Saint Peter, being Biſhop
at Rome (as they ſay) 25. yeares. Read the laſt chap. of this epiſtle,
and thou ſhalt ſee the catalogue which S. Paule maketh
from the fift verſe to the fifteenth, he ſaith onely: Salute ſuch a
one, ſalute ſuch a one, &c. without naming of Saint Peter. Becauſe
he neither was Biſhop of Rome, nor yet was in Rome.
Alſo, the Iewes which dwelled in Rome (as reciteth S. Luke,
Act. 28. 21. 22.) ſaid to S. Paule, when he came priſoner to
Rome, that they had not heard nor vnderſtood any thing concerning
him: and prayed him to declare his opinion touching
that ſect, which was gainſayd and euill ſpoken of in all places,
vnderſtanding by this ſect the Goſpel which Saint Paule preached.
Who will beleeue that S. Peter which (as they ſay) was
before come to Rome, and a Miniſter of the Circumciſion, had
not taught nor ſpoken ought vnto them of the Goſpell? Theſe
reaſons taken out of holy Scripture, are me ſeemeth (as they be)
very ſufficient to proue the common opinion holden of S. Peters
being Biſhop of Rome, and that 25. yeares, to be falſe.
Whereupon that of the Papiſts appeares plainely to be meere
ignorance, or (which is worſe) extreame malice, when they call
the Pope Saint Peters ſucceſſor, Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt, as though
hee were Saint Peter, and therefore vniuerſall Biſhop. Againſt
the Primacie of the Pope, we will ſpeake in the end of
this Treatiſe.
            Seeing then Saint Peter was not Biſhop of Rome,Linus. we place
Linus for the firſt. All the Biſhops of Rome that were from Linus
to Sylueſter (who was in the time of the Emperour Conſtantine
the great) whom we will put in the firſt order, were
in generall trulie Biſhops and holy men, who with their
good doctrine, and holy life and conuerſation, wrought great
fruit in the Church of God: They were the ſalt of the earth,
the light of the world, a Citie built vpon a mountaine, a candle
light, and ſet vpon a candleſticke. Theſe be the titles

wherewith Chriſt adorneth his apoſtles and miniſters, Math. 5.
Theſe were the Angelles of God according to the ſaying of
Malachie;
               Mal. 2. 6. 7. ſpeaking of Leuie, and conſequently, of the good
Miniſters: The lawe of trueth (ſaith he) was in his mouth, and no
iniquitie was found in his lippes: In peace and equitie he walked with
me, and turned away from iniquitie: For the prieſtes lippes ſhould
preſerue knowledge, and they ſhould ſeeke the lawe at his mouth:
for he is the Angell of the Lord of hoſts. Many more titles are compriſed
in the holy ſcriptures, wherewith the true miniſters are
adorned: which I will paſſe ouer, to auoide tediouſnes. In the
ende, theſe good biſhops of Rome, ſealed the Goſpell which
they had preached with their bloud: and ſo were Martyrs
of Ieſus Chriſt. Men they were, poore in ſpirit, and ſimple of
heart, ſtrangers to couetoſnes and ambition. they were true
biſhops for the ſpace of almoſt three hundred yeares:300 years good biſhops in Rome. And ſo
the Church of the Lord hauing ſuch miniſters, was then happie,
and rich in the ſight of God: albeit in the eies of men,
contemptible & miſerable; ſuch as the Apoſtle in the eleuenth
chapter of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, from the 36. to the 38.
verſe deſcribeth. Others (ſaith he) haue benetryed by mocking, and
ſcourgings, yea, moreouer by bonds and impriſonment. 37. Others
were ſtoned; others were hewen aſunder. Others were tempted.
others ſlayne with the ſworde. Others wandered vp and downe in
ſheepes skinnes, and in goats skinnes, being deſtitute, afflicted and
tormented 38. whome the worlde was vnworthie of: they wandred
in wilderneſſes, and mountaynes, and dens, and caues of the earth,
&c. Theſe Biſhops caried on their heads, not Miters, but coifes,
not honor, but diſhonor: not riches, but pouerty: following
herein their Maiſter, as Eſaias the Prophet in his chapter 53. 3.
doth liuelie deſcribe him. Deſpiſed and forſaken of men: a man
full of ſorrowes, hauing experience of infirmities, and we hid (as it
were) our faces from him; he was deſpiſed, and we eſteemed him
not. This was the outward apparance of the Primitiue Church;
and ſo hath it bene in our time: ſithens the reformation of the
Church began theſe 70. or 80. yeers vnto this time, how many
haue bin burned, drowned, beheaded, hāged, baniſhed, ſhamefully
diſgraced and died of hunger. Truly innumerable; and that
which is more admirable, the more they burned and killed, the

more they increaſed and multiplied. For the bloud of the
Martyrs (as ſaith Tertullian) is the ſeed of the Goſpell. From
the paſſion of the Lord, vnto Saint Silueſter, which is the time
of the firſt order, were almoſt three hundred yeares: wherein
the Emperours of Rome became Lords of Spaine. The Romanes
in two hundred and ſo manie yeares, that they conquered
Spaine, vntill the time of Auguſtus Caeſar, were neuer
abſolute Lords thereof. Auguſtus was the firſt that vanquiſhed
the Montaniſts and Biſcayes, and made himſelfe abſolute
Lord of all Spaine.
            The Romiſts, as thoſe (ſay they) that haue held the command
and ſtaffe for many yeares, to giue antiquitie and authoritie
to their ceremonies, and humane traditions, haue
falſly reported, that manie of theſe good Biſhops of Rome
(whom we place in the firſt order) ordained them. Clement the
fourth Biſhop of Rome (ſay they) ordained the confirmation
of young children, the Maſſe, and holy garments wherewith
the Prieſts are clothed. They do not conſider that he was a
a man poore, and for preaching of the Goſpell baniſhed into
mines, where he hewed Marble ſtones, and tyed in the end to
an anchor, they caſt him into the ſea.
            D. Illeſcas, ſpeaking of Pope Caius in his Pontificall hiſtorie
ſaith: He ordained that no laye man might bring a Clearke to
iudgement: That no pagan nor heretike might make accuſation
againſt a Chriſtian, &c. How can this be true, ſith Caius liued
and died in the time of the tenth perſecution: which (as
Illeſcas himſelfe ſaith) was of all the moſt cruell, and laſted many
yeares? Let the Romiſts be aſhamed, and ceaſe with lies to
confirme their religion. Now is it not the time that was wont
to be, when the blind led the blind, &c. So ſay they alſo, that
Euariſtus, Alexander and Siſtus, fifth, ſixth and ſeuenth Biſhops
of Rome, made the popiſh decrees; namely, the ordering of
the Clergie: holy water, and holy garmentes. Teleſphorus
(ſay they) that was the eighth Biſhop of Rome, ordained three
Maſſes to be ſayd on the day of the Natituitie. Theſe good Biſhops
had other cares, and embraced not ſuch childiſh and ſuperſtitious
toyes. Saciety and idleneſſe brought them forth. O
what euils haue riches wrought to the Church of God? Wiſely

therfore ſaid Frederick the Emperour: Detrahamus illis nocentes
diuitias: hoc enim facere, opus eſt charitatis: Let vs take away,
(ſpeaking of the Pope and clergie) the riches, which ſo much
hurt them, for this to do is a worke of charitie.
            Here it is to be noted (as reciteth Panuinus in his chronicle)
30 Siſmes to haue bin;1. Siſme. and that which happened in the yeere
252. betweene Cornelius and Nouatus, is counted for the firſt:
and the ſame only hapned in the firſt order: wherin were good
all the Roman Biſhops, except Marcellinus, who offred incenſe
to Idols: but touched by God, he greatly repented, ſo came
into the Councell holden at Seſſa, in the kingdom of Naples;
where were preſent (as ſaith D. Illeſcas) three hundred Biſhops
and thirtie Presbiters, or (as ſaith Platina) 180. Biſhops, and
there asked he with teares, God and them pardon, of the moſt
grieuous ſin which he had cōmitted. Frō Seſſa he went to Rome
and there did chide Diocleſian for compelling him to ſacrifice
to Idolles: wherefore Diocleſian commanded to kill him. When
Marcellinus was dead, the ſeate was voide 7. yeeres and a halfe;
as ſaith Illeſcas, and 25. daies, or (as ſaith Platina) 25. daies.
            The ſecond order conteineth the biſhops of Rome from
Silueſter 1.The 2. order. vnto Boniface the 3. Theſe neither in life, nor doctrin
agreed by far with the biſhops of the firſt order. For perſecution
nowe ceaſſing, they gaue themſelues to idleneſſe and
pleaſure and made Cannons, and Decrees, wherby they prepared
the ſeate of great Antichriſt. Thoſe of the ſecond order
were called for the ſpace of 200.Archbiſhops. yeeres Archbiſhops. It is to be
vnderſtood, that from the yeere 320. vnto that of 520. afterwardes,
from the yere 520. vnto that of 605. they were called
Patriarks.Patriarks. Liberius an Arrian. S. Silueſter was then the firſt Archbiſhop, whome
Marcus, Iulius. 1. and Liberius ſucceeded: Liberius in the
beginning of his Biſhopdome thought well of the diuinitie of
the ſonne of God; and for ought the Arian Emperour Conſtantius
did, would not be drawne to condemne Athanaſius: for
which cauſe he was baniſhed Rome. Theodoretus lib. 2. ca. 16.
of his hiſtorie, reciteth the conference that paſſed between him
and Conſtantins, when he was baniſhed; wherein Liberius
ſhewed himſelfe verie conſtant. Three yeeres (ſaith Platina)
and others ſay leſſe, was Liberius baniſhed. The Romans at

this time held a Councell,Felix. 2. wherein they choſe for biſhop Felix
ſecond. This Felix (as ſaith Platina) was a very good man: and
ſo by his liking, and conſent of 48. biſhops, 
                  Ʋrſacius, and
Valens, which held part with Conſtantius the Arrian Emperour,
were depoſed. Theſe two went to Conſtantius and complained
vpon Felix, praying the Emperour to reſtore againe Liberius,
who wearied with the trouble of his baniſhment, and nowe
changed his opinion, through ambition, and the counſell of
Fortunatus, Biſhop of Aquilea. His baniſhment pardoned,
and Liberius reſtored to his Biſhoprike, in and by all things (as
ſaith Platina) he agreed with the heretikes. This reſtoring of
Liberius, and depoſing of Felix cauſed great tumult in Rome,
ſo that the matter came to blowes, and many Prieſtes and Eccleſiaſticall
men, euen in the Churches were murthered. This
was the ſecond Siſme.2. Siſme.
            
            In that which I haue ſaid of Liberius and Felix, I haue followwed
Platina, who vpon the life of Felix ſaith, that faulting in
nothing which became a true and good Chriſtian, he was
caught with manie more good Chriſtians, and ſo by the aduerſaries
murthered. Athanaſius, in an Epiſtle written to ſuch as led
a ſolitarie life, ſaith plainly, that Liberius after two yeares of his
baniſhment paſſed, being threatened wrth death, changed his
opinion: and ſubſcribed againſt Athanaſius. Ierome in his Chronicle
ſaith, that Liberius ouercome with diſdaine of baniſhment,
ſubſcribed to that wicked hereſie Tome 1. Concil. It is
ſaid, that when Liberius was entered Rome, he agreed with the
heretike Conſtantius. The ſame ſaith Damaſus in his booke de
Pontif. And Platina, and Alonſo venero, in his Enchiridion of
times, and Iohn Stella, and others. Bale ſaith, With ambition Gigas
ſaith, that Liberius moued with the martyrdome of Felix,
and fearing the like agreed with the Arrians, & approued their
doctrine. No mention is made of Liberius repentance, & therefore
he is counted among the Arrian Popes. Damaſus his ſucceſſour
for this cauſe condemned Liberius,
               That which one Pope doth another vndoeth. & al that he did. But
Gregorie 7. that abominable Pope, as afterward in his life ſhall
appeare, canonized notwithſtanding this Arrian Liberius, and
cōmanded (ſaith Card. Benon) his feaſt to be celebrated. Panuinus
the Popes great paraſite, in his chronicle of Biſh. cals him S.

               Liberius.
               The Pope erreth in faith. Behold, if that which is ſaid be true, that many bee
holden for Saintes, whoſe ſoules are burning in hell. Behold
if the Pope may erre in 
                  •
               aith.
            To write the life of this Liberius hath coſt me ſome trauell,
and diuerſity of opinions, the cauſe. Some hold him for a Catholike,
others for an Arrian, and both the one and the other
ſay truth. For in the beginning of his Biſhopdome he was (as
we haue ſaid) a Catholike, but after without repentance, an
obſtinate Arrian. Note we here what an euill beaſt is ambition.
He that ſtandeth, let him take heed leſt he fall. It ſufficeth
not to begin well, but to end well is needfull. He that continueth
to the end (ſaith the Lord) ſhall be ſaued. God giue vs
grace to tame our ambition, which we all haue need of. For
there is none which reputeth not himſelfe for a demi-God:
and giue vs ſtrength in afflictions, which for his name we ſuffer.
Remember we Liberius. But what ſpeake I of Liberius?
Remember we Salomon, that ſo well began, but how proceeded
he afterward? The Lord gouerne vs vnto the end.
            In the time of this Liberius, and in the citie of Tagaſta in Affrike,
was borne the great Doctor and light in the Church,
Saint Auguſtine: and on the ſame day (they ſay) that Pelagius
the heretike was borne in great Brittaine. Oh the great
mercie of God, that prouided an Antidote againſt the poiſon
of Pelagius!
            
            
               Damaſus,
               Damaſus. a Portugall (as we haue ſayd) condemned Liberius.
Damaſus was verie deuout and ceremonious. Panuinus
in his Chronicle noteth, that all the Biſhops of Rome vntill
Damaſus, were choſen and conſecrated vpon one ſelfe ſame
day. But afterwards (ſaith he) this was not ſo obſerued. Vpon
the day of Conſecration, now called coronation, is a ſolemne
triumph holden in Rome. So much haue increaſed the riches,
power, ambition, and pride of thoſe which call themſelues the
Fiſhers ſucceſſours. In this time flouriſhed Saint Ierome, and
was a deare friend of Damaſus, as by their writings appeareth.
Betweene Damaſus and 
                  Ʋrſinus was the third Siſme.The 3. Siſme. 384.
            
            But in the 367. yeare 
                  Ʋrſinus renounced, and was made
Biſhop of Naples. Damaſus died in the 384. yeare, and Siricius
ſucceeded him.
            
               
               Siricius (as ſaith Gracianus,
               Siricius. Concerning the forbidding of mariage, read afterwards in Gregorie. 
               diſt. 82.) was he that firſt forbad
mariage to the Weſterne prieſts: which ordination many nations,
and chiefly our countrey of Spaine, nothing eſteemed.
Wherefore Hymerius, then Biſhop of Tarragona, wrote to
Siricius, that the prieſtes of Spaine would not obey the lawe
which commanded them to leaue their wiues. At the hearing
whereof Siricius was angry, and ſayd, That ſuch as were in the
fleſh could not pleaſe God, Rom. 8. 8. The ſame Siricius alleageth
this authoritie in the fourth epiſtle which he wrote to the
Biſhops of Africa. Siricius vnderſtanding this place, of maried
folks, writhed and wreſted the ſcripture. So alſo was this place
wreſted by Innocent the firſt. But S. Paule by this (in the fleſh)
meant not maried folks, for therby ſhould he condemne the eſtate
of matrimony, inſtituted by God in Paradiſe, Gen. 3. 24. &
ſanctified by his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt with his preſence working
there his firſt miracle, Ioh. 2. 11. Very well knew the Apoſtle,
Mariage to be honorable among all men, and the bed vndefiled.
Very well did he know, that God would chaſtiſe fornicators
and adulterers. Heb. 13. 4. Wherfore he commandeth, that
they which had not the gift of chaſtity ſhould marie. 1. Cor. 7. 2
9. And he himſelfe defendeth the liberty, which he and Barnabas,
being Apoſtles, had, to haue their wiues, and to carry them
with them. Or haue not we authority (ſaith he, 1. Cor. 9. 5.) to leade
about a ſiſter (that is to ſay, faithful) aſwell as the other Apoſtles, and
the brethren of the Lord, &c. Paule then (with fauour of Siricius,
and Innoncent 1.) by being in the fleſh, vnderſtandeth not the
maried but carnal men, and vnregenerate by the Spirit of God.
Such (ſaith he, be they ſingle, maried, or widdowes) cannot
pleaſe God. And that this is ſo, appeareth by that which the
ſame Apoſtle, ſpeaking to the Romanes, of whom many were
maried, ſaith, But you are not in the fleſh, but in the Spirit, becauſe
the Spirit of God dwelleth in you, &c. Rom. 8. 9. By this interpretation
which Siricius and Pope Innocent 1.The Pope erreth in the interpretation of the Scripture. made of the place of
S. Paule, ſhall our aduerſaries ſee, albeit they denie it, that the
Pope may erre & that in the interpretation of the Scriptures. Siricius
after Platina hauing bene Pope almoſt 16. yeares, died &
Anaſtaſius the firſt, Innocentius the firſt, Zozimus the firſt, and Bonifacius
the firſt ſucceded him.
            
               
Betwene Boniface and Eulalius,
               Boniface. 1. Siſme. 4. 420. was the 4. Siſme in the yeare
420. Eulalius verie vnwillingly renounced: but yet was made
Biſhop in Campania. Celeſtine ſucceeded Boniface: Siſtus 3.
ſucceeded Celeſtine; who being falſely accuſed, made anſwere
for himſelfe in an open Sinod, and Baſſus his aduerſarie, was
condemned. The councels were then aboue the Pope.
            
               Leo 1.Gelaſius. 1. 
               Hillarius, Simplicius, Felix 3. Gelaſius ſucceeded Siſtus.
To this Gelaſius, that notable ſaying, of communicating in
both kindes is attributed; which we will alleage in the Treatiſe
of the Maſſe. After Gelaſius 1. Anaſtaſius 2 ſucceeded.
            
               Anaſtaſius 2.Anaſtaſius 2. an heretike. tooke parte with the Eutichians, and other
heretiques, and communicated with them▪ For confirmation
hereof, reade Gracian in the decree diſt. 19. Cap. Secundum
eccleſiae Catholicae: And Cap. Anaſtaſius. And the 2. Tome of
the Councels: and Platina. Beleeue not the Popes Paraſites,
(as be D. Illeſcas, and the two late writers, Albertus Pighius,
& Diego de Couarrunias whom he alleageth) Anaſtaſius in doing
his needes,Anno 417. the Gothes began to reigne in Spaine. voided (ſay Volateramus and Platina) his guttes
into the draught. At this time in Spaine the Gothes reigned:
who began there to reigne in the yeare of the Lord. 417. where
expelling the Roamanes, and other nations, they reigned
three hundred yeares. After Anaſtaſius ſucceeded Symachus.
            
            Between Symachus and Laurencius,
               Symachus. The 5. Siſme. 498 was the 5. Siſme But Laurencius
renounced; and in the 498. yeare (as ſaith Panuinus)
was made Biſhop of Nuceſino after Symachus, ſucceeded
Hormiſda.
            
            
               Hormiſda Campanus,
               Hormiſda the the firſt Patriarke. 520 was the firſt (as ſaith S. Iſidor) that by
means of Iuſtin the Emperor in the 520. year, of an Archbiſhop
was made Patriarch, by litle & litle they proceeded, they wil
ſhortly be Popes,He excommunicated the Emperour. I wold ſay perfect Antichriſts. He excōmunicated
the Emperor Anaſtaſius: becauſe he ſaid the Emperor was
to cōmand,Anno. 523. & the Biſhop to obey. At this time began Antichriſt
to appear.Iohn 1. Ambaſſadour. 
               Hormiſda died, in the 523. year, Genſelaricus reigning
in Spaine and Iohn 1. ſucceeded Hormiſda. Iohn. 1. a Tuſcan,
being made Patriark was iointly with others ſent Embaſſador
for Theodoricus king of Italy, vnto Iuſtinus the Emperor. The Biſhops
of Rome had not as yet that abſolute, or to ſpeake better,
that diſſolute power which now they hold. He died a Martyr.

in the 527. yeare. I cannot omit a ridiculous hiſtorie, which
Friar Iohn de Pineda, ſpeaking of this Iohn the firſt, reporteth
for a miracle. About to go (ſaith he) to the Emperour, he tooke
a borrowed horſe, which when Pope Iohn was mounted vpon
him, would not permit his maiſters wife to ride. Felix the third
called the fourth ſucceeded Iohn: and Boniface the ſecond ſucceeded
Felix.
            
            In the 530.6. Siſme. Boniface 2. 530. yeare was the 6. Siſme betweene Boniface the ſecond
& Dioſcorus. After Boniface, Iohn the 2. Agapetus, Siluerius,
Vigilius ſucceeded.
            
               
                  Ʋigilius a Romane,Vigilius and a crafty accuſer of his predeceſſour
Siluerius, by deceit aſpired to the Biſhopdome: whereunto he
was aduanced by meanes of Theodora Auguſta, and of Antonina,
the wife of Beliſarius. But God who is iuſt, gaue them both
their reward. Vigilius by ſubtilty, and Siluerius (the ſonne of
Pope Hormiſda) by force,The 7. Siſme. obtained the Biſhopdome. This was
the ſeuenth Siſme. And Theudiſelo or Theodiſco in Spaine at this
time reigned.
            
               Pelagius a Romane,Pelagius. was the firſt that affirmed the primacie
of the Church of Rome to depend neither of the Councels,The Primacie of Rome. nor
men, but of Chriſt himſelf, diſt. 21. But the Cannoniſts are againſt
him ſaying:The Cannoniſts agree not with the Pope. that Omnis maioritas & minoritas, etiam Papatus
eſt de iure poſitiuo: that is, all maioritie and minority, yea
the Popedome it ſelfe, is of the poſitiue lawe. He ordained that
Eccleſiaſticall perſons ſhould pray (or mumble vp) the ſeuen
Canonicall houres, which be the Mattens, Prime, Third, Sixt,
Tenth, the Euenings and Completes.
            
               Pelagius ordained (ſaith D. Illeſcas) that the Prieſtes ſhould
each day pray ouer the ſeuen houres,The 7. Canonicall houres. which we call Canonical.
And the ſame Illeſcas vpon the life of Sabinianus, ſaith: Sabinianus
was the firſt that ſet an order in prayer, diuiding the Office
into ſeuen houres, which we call Canonicall. How can Sabinia
                  
                     ••
                  us
be the firſt that ordained the 7. Canonicall houres, if Pelagius
had firſt ordained them? This inſtitution was an occaſion
that Eccleſiaſticall perſons ſhould not read the Bible. And ſo
we ſee that very few Church-men in Spaine haue the Bible in
their houſes: but none of them is with his Breuiarie, which all
of them do hold for a verie Catholike booke▪ but the Byble in

generall, doe they call a booke of hereſies. One day will God
puniſh this blaſphemie. In the time of this Pelagius, Agila
reigned in Spaine, and in the 561. yeare, Iohn 3. ſuc
                  •
               eded
Pelagius.
               Iohn 3. contrary to his predeceſſor. 
               Iohn 3. made a contrary decree, to that which his
predeceſſor Pelagius had made; and Diſt. 99. comaunded; that
none ſhould call him high prieſt, nor vniuerſall biſhop. So one
Pope did that, which another vndid: one commanded that
another forbad: In his time the Armenians became Chriſtians▪
and Athanagilda now raigned in Spaine. After Iohn. 3 ſucceeded
Benedict, and Pelagius 2.
            
               Pelagius 2.Pelagius 2. ſa
                  
                     ••
                  sfieth the 
                     •
                  mperour. a Romane (the citie being inuironed contray to
the wonted cuſtome, and without the Emperours commaund)
was made cheife Biſhop. For which cauſe he ſent Gregorie,
who after him was Biſhop, to Conſtantinople, to ſatiſfie and
appeaſe the wrath of the Emperour.590. In the 590. yeere died
Pelagius, and then Leonogildo reigned in Spaine.
            
               Gregorie 1. a Romane, was of beſt life, and more learned
then any of the Patriarkes his predeceſſors: yet very ceremonious:
as by ſo many ſupreſtitions by him brought into the
Church,The firſt pardons and indulgences. appeareth. He was the firſt that granted Indulgences
to ſuch, as at certaine times wold come to the church: Pardons
he granted:The ſoule of Traiā brought out of Hell. but ſold them not (as his ſucceſſors) for money
He brought backe from Hell (ſaith Damaſcen) the Soule of the
vnfaithfull Emprour Traian; (O horrible lie!) Pero Mexia
vpon the life of Traian ſaith; that which is ſaid of the ſoule of
Traian to be a fabulons Ieſt Illeſcas vpon the life of Gregorie 1.
holdes it for a very trueth, and condemneth Pero Mexia: In
the following treatiſe of the Maſſe, wil we ſpeake of this matter.
This good did Gregorie;
               Gregorie 1. a great enemy to the Primacy that both by wordes and deedes, he
was mortall enemy to the Primacie: and ſo wrote againſt the
name of vniuerſall biſhop (as we will afterwardes declare)
againſt which,Seruant of Gods ſeruant. he called himſelfe the ſeruant of Gods ſeruants;
which title haue his ſucceſſours (but hypocritically) holden;
ſeeing that calling themſelues ſeruanth, they haue made themſelues
lordes of the worlde, and kinges, Emperours and Monarkes
kiſſe their feete, and if the Pope will doe them that grace
and fauour, they holde themſelues happie.
            
               Gregorie much complained that in the worlde were ſo

many Prieſtes, and ſo few prachers of the Goſpel. Of this S.
Gregory,
               Marriage forbidden, and againe permitted to prieſtes. 
               Huldricke Biſhop of Auguſta, in an Epiſtle ſent to
Pope Nicholas 1. reciteth a notable hiſtorie, the ſumme whereof
is this. That Saint Gregorie commaunded, prieſtes ſhould not
marry: but afterwardes vnderſtanding they ſecretle committed
great filthineſſe; and for that cauſe much murder enſued,
by commaunde he diſanulled his decree: affirming it better
to marry, then to giue occaſion of murther. Wherfore ſending
vpon a time to fiſh,6000. heades of young children in a pond. they found in a fiſhe poole, or pond, 6000.
heads of young children, that had there bene drowned. Which
Gregorie ſeeing to proceede of conſtrained ſingle life, ſorowing
and ſighing from his hart,The fruites of Popiſh ſingle life. he then reuoked his decree. For
that not only (as ſaith the ſame Huldricke) they had not abſtayned
from maydes, and married women, but defiled themſelues
alſo with their kinred, with males, and brute beaſtes. Such are
the fruites of Popiſh chaſtitie,The ſaying of Pope Pius. 2. agsing conſtrayned ſingle life. and their Angelicall life. Theſe
thinges conſidered by Pope Pius 2. with great reaſon (ſaid
he) he forbad Prieſtes marriage, but with much more reaſon
he ought to reſtore it them againe. And in another place:
It ſhall not happilie be worſt,Note before vpon Siritius and after in Paul 2. that the greater parte of prieſtes
doe marry: for many are ſaued in their marry prieſthood, which
in their barren prieſthood are cōdemned. The ſame Pius 2. (as
witneſſeth Celius. 2.) ſupreſſed certain Monaſteries of Nuns of
Saint Bridgit and S. Clares order;604. commaunding them thence
to depart, and no longer to burne in luſt, leſt they ſhrowded a
whore vnder a religions habite. In the 604. yeares dyed Saint
Gregorie, at this time Leonigildo the Arrian that martyred Herminigildo
his ſonne,Sabinianus. raigned in Spaine.
            
               Sabinianus, ſucceſſour of Gregorie 1. was the laſt Patriarke
of Rome, a man very ſimple, and ſo much hated Gregorie his
predeceſſour, that he cauſed his bookes to be burned. Onely
will I here ſet downe a fable of the death of this Sabinian. reported
by Bergomenſo, for a very truth. Saint Gregorie (ſaith he)
being dead, three times appeared to Sabinianus, and ſharply
reproued him for ſeeking to defame him;One Pope being dead killed another. but his ſpeach could
nothing a mend Sabinianus (which ſeeing S. Gregorie) he gaue
ſuch a blowe vpon the head of Sabinianus that he made him
die miſerably. Mon. eccl. part. 3. lib. 17. cap. 10. ¶1. hereof

is made mention.605. If this be true then one Pope killed another.
In the 605. yeare dyed Sabinianus. This Sabinianus (ſaith
Illeſcas) was the firſt that ſet an order in prayer, deuiding
the Office into the 7. Canonicall houres: the ſame ſaid he of
of Pelagius 1. At this time reigned in Spaine Recaredo king
the Gothes, who deſtroyed the Aryan hereſie, which moſt parte
of the Gothes maintained.
            The third and laſt order conteyneth thoſe Biſhops,The 3. order which
we properly call Popes, and be very Antichriſtes. As Boniface
3. began this order vntill Clement, 8. who now tyranizeth,
hath continewed, and in the laſt Pope ſhall take end. Whom
Chriſt will deſtroy with the ſpirit of his mouth,2. Theſ. 2. 8. as he deſtroyed
his prodeceſſours. And ſo ſhall the end come. The Biſhops
of the firſt order were the Angels of God, holy in life and Doctrine.
Theſe of the ſecond, were men, ſubiect to falling: but
theſe truly of the 3. are diuels incarnate. Not by any figure
Hiperbole, or exaggeratiō: but plainely doe I ſpeake this, I know
it to be ſo, as by their liues we will afterwardes proue.
            
               Boniface 3.Boniface 3. the 1. Pope. and firſt in this Catalogue, was a moſt ambitious
deuill: And being Patriarke of Rome, was made Pope by
meanes of Phocas the Emperour, who was an adulterer, murtherer
and tyrant. A murtherer I call him, for that to make
himſelfe Emperor (as he did) he murthered Mauricius his Lord
and Chriſtian Emperour.
            This Boniface 3.Phocas granted Rome to be head of the Churches. (by many requeſtes and giftes, which
breake the very rockes much more Phocas) obteyned of Phocas,
that the Roman ſeate ſhould be called the head of all
Churches. Three miſerable thinges at this time happened:
the moſt noble Empire began to fall: the Popedome to
ariſe and Mahometiſme to ſpring vp.The fall of the Empire. Of the ruines of the empire,
theſe two beaſtes aroſe, which ſo much haue harmed the
Church of Chriſt.The Pope and Mahomet ariſe. And by how much the more the Empier decayed,
by ſo much the more theſe two beaſts increaſed. It is
now almoſt 1000. yeares ſince, that by ſuperſtition and falſe
Doctrine, the light of the Goſpell began to be darkened. This
miſerable firſt Pope, before a yeare of his Popedome was fully
ended, went to viſite the Diuell the Father of ambition,
and with him there remayneth. And albeit this firſt Pope

was ſo ambitious and, in his Ambition obſtinately dyed.
Yet Panuinus calles him Saint Boniface notwithſtanding.
At this time in Spaine, the moſt Catholique Recaredo 1. reigned.
            
               Boniface 4.Boniface 4. ſucceeded Boniface 3. who (as ſaith Platina) obteyned
of Phocas the Emperour the Temple which they called
Pantheon (to wit of all the Gods, becauſe it was dedicated to Sibylla,
and all the others Gods. This Temple did Boniface dedicate
vnto the bleſſed virgin, and all the Martyrs, which now
is called S. Maries the round. And thus far Platina.
            
            
               Don Alonſo of Carthagena Biſhop of Burgos, vpon the life of
King Recaredo, ſaith theſe wordes: Phocas graunted to the
bleſſed Boniface 4. Biſhop of Rome, the Temple called Pantheon,
to be conſecrated in the honour of the bleſſed virgin Mary,
and of all the ſaintes: as in the legend of that feaſt, celebrated
the firſt day of Nouember, more largely is conteyned thus
farre the Biſhop.
            Here is to be noted the ſaying of the Biſhop, Platina and
many others. That the Pope demaunded of the Emperour this
Temple, and that the Emperour did graunt it. Doctor Illeſcas,
as a flatterer of the Pope, in his Hiſt. Pontif. ſaith, that Boniface
did conſecrate the Temple, &c. the which (ſaith he) well
pleaſed the Emperour Phocas: and ſaith not: that he demaunded
it of the Emperour, leaſt he he ſhould ſeeme to impeach
the authoritie of the Pope. Of that which we haue ſaid it followeth;
that the Pope was not then Lord of Rome: For had he ſo
bene,The falſe donation of Cō
                  ſtantine. he would not haue requeſted the Temple of the Emperour.
This onely reaſon (were there no other) ſufficeth to
proue the donatiō of Conſtātine (as they call it) to be falſe, which
was almoſt 300. yeers before: wherin he made the Pope (ſaith
they) abſolute Lord of Rome, and of many other lands which
they call S. Peters patrimony. The Pope, as a thiefe, hath either
ſtolne it from the Emperor,Anno. 613. or as tyrant by force hath life himſelfe
vp with him. In the 613, yere dyed Boniface. At which time
in Spaine the great Catholique Recaredo 1 reigned.Deus dedit. 
               Theodatus,
or Deus dedit,
               Godfathers The G
                     •
                  dfather ſhould not marry with the Godmother. ordeyned Godfathers and Godmothers to be
had in baptiſme: and that the godfather ſhould not marry with
the Godmother, nor the goddaughter with the ſon of the Godfather.
This Pope died in the 616 yeare, & at that time in Spaine

               Huiterico reigned. Boniface 5. ordeyned, theeues and murtherers,
which fled to the Churches or Churchyardes, might not
be drawn from thence,Boniface. 5. which hath emboldened many to commit
great villanies,The Church a refuge for euill doers. and flying to a Church haue freely eſcaped
without any puniſhment. And theſe they call ſanctuary
men. He dyed in 622. yeare. In which time raigned Seſibuto
in Spaine. After Boniface. 5. ſucceeded Honorius 1. A Monothelite
heretique he was, and for ſuch a one (as ſaith Fryar Iohn
de Pineda. part. 3. lib. 17. cap 34. ¶1.) in the 13. 16. and 17. Acts,
of the 6.Anno. 622. Councell of Conſtantinople, coneemned. The which
by a letter of the Emperour, and by a nother from Leo. 1. to
the Emperour, is confirmed. D. Illeſcas, as he which could not
beleeue that any Pope could erre, calleth Honorius a holy and
commendable Biſhop. Panuinus to excuſe Honorius ſaith, that
the copies of the 6. Councell of Conſtantinople be corrupted:
he giueth his excuſe. Seuerinus ſucceeded Honorius. Iohn. 4.
Theodorus, and Martinus.
            
            
               Martine.
               Martinus. 1. Crownes. 1. ordeyned that Prieſtes ſhould carry Crownes,
to wit, the head ſhaued, leauing a circle vpon it, which they
call a Crowne. The Pope this commaunding, did not imitate
Chriſt, nor his Apoſtles, who neuer had ſhauen Crownes: but
the Prieſtes of the Idolls, which (as ſaith Baruc) had their heads
and beardes ſhauen,Baruc 6. 30. and ſate bare headed in the houſes of their
Gods. Let our aduerſaries ſee, if their Prieſtes doe not the like.
Wherein they imitate doutleſſe, the Prieſtes of the Idolls. He
commaunded, that biſhops euery yeare ſhould conſecrate holy
oyntment,Holy oyntment Vowe of Chaſttitie. and ſend it through their Dioſes. He impoſed vpon
Prieſts the vowe of Chaſtitie, a very hard yoke, and borne
but of a fewe, as in Gregorie 1. we haue noted. In the. 653. yeare
dyed Martinus 1.Anno. 653. 
               Siſenando then reigning in Spaine, and Eugeniup,
and Vitelianus ſucceeded Martinus.
               Vitelanus.
            
            
               Vitelianus ordeyned the ſong,Diuine ſeruice in Latine. and organs in the Church. He
commaunded, the howers, ſinginges, ceremonies, and Maſſes
ſhould be celebrated in the Latine tongue: contrary to that
which ſaith the Apoſtle: the vſe of ſtrange tongues is vnprofitable,
and therefore without interpretation of that which is ſaid,
not to be vſed.Anno. 672. 1. Cor. 14. Vitelianus dyed in the 672. yeare in
whoſe time Tulga reigned in Spaine, after Vitelianus ſucceeded

               Adeodatus,
               Agathus. 1. 
               Donus, and Agathus.
            
            
               Agathus commaunded,Popiſh conſtitutions be Apoſtolicall that the conſtitutions of the chiefe
Biſhop ſhould be holden for Apoſtolicall, as pronounced by
the mouth of God (O grieuous blaſphemie!) In this time was
celebrated the ſixt generall Councell in Canſtantinople, where
marriage to the Grecian prieſtes was permitted but to the Latine
prieſtes forbidden.Mariage to the Greeke prieſts permitted. This Agathus ſent to the 6. Councell
an Epiſtle, wherein he condemned Honorius 1. for a Monothelite.
In the 682.Anno. 682. yeare dyed Agathus, and Leo 2 Benedict. 2. and
Iohn 5. ſucceeded him
            
               Iohn.
               Siſme 8. 5. being dead, then aroſe the 8. Siſme, and 2. Popes
were elected, Petrus and Theodoretus: which being depoſed,
in the 606.The 9. Siſme. yeare was Cunon choſen. Cunon dying in the 687.
yeare was the 9. Siſme and 2. Popes Theodor and Paſcall, were
elected. Both which depoſed, Sergius who was Pope thirteene
yeares, eight moneths, and thirteene dayes, was choſen. After
Sergius ſucceeded Iohn. the 6. Iohn the 7. Siſimus and Conſtantine
the firſt.Conſtantine 1.
            
            
               Conſtantine 1.The firſt Pope that gaue his feete to be kiſſed. was called of the Emperour Iuſtinianus to goe
to Conſtantinople: He was the firſt that gaue his feete to the
Emperour his Lord to be kiſſed. And againſt the firſt commaundement
of God,Images. 
               Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any Image,
&c.
               Anno. 716. diſſipation of Spaine. he commaunded Images to be placed in the Temples
and worſhipped. He dyed in the 716. yeare. At this time
was the miſerable diſſipation of Spaine, made by the Moores
of Affrik with the ayd of the Count Don Iulian. Don Rodrigo
then king,Gregorie. 2. the laſt of Gothes, end the firſt vnfortunate.
            
               Gregorie 2.Gregorie. 3. and Gregorie 3. continewed the commaundement
of Image-worſhip,Leo the Emperor excommunicated. 731. 741. contrary to the commaundement
of God. And Leo the Emperour for not allowing them,
was excommunicate. In the 731. yeare dyed Gregorie 2. & in the
741. yeare Gregorie 3. In the time of Gregorie 2. Don Pelayo
reigned in Spaine, and in the time of Gregorie the third Don
Faſila.
               Zacharias.
            
            
               Zacharias,
               The Church veſtments decked with gold, &c. was the firſt that inuented to adorne the Church
veſtiments with gold and precious ſtones. He was alſo the
firſt that attributed to himſelfe,Making and vnmaking of Kings. a certaine diuine power: concontemptuouſly
tooke vpon him to make and depoſe kinges.

He was the firſt that abſolued vaſſals of their othe made to
their Lordes: which Childerick King of France (whom the
foreſaid Zacharie depoſed at the inſtance of Pipin the little
baſtard ſonne of Charles Martell, vaſſall of Childericke) tried.
In this Zacharie and Pipin, the old prouerbe was verified. Vn
mulo raſca à otro, y Hazme la barua, y hazer tehe el copete. One
mule rubbeth another, and doe thou forme and Ile doe thee.
            The Pope had neede of Pipins ayd, to exempt himſelfe from
the ſubiection of the Emperour of Greece, his Lord. Saint
Gregorie writing to the Emperour, called him Lord. Pipin and
and his ſucceſſors the kinges of France, mindfull of this benefit,
did great ſeruice to the ſea Apoſtolique.The king of France moſt Chrſten and why. And for being
ſuch loyall ſeruantes, he gaue vnto them, the name of Moſt
Chriſten. All that which the Pope holdeth, and all that almoſt
which was the Kinges of France (for that which they ſay of
Conſtantines donation is mockery and lies,The donation of Conſtantine. as Laurencius Ʋalla,
and other learned men haue proued) it may be, and is ſo to be
thought, that God will raiſe vp ſome of France, which will
take it from him, ſeeing by himſelfe it is ſo il vſed. Zacharie dyed
in the 752.Anno. 752. yeare, In his time Don Alonſo the firſt called Catholique
reigned in Spaine.The king of Spaine Catholique.
            
            
               Stephen 2. (or as ſome call him, 3. becauſe Stephen 2. was
before him,Stephen. 2. which was not Pope, but 3. or 4. dayes) being
inuaded by Aſtolpho king of Lombardie, ſent with great inſtance,
to demaund ayd of Pipin; who was very diligent to
ſerue him, and taking Exarcado from the Emperour, gaue it
to the Pope.The donation of Conſtantine. This is the blacke donation which they falſely call
Conſtantines. Pipin proſtrate on the ground before the Pope kiſſed
his feete,Pipin kiſſed the Popes feete, &c. held his ſtirrop with one hand, and his bridle with
the other. Thus the king of France made the Pope rich, and
the Pope ſeeing himſelfe rich, made himſelfe mightie, high,
preſumptuous, a tyrant, God in the earth, ouer all Chriſtian
Princes, and them his vaſſalls, and feodaries. In the 757. yeare
dyed this Stephen,
               Anno. 757. In his time in Spaine reigned Froila.
            
            
               Paul 1.Paul 1. excommunicated the Emperour Conſtantine 5. who
nothing regarding the fooliſh excommunication, perſeuered
to forbid that, which God in his holy law forbiddeth. Thou
ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any grauen Image,
               Exod. 20. 
               &c. This Paul (as

ſaith 
                  Ʋicelius, the Popes notable paraſite) exceeding much reuerenced
the body of Saint Petronilla, daughter of Saint Peter:
vpon whoſe marble tombe (as ſaith Carſulano) he found this
Epitaph written with the proper hand of Saint Peter (a lye qualified
with ſuperſticion) To Petronilla made of gold,A notable lie. moſt
ſweete daughter.Anno. 767. 
               Paul dyed in the 767. yeare and Aurilio, in his
time reined in Spaine.The 10. Siſme. Great Siſme, which was the 10. aroſe
in the Roman Church, wherin Theophilatus, which renounced,
and Conſtantine,
               Conſtantine. 2. a lay man without any order was made. that was depoſed, were choſen.
            
               Conſtantine 2. by meanes of his brothee Deſiderius King of
Lumbardy, albeit he had many competitors, was made Pope.
In this Pope a very rare thing hapned, that he being a lay or
or ſecular man,Pope. was imediately made Pope. And therefore of
many, not reckened among the Popes. One yeare very pontifically
he executed the Popes office In whoſe time,The Councell depoſeth the Pope. a Councell
was holden, wherein he was depoſed. And it was commaunded,
that all whatſoeuer Conſtantine 2. had done and ordeyned
(Baptiſme and holy oyntment excepted) ſhould be
voyd, and of no vallewe. I demaund now of our aduerſaries,
what thinke they of the Biſhops and prieſtes in this Popes time,
and that which they did by his authoritie? What: ſay they of
the Maſſes which the, celebrated, did they conſecrate, or no?
If they did not conſecrate, then the Pope that ordeyned them,
was not Pope, nor they prieſtes. And ſo both Pope, and they
were diſgraded, and by the ſame reaſon, all thoſe that heard
their Maſſes did commit Idolatrie according to their owne
Cannons, which ſay: that he coſnecrateth not which is no
Prieſt. And moreouer it is meete the prieſt haue an intent to
conſecrate; which wanting, there is no conſecration at all.
Conſtantine thus depriued, was put into a monaſterie, and
his eyes, puld out: but king Deſiderius his brother reuenged
this iniurie, by pulling out their eyes that pulled out the eyes
of his brother Ceſtantine.
               The 11. Siſme. 
               Silo at this time reigned in Spaine.
Now alſo was the eleuenth Siſme. wherein Phillip was choſen;
but at the endeoffiue he dayes was depoſed,Stephen 3. and Stephen
elected.
            
               Stephen 3. or after others 4. demaunded ayde of Charles
the great, againſt Deſiderius king of Lumbardie. This Stephen,
               
condemned the actes of his predeceſſour Conſtantine.
               Adoration and cenſing of images. He condemned
the 7. Councell of Conſtantinople, againſt Images;
commaunded they ſhould be worſhipped, and cenſed, after
the maner of the Gods of the Gentiles.Anno 772. In the 772. yeare he
died, and Silo then reigned in Spaine.
            In this buſines touching Images inſiſted Adrian 1.Adrian. 1. Images. he wrote
a booke of the adoration of them: and condemned Felix, and
all the enemies of Images, Charles the great, the ſonne of Pipine
(for the great benefite receaued of Pope Adrian, who tooke
part with him, againſt the ſonnes of Charles Manno his brothers
right heires of the kingdome, and made him king) deliuered
the Pope from all vexation. This Adrian, called Charles
the great Moſt Chriſtian,Moſt Chriſtian Anno. 795. and gaue him power to chooſe the
Pope. When Adrian had bin Pope almoſt 24. years, in the 795.
yeare he died. Maugaretto at this time reigned in Spaine. In the
time of this Adrian (Conſtantine, and his mother Hirena ruling
the Empire) was holden the ſecond Councell of Neece,
called the ſeuenth generall Councell:The ſecond Councell of Neece. wherein, it was decreed,
that Images ought to be adored &c. and the reliques of
ſaints,Images worſhipped. worſhipped. This Conſtantine (as ſaith Rodrigo Sanchez
biſhop of Palencia, in the third part of his Spaniſh hiſtorie) was
in name 10. years Emperour with Irena his mother who ruled
all: but 10 yeares expired, he reigned alone without his
mother. Herein ſaith he, did he Imitate Ninus; who depriued
Simiramis his mother of the kingdome of Babylon. But Irena
tooke the Empire from Conſtantine her ſonne, and incited with
infernall rancor, put out his eies; and ſo depriued him both
of life and Empire.The cruelty of a mother. Wherefore, and for that ſhe ſought to
marry with Charles the Great, the Grecians ſhut her vp in a
Monaſterie, and made Nicephorus Emperour. Thus far Rodrigo
Sanchez. Terrible was this cruelty: when was it heard, that a
mother (to rule) pulled out the eies, and tooke away the life
of her ſonne? and chiefly, being of age to inherite and rule the
Empire of his deceaſed father?
            Frier Iohn de Pineda lib. 18 Cap. 13. of his Eccleſiaſticall
Monarchie ſufficiently ſpeaketh againſt the wickednes, cruelty
and ambition of this Irena. Leo 3. in an oration which he made,
to make Charles the Great, Emperor in the Weſt, among other

reaſons for that purpoſe, giueth this: Seeing (ſaith he) that by the
renunciation of Auguſtus the Empire, (at leaſt in the weſt) was
voide: and ſtrictly examining the buſineſſe, as well may it alſo
be ſaid, that the Empire of Greece was voyd, ſith a woman
held it almoſt by tyrannie. Theſe ſelfe ſame wordes reciteth
Illeſcas vpon the life of Leo the third. And notwithſtanding holdeth
Irena for moſt holy: and ſo vppon the life of Adrian the
firſt, theſe words ſaith he of her: Moſt faire was Irena, and one
of the moſt excellent and famous women in all kind of vertues
and of all Chriſtendome the moſt renowmed. And a little lower.
Irena as a holy and Catholike woman which ſhe was and
euer had bene,Irena an Idolater and a murtherer. &c. Thou ſeeſt here what a one was Irena, the
great Patroneſſe & Defendreſſe of Images. In cauſing images
to be adored, ſhe ſinned againſt the ſecond commandement of
the firſt Table, which ſaith, Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe anie
Image, &c. And in murthering her ſonne, ſhe ſinned againſt the
ſecond Table, which ſaith, Thou ſhalt not kill. This is that holy Irena,
ſo much celebrated of the Papiſts.
            
               Leo 3.Leo 3. acknowledging the benefites of Charles the great,
gaue him the title,Two Emperors one in the Eaſt another in the Weſt▪
                and crowned him Emperour: but with this
condition, that the Emperour with an oath ſhould promiſe him
obedience. This Leo commaunded that the Decrees of the
Pope ſhould be of more authority then the writings of all the
Doctors.The▪ Popes decrees of more authority then the writings of all the Doctors In Mantua at this time a citie of Italie, was a woodden
Crucifixe, which, they affirmed did ſweate bloud. When
Pope Leo the third heard this newes, he went to Mantua, and
there ſeeing (as hee ſaid) the miracle, commaunded this
bloud to be holden for the true bloud of Chriſt.The Crucifixe of Mantua. And to this day
at Mantua is this Crucifixe ſeene and worſhipped. Of this bloud
maketh mention Baptiſta Mantuanus, ſaying:
            
               Et quae purpureus ſanguis faciebat in horas,
               Mira opera intuitus, credi debere putauit
               Effuſum noſtra pro libertate cruorem.
            
            Which ſignifieth the Idolatrie before mentioned.A moſt ſubtill craft to aduāce Images. What diuell
could more inuent to raiſe vp and authorize images,
which in Greece were vtterlie aboliſhed. In the 816. yeere
died Leo the third,Anno. 816. hauing bene Pope more then 20 yeares. At
this time in Spaine reigned Don Bermudo.
            
            
               
               Stephen the fourth (or the fifth) who ſucceeded Leo,
               Stephen 4. was
choſen without conſent of the Emperour wherefore, to excuſe
himſelfe to the Emperour Lodouicus pius, after 3 moneths,
he went into France, Lewis anſwered, that what was paſt, was
paſt, but they ſhold afterward beware of doing the like. Behold
here, how the Popes obſerue their owne Decrees. Adrian and
Leo imediate predeceſſors of Stephen, made this decree: but
Stephen did nothing regarde it. The Pope conſidering, that
this decree, which gaue ſuch authoritie to the Emperour, might
cauſe great euill to the Sea Apoſtolike, returned from France to
Rome, and perceiuing the Emperour to be of gentle and milde
nature, he attempted to diſanull it, ſaying: that the election of
the chiefe Biſhop pertained to the Clergie, Senate & people of
Rome.The Popes excuſe for not ſeeking the conſent of the Emperor. And not to prouoke the Emperour, he ſmothed this abrogation,
ſaying: that they aboue named without licence of
the Emperour, might chooſe the chiefe Biſhop: but conſecrate
or (as they call it) crowne him without the preſence of the Emperour,
or his vicar they could not.Anno 817 In the 817. yeere died Stephen,
and Don Alonſo the 2. ſurnamed the chaſt, then reigned in
Spaine.
            
               Paſcall the firſt following the ſteppes of Stephen,
               Paſcal 1. was Pope without conſent of the Emperour. without
conſent of the Emperour was elected Pope: and when the Emperour
complained of this election, he craftily cleared himſelfe.
Paſcal died in the 824.Anno 824. yeare. Don Alonſo thē reigning in Spain.
            
               Eugenius 2.Eugenius. 2. ſucceeded Paſcal, in whoſe time the 12. Siſme
betweene Eugenius & Zinzinus aroſe.The 12. Siſme. After Eugenius ſucceeded
Valentinus.
               Gregorie 4. And after Valentinus Gregorie the fourth.
            
               Gregorie 4.Confirmation of the Emperour. would not be Pope vntill the Emperour had confirmed
his election. He died in the 844. yeare. And D. Ramiro
the firſt then reigned in Spain.Anno 844.
            
            
               Sergius 2.Sergius 2. firſt changed his name. was the firſt Pope that changed his name: before
he was Pope he was called Swines-mouth. Lotharius the Emperour
ſen
                  •
               
               ▪ 
               Lewis his ſonne to Rome, to confirme the election
of this Pope. This confirmation the Popes expected vntil Adriā
               
3.Anno 847. ordained, that it ſhould not be reſpected. Sergius 2. died in
the 847. yeare, and Don Ordono then reigned in Spaine.
            
               Leo the fourth was the firſt that promiſed Paradiſe to ſuch as
in defence of the ſea Apoſtolike,Leo 4. promiſeth paradiſe▪
                would fight againſt the infidels.

He made a Decree that the Biſhop ſhold not be condemned
but by the teſtimonie of 72 witneſſes. He was the firſt
that againſt the Cannon of the Councell of Aquiſgrana,
               72 witneſſes to condemne a Biſhop. adorned
with precious ſtones his Croſſe Papall, and cauſed it to be
borne before him.The Papal croſſe. He gaue his feete to be kiſſed of the people,
and in the 847. yeare he diſpenſed with Ethelulpheus,
of a Monke to be made king of England.A Monke made king. For this benefite
commaunded the king,S. Peters pence in England. that each houſe in England ſhould
pay euery yeare to the Pope a penie, which they called Saint
Peters penie:Anno 855. ſixe of which pence make a Spaniſh Ryall. In the
855. yeare he died, and Don Alonſo the third then reigned in
Spaine.
            
               Iohn the eight,Iohn 8. a whore an Engliſh woman, or to ſpeake better, Ione alone
of that name, before called Gilbert, ſucceeded Leo the 4.
In her is plainly fulfilled without figure or allegorie, that which
Saint Iohn in the 17. chap. of his Reuelation ſaith of the whore
of Babylon: for ſhe was a woman and a whore. Such as liſt
to know her life, let them reade Platina vpon the life of Iohn
the eight. Sabel. En. 8. lib. Ʋolat. libr. 22. Berg. lib. 11. Boccace
of famous women. Faſcic. tempor. Mant. vpon Alphonſus lib.
3. Enchiridion ef times. Rodrigo Sanchez vpon Don Alonſo 3.
and Pero Mexia vpon the liues of the Emperours, and in his
Sylua variarum lection. where of her hee maketh one whole
chapter. This Pero Mexia was a man very ſuperſtitious, and
wholly a Papiſt, who procured what he might to quench the
light of the Goſpell, which at his time in S
                  •
               uill was kindled. He
greatly perſecuted the good Doctor Egidius,
               Adout the yeer 1550. or to ſay better,
Chriſt in Egidius and other his members. Notwithſtanding that
he was ſo great a Papiſt, yet could he not but ſpeake, & note ſo
ſo great an infamy & blow to the Church of Rome. For authors
of that he ſaith cōcerning this woman Pope, he citeth in his hiſtories
Martin, Platina, Sabellicus, S. Antonino. In the 9. ch. of his
Sylua thus ſpeaketh Pero Mexia. There is none almoſt but knoweth,
or hath read, or hard, that there was a womā Pope, which
went in mans apparell, but becauſe all men know not how this
thing hapned; and for that it was one of the wonderfull chances
that euer hapned in the world, I will here declare, as in faithfull
authors I find it written. There was a woman borne in England,

who with a man greatly learned liued in her youth a diſhoneſt
life, of whom being welbeloued, and he of her, taking
mans habite, and calling her ſelfe Iohn, ſhee left her natiue
countrie, and went with him to the citie of Athens in Grecia,
wherein at that time, was a great Vniuerſitie, and generall
ſtudie. With her excellent wit, and great ſtudie, ſhee there ſo
much learned, and attained ſuch knowledge, that ſome yeares
after ſhe came to the citie of Rome, alwayes in the habite of
a man, tooke the Chaire, and taught openly in which, and
in publike diſputations, ſhee caried ſuch eſtimation, that
ſhe was holden for the moſt learned man of that time: and
ſuch fauour and authoritie among all men obtained, that
the ſeate Apoſtolike by the death of Leo, the fourth of that
name being voyd, in the yeare of the Lord 852. ſuppoſed to
be a man,An. 852. Pope Ione was choſen. ſhe was choſen for chiefe Biſhop of Rome, and
Pope vniuerſall in the Church of God: and in that ſeat ruled
two yeares, and thirtie and ſo many dayes. And albeit placed
in this throne, yet liued ſhe not chaſtly, but vſed priuate familiaritie
with her ſlaue, in whom ſhe much truſted, and by
whom ſhe was great with child, yet ſo diligently ſhe cloaked
it, that no other but himſelfe knewe it. And as God
would not ſuffer ſo great wickedneſſe to reſt any longer vnpuniſhed:
ſo it happened, that vppon a day (being the time
of her child-birth) as ſhe went with accuſtomed pompe to viſite
Saint Iohn de Lateran: of a ſecrete ſinne it pleaſed God to
ſhew an open puniſhment: and comming to a certaine place
betweene the Church of Saint Clement, and the Theater,
which they call improperly Coliſeo, with extreme paine ſhee
brought forth a creature, to the wonderfull amazement of
thoſe that were preſent: and therewithall ſodainly died: and
without honour, or pompe was buried. For this ſo ſtrange accident,
in this place happened, it is commonly ſayd, that when
the chiefe Biſhops go ſithence to the Church of Lateran,
               The Pope turneth aſide, and the cauſe. comming
neere vnto it, they turne aſide & go not that way, in deteſtation
of ſo horrible a chance. And leſt happily another ſuch
like woman might worke the like deceit,A ſeat and for what cauſe. there is now in the ſacred
palace a ſeate, open below, that it may ſecretly be ſeene if
it be a man that is choſen.
            
               
The Romans now aſhamed at the ceremonie for which his
ſeate was inuented, call it a dunghill, & imploy it to other purpoſe.
Another like ſeat there is, or was if it be not thence taken,
in the Monaſterie de Monte Caſſino, where in olde time they
choſe many Popes. The ſame Author proceedeth. In that way
(ſaith he) is alſo a ſtatue of ſtone,A ſtatue in Rome of Pope Ione. repreſenting the child-birth
and death of this bold woman. Thus farre Pero Mexia. That
which he ſaith of the ſtatue, and the cauſe of it there being, is
moſt true.The ceremonie of the ſeat now not vſed, and the couſe. But it is to be vnderſtood, that the ceremony of the
ſeate, to knowe whether it be man or woman, is not now vſed:
becauſe thoſe which are choſen for Popes, haue ſo honeſtly liued,
that (wanting lawfull wiues) amongſt their concubines,
whores, and ſtrumpets which they keepe, and by whom they
haue had he or ſhe baſtards, they haue ſhewed themſelues to be
men.A rare example the father, ſon, & Grand-child Popes, & none of them either good or honeſt. 
               Sergius had a baſtared by a notable ſtrumpet called Marozia,
as ſaith Luithprandus an ancient Writer, in his ſecend
booke and thirteenth chapter, and in his third booke and
twelfth chapter. This ſonne of the Pope was Pope alſo called
Iohn the twelfth. This Iohn the twelfth had a baſtard which alſo
was Pope, called Iohn the fourteenth. Innocentius 8. had 8.
ſonnes, and as many daughters. But leauing out the auncient
let vs come to our later Popes. How manie hee and ſhe baſtards
had our Spaniſh Alexander the ſixth? Of Leo the tenth
it is ſayd, that he had baſtardes, and that Clement the ſeuenth
was his ſonne, of whom the Biſhop Paulus Iouius counteth
manie abominations. Paule the third had baſtardes, among
whom was one, and Pero Lewis his name, the moſt abominable
Sodomite of his time, and for the ſame was put to
death. Pope Gregorie the thirteenth, not long ſince deceaſed,
before and when he was Pope, had alſo baſtardes. Iohn
Pannonius giueth the like reaſon with vs in theſe verſes:

                  Non poterat quiſquam reſorantes aethera claues
                  Non exploratis ſumere teſticulis.
                  Cur igitur noſtro mos hic iam tempore ceſſat?
                  Antè probat ſeſe quilibet eſſe marem.
               
            
            The Church of Rome then hauing ſuch certaine proofes, a
ſeate now is not needfull: Friar Alonſo venero in his Enchiridion

of times, ſpeaking of the vnhappines of theſe times, ſaith
thus: What greater euil thē a woman by her ſubtiltie, & worldly
learning diſſembling her ſexe and nature, to vſurpe the Pontificall
ſeat of Chriſt? Friar Iohn de Pineda par. 3. lib: 18. cap. 23. ¶. 6
ſaith: This deede cauſed great admiration, that a woman did
dare to be the vicar of God, ſith the holy virgin Marie for being
a woman, is held irregular for any eccleſiaſticall act or holy
gouernment ſoeuer, &c. So long haue I dwelled vpō this hiſtorie
of Pope Ione, and with ſo many, to wit, 12 authors at the leaſt
confirmed it to confound ſome papiſts of our time; which ſeing
the diſorder of this Pope (this ſhee Pope I ſaie) becauſe the
Pope is oft of the common of two genders,The Pope is of the common of two genders, or els that is worſe the boubtfull. to auoide the ſame,
very maliciouſly denie any ſuch Pope to haue bin: and the
more to fortifie their vntrueth, they are not contented to ſpeak
but alſo to write, and print the ſame. Amongeſt whom Onuphrius
Panuinus of Saint Auguſtins order, as they call it, is one,
who among many other notes vpon Platina, concerning the
liues of the chiefe Biſhops, ſpeaking of this Pope Ione, maketh
one verie large note: wherein he abſolutely, or rather diſſolutely
denieth any ſuch Pope to haue bene. And his chiefeſt
argument drawne to confirme his opinion, is, that ſuch a one,
and ſuch, &c. writing of the liues of the chiefe Oiſhops, doe
not once mention this Pope Iohn. 8. whereupon it followeth as
he concludeth, that there was neuer any ſuch Pope. To this
I anſwer, that the Authors by him alleaged, either by forgetfulneſſe;
or ignorance, or which is more credible, mallice, or
elſe at leaſt for ſhame, haue made no mention of him. As a
Logitian, I further anſwer: that an argument taken ab authoritate
negando, is nothing worth. For example, Cicero vſed not
this word: therefore it is not Latine: but if any other Latine
authour, as Caeſar, Liuius, Saluſt, &c. vſed it, it ſhall be Latine,
though not vſed by Cicero. I now likewiſe anſwer, that albeit
thoſe Authors by him alleaged, make no mention of this Iohn
the eight: others and manie more, ſuch alſo as Pero Mexia
calleth faithfull Authours, haue done it. An argument taken
not ab authoritate negando, but affirmando is good. Of this Pope
Mautuan in his third booke vpon Alphonſus, ſpeaking of hell,
thither ſaith he Iohn the eight deſcended.
            
            
               Hic pendebat adhuc ſexum mentita virilem
               Foemina cuitriplici Phrygiam diademate mitram,
               Et tollebat apex, & pontificalis adulter.
            
            Here will we make to the Papiſts, and with much more reaſon,
the ſame demaunds, that we did, ſpeaking of Conſtantine
the ſecond. What will they ſay of thoſe Biſhops, Archbiſhops,
and other Eccleſiaſticall perſons, by her or her authoritie
ordained? Take away the cauſe, and the effect ceaſeth.
As ſhe by their owne Cannons was not Pope: ſo all thoſe that
ſhe ordained were not Prieſtes, nor did celebrate, nor conſecrate.
And all the people in hearing their Maſſe committed
idolatrie. Who then was head and vniuerſall Biſhop of
the Church? Who Saint Peters ſucceſſour? Who the Vicar
of Chriſt? A woman, and that a whore, both before ſhe
was Pope, and after. Pero Mexia hereof aduiſing, anſwereth:
that albeit neither ſhe, nor any other woman, be capable
to receiue any character of ordination, nor to ordaine,
nor abſolue anie, and thoſe which were ſo ordained, ought to
be againe ordained; yet the grace of the Sacrament did ſhe obtaine
for thoſe that with a good faith, by an inuincible ignorance
did receiue it. I anſwer, he deceiues himſelfe: for thoſe
are not Sacraments, which are not adminiſtred by thoſe whom
God hath ordained, albeit they haue many imperfections;
yea although they be hypocrites, as by the Prieſtes that liued
in the time of Ieſus Chriſt, appeareth: which, albeit they were
wicked, yet becauſe they were of the tribe of Leui, and ſo
outwardly called, their Sacrifices were Sacrifices, and their
Sacraments were Sacraments. And ſo the Lord and his Apoſtles,
when they found them ſacrificing and celebrating in
the Temple, held them for ſuch. Contrariwiſe the Sacrifices
which the Prieſtes of Ierohoam did offer, and the Sacraments
by them adminiſtred, were no Sacrifices, nor Sacraments,
becauſe they were not adminiſtred by thoſe of the
Tribe of Leuie, whome God himſelfe had ordained. Ione
then, being a woman (I ſay) was no Prieſt, and being no
Prieſt, had authoritie neither to ordeine nor yet to conſecrate
and therefore the Prieſtes by her authoritie ordained, were
not the Prieſtes of God, but of Ieroboam, or of Baal. And

(theſe I ſay) that receaued their ſacrament, had no ſounde
faith, for Faith is founded vpon the word of God. Faith (ſaith
the Apoſtle) commeth by hearing, and heariing by the word of
Chriſt.
               Rom. 20. 17. Other maner of conſolation and quietnes of conſcience
haue they, which beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt, euer was, is, and
ſhalbe the head and foundation of his Church, and that there
is no other head, nor foundation but he alone: as ſaith Saint
Paule 1. Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation (ſaith he) then that which is
Ieſus Chriſt, can no man lay, he onely is the foundation, he onely
is the head of his Church, whoſe Vicar generall is his Spirit,
as he himſelfe witneſſeth:Ioh. 14. 26. That Comforter, the holie Spirit,
whom the Father ſhall ſende in my name, he ſhall teache you
all thing
                  •
               s, and bring to your remembrance all that, whatſoeuer
I haue ſaid vnto you. Pero Mexia by a good faith, meaneth
that faith (as they call it) of the Collier.The faith of the Colliar. This Collier being
at point to die, a learned man (the diuell, ſay ſome others came
to tempt him) demanding of him what he beleeued. I beleeue
(anſwered he) that which the holy mother the church beleueth.
The deuill replying, and what beleeueth the Church? That (anſwered
the Collier) which I beleeue. And ſo often as the diuill
demanded, the veri
                  •
                ſame did the collier anſwer: For the poore
man knew not what he beleeued, much leſſe what the Church
beleeued. Of that ſort was he, which not knowing what they
beleeue, ſayd they beleeue in God, à pies Iuntillos, fully.
Hoſius Biſhop of Varmiens intreating in his third booke of, or
againſt the authoritie of holy ſcripture; doth hold it a very ſafe
thing to followe the example of this Colliar. Oh fearefull ignorance,
which ſhall not excuſe ſinne! God commaundeth to
reade, and ſearch the ſcriptures; and they will neither reade,
nor ſearch thē
               ▪ what excuſe wil they haue with their ignorance?
Saint Peter exhorteth,1. Pet. 3. 15. eu
                  •
               rie faithfull Chriſtian to be readie to
yeeld accompte of his hope: And who ſhall giue accompt of
his hope or faith that neither readeth, nor heareth the word of
God?Faith is compared to a lampe, and why. For knowe this, that as the wyke in a candle or Lampe
no longer burneth then oile continueth, no more alſo can faith
liue, but whiles it is nouriſhed with the word of God. He that
neither readeth nor heareth, nor meditateth vpon the worde
of God, what faith can he haue? that which they call fully to

bele
                  •
               ued in God: and that of the Colliar, which neither knewe
what the Church, nor he himſelfe beleeued. But returne we
now to our Pope Ione. The Emperour Lewes 2. ſonne of Lotharius,
in the time of this Ione, came to Rome; & at her handes,
receiued his ſepter, and crowne Imperiall, together (as they
call it) with Saint Peters bleſſing. In her time alſo Don Alonſo
the third reigned in Spaine, as Don Rodrigo Sanchez Biſhop
of Palencia deſcribing the life of Don Alonſo the third, ſaith: In
his time (ſaith he) at Rome ſate Leo the fourth, Iohn the eight,
Benedict the third, and Nicholas the firſt. And Don Alonſo of
Carthagena, ſpeaking in his Concurrence of this Don Alonſo
the third, ſaith: there was Leo the fourth, and Iohn the Engliſh.
            Pope Ione dying in ſort as before ſaid,Benedict. 3. 
               Benedict the third
was choſen. He was the firſt that ſate in holed ſeate, &c. The
cauſe why, vpon the life of Ione we haue before declared. Lewes
the Emperor ſent his Embaſſadours, to confirme this election.
At this time Don Alonſo the third raigned in Spain
                  •
               . The thirteenth
Siſme was betweene this Benedict. and Anaſtaſius: but
Anaſta
                     •
                  ſius renounced.The 13. Siſme.
            
            In the the preſence of Lewes the Emperour,Nicholas 1. 
               Nicholas the
firſt was choſen:The whole dri
                     •
                  t of this Pope to free himſelfe, & the Clergie from obedience to the Magiſtrate. but when the Emperour was departed out of
Italie, the Pope made many 
                  ••
               nſtitutions, and among others,
theſe. That the life of the Clergie ſhould not be iudged by the
Laytie: that none ſhould any way diſpute of the Popes authoritie:
That the Chriſtian magiſtrate had no authoritie ouer
the chiefe Biſhop: becauſe the chiefe Biſhop (ſay they) is called
God.The Pope called God. 
               Anton. tit. 16. The conſtitution, that the diuine office
ſhould be celebrate in Latine he renewed. Yet diſpenſed with
them of Slauonia,
               The diuine office in Latine. Blaſphemie. and Polonia, which did celebrate it in their
vulgar tongue. He ordeined that the conſtitutions of the Popes
ſhould be equall in authoritie with thoſe of the Apoſtles. The
Beaſtes hornes growe:Read aboue Siricius. very ſeuere was this beaſt, againſt
married Prieſtes. To which impietie, Huldricke Biſhop of Auguſta,
opoſed himſelfe,Gregorie 1. & afterwardes Paul 2. and Pius 2. and wrote an Epiſtle which excellently
ſhewed the curſed fruites of conſtrained ſingle life. The
ſumme whereof, ſpeaking of Gregorie the firſt, we haue before
declared. This Nicholas with other Biſhops forbad all faithfull

Chriſtians to heare Maſſe ſaid by a wenching Prieſt.The Maſſe of a wēching prieſt not be heard. If this
were obſerued, few Maſſes would be heard, becauſe the greateſt
parte of prieſtes,Anno 867. be wenchers. In the 867. yeare, dyed
Nicholas. In whoſe time in Spaine reigned Don Alonſo 3. and
Don Garcia his ſonne. After Nicholas ſucceeded Adrian 2. and
after Adrian, Iohn 9. whom others (omitting Ione) call Iohn 8.
            
               Martin 2.Martin 2. without conſent of the Emperour. by deceit, and wicked arts was made Pope, with
the ceremony of the ſeat, &c. and confirmed without any autho
                  •
               itie
or conſent of the Emperor. For now the hornes of the
Popes were growne, and of the Emperour they nothing eſteemed,
he dyed in the yeare 884.Anno. 884.
            
            
               Adcian 3.Adrian 3. being Pope made a decree, that in the election
of the chiefe Biſhop, the Emperour ſhould not be regarded: but
that the Clergie & people of Rome, might freely make choiſe,
without any confirmation at all of the Emperour. Thus loſt the
Emperour his right in Rome.The Emperour loſt his right in Rome. and in the choiſe of the chiefe
Biſhop. And by reaſon of the Emperours then warres with the
Normans, the Pope ſwayed the matter. Adrian dyed in the
885.885. yeare. In whoſe time Don Garcia reigned in Spaine.
            
               Stephen the 5.Stephen. 5. (or 6.) was the firſt (ſaith Gracian dict. 16. cap.
Enimuerò) that commanded al men of neceſſitie to obſerue the
ſtatute of the Roman Church.The ſtatutes of the Church of Rome neceſſary to ſaluation. In the 891. yeare he died. In
whoſe time Don Alonſo 4. reigned in Spaine.
            
               Formoſus being Biſhop,Anno 891. was depoſed, and ſworne neuer to
be ſo againe,Formoſus. Money is the holy ſpirite that chooſeth the Pope. of which oath made to Iohn 9. Martin 2. for m
                  •
               
               ney
abſolued him. Stephen 6. being dead, Formoſus by giftes
obteyned the Popedome; albeit Sergius, who ſought to haue
had it, did greatly withſtand him: but Formoſus with his faire
giftes preuailed. This was the holy ſpirit that did choiſe him. In
the 895.Anno 895. yeare dyed Formoſus, Don Alonſo 4. then reigning
in Spaine.The 14. Siſme. Sergius 3. The 14. Siſme wherein Sirgius 3. was elected againſt
Formoſus. But vnable to ſtriue further, renounced, & was baniſhed.
Formoſus being dead,Boniface 6. 
               Boniface 6. was choſen, who continewed
Pope 15 dayes. Don Alonſo 4. reigned in Spaine.
            
               Stephen 6.Stephen 6. (or 7.) was vngratefull to Formoſus, that had made
him Biſhop, whom he ſo much abhorred, that being Pope, he
not contented himſelfe to diſanull and make voyd all whatſoeuer
Formoſus had don
                  •
               , ſaying: that he was not lawful nor truly

Pope: but afterwards condemned him in a Councell which
he held.A cruel Pope. After he was condemned; he cauſed him to be vnburied,
and being vntombed, taking from him all his pontificall
ornaments, & clothing him in ſecular habite, did diſgrade him:
he cauſed the 2 fingers of his right hand,Sergius 3. did yet intreat him worſe. which the prieſts vſe
chiefely in conſecration, to be cut off, and caſt into Tyber. The
very ſame almoſt, did Paſcal 2. to the body of Clement 3. Herein
did he not imitate Chriſt, who commanded to pardon iniuries,
and to do good to them that hate vs; but Silla, who for the great
hatred he bare him, cauſed Marius to be vntōbed. Platina vpon
the life of this Stephen, ſaith: that he raiſed hereby an euill ſlaunder
and example to his ſucceſſors:Pope againſt Pope, & Councell againſt Councell. for the Popes afterwardes,
did vſually diſanul that, which their predeceſſors dad ordeined:
yea albeit by a Councell confirmed, by authoritie of another
Councell they made it fruſtrate.Romanus. And ſo did Romanus ſucceſſour
of Stephen condemne all whatſoeuer Stephen had done,
and reſtored to his honour Formoſus. The ſame did Theodor 2.
and Iohn 10. or 9. Theſe Popes ſaith Platina, were monſters, or
to ſpeake better diuels in carnate. Iohn 10. held a Councell of
74. biſhop, wherin he iuſtified Formoſus, & condēned Stephen 7.
Note here, that frō the 891. yere to the 903. which was 12. years
were 10 Popes.10. Popes in 1 yeares. 
               Formoſus, Sergius 3. Boniface 6. Stephen 7. Romanus
Theodorus 2. Iohn 10. Sergius 3. againe. Benedict 4. Leo 5▪
               Chriſtopher.
               Sergius was 3 times Pope. S
                     •
                   alſo was afterward Benedic
                     •
                  . 9. And laſtly Sergius 3. whom in this catalogue haue
we three times named. For thriſe was he Pope, the 1. & 2. time
depoſed, but the third time truly, becauſe he caried away the
matter. In the firſt time that Sergius was Pope, was the 14.
Siſme, and in the ſecond,The 15. Siſme. the 15. Siſme in the 897. yeare dyed
Stephen 7.Anno 897. And Don Alonſo 4. reigned in Spaine. Plati
                     •
                  a ſpeaking
of Benedict.
               Benedict. 4. 4. ſaith: that when the Church through wealth
began to wax wanton,Platina calleth the Popes monſters. and wanted a Prince to bridle the villanies
of the Clergie, then libertie to ſinne brought forth theſe
monſters, and intolerable burthens. This honorable teſtimony
of him giueth Platina.
            
            
               Leo 5.Leo 5. being Pope liued in great troubles. For one Chriſtopher
whō he had brought vp & aduanced,Chriſtopher. not without great bloudſhed,
as noteth Platina, tooke & caſt him into priſon, & by that
meanes made himſelfe Pope, whoſe violence, ingratitude, and

wicked artes, were the holy ſpirite that did choſe him. But
Sergius 3. ayded by Marozia his ſtrumpet, of whom he had a
ſonne,Sergius 3. that after his father was Pope (as Luithprandus in his
hiſtorie,Lib. 2. cap. 13. doth witneſſe) depoſed the Pope, put him into a monaſterie,
and by the helpe of his Marozia,
               Lib. 3. cap. 12. a famous and notable
whore, made himſelfe Pope. This Sergius 3: was competitor
with Formoſus in the Popedom: but Formoſus (as vpon Formoſus
we haue ſaid) preuailing, Sergius wēt into France. From whēce
returning, he ſo intreated Chriſtopher as afore is declared.
            When Sergius was made Pope he called to mind the iniuries
receiued of Formoſus,
               A cruell Pope. and thirſting for reuenge, vntombed his
body, that had eight yeares bene buried, made ſhewe to kill
him as though he had bene liuing, cut off the three fingers
which Stephen had left, and moreouer, his body as vnworthy
of Chriſtian buriall, he caſt into Tyber. And notwithſtanding
that Formoſus had by three Popes bene approued: yet did he
condemne whatſoeuer Formoſus had done, & ordeined a new
all thoſe by Formoſus ordeined. Behold here, how Stephen and
Sergius condemned Pope Formoſus:
               That which 3. 
               Romanus, Theodorus & Iohn
approued him,Popes approue 2. Popes condemne. and all that he did. In theſe Popes time, Don
Ramiro 2. reigned in Spaine.
            
               Anaſtaſius 3.897. ſucceeded Sergius 3. in whoſe time hiſtories report,
that certaine fiſhermen in Tyber,
               Anaſtaſius. found the body of Formoſus:
they ſay further, that when his body was buried in the
Church of S. Peter, the Images of the Church did ſalute him &
doing him certaine reuerence, gaue him the welcome. Monſtrous
is this lie: or if it be true, the diuell, the more to blind the
people with ſuperſtition,
                  
                     •
                  . Theſ. 2 9. Anno. 913. Lando. and deceit, cauſed that motion: For
Antichriſt (as ſaith S. Paul) ſhall come with lying wonders. In
the 913. yere died Anaſtaſius, & D. Ordono 3. reigned in Spaine.
            
               Lando as ſaith Petrus Premoſtratenſis had a ſonne in adultry
before he was Pope, which alſo was Pope, and called 
                  
                     •
                  ohn 11.
or 10. of wicked life was this Lando, he was Pope but 6. moneths
& 22. daies, & therfore by ſome not counted among the Popes.
            
               Iohn 11.Iohn 11. (or 10. ſucceeded his father Lando; another ſuch
or rather worſe then he, for he was Pope 14. yeares. Platina ſaith
that he was the ſonne of Sergius 3. whoſe life, Luithprandus
which then liued, noteth to be wicked. At this time Theodora, a

ſhameles ſtrumpet, is ſaid to haue commaunded in Rome: two
daughters ſhe had, Marozia, and Theodora; and if the mother
were a notable whore, the daughters were more notable. Of
this Iohn, before he was Pope, was the mother enamored, and
by his ſtrumpets meanes, was he firſt made Biſh. of Bologna, &
afterwardes Archbiſhop of Rauenna: during which time, the
Pope dyed.A whore maketh her louer Pope. Now Theodora ſeeing this occaſion, and vnwilling
to remayne ſo far remote from her louer, for that Reuenna, was
200 miles diſtant frō Rome, ſhe cauſed him to leaue his Archbiſhoprick,
and made him Pope. The ſame Luithprandus in the
12. chap. of his 3. booke, reciteth the miſerable end of this Iohn.
And thus it is, Marozia his daughter in law (ſay we) the daughter
of Theodora, intending to make Pope his ſonne Iohn 12. the
ſon alſo of Pope Sergius 3. cauſed him to be taken, & with a pillow
laid ouer his mouth, to be murthered. But as thē could it not
be;Leo 6. for Leo 6. was choſen, who liued but 7. moneths, and dyed
(as they ſay) of poyſon giuen him by Marozia,
               Poyſon. to make her
baſtard to be Pope. Yet fayled he at this time alſo, and Stephen
the 7.Stephen 7. (or the 8.) was elected,930. who many yeares enioyed not
his biſhopdom.poyſoned. In the 930. yeere, not without ſuſpition of poyſon,
he dyed. And D. Sancho 1. then reigned in Spaine.
            
               Iohn 12.Iohn 12. (or 11.) was the baſtard ſon of Sergius 3. and of Marozia
that ſhameles whore,Lib. 3. cap. 12. as Luithprandus calleth her. Platina
ſuppoſeth that this Iohn and Iohn 11. were brothers, the ſonnes
of Sergius 3.The Church of Rome gouerned by a whore 
               Marozia, the mother of this Pope in her ſonnes
time alſo, as before, both in the temporalty, and ſpiritualty (as
noteth Luithprandus) gouerned the Roman Church. In the 935.935.
yeare he dyed. And Ra
                     •
                  iro 3. then reigned in Spaine. After
Iohn, Leo 7. Stephen 9. Martin 3. Agapetus & Iohn 13. ſucceeded.
            
               Iohn 13.Iohn 13. a moſt filthy and wicked man. (or 11.) of all the Popes before his time, was the greateſt
villaine. Fryar Iohn de Peneda in his eccleſiaſticall monarchie
pag. 3. lib. 19 calleth him Iohn the ſinner, and in the ¶1. he
ſaith: An infernall monſter in his liuing, the ſonne of Alberto a
mightie Roman, ſucceeded Agapeto, who with requeſts, money
and threates, cauſed his ſonne called Octauian to be choſen, and
after being Pope he was called Iohn. And a little lower, he was
of curſed life, in cruelties and huntings, & moſt vnhoneſt luſtes,
&c. who liſteth to know his villanies, let him read Luithprandus
               
from the 6. ch. of the 6. book vnto the 11. In a Synod at Rome,
& preſence of the Emperour Otho 4, he was accuſed for not recititing
his howers:The Pope accuſed in the Councell of enormious abhominations. that ſaying Maſſe he did not communicate:
that he ordained Deacons in a ſtable, that he had committed
inceſt with two ſiſters: to make him win at dice-play, that he
had inuocated diuels: that for money he made younglings Biſhops,
defloured maidens: turned his ſacred palace to a ſtewes:
lyen with Stephana his fathers concubi
                  •
               e: and with the widdow
Reynera, and with another widdow called Anna, and with his
neece: that he had made his Confeſſor blind: that he went publikely
a hunting: that he went armed, that he had cauſed fire to
be kindled: that he had broken downe doores and windowes
in the night ſeaſon: that in wine he had drunke to the diuel. &c.
for theſe and other like abhominatious he was depoſed in the
Romane Councell,Iohn 13. depoſed in the Coū
                  cell at Rome. Leo. 8. and Leo 8. choſen. But when the Emperour
was departed, thoſe wicked women, with whom he accompanied,
incited the Nobility of Rome, by promiſing thē the treaſures
of Rome, to receiue Iohn for Pope, & (which they did) to
thruſt out Le
                     •
                  .
               The Emperour to be crowned in Rome. This Pope Iohn ordeined that the Emperor thēce
forth ſhould be crowned by the Pope in Rome. The end of this
curſed Pope was this.Anno 964. In the yeare 964. & 10. yere of his biſhopdom,
he was ſtabbed to death by the husband of one, with whō
he was taken in adulterie. The diuel (ſaith Luithprandus in his 6.
booke & 11. ch.) did ſo wound him, in the verie act of adultery,
that within 8 dayes after he died.The husband found the Pope in the act of adultery and killed him. It may be that the husbād was
arrayed in figure of a diuell to kill the Pope. Read this hiſtorie,
ô ye Spaniards, & behold what a one is the Pope, for whom ye
wontedly hazard your goods, honors & liues. God for his mercies
ſake, & the honor of his ſon Chriſt Ieſus giue you the grace
to know him. In the time of this diſſolute & carnall Pope, the
married Prieſts in England were caſt out of the Cathedrall
Churches: & Don Bermudo reigned in Spaine. In the yeare 963.
betweene Leo and Benedict was the 16. Siſme.
            
               Iohn 13.The 16. Ciſme. Benedict. 5. being dead, through partiality Benedict 5. was elected:
but Otho the Emperor came to Rome, & cōpelled the Romans
to deliuer vp Benedict 5.Leo 8. once againe Pope. & receiue againe Leo, whom they
had caſt frō the Popedome. Which benefit receiued of the Emperour,
Leo eftſoones Pope acknowledging, made a ſynodall
decree wherin he tooke away from the Clergie and people of

Rome, the authority to make the Pope, giuen thē (as ſaith Gracian)
by Charles the great, & gaue it to the Emperour, & adnulled
the Law,The Emperour chooſeth the Pope. made by Adrian againſt him. This did Leo to auoyd ſeditions
that wontedly hapned, in the elections of the Popes: &
the Emperor reſtored vnto him that which Conſtantine (they ſay)
had giuen to the Pope,Pope againſt Pope. or rather that which Pipin & Charles (taking
it frō the Lombards) gaue thē. In the 965. yeare died Leo.
At what time in Spaine reigned Alonſo 5.Anno 965. who woūded with an
arrow which was ſhot by a Moore, at theſiege of Viſeo, died.
            
               Iohn 14. or 13. ſon of Pope Iohn 12. was againſt his enemies
extremely cruel,Iohn 14. a cruell tyrant as by one Peter, a chiefe Magiſtrate in Rome
appeareth. Frier Ioh. de Pin. par. 3. lib. 19. cap. 11. ¶. 1. concerning
him, ſaith: The Pope cauſed a certaine gouernor to be hanged
one day by the haires, ſet naked vpō a horſe of the Emp. Conſtaſtantine,
& afterwards ſet him to tide vpon an aſſe, with his face
backward, & a beaſts skin vpō his head, to be whipped through
the citie: afterwards to be put in priſon, and laſtly baniſhed into
Almaine. He more reſembled Phalaris, Dionyſius, Nero, & other
ſuch tyrants,The bell of S. Iohn de Laterane was the firſt that was baptized. thē Chriſt, who cōmands vs to loue & do good to
our enemies. He it was that baptiſed the great bell of S. Iohn de
Lateran, & gaue it his name: frō whence ſprang the cuſtome to
baptize and giue names vnto bels. In the 972 yeare he died.
            
               Donus 2.Anno 972. ſucceeded Iohn 14. he was Pope onely 3 moneths
whō 
               Benedict 6.Donus 2. or 5. not counting the 5. which was made in the
Siſme,Benedict 6. a notable villaine Anno 954. ſucceeded. For his villanies was he caſt into priſon, where
he was ſtrangled: or (as ſay his friends) at cōmandement of his
ſucceſſor Boniface he died of hunger. Alonſo 5. then reigning in
Spaine.The 17. Siſme. Between Boniface & Benedict 6 or 7. was the 17. Siſme.
            
               Boniface 7.Boniface 7. a cruell Pope. through wicked artes made himſelfe Pope, but a
ſmal time cōtinued; for the Romans cōſpired againſt him, who
ſeing himſelf vnable to preuaile, robbed al the treaſure found in
the church of S. Peter, & therwithal went to Conſtantinople wherof
making ſale, after ſome moneths, with much ſiluer he returned
to Rome: whiles he was abſent from Rome, the Romanes
made pope Iohn 15.Iohn 15. or 14. but Boniface with his money corrupted
the Romans, & ſo they turned to receiue him for Pope, who
eftſoons being Pope,Cruelty. impriſoned Iohn the fifteenth, pulled out
his eyes,Anno 976. and famiſhed him to death. In the 976. yeare died

               Boniface, after he had bene Pope 9 yeares and more. Of him
ſaith Friar Iohn de Pineda part. 3. lib. 19. cap. 15. ¶. 1. Boniface but
a while liued after that he returned to the ſeate, and ſodainely
died; towards whom, the Romanes ſhewed the loue which
they bare him, taking his dead body, and giuing it a thouſand
blowes and woundes, they drewe it, tied by the heeles to the
ſtreete of Saint Iohn de lateran, and there left it to the dogs, &c.
Quien tal haze, q̄ talpague. Such deed (ſaith the spaniſh prouerb)
ſuch paiment. Benedict 6. or 7. ſucceeded him, and then reigned
in Spaine Bermudo 3.
            Such were the deedes of Pope Iohn.
               Iohn. 16 (or. 15.) that he
was abhorred of the Clergie and people of Rome. He gaue
without diſcretion, all to his kindred, which error (ſay Platina
and Eſtella) we ſee vnto our time continueth.Anno 995. He died in the 995
yeere: at what time Don Bermudo 3. reigned in Spaine. Iohn
17.Iohn 17. ſucceeded Iohn 16. and the ſame yeere, after he had bene
pope only 4. monethes, died.
            
               Gregorie 5. being an Alman, by authoritie of the Emperour
Otho 3.Gregory 5. was made Pope. But when the Emperour was returned
into Almaine, the Clergie and people of Rome depoſing Gregorie
made Iohn 18.18 Siſme. (or. 17.) Pope. Gregorie retired to the
Emperour,Anno 996 who offended with the Romans, came againſt them
and tooke Rome:Iohn. 18. he tooke alſo Pope Iohn, pulled out his eies,
& ſo the Pope which with his ſtore of mony had corrupted the
Romans to make him pope,The Popes eies pulled out. died, Mantuan. 3. Calamitatum
lib. thus ſpeaketh:
            
               Pernicies mercantur equos, Venalia Romae
               Templa, ſacerdotes, altaria, ſacra, Coronae
               Ignes, thura, preces, coelum eſt venale, deus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  .
            
            As much to ſay, as all things are ſold at Rome, be they holy or
profane, and euen God himſelf. Platina calleth this Iohn a thiefe
who dying as afore is ſaid, Gregorie returned to be Pope: he
appointed that thenceforth the Princes of Germanie (namely
the 3 Archbiſhops of Maguntia,
               7. Electors of the Empire. 
               Treuir and Cullen, the Countie
Palatine of Rhine, the duke of Saxonie, the Marques of Brandenburg,
and the king of Boheme, who then alſo was not king,
ſhould chooſe the Emperour, and ſo the Empire was tranſlated
into Germany.Anno 998. In the 998 (or after ſome 997) yeere Pope Gregory
               
died. And ſome count not Iohn 18. for Pope.
            
               Sylueſter 2. euen frō his youth gaue himſelfe to inchātments
& witcherie,Sylueſter 2. an inchanter. who vnderſtanding that in Seuill dwelled a Moore
and great maiſter in that Arte; with the great deſire he had to
be perfect alſo therin himſelfe, he left France, his natiue countrie
went to Seuil, and there abode with the Moore. And now ſeing
himſelfe ſkilfull he returned into Fraunce, carrieng with him
a booke wonderfull in that arte; which by the meanes of the
Moores daughter with whome Sylueſter had abuſed himſelfe
he ſtole from his Maiſter. This Sylueſter the better to effect his
Inchantments, made a couenant with the deuill offering him
his body and Soule, conditionally; that the diuell ſhould helpe
him to attaine to great dignities, returned into Fraunce: with
greate applauſe taught he the liberal Artes, notable diſciples he
had, by whoſe meanes he was made biſhop of Remes, and afterwards
by wicked artes, Archbiſhop of Rauenna: In the end,
by the aide of the deuill, in the 999. yeere, he came to be Pope.
who liſteth to know his holy life, let him read Platina, Sabel. En. 9
lib. 2. Volat. lib. 22. Berg. lib. 12. Faſcic. Temp. Pet. Premoſtrat. and
Benon. And particularly Frier Iohn de Pineda, par. 3. lib. 19. cap. 15.
¶. 5. & 6▪ a very late writer, and he ſhal ſee, if I ſpeake truely or
no. Whiles he was Pope, he concealed his arte: but in priuate he
could not forget his old friendſhip which he had with the diuel.
A copper head had he in ſecret, which alwayes gaue him anſwer
of that he demanded of the diuell. This Pope vpon a time,
luſting to know how long he ſhould be Pope, demaunded the
ſame of the diuell: who doubtfully anſwering (as he wontedly
doth) told him he ſhould not die, vntill he had ſayd Maſſe in Ieruſalem.
This hiſtorie reporteth S. Antonino, Frier Iohn de Pineda,
& others. At this anſwer the Pope much reioiced: & neuer purpoſed
to go to the city of Ieruſalem. It was a cuſtome in Rome,
that on a certaine day in Lent,The diuell deceiueth the Pope with the Maſſe. the Pope ſhould ſay Maſſe in the
church of the holy Croſſe, called Ieruſalem: where Sylueſter forgetfull
of the diuels deceits, did celebrate his Maſſe: and was
forth with taken with a great feuer. The Pope then (ſaith Petrus
Premoſtratenſis) by the roring of the diuels, knowing his end to
be come: being in theſe ſorrowes, he beſought them (ſaith Benon)
to cut off his hands, & tongue, &c. Behold here if the Pope

can erre. Note what maner of vicaredge is that of the Pope, ſeeing
many attained it by wicked, & deuilliſh arts. Learne heere
(ô Spainards) what a thing is the Maſſe ſeeing with it the deuill
mo
                  •
               keth & deceiueth, as in this Sylueſter we haue ſeen. Be wiſe
now ye Spainards: For long time vpon earth haue the Pope &
Maſſe bene your god. Nowithſtanding that ſuch a one was Sylueſter
2. one Iulius Roceus, Genebrardus, Panuinus & Illeſcas, the
Popes great paraſites affirme, that he was no Magitian, but a
moſt wiſe Mathematitian, &c. Speake the truth although it be
bitter: God, to aduance his holy catholike faith, hath no need
of your lies. Don Bermudo 3. at this time raigned in Spaine.
            
               Iohn Siccus 19. or after ſome (who count not of Iohn 8. being
a womā,Iohn 19. nor Iohn 18. being Antipope) the 17. by the ſame means
& help of the diuel, that had his predeceſſor, ſucceeded Silueſter
in the Popedome: & as the diſciple of ſuch a maiſter, cōmanded
that the feaſt of the ſoules in Purgatorie,The feaſt of the ſoules in purgatorie inſtituted by Iohn 19. the day following the
feaſt of all Saints, ſhould be celebrated. This Pope affirmed, that
he hard the grones, which the deuils gaue whē by vertue of the
Maſſes, & praiers for the dead, the ſoules ſnatched at thē. At this
time (ſaith Baconthorpius) began the name of Cardinal to be had
in eſtimation.Cardinals. This Iohn. 19. took away the voyce of the Roman
people in the election of the Pope,The people of Rome loſt their voyce. ſaying, that the people were
to be taught, & not to be followed: and that of greater dignitie
is the law which by the holy ſpirit is gouerned, then that of the
ſecular law.Anno 1003. In the yeere 1003. not hauing fiue moneths bene
Pope, he died, and Don Bermudo 3. then reigned in Spaine.
            
               Iohn 20.Iohn 20. (or 18.) by wicked Arts was made Pope. And it is to
be noted (as alſo noteth Cardinal Benon) that all the Popes being
18. ſucceſſiuely from Sylueſter 2. vntill Gregorie 7. (no leſſe
a villaine then an Inchanter) were Inchanters. The doctrine of
Purgatorie in the time of this Iohn 20.18 Popes inchanters, in whoſe time the doctrin of Purgatory increaſed. (by meanes of falſe apparitions
of wicked ſpirits, which cryed, groned ſhriked, & complayned
of the great torments they endured in Purgatorie: ſaying
they were the Soules of ſuch and ſuch, and deſiring ſo
many Maſſes, and ſo many trentals to be ſaid for them) did grely
increaſe. The ſimple poore people beleeued that which
they ſaid, to bee truth and drewe the money from their purſes,
wheate from their barnes, the wine from their cellars, and

the waxe from their hiues,Purgatorie. and offered them for the ſoules
in Purgatorie. But who eateth and drinketh the ſame? not the
ſoules; but the Preiſts, and Friars, their concubines and children.
A poore old woman watched early and late to ſpinne,
and ad farthing to farthing, for a Maſſe to be ſaid for the ſoule
of her husband, brother or ſon: ſhe forbare to eate, and gaue
it vnto knaues. All theſe viſions or apparitions they made by
the Arte of the deuill. Iudge (Lord) thine owne cauſe: deliuer
the poore people from the handes of theſe Inchaunters, falſe
prophets and deceiuers. Open thine eies (ô Spaine) and ſee,
beleeue him that with great loue doth aduiſe thee. Behold
whether this that I ſay be true or no:Anno 1009. 
               Iohn 20. of poyſon (as ſome
ſay) in the 1009.Poyſon. yeare died. & Don Fernando 1. then reigned in
Caſtile & Leons.Sergius 4. an inchanter. 
               Sergius 4. a Roman by the accuſtomed waies
in his time had the Biſhopdome: albeit Platina and Eſtella, the
Popes paraſites,Prognoſtications. affirme him to haue bene a holy man. The Sun
in his time was darkened, the Moone in ſhew like bloud, famin
& peſtilence were in Italy, & the water of a certaine fountaine
in Lorena was turned into bloud. All theſe were prognoſtications
& moſt certain ſigns of Gods wrath, for the idolatry which
then reigned.Anno 1012. 
               Sergius died in the 1012. yeare. Benedict 7. or 8. ſon
of Gregorie Biſhop of Porta,Benedict 8. an inchanter. a lay man, by the aid of his nephew
Theophilact, a great inchanter, and diſciple of Sylueſter 2. which
learned his nigromancy in Seuill (as in his life before we haue
declared) was made Pope. This Theophilact proued very expert
in his art:Theophilact. an inchanter. ſo that ſacrificing to the diuel in woods & moūtaines,
he cauſed by his ſorcery (ſaith Cardinal Benon) that women enamored
of him, left their houſes & followed him: ſuch a one as
he was, he was afterwad Pope. Whileſt Henrie Banare the Emperour
liued, this Benedict was Pope quietly; but the Emperour
once dead, the Cardinals diſpoped him, & placed another in his
room, but afterward appeaſed with mony, which Benedict gaue
them, they inthronized him againe, & caſt out the Antipope.
This was the 19 Siſme.The 19. Siſme. Of this Benedict reporteth Pet. Damianus.
& the ſame alſo reciteth Antoninus,
               Anno 1024. Frier Iohn de Pinedapar. 3.
lib. 19. cap. 17. ¶. 3. & others, that a horſeman on a blacke
                  •
               horſe
(after his death) appeared to a Biſhop his verie friend. The
Biſhop appalled with the viſion, demaunded, ſaying:

What, art not thou Pope Benedict, that lately died? I am the
ſame that thou ſayeſt, ſayd Benedict. The Biſhop demanded: Father
how doeſt thou? Grieuouſly tormēted, anſwered the pope,
but I may well be holpen. Go then & tell my brother, the now
pope, that he giue to the poore the treaſure in ſuch a place hidden.
Moreouer he appeared to the pope his brother, ſaying: I
hope I ſhall be deliuered.Purgatorie confirmed with falſe apparitiōs. Oh wold God Odilus Cluniacenſis wold
pray for me. See here how the diuel dalied with men, to confirm
their Maſſe & purgatory. Benedict in the 1024. yeare died, and
Fernando 1.Anno 1024. reigned in Caſtile and Lyons.
            
               Iohn 21.Iohn. 
                     •
                  21. an inchanter. or 19. was pope by the ſame means that his brother
was:The Pope a lay man. to wit, by the means of Theophilact his nephue, the great inchanter.
This Iohn being a lay man without any orders receiued
was made pope. In the 1032. yeare he died. And Don Fernando
1.Anno. 1032. in Caſtile and Lyons reigned.
            
               Theophilact the great inchanter,Benedict. 9. an inchanter. of whō we haue made mention,
after the death of his two vncles, Benedict 8. & Iohn 21. by
his wicked arts was made Pope, & called himſelfe Benedict 9. or
8.The Popeſold his popedome for 1500. 
                     •
                  . The Cardinals Laurentius & Ioh. Gracianus his diſciples, and
great nigromancers, he made great account. So skilful wer they
in Nigromancie, that they knew what paſſed in the Eaſt, Weſt,
North & South. Many thought thēſelues happy to be their diſciples.
Out of this curſed ſchoole iſſued that curſed Hildebrand
(who being Pope called himſelfe Gregory 7.) and as ſaith Cardinal
Benon, wrought ſo great miſchief. This Benedict 9. fearing
Henry the Emperor, for 1500. 
                  •
               . ſold his Popedome to l. Gracian.
his companion, who called himſelf Gregory 6. For this ſale (ſaith
Platina) was Benedict of all accuſed,Gregorie 6. & by diuine iudgement cō
               demned.
And why was he not ſo, for his fornications, adulteries,
idolatries, nigromancies, inchantmēts, exorciſmes, inuocations
of diuels, & other abominations? Thus was his end, he was ſtrā
               gled
by a diuel. Hiſtories report, namely Martiniana, Iohn de Col.
S. Anthonin. Ioh. de Pineda & others, that this Theophilact or Benedict
appeared after his death to a certain Hermit, in a very fearful
figure: for in his body was he like a beare: & his taile & head
like an aſſe,A fearful figure & being demanded of the Hermit, how he became
ſo fearful? he anſwered (ſay they) becauſe in my popedō I liued
without law, without God, & for defiling the Romā ſeat with al

kind of filthineſſe.Cardinals. The name of Cardinal in his time very highly
climbed.Anno 1034. In the 1034. or after others 1032. died Benedict 9.
of whom note more vpon Sylueſter 3. Don Fernando 1. then
reigned in Spaine.
            After that Benedict 9. had ſold his Popedome. Sylueſter 3. by
bribes was made Pope:Sylueſter. 3. albeit others labored for Iohannes Gracianus,
vnto whō for mony, Benedict had renounced the Popedome:
in the end was Sylueſter Pope, albeit no more but 49.
dayes. For to ſuch a ſtate (ſaith Platina) the Biſhopdome then
came, that who ſo could do moſt with money and ambition (I
ſay not with holineſſe of life and doctrine, the good being ſuppreſſed
and caſt aſide) he only obtained the Popedome. Would
God ſuch cuſtoms were not in our time vſed. But this is nothing
worſe things then thoſe ſhal we ſee, if God put not to his hand.
Hitherto Platina. Otho Frinſingenſis, Godfridus Viterbienſis, and
other Anthours report three Popes to haue bene in the time of
Benedict.
               The 20. Siſme of three Popes together in Rome. 9. and all of them in Rome Benedict 9. Sylueſter 3. Gregorie
6. Benedict held his ſeat in the Pallace of Lateran, the other
held his in S. Peters,
               Gregorie. 6. and the third held his in S. Maries the great.
Henry the Emperour hearing of theſe ſeditions,The Emperour called a Coūcel wherein three Popes are depoſed. came to Rome,
and held a Councell, wherein the ſaid three Popes were condemned,
and a fourth choſen whom they called Clement the
ſecond. Theſe three great villaines did not the Emperour puniſh
as he ought,Clement 2. but only (as ſaith Bennon) chaſed Theophilact
from Rome, caſt Gregorie into priſon, whom iointly with Hildebrand
he baniſhed into Germanie: and cauſed Sylueſter to returne
to his Biſhopricke of Sabina. Note that this Bendict 9. was
three times Pope:Benedict 9. was 3. times Pope as was alſo before him Sergius 3. the firſt, he caſt out Sylueſter, and was depriued:
the ſecond, Clement 2. being dead, and was depriued: the
third, after the death of Damaſus the ſecond: he was Pope by
times (as writeth Platina) the ſpace often years, foure moneths,
and nine dayes. The like happened to Sergius 3. who in the
yeare 897.Anno 1045. was three times Pope. In the 1045. yeare was Sylueſter
depriued, and Don Fernando 1. reigned in Spaine.
            In the Councel of Rome after the ſaid three Popes were depoſed,Clement. 2.
               Clement 2. an Almaine, by commandement of the Emperour
was choſen. He crowned the Emperour Henry, and cauſed
the Romans by an oth to renounce their right in election of

the Pope. For cofirmation of this renunciation, I will here declare
what Frier Iohn de Pin. pa. 3. lib. 19. cap. 24 ¶2. Blundus (ſaith
he) holdeth, that Clement 2. for the auoyding of Siſmes, depriued
the Romans of the election of the Popes. But Crancius & Saxus
ſay, that in the Sutrian Councell it was forbidden them, and
granted to the Emperour. And Naucterus and Sigebertus write
that Henrie the Emperour bound the Romanes by an oth, not
to intermeddle with the Popes elections. Thus farre Pineda.
The Romanes not regarding their oth, after the Emperours
departure from Rome, poyſoned the Pope: whereof, hauing
bene Pope nine moneths,Poyſon. he died. Stephen (they ſay) who ſucceeded
him in the Biſhopdome, and called himſelfe Damaſus
the ſecond, prepared for him the poiſon. Don Fernando 1. reigned
in Spaine.
            
               Damaſus the ſecond of Bauara,Damaſus 2. without conſent either of
the Clergie, or people of Rome, by force held the Popedome.
For then (as ſaith Platina) was the cuſtome,The cuſtome to make Popes. that he which moſt
could, he had the Popedome. But he enioyed not his biſhopprick,
ſo ambitiouſly gotten, but 23 dayes, for he was poiſoned.
The cauſe therof was,Poiſon. that there was thē in Rome a man called
Gerardo Brazuto,
               Six Popes one after another poyſoned. who vſing a certaine deceitfull kind of friend
ſhip, in the ſpace of 13 yeares diſpatched with poiſon 6 Popes,
whoſe names be theſe, Clement 2. Damaſus 2. Leo 9. Victor 2. Stephen
9. Nicholas. 2. The Romanes, ſeeing themſelues in ſuch
Siſmes and ſeditions by the blacke elections of the Popes, ſent
their Embaſſadors,The Emperour maketh the Pope. and beſought the Emperour Henry to giue
them a pope: who ſent vnto them Leo 9.
            
               Leo 9.Leo 9. comming to Rome, encountred by the way with the
the Abbot of Clunia, and Hildebrand, that afterward was Pope,
who ſeeing him Biſhop-like attired, perſwaded him by no
meanes ſo to enter Rome, becauſe not the Emperour but the
Clergie and people of Rome had authoritie to make a pope.
Brunon, before ſo called, did as they aduiſed him, came to Rome
confeſſed his offence, & ſo they made him pope. When he was
pope Hildrbraud he made Cardinall, and was with him very
familiar, granting all whatſoeuer, he demaunded: And ſo was
Hildebrande of a poore Monke, made a rich Cardinall Hildebrand
reconciled with Pope Leo his old Lord and maiſter Theophilact,
               
before depoſed from the popedome, and now hipocritically
reconciled. In Verceles held Leo a Councell, wherein he
condemned the doctrine of Beringarius,
               The doctrine of Beringarius. becauſe he would not
worſhip the cōſecrate bread, for that it was bread, & not God.
Frier Ioh. de Pineda par. 3. lib. 19. ca. 26. ¶. 2 of Berengarius (albeit
an enemie touching doctrine) reporteth great vertues: Beringarius
(ſaith he) was a man of good learning, quicke and mercifull:
and S. Antoninus addeth humbled: whereof I much maruell,
&c. And a little lower: Moſt chaſt was he alſo, ſo that he would
not enter where any woman was. This Leo 9. and partly at the
inſtigation of that good peece Hildebrandus, wholly forbad mariage
to to eccleſiaſticall perſons. Of this Leo 9. reporteth Carion
lib. 4 of his hiſtorie, that being Pope, he went with the Emperour
into Almaine: And when the Emperour had called a
Synod, which was held in Maguncia, the Pope being in the
Councell, would haue preferred himſelfe to the Biſhop of Maguntia.
But the Biſhop (alleaging his right defended the ſame:
and ſo was the Pope conſtrained to giue place. For albeit the
Popes had oftentimes attempted the tyrannie to be preferred
before other Biſhops: yet had they not preuayled. The which
in the time of Henry the fift they obtained.Poyſon. Fiue yeares was he
Pope,Anno 1054. and the 1054 yeare of poyſon which Brazuto gaue him
he died.Victor 2. 
               Don Fernando 1. then reigned in Caſtile. 
                  Ʋictor 2. was
Pope two yeares and ſomwhat more,Poyſon. but Brazuto with poiſon
diſpatched him. Don Sancho 2. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Stephen 10 (or 9.Stephen 10.) fulfilled not one whole yeare. For Brazuto
diſpatched him quickly in the 1058.Poyſon. year. Don Sancho 2. reigned
in Caſtile.Anno 1058. In the abſence of Hildebrand, was Benedict 10.
(or 9.Benedict. 10) But Hildehrand, who then was the holy Spirit which ruled
the Court of Rome, did much ſtomacke this election, and
accuſing him that by force & bribes he had attained the Popedome,
ſo wrought that Benedict was depoſed. Wretched Hildebrand
and how was he afterwards, and his predeceſſors before
him? The old ſaying in this Benedict was fulfilled: Para los deſdichados
ſe hizo la horca. For the vnhappie was the gallowes prepared.
In the 1059.Anno 1059. yeare, Benedict vnwillingly renounced. And
Don Sancho 2. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Benedict depoſed, Hildebrand laboured the Clergie to chooſe

               Gerrard,
               Nicholas 2. whom they called Nicholas 2. But (vnable with his
ſafety to make him in Rome) they went to Sena, and elected
him there.
            
               Nicholas ſeeing himſelfe Pope, called againſt Benedict the
10.The 21. Siſme. a Synod in Sutrio. This was the 21. Siſme: which Benedict
perceiuing, who was a peaceable man, leauing the Popedome
he fled from Rome, and ſo died not of poyſon. This Nicholas 2.
held another Councell in Rome, which they called the Councell
of Lateran:Can. Si quis pecunia. 76. diſt. wherin he commanded, that whoſoeuer, either
by money, fauour, popular tumult, or warre, without the mutual
conſent of the Cardinals,A decree euilly obſerued. attained to the ſeat of S. Peter, ſhould
not be holden for Apoſtolicall, but Apoſtaticall. To the Cardinals,
Clergie, and Laity he gaue power to excommunicate and
curſe as a thiefe ſuch a chiefe biſhop, and to call a Councell for
depoſing of ſuch a Pope. And if they could not in Rome, yet in
ſome other place they ſhould call it. Behold if his ſucceſſours
kept this decree.1061. Poyſon. 
               Nicholas 2. poyſoned by Brazuto, in the 1061
yeare dyed. Don Sancho 2. then reigned in Caſtile.
            By the crafty ſubtiltie of Hildebrand, and without conſent of
the Emperour, was Alexander 2. made Pope: for which cauſe
the Lombards in the Diet holden at Baſil,Alexander 2. where the Emperor
was preſent,Honorius 2. 22 Siſme. 1061 elected Honorius Cadolus. This was the 22. Siſme.
Honorius came with a great hoſt, and beſieged Rome: but he &
his were deſtroyed, and ſo Alexander 2. gotte poſſeſſion. This
Alexander commanded that the Cardinals only ſhould chooſe
the Pope.The Cardinals only chooſe the Pope, & none but the Cardinals are in election. Great alterations haue bene in chuſing of the Pope.
Firſt by the Senate, Clergie and people of Rome, with conſent
of the Emperor he was choſen: then was he choſen of the Clergie
and people of Rome: one while with the Emperours conſent,
another while without: afterwards he was choſen by the
Clergie: now only by the Cardinals: and is not to be choſen,
except he be Cardinall, preſent in the Conclaue when the election
is made. The holy Spirit that gouerneth in the Popes election,
is euery day more wiſe, and better aduiſed. Hildebrand
caſt this Pope Alexander into priſon, aduancing himſelfe with
the papall rents, and not giuing to the Pope but only fiue ſhillings
a day. Thus did Hildebrand enrich himſelfe greatly. Alexander
by Hildebrand ſo tyranically handled, in the 1074. yeare

dyed,Poyſon. and of poyſon as it is preſumed, which Hildebrande gaue
him. Don Sancho 2. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Alexander being dead,Gregory 7. a curſed inchanter. 
               Hildebrand fearing that if he foreſlowed
it, another would be choſen, ayded by his ſouldiers, without
conſent either of the Clergie or people, enthronized himſelfe.
To his election none of the Cardinals ſubſcribed.A tyrannicall enthronization. And as the
Abbot of Caſſina was comming to this election (already made)
Hildebrand ſaid vnto him: Thou haſt much ſlacked brother. To
whom the Abbot anſwered, and thou Hildebrand haſt too much
haſtened; which before the Pope thy Lord was buried, haſt cō
               trary
to the commons, vſurped the ſeat Apoſtolicke. Hildebrand
thus enthronized,The Pope a ſeditious heretique. &c. how he liued, how he caſt from him the Cardinals,
which ought to haue bene witneſſes of his life and doctrine;
how miſerably he tormented the world; with how many
hereſies he corrupted it; how many were his periuries; & what
great treaſons he practiſed, hardly could many deſcribe. The
blood of Chriſtians, which hath miſerably beneſhed, whereof
he was the author and procurer cryeth vnto the Lord. This tyrannicall
hiſtory reciteth Cardinall Bennon. Hildebrand being
Pope, called himſelfe Gregory 7. In briefe he was a notable villaine,
and terrible inchanter: which art he learned of Lawrence,
who was diſciple of Silueſter 2. Betweene the Cardinals, Lawrence,
Theophilact, Iohn Gracian & Hildebrand, was a moſt ſtaight
league of familiaritie. Of this Pope, Cardinall Bennon, reciteth
a notable hiſtorie.A notable villanie and impietie of the Pope againſt Henry the Emperour. The Emperour (ſaith Bennon) did vſually repayre
to S. Maries church, which is in mount Auentino to pray;
and as Hildebrand by his eſpials, diligently enquired of all that
Henry the Emperour did, he cauſed the place where the Emperour
prayed, to be marked; and perſwaded a certaine man with
great promiſe of reward, to place ſecretly certaine great ſtones
ouer the beames of the Temple; ſo that they might fall from an
high vpon the head of the Emperour praying, and bruſe him to
peeces: which thing as this miniſter of ſo notable a villanie haſtened
to effect, & would haue placed ouer the beames a ſtone
of great poiſe, the ſtone with it waight, fel backward vpon him,
and breaking a table that was amongſt the beames, the ſtone
and the miſerable man by Gods iuſt iudgement, fell from an
high to the floore of the Church, & ſo was he cruſhed in peeces.

Thus farre Cardinall Bennon. This Hildebrand demanding anſwere
of the Sacrament againſt the Emperor; and it not anſwering,
he caſt the ſacrament into the fire,The Pope burneth the Sacrament. albeit the Cardinals
preſent did gaineſay him. He left not for all this, to perſecute
the Emperour; he excommunicated him, depriued him, and
named another Emperour, to whom he wrote this verſe:
            
               Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho.
            
            The Rocke gaue to Peter, Peter giueth the crowne to Rodulph.
This Rodulph, was Duke of Sueuia. Henrie here with
diſquieted, left his Imperiall ornaments, and with his wife and
little ſonne in the middle of winter, came to Canuſium, where
the pope remained. The Emperour clothed in linnen, and barefooted,
made a ſpectacle (as ſaieth Cardinall Bennon) to Angels
and men, came to the gates of Canuſium: There continued
he faſting from morning to night, humbly crauing mercie.
The beaſt muſt be cut off; his horne hath very much increaſed.
Somewhat long is the hiſtorie, but we will make it ſhort. Thus
abode there the Emperour for three dayes ſpace: and when he
inſtantly craued licenſe to enter. The Biſhop (he was anſwered)
as yet was buſied, and could not ſpeake with him. In the
ende, the fourth day, at requeſt of the Counteſſe Mathilda,
(who ſayth the hiſtorie much loued the Pope) and others, the
Pope commanded he ſhould enter. Foraſmuch as this Maud
is one of the chiefe benefactors of the Popes, I will heere
declare that which ſaieth Pineda. lib. 16. cap. 26. ¶4. There
was (ſayth he) in Italie, one Beatriee, ſiſter of the Emperour
Henry the ſecond, and wife of Boniface Lord of Luna, of whom
was borne the famous Maude wife of the Counte Gofredo,
which inherited her fathers poſſeſſions, and Gofredo gouerned
the landes of Luca,This Maud left S. Peters Patrimony to the Pope. Parma, Regio, Mantua, and others of Italy,
which came by the Teſtament of Maud to the power of the
Popes, and called them S. Peters patrimonie. When the Emperour
was entered, he demaunded pardon, and gaue him his
crowne, but the Pope would not pardon, nor abſolue him of
the excommunication;Read the like hiſtory in Alexander 3. of the Emperor Fredericke. vntill he promiſed to purge himſelfe in
the Councell; with other vnlawful cōditions as the Pope ſhould
command. All which the Emperor promiſed: yet for al this was
he not reſtored to his Empire. After (ſaith the hiſtory) that Henry
               
vanquiſhed Rodulph: and that Rodulph was dead, the Pope made
Emperor Herman County of Lucēburg (whō a womā ſlew with
a ſtone.) And yet for all this, this cruell Pope did not ceaſe; but a
third Emperour named againſt this good Henry: who being
newly named, by the hand alſo of the Emperials, as miſerably
ended. By how much the more adulterous and filthy was this
pope; by ſo much the more, pure mariage hee forbade to his
Clergie. Fryar Iohn de Pineda part. 3. lib. 16. cap. 29. ¶5. of
him ſaith: He depriued married Prieſtes from the diuine office,
and forbade lay men to heare Maſſes of ſuch and publique
wenchers: and they mortally ſinne that of ſuch heare Maſſes:
although they remaine without Maſſe hearing vppon Eaſter
day, except the Councell of Conſtance doe free them, &c.
And a little lower: This euill happened, that lay men contemned
the moſt holy Sacrament of the bodie of our Redeemer
conſecrated by Prieſts openly married, or concubine keepers,
and turned the blood of Chriſt, as if it were no Sacrament: but
let this be holden for an vndoubted trueth, that the Sacraments
of Baptiſme, and the Euchariſt, looſe nothing of their vertues
by the wickedneſſe of the Miniſters, which that crue beleeued
they did.
            Thus farre Pineda. All Germanie (as ſaieth Carion lib. 5.)
withſtoode this wicked forbidding of matrimonie: the which
when Maguntino propounded it, thoſe that were preſent were
ſo greatly prouoked, that they almoſt killed Maguntino. To this
purpoſe, reade aboue the liues of Siricius and Gregorie. 1. Pope
Liberius an Arrian he canonized, and commanded (as ſayth
Cardinall Bennon) that his feaſt ſhould be celebrated. Behold if
the Pope erred;The Pope erred. one heretique did canonize another. Pope Damaſus,
which liued in the 366.The Pope an heretique. yere, for an Arrian condemned
this Liberius. And S. Ierome, who at the ſame time liued, held
him for an Arian: but Gregorie 7. did ſanctifie and canonize him:
Pope Vrban 2.One Pope an heretique canonized another heretique Pope, by another Pope condemned. who in the 1088. yere liued, confirmed all that
which Gregorie the ſeuenth had done, this Gregory condemned
the doctrine of Beringarius touching the Sacrament. This
Pope was the firſt (as is ſaid) that put in practiſe Tranſubſtantiation.
Gregorie in the end wickedly ended: for the Emperour
celebrated the Councell of Brixa,Tranſubſtant. wherein Pope Gregorie was

condemned,Clement. 3. and a new Pope made, who was called Clement 3
Reade a little lower,The 23. ſiſme. in Paſcual. 2. (this was the 23. Siſme)
whom the Emperour placed in the church of S. Peter in Rome,
and put Rome to ſuch a ſtraight,Anno 1080. that forced it was to demand
peace. Gregory ſeeing himſelfe forſaken, fled to Salernum,
where in the 1086 yeere,Anno 1086. he miſerably ended his life. Albeit
that this Gregory was ſo abhominable, there wanted not papiſts
that ſaid he wrought miracles after his death.
            D. Illeſcas vpon the life of this Gregory 7. as a great flatterer
of the Popes, of him ſaith: The Cardinals without much diſpute
ioyning in one, gaue their mutuall and willing conſents to the
moſt excellent, and no leſſe valerous S. Hildebrande: and ſomewhat
lower. And this in particular was due to the holy and moſt
prudent Hildebrand: one of the moſt famous chiefe biſhops, the
Church of God hath had &c. Mon. Eccleſiaſtic. he calleth him
the great ſeruant of God.
            Againſt this deuilliſh beaſt, wrote Hugo Candido the Cardinall
Walramus biſhop of Neburgo, 
                  Ʋenericus biſhop of Vercelle,
Rolandus a prieſt of Parma, and many others; Cardinal Bennon
doth witnes. 13. Cardinals to haue bene againſt him. Should
we recount all the villanies of this Pope, we ſhould neuer make
an end: let what is ſaid ſuffiſe. When Gregory 7. was depoſed,
Clement 3.1101 was made Pope. He was pope 21 yeeres, after whoſe
death thoſe of his part, in the 1101 yere, elected Albertus. Paſcal.
2.Paſcal. 2. a cruel Pope, who burned another Pope. cauſed the bodie of Clement to be vntombed and burned.
The ſame which hapned to Clement 3. hapned alſo to Formoſus
as before we haue ſaid, vpon Stephen 6. or 7. and Sergius 3. In
the time of this Pope Gregorie 7. raigned Don Alonſo 6. This Alonſo
wan Toledo, in whoſe time and preſence the miracle in
Toledo,Lib. 6. cap. 26. recited by Don Rodrigo, Archbiſhop of Toledo, in his
hiſtorie of Romiſh and Gothiſh offices,The Romiſh office but not the Gothiſh burned. which both were caſt
into the fire, happened. The Romiſh was burned, and not the
Gothiſh. Which hiſtorie in the treatiſe of the Maſſe we will afterwards
declare.
            
               Victor 3.Victor. 3. not by the Cardinals, nor the people of Rome, but
by Maud the adultereſſe, & whore of Pope Gregory 7. was made
pope. This Victor tooke part againſt the Emperour, and Clement
3. but that which he would he did not: for in the 1088. yeere of

poyſon which his ſubdeacon,Poiſon in the Chalice. in ſaying of Maſſe, caſt into the
Chalice, he quickly died. Don Alonſo, of Cartagena biſhop of
Burgos, ſpeaking of Don Alonſo the king in his time maketh
mention hereof.
            By Maud alſo,Vrban 2. an heretike. was 
                  Ʋrban 2. made Pope. He was the diſciple
of Hildebrand, whom Cardinall Benon in contempt calleth
Turbano.
               One Pope excōmunicateth another. He was a Siſmatike, an heretike, an Arrian. He excō
               municated
Clement 3. and the Emperor that did chuſe Clement.
This Clement alſo (as ſaith Vicencius) did excommunicate 
                  Ʋrban
and when Vrban would not abſolue any of thoſe whome Hildebrand
had excommunicated, he ſecretly departed from Rome.
Many Councells did this pope celebrate. 1. in Melphis. 2. in
Troya in Pull. 3. in Placencia, 4. in Clarmont. 5. in Turon: wherein
he approued and confirmed that which Gregorie 7. (that good
peece, did. In that of Claremont, a voiage into the holy land was
concluded: and ſo went there 3000. men; and with them
Petrus Hermitanus. From this Petrus Hermitanus, ſay many,
(as noteth Friar Iohn de Pineda) iſſued praying by count, which
we call the Roſaries. But I demaunde what worde of God; or
what example taken out of the old or newe Teſtament haue
they to confirme this maner of praying. It is then a humane
inuention and by conſequence abhominable in the ſight of
God. This Vrban made the Archbiſhop of Toledo Primate
of all Spaine.The Archbiſhop of Toledo Primate of Spaine. Two yeares was this Pope hidden in the houſe
of Peter Leo, for feare of Iohn Paganus a citizen of Rome,
where in the 1099 yere he died. His aduerſary Pope Clement 3.
who being Pope,Anno 1099. ſaw 3 Popes the ſame yere, died. Don Alonſo
6. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Paſcal 2. a Thuſcan, was the diſciple of Hildebrand. This
Paſcal ſeeing they wold make him Pope, would not aſcend to
the Papall ſeat,Paſcal 2. before the people had three times ſaid, S. Peter
hath choſen a moſt good man Reinerus. In warres and ſeditions
he conſumed his life. In a Councell which he held, he renued
the excommunication againſt the Emperour Henry 4. &
ſuch was his hate towardes him,The ſon againſt the father by the inſtigation of the Pope. that with deceits and ſubtilties
he incited Henry 5. againſt his owne father. What thing
more cruell and horrible can be, then to cauſe an onely ſonne
not onely cauſeleſſe to deſpiſe, forſake, and abandon his father:

but alſo with warre to perſecute him, take him by deceit,
and ſo taken,Crueltie. to ſuffer him die a moſt miſerable death?
And who incited him to this? Euen the Pope himſelfe, who
being a Prieſt (as he cals himſelfe) was to haue exhorted the
ſonne to loue and honor his father, as God in th fifth Commandement
of his holy law commandeth. And yet after the fathers
death ceaſed not the Pope to ſhew his malice: He commanded
to vntombe him, caſt him out of the Church, and his bodie to
remaine fiue yeares without Chriſtian buriall.A cruell Pope. Otherwiſe commandeth
Saint Peter (whoſe ſucceſſor he ſaith that he is) that
kings ſhould be honoured. Be ſubiect (ſaith he, 1. Pet. 2. 13.) to
euery ordinance of man, for Gods cauſe: be it to the king as ſuperiour.
Otherwiſe commandeth S. Paule, that we ſhould honor them.
Let euery ſoule (ſaith he, Rom. 13. 1.) be ſubiect to higher powers,
for there is no power but of God, &c. And to Titus, chap. 3. 1. he
ſaith, Warne them that they be ſubiect to Princes and potentates,
that they obey &c. But he is ſhameleſſe, all the earth is his, he
may do all whatſoeuer he liſteth, without reckoning of God,
his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, or his holy Apoſtles, who commaund
vs to honour kings and bee ſubiect to them. And as Paſcal
was an vnquiet and ſeditious man: ſo began he alſo with the
ſonne, and denied to confirme the Biſhops which Henrie
the fifth had nominated. But the Emperour gaue him his payment,
who (diſſembling) came to the Pope,The Emperour taketh the Pope. and after he had
kiſſed his feete, cauſed him to be taken, and would not releaſe
him out of Priſon, vnill he had confirmed the ſaid biſhops, and
crowned him. But as the Emperour turned his backe to returne
into Germanie, then reuoked the Pope (periured as he
was) all whatſoeuer he had promiſed: and excommunicated
the Emperour. In Campania of France held this Pope a Councell:
Wherein he tooke away the lawful wiues from the prieſts
of Fraunce: as Hildebrand his maiſter tooke them from thoſe
of Germanie.Templars. In his time the Templars began. This Pope (as
in Gregory the ſeuenth we haue ſaid) cauſed the body of Clement
the third to be vntombed and burned.A cruel Pope. 
               Paſcal died in the
1118. yeare. and Don Alonſo the ſeuenth reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Gelaſius Gaietanus the ſecond,Anno 1118. with great tumult, and without
conſent of the Emperour was made Pope.Gelaſius. 2. The Emperour

leuied a great hoſte againſt Rome. Gelaſius fearing him,
went with his partakers to Gaeta. When the Emperour was
come to Rome hee made another Pope, whom they called
Gregorie the eight.Two Popes. Archbiſhop of Braga, which done the Emperour
departed from Rome.Gregorie 8. 
               Gelaſius hearing the ſame, came
ſecretely to Rome, and boldly went to ſay Maſſe in the Church
of S. Prax
                  •
               idis: where thoſe of the contrary faction did ſo aſſault
him, that he hardly eſcaped their hands, and ſo fled to Piſa, and
from thence into France:The 24. Siſme. where, after he had a yeare and ſome
dayes bene Pope, he died. In Colonia he held a Councell, albeit
not preſent there himſelfe, where the Emperour was excommunicated.
He ordained in this Councell that his ſucceſſors
the chiefe Biſhops of Rome,The priuilege of the Pope. neither might nor ought to
be iudged of anie. In the 1119.1119. yeare he died: and Don Alonſo
reigned in Caſtile.
            In the place where Gelaſius died,Caliſtus 2. was Caliſtus the ſecond, a
Burgoignian, by ſome of the Cardinals that went with him
choſen: which election ſome Cardinals abiding in Rome and
Italie did alſo approue. He (thus made Pope) went to Rome,
where moſt honorably he was receiued, & thence ſent to command
his Legate, as then at the Councell, to continue the excommunication
againſt the Emperour. Who fearing the like
ſhould happen to himſelfe as did to his father, admitted (albeit
wicked) the conditions of peace, Gregorie as yet liuing, whom
he had made Pope. This peace concluded, Caliſtus bent himſelfe
to perſecute Gregorie. Gregorie ſeeing his part ouerthrown
fled from Rome to Sutrio, whither followed Caliſtus: tooke
him, and with great ignominie brought him to Rome, & put
him into a Monaſtery.Compoſtella an Archbiſhoppricke. This Caliſtus the more to confirm idolatrie,
and the better to intertaine ſuperſtition, made the Church
of S. Iames of Galicia an Archbiſhoppricke, and a booke alſo of
S. Iames his miracles.Anno 1124. In the 1124. yeare he died: and Don Alonſo
7. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Honorius the ſecond,Honorius 2. a Bulloniſt, entered not (ſaith Platina)
rightly into the Popedome. For more by ambition then the
conſent of good men, he obtained it. The Cardinals choſe for
Pope Theobald,
               Celeſtine 2. Cardinall of S. Anaſtaſia, whom they called
Celeſtine the ſecōd.The 25. Siſme. This was the 25. Siſme. The people ſought to

haue the Cardinall of Saint Stephen to be Pope. There was thē
in Rome a very rich mā called Leo, who ſo much wrought both
with the Cardinals and people, that neither the Cardinall of
S. Anaſtaſia, nor he of Saint Stephen, but whom he himſelf liſted,
called Honorius 2. was Pope. Honorius ſent into England Iohn of
Crema, Cardinal of S. Griſon his Legate: which Cardinall in a
Councell by him held in London, condemned married Prieſts,
and was taken the night following with the theft in his handes:
with a wicked woman they caught him,A notable exā
                  ple of hypocriſie. which (as ſaith Mathew
Paris) gaue no ſmall ſcandall to the Church. Such be theſe, as
were the Phariſies, of whom the Lord ſaith: that they binde
heauie burthens,Matth. 13. 4 and hard to beare, and put them vpon the
ſhoulders of men, but they themſelues wil not moue them with
one of their fingers.Anno 1130. 
               Honorius died in the 1130. yeare, and Don
Alonſo 7. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Innocent being Pope,Innocent. 2. ſhewed great hatred to Rogero king
of Sicilia, againſt whom he went forth in battell. And as he carried
him away vanquiſhed, behold, the ſonne of the king came,
and tooke the Pope and his Cardinals.Anacletus. Now did the Romans
make another Pope,Two Popes. whom they called Anacletus the ſecond
(this was the 26.The 26. Siſme. Siſme) which Innocent hearing, compounded
with the king, and minding to go to Rome, but durſt not
attempt it. He went into France, and in Claremount held a
Councell, where he condemned Anacletus: and went to ſee
Philip king of France: then Henrie the firſt, king of England:
and afterwards Lotharius king of Almaine; to the end they
ſhould reſtore him to his Popedome. Lotharius with a great
campe came vpon Rome, put to flight Anacletus, and in his
ſeat placed Innocent, which Pope to ſhewe himſelfe gratefull,
crowned Lotharius Emperour. This Innocent ordained, that
whoſoeuer wounded any Prieſt or eccleſiaſtical perſon, ſhould
ipſo facto, be excommunicate, and none might abſolue him
but the Pope himſelfe,Anno 1143. Concil. 17. q. 4. Siquis. In the 1143.
yeare hee died: and Don Alonſo the ſeuenth reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Lucius 2.Lucius 2. was made Pope. In whoſe time the Romans (vnable
to beare longer the violence and tyrannie of the Popes) elected
one Patricio a noble man of Rome called Iordan. This

               Patricio demaunding the rights of the citie of Rome, aſwell
within as without the walles, ſaid: that this right by reaſon of his
office perteined to him: which the Pope, by meanes of Charles
the Great ſuppreſſing al the Patricios, had ſo long time vſurped
to himſelfe. He commaunded that the Pope (as his predeceſſors
had done) ſhould content himſelf with the firſt fruits;The Romans limit the Pope. tenths
and oblations. The Pope ſeeing himſelfe ſo diſquieted by the
Romans, ſent his Ambaſſadors to the Emperor Conrado, requeſting
him to come into Italie and aide him, which Conrado
could not do. The Pope ſeeing there was no remedie to be expected
by the Emperour,A Popiſh ſubtilty. vſed this ſubtiltie. He awayted his
time, when all the Snators of Rome and the Patricio with them
were together in the Capitol. This oportunitie found, the Pope
like a good Captaine, vtterly to deſtroy that Senate, went with
many ſouldiors in perſon to the Capitol. The bruit of the Popes
pretenſe flue preſently through Rome: the Romans took armes
and fought brauely againſt the Pope:The Pope ſtoned for his tyranny. 1145. who receiued in the battell
ſo many blowes with ſtones, that thereof ſhortly after, in the
1145. yeare, not hauing yet fulfilled a yeare in his Popedome,
he died, Don Alonſo 7. reigned in Caſtile. In the time of this Don
Alonſo 7.Eugenius 3. and whiles Eugenius 3. ſucceſſor of Lucius was Pope,
Don Alonſo 1.The firſt king of Portugal, after he had 27. yeeres bene Earle of Portugal,
hauing conquered fiue Mooriſh kings, was made king of Portugal,
and ſo continued king 46 yeares.
            
               Anaſtaſius 4.Anaſtaſius 4. was not ſo wicked as his predeceſſours: In the
ſecond yeare of his Biſhopdome he died. In his time (ſaith Mathew
Paris) was William reſtored to his Archbiſhopricke of
Yorke in England, who the ſame yeere (of poyſon, which in
ſaying Maſſe they put into the Chalice) died.Poyſon in the chalice. 
               Don Alonſo 7. then
reigned in Caſtile.
            When Adrian an Engliſhman,Adrian 4. and ſon of Robert a Monke
of Saint Albons, was choſen, he wold not be conſecrated vntill
Arnold Biſhop of Brixta was caſt out of Rome. This Arnold
had perſwaded the Romans to recouer their liberty of chuſing
their magiſtrates, & gouerning their common-wealth: but
the people would not graunt what the Pope demaunded: for
which cauſe the Pope did excommunicate them. Arnold in the
end was expulſed Rome, and the Conſuls renounced their office.

At this time came Fredericke the Emperour to Rome;
the Pope and clergie met him in Sutrio. The Emperour then
lighting from his horſe, led the horſe of the Pope, and held
his left ſtirrope, for the Pope to alight: The Pope derided the
Emperour, becauſe he held not the right ſtirrop: with this
diriſion was the Emperour ſomewhat angrie,The inſolency of the Pope becauſe the Emperour held not the ſtirrope as he ought. and ſmilingly
anſwering him, ſaid: That he neuer had bin horſe boie. The
daie following, came the Pope to the Campe of the Emperour,
who corrected with his former reproofe, by holding the
right ſtirrope, better perfourmed his office. This done, the
Emperour would be crowned: but the Pope wold not crowne
him till he had caſt from Pulla Willam king of Sicilia: and this
at the proper charge of the Emperour. The Popes reſolution
vnderſtood, the princes anſwered; that a greater Campe was
needefull: that then he ſhould crowne the Emperour, who
wold returne with a greater hoſt, and performe that which he
commaunded; and ſo was he crowned the daie following▪
when the Emperour was departed, the Pope ſeeing himſelfe
deſtitute of his aſſiſtance, excomunicated the king of Sicilia,
and abſolued all his vaſſals of their oath and allegeance; but
ſeing this nothing preuailed, he incited againſt William, Manuel
Emperor of Grecia: William ſeeing himſelfe ſo greatly ſtraighted,
demaunded peace; promiſing to make full reſtitution:
but by the counſaile of ſome Cardinalls, which gained by the
warres, the Pope would not grant it: William ſeeing the cauſe
to be deſperat; leuied a great armie, wherwith he put to flight
the Emperour: he beſieged Beneuente where was the Pope
with his Cardinals, and put them to ſuch a ſtraite, that they craued
peace: which William graunted: and ſo the Pope declared
him king of both Sicils. At this time commaunded the German
Emperour, that if the Pope ſent his Legats into Almaine,
they ſhould not be receiued, but commanded to returne. The
Emperor alſo cōmanded that none ſhold appeale to Rome,The Emperour commandeth that none ſhould appeale to Rome. &
in letters placed his owne name before the name of the Pope:
wherwith the Pope was highly offended: as by a letter which
he ſent, cōplaining of theſe things which the Emperor had cō
               manded,
appeareth. Whereunto the Emperor very Chriſtianlike,
among other things anſwered, ſaying, that Ieſus Chriſt cō
               māded

               to giue vnto Caeſar that which was Caeſars: & that the Pope
being his vicar, ſhould do the like. He ſhewed the cauſe why
his Cardinals were not admitted: for that they were (ſaith he)
not preachers but robbers: but when they performe their duty
& office, then will we not let to ayd them. D. Illeſcas in his hiſt.
Pontif. vpon the life of this Adrian 4. ſetteth downe the letter of
the Pope: but (craftie as he was) he ſet not downe the anſwer of
the Emperor, recited by Nauclerus. In the end he excommunicated
the Emperor:The Pope killed with a flie. but no further could the Pope ſhew his malice:
for that he ſwallowed a flie:Ireland. and in the 1159 yeare thereof
died.Anno 1159. This Pope granted the Henrie 2. king of England, the ſeignory
of Ireland. In this yere 1159. died Don Alonſo 7. who reigned
51 yere in Caſtile.
            
               Alexander 3.Alexander 3. was made pope with great ſedition: for 9 Cardinals,
which tooke part with the Emperour,A Diuelliſh Pope. made the Cardinal
of S. Clement,
               Victor 4. whō they called Victor 4. Pope. Victor being dead,
in his place was choſen Paſcal, then Caliſtus, and afterwards Innocentius.
All theſe one after another oppoſed themſelues to Alexander.
This was a much greater Siſme then the 27 was.The 27. Siſme. The
laſt (which was Innocent) vnwillingly renounced.Anno 1159. All the time
that Alexāder was Pope, which was 22 yeres, indured this ſiſme
Frederick the Emperor in the time of this Siſme, held a Diet in
Pauia, where he cōmanded that Alexander, & the Pope his aduerſary,
ſhould appeare, that the cauſe might be examined, and
he Pope alone, which had moſt right to be Pope. Alexander
ſcorning the meſsēgers of the Emperor, proudly anſwered: The
Biſhop of Rome ought not to be iudged of any: & thē wrote his
letters to the chriſtian Princes, & excōmunicated the Emperor
& Victor the Pope. To the Cardinal his vicegerent in Rome ſent
he great preſents, to gaine the good wils of the Romans, that
they might chuſe ſuch Conſuls as ſhold take part with him. To
him Philip king of France gaue great aſſiſtance. The Emperour
ſeing the obſtinacy of Alex. leuied a great hoſt & came into Italy:
whē the Emperor was come to Brixia, Harmā
                Biſh. of that citie,
who had bin Secretary to the Emperour, perſwaded him (&
that by the coūſel of Alex. whō he feared) to paſſe with this gret
hoſt into the holy land, & there make war with the Turke. The
Emp. moued with this exhortatiō of Hermā, ſuppoſing al waters

were cleare, and that there was no deceit, departed to make
warres with the Turkes: of whom he had many victories, and
gained many cities, and among them the citie of Ieruſalem:
Aelexander hearing of ſuch, and ſo great victories, beganne
newly to feare, leſt the Emperour at his returne into Italie,
would newly aſſaile him. To preuent ſo great a miſchiefe, by
all poſſible meanes he practiſed to deſtroy,The Pope a murtherer. and cauſe him to
be killed. Then ſent he for a painter, which ſhould picture the
liuely purtrait of the Emperour,A ſtratagem of the Pope. which picture or purtraite the
Pope ſent to the Souldan, aduiſing him by his letters, that if he
coueted to liue in peace, he ſhould kill him by deceit whom
that picture repreſented. The Souldan taking the counſell of
this diuelliſh Pope, ſought all wayes poſſible to kill him: and
vnable by force of armes, by fraud and ſubtiltie. The Emperour
and his campe then marching in Armenia, and the ſeaſon
being verie hot, he reſolued to go bathe in the riuer, and
none to accompanie him but one of his Chaplaines: being
thus alone, he was taken by ſuch as the Souldan ſent to watch
him: and taken, was through the woods and groues carried
to the Souldan, without the knowledge or ſuſpition of anie of
his followers. His people on horſeback all that day and the next
ſought him, and not finding him, it was bruited through the
hoſt, that the Emperour was drowned. And ſuppoſing that
he was drowned, they returned to their owne countries. When
the Emperour was preſented to the Souldan, he fained himſelfe
to be the porter of the Emperour: but the Souldan well
knowing him by the picture, which the good Pope had ſent
him, commanded the purtrait and letters ſent by the Pope
to be brought forth, which in his preſence he cauſed to bee
read. Then was the Emperour apalled: and ſeeing that his
deniall nothing auailed, confeſſed whom he was, and craued
mercie. The Souldan ſeeing the great goodneſſe and wiſeof
the Emperour, with great gentleneſſe vſed him: and ſo it
happened, that he gaue him libertie, with this condition, that
an euerlaſting peace ſhould be betweene them, and that he
ſhould pay an hundred thouſand duckets for his ranſome: for
the which his Chaplaine (taken with him) ſhould remaine
vntill it were paide. The Couenantes thus beeing made,

the Soldan diſmiſſed the Emperour, and giuing him many preſents,
and prouiding all things neceſſary for his iourney, he cauſed
34 horſemen to attend him, & ſo came he to Brixia, where
he abode. The Gemane Princes hearing of the Emperours
arriuall, came to kiſſe his hands, and giue him the welcome-home.
The Emperour rewarded the Souldans people that had
attended on him, and ſent them backe to their Lord againe.
This done the Emperour held a Diet in Norinberge: where he
recoūted that which had hapned, the great treaſon of the Pope,
& read the letter ſent by the Pope to the Souldan: which ſeene,
the Princes promiſed their aid both for performance of his promiſe
to the Souldan: and alſo for the chaſtiſing of Pope Alexander.
A great campe he leuied, without any let paſſed through
Italy, and went towards Rome. The Emperour ſent Ambaſſadors
to Rome, by whom he required (without mentioning the
receiued villanies and iniuries by Pope Alexander) that the
cauſe of the Popes might be heard & examined, that he which
had moſt right might be Pope: and ſo the Siſme ceaſe. Alexander
ſeeing his part vnfurniſhed, fled by night to Gaeta, and
from thence to Beneuente: and there attiring himſelf in the habite
of his Cooke,The Pope flyeth in a Cooks habite. in the 17. yeere of his Biſhodome came to
Venice, where he was made Gardiner of a Monaſterie: from
whence by commandement of Sebaſtian Duke of Venice; with
great pome he was taken and very pontifically carried to the
Church of Saint Marke. This hiſtorie is cited by Nauclerus,
Barnus, Funcius, and others. The Emperour hearing that the
Pope was in Venice, requeſted the Venetians to deliuer ſo pernicious
a man his enemie vnto him: which denied by the Venetians,
the Emperor with an Armie ſent Otho his ſonne: & commanded
him not to fight before his comming. The young
Prince deſirous of fame, ſought with the Venetians againſt the
commandement of his father, of whom he was vanquiſhed,
and carried priſoner to Venice. This was a notable victorie: for
the Generall of the Venetians, called Ciano, brought but thirie
Gallies and Otho 75. I will here recite that which Frier Iohn de
Pineda lib. 25. cap. 7. ¶. 3. ſaith: Glorious Ciano entered into
Venice, &c. and ſomewhat lower. The Pope gaue him the glorie
of the victorie: a little gold ring he alſo deliuered him: ſaying:

he gaue him that, in token he graunted him the ſegniorie
of the ſea, which he had gotten; and would, he ſhould caſt it into
the ſea,The mariage of the Duke of Venice with the ſea. to bind the ſea thenceforth as his wife, to be alwayes
kept vnder the Venetian Empire. And that all the after Dukes
ſhould vpon ſome ſpeciall day, celebrate this ceremony euerie
yeare. And ſomewhat after: the ceremony paſſed, was vpon
the day of the Aſcenſion: and the Pope granted in that Church
vpon ſuch day, full remiſſion, &c. for euer. Thus farre Pineda.
Alexander growne proud with this victorie, would not make
peace with Fredericke, vntill he himſelfe ſhould come to Venice,
at ſuch day as the Pope would appoint. The father, for the
loue he bare to his ſonne, did all whatſoeuer he was commanded.
He came to Saint Markes: where the Pope before all the
people commanded the Emperour to proſtrate himſelfe, and
craue mercie: which the Emperour there did. Then trode the
Pope with his feete vpon the necke of the Emperour, who was
proſtrate on the ground,The Pope treadeth in the necke of the Emperor Fredericke. and with his mouth that ſpake blaſphemies,
ſaid: It is written, Thou ſhalt go vpon the Aſpe and Baſiliske,
and vpon the Lyon and Dragon ſhalt thou treade. The Emperour
herewith aſhamed, made anſwere: Not to thee, but to
Peter.
               Pſal 91. 13. Whereat the Pope ſtamping vpon the necke of the Emperour,
ſaid:Blaſphemy and tyranny. Both to me and to Peter. Then was the Emperour
ſilent, and ſo the Pope abſolued him of his excommunication.
Another ſuch like thing as this, to the Emperor Henry (of
whō we haue ſpoken in the life of Gregory 7.) hapned. The conditions
of peace were, That the Emperor ſhold hold Alexander
for rightfull Pope: & reſtore all whatſoeuer, that during the war
he had taken. The peace thus made, the Emperor with his ſonne
departed. Robert. Montenſis, in his hiſtorie, reporteth, that Lewis
king of France, and Henry king of England, going on foot, and
holding the bridle of the horſe, whereupon this Alexander
rode, the one with the right-hand, and the other with the
left, with great pompe they led him through the citie of Boyanci,
which is vpon the riuer Luera. In the time of this Alexander.
God to reproue the pride and tyranny of the Biſhop, raiſed vp
the Waldenſes,Waldenſes. or as other call them, the poore of Lyons, in the
yeare of the Lord 1181.Anno 1181. in which yeare this beaſt died: and
Don Sancho 3. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               
               Lucius 3.Lucius 3. who purpoſed to aboliſh the name of Conſuls in
Rome, by the commō conſent of the Cardinals was choſen. For
which the Romans much offended, expelled him from Rome,
diſgraced with diuers kinds of reproches thoſe of his part; and
ſome of them alſo they killed.Anno 1185. In the 1185. yeare he died: and
Don Sancho 3. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Vrban 3.Vrban 3. (whom for his troubleſomeneſſe they called Turbano,
as ſaith Albertus Crantzio in the 6. booke, and 52. chap.
of his Saxon hiſtorie) determined to excommunicate the Emperour:
becauſe he was a let vnto him, and wold not permit him
to do what he liſted:Anno 1187. but he did it not, becauſe in the 1187. yere,
he died before he would.Ieruſalem takē by the Moores. 
               Don Alonſo 8. reigned in Caſtile, and
at this time the Moores tooke Ieruſalem.
            
               Gregorie 8.Gregory 8. before he was two moneths Pope died.
            When Clement 3.Clement 3. was Pope, he incited the Chriſtian Princes
(as had done his predeceſſours) to warre beyond the ſeas:
which did the Popes, not ſo much for the increaſe of Chriſtendom,
as for their own peculiar intents & commodities, as vpon
Alexander 3. we haue already declared: becauſe the Princes
being ſo farre remote, and intangled with warres againſt the
Infidels, the Popes might do, and did, whatſoeuer they liſted.
The Danes this Pope excommunicated,The Danes would haue their prieſts maried. becauſe they would
their Prieſtes ſhould be married, and not concubine keepers.
In this 1191. yeare he died. Don Alonſo the eight then reigned
in Caſtile.Anno 1191.
            
            The next day after,Celeſtine 3. 
               Celeſtine 3. was made Pope. He crowned
Henrie 6. and much repining that Tancred, the baſtard ſon
of Roger (whom the Sicilians had choſen for king, William their
king being dead without heire) ſhould be the king of Sicilia.
The Pope married the Emperour with Conſtantia the daughter
of R
                     •
                  gero,
               A Nunne married with the Popes licenſe. taking her out of the Monaſterie of Panormo, where
ſhe was a Nunne, vpon this condition, that expelling Tancred,
who then poſſeſſed it. He ſhould demaund for dower the kingdome
of both Sicils: and for being king of Sicilia ſhould pay
his fealty to the Pope:Cicilia tributarie to the Pope. which was the cauſe of much bloudſhed.
When this Emperour Henry was dead great ſiſme aroſe in the
Empire, & ſuch and ſo great was the diſcord, that hardly one pariſh
agreed with another. By theſe cōtentions amōg the prieſts

the Pope greatly enriched himſelfe; becauſe in Rome they
were to be ended, as noteth Conrado Lichtenao, Abbot of Veſpurg:
whoſe words,A notable ſaying of the Abbot of Veſpurg. againſt the Roman Court. for that they are worthie of perpetuall memorie,
I will here recite them. Hardly, ſaith he, remayned
any biſhopricke or eccleſiaſticall dignity which entertained
not ſtrifes; whoſe cauſe, but not with emptie hande, was
caried to Rome. Be glad mother Rome; becauſe the ſluces of
treaſures doe open in the earth; that the flouds and riuers of
money, may come to thee in great abundadnce. Reioice ouer
the wickednes of the ſonnes of men: becauſe for recompence
of ſo great wickednes, the price to thee is geuen: delight thou
with diſcorde thy helper, which iſſued from the pit infernall,
that many rewardes of money might be heaped vnto thee.
Hold that for which thou haſt thirſted: Sing to ſing, becauſe by
the malice of men, and not their godly religion, thou haſt ouercome
the world: draw men vnto thee, not their deuotion, but
the committing of great abhominations,Anno 1198. and the deciding of
ſtrifes for reward. Hitherto the Abbot; who ſo now would ſay
thus ſhould be an heretike,Innecent. 3. a Lutherane. In the 1198. yeare
died Celeſtinus. Don Alonſo 8. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Innocent 13. (whom the Hiſtorians call Nocentiſſimus) bare
ſo great hatred to the Emperour Philip, becauſe againſt his liking,
he was choſen by the Germane Princes, that he ſaid theſe
words:A ſtout Pope. Biſhop, either take the crowne and kingdom from Philip;
or Philip take from the Biſhop his Biſhopdome. And ſo ſtirred
he vp Otho, a great and raſh warriour, againſt the Emperour.
Much bloud he ſhed for the Popes cauſe: vntill another
Otho,
               The Pope cauſeth the Emperor to be killed by treaſon. and great taitor ſlew Philip: and ſo his Competitor Otho
came to Rome, and for his good ſeruice done to the Pope was
crowned. Note that which before we haue ſaid vpon Alexāder
3. againſt the Emperour: but long laſted not the friendſhip between
Innocent & Otho. For Otho willing to recouer that which
the Popes had vſurped of the Empire, was by the Pope excommunicated:
& all whoſoeuer ſhould call, or hold Otho for Emperour
were accurſed. And ſo the Pope procured the Princes
to chooſe for Emperor Frederike king of Cicil. The Popes be
like vnto ſtumpets, which no longer loue their ruffians, then
they do them ſeruice. In the time of this Pope, which was in

the 1212 yeare, ſome of the Nobles of Alſacia (as Huldericus
Mucius reporteth) condemned the Pope for wicked, becauſe
he ſuffered not the Prieſts to be maried: And becauſe certaine
men ſaid: it was lawfull for euerie Chriſtian to eate fleſh and
marrie at any time of the yere; the biſhops burned in one daie
a hundred perſons. If this be hereſie, then Saint Paule was an
heretique. 1. Timothie. 4. 3. where he calleth them that forbid
mariage, and meats, which God hath created, &c. apoſtatates
from the faith. This Innocent 3. vnder colour to recouer the
holy land, did celebrate the Councell of Laeteran: but his principall
intent was, to excommunicate and depoſe the Emperor,
becauſe he had taken ſome citties of the Patrimonie of Saint
Peter. The Pope in this Councell, brought forth auricular confeſſion.
He was the firſt that impoſed this charge vpon chriſtians
He was the firſt,Auricular conconfeſſion impoſed by Innocent 3. that forbad the laitie (as they call them) the
cuppe in the communion. This prohibition was confirmed in
the Councell of Conſtance. Almericus a learned man, he condempned
for an heretike,The Cup forbidden to the Laytie. and cōmaunded his bones to be burned
in Paris, and all thoſe that held his opinion. This did the
Pope, (ſaith Friar Domingo Soto in one of his ſermons;) becauſe
Almericus had taught, that Images ſhould be caſt out of the
Temple.Images. That which God forbiddeth the Pope commandeth. Seeſt thou not ô Pope, that God forbiddeth that
which thou commandeſt; and comandeth that thou forbiddeſt;
with great reaſon doe men call thee Antichriſt. The Councell
of Eliberis, celebrated in Spaine, at the ſame time almoſt
with the firſt Councell of Nice, comaundeth; that that which
is reuerenced, or adored, ſhould not vpon the walles be pictured,
as in the beginning of this Treatiſe, we haue ſaid. This Pope
ordeined, that when the princes diſagreed in election of the
Emperour; ſuch election ſhould remaine to the arbitrement of
the pope. Concerning the election of the Emperour, and the
authoritie of the 7 electors,The Sacramēt in the Churches. reade Carion. lib. 5. fol. 3. and 5.
Therewith hath the Pope nothing to doe. He commaunded
the God Pan, the wheaten God, ſhould in the Churches be
kept.A littlebell and light carried before the ſacrament. And that when they carried it to any ſicke perſon, a
little bell and light ſhould be borne before it. Hee ordained
that the Pope ought to correct the Princes of the whole world.

And that none bee holden for Emperour, which ſhall not bee
crowned by the Pope. If this be true, it followeth, that Don Fernando
in our Countrey of Spaine, nor Maximilian his ſonne,
nor Rodulph his nephewe, that nowe is Emperour; were no
Emperours: ſeeing, that none of theſe three beſides other
more were crowned by the Pope.Anno 1216. In the 1216. yeere he dyed,
Thomas Cantipratenſis, a Dominican (as recounteth Friar Iohn
de Pineda lib. 21. cap. 26. ¶7.) writeth that this Innocent, after
his death burning in cruell flames, appeared to the holy Virgine
Lutgarda, and ſaid vnto her, that ſo ſhould he goe vnto
the end of the world: and that for three ſinnes hee had deſerued
euerlaſtingly to bee condemned, but that the glorious
mother of God, and of mercie fauoured him becauſe he had
built a Church in honour of her holy and ſweete name. And
this Authour ſaith, that Saint Lutgarda tolde him what ſinnes
they were, but that hee for the Popes honour would not
write them. O yee Church-men that for true prelates confound
the Churches, God grant ye become not worſe then Innocent.
Thus farre Pineda. Open thine eyes (ô Spaine) and
vnderſtand at laſt, what a one is the Pope, whome as a God
on earth thou adoreſt. Don Alonſo the ninth then reigned in
Caſtile.Honorius 3.
            
            
               Honorius the third againſt the excommunicated Otho the
fourth and Henry the firſt, crowned Frederick ſecond ſonne of
Conſtantia the Nunne (of whom we haue ſpoken in the life of
Celeſtinus the third) which Fredericke, becauſe he ſought that
which was his in Sicilia and Pulla, the Pope did afterwards excommunicate.
This Honorius forbad the Ciuill lawe to be read
in Paris.The ciuill law not to be read in Paris. In the time of this Pope, and the 1223. yeare, did one
Adam Biſhop of Cathan in Scotland, excommunicate certaine
men,The Biſhop burned in his kitchin. for not paying their tithes, againſt whome the citizens
were ſo muche offended, that they burned him in his kitchin.
So much did the Pope ſtomacke this matter, that he ſtaied not
(till the king of Scotland called Alexander did it:The great cruelty of the pope.) but 400. of
them he cauſed to be hanged, and their ſonnes to be gelded;
that their name ſhoulde not remaine in the earth. Cruell
and reuengefull is this beaſt.Anno 1227. In the 1227. yere he died. Don

Fernando, ſurnamed the Holie; which wan Seuill, Cordoua,
and a great part of Andaluſia,
               Gregorie. 9. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Gregorie 9. the Nephew, or to ſpeake better, the ſonne of
Innocent 3. bare great hatred againſt Fredericke, and ſo he confirmed
the ſentence of excommunication, which Honorius had
giuen againſt him. The Ambaſſadors, which the Emperor ſent
for his excuſe, he would not heare. He incited manie Princes againſt
him, which thing the Emperor ſeeing, to auoyd the furie
of the Pope, he went to Paleſtina to make warre with the Souldan,
as the pope commanded. But when the Emperor was paſſed
the ſea, then the Pope made himſelfe Maiſter of Pulla, and
would not conſent that the croſſed ſouldiers, which were to
go and ſerue the Emperour, ſhould paſſe the ſea. The Emperor
went thither, where ſo valiantly he behaued himſelfe, that he
wan Ieruſalem and other cities, and made truce with the Souldan
for ten yeares. All which, by his Embaſſadors he ſignified
to the Pope, ſuppoſing that the Pope would haue reioyced:
But ſo farre off was the Pope from reioycing at the newes,A cruell and lying Pope. that
he commanded thoſe which brought them to be ſlaine, leſt
they ſhould tell them to others, and bruted it abroad, that the
Emperour was dead. This did the Pope, that thoſe certaine
citties of Pulla, which were not yet rendered, hearing
of the Emperours death might yeeld themſelues vnto
him. Herein the Pope ſhewed himſelfe a murtherer and lyer,
the verie ſonne of the diuell. And that the Emperour
might not returne, the Pope by letteres requeſted the Soldan
not to deliuer the holie land vnto him. But the Emperour
ſet all things in good order, returned into Italie, and
recouered againe that which the Pope had vſurped in Pulla.
The Pope ſeeing this, did excommunicate him againe,
obiecting againſt him, that hee had made truce with the
Souldan: yet in the end by the mediatiation of the Princes
the Pope abſolued the Emperour, prouided that he payd for
his abſolution an hundred thouſand ounces of gold, or as ſaith
Hiſt. Pontific. vpon the life of this Gregory the ninth, a hundred
twenty fiue thouſand ounces. But Nauclerus, Friar Iohn de Pineda,
Rerum Germanicarum Epitome: and Carion lib. 5. ſay,
120000. ounces of gold. How deerely the Pope ſelleth his vile

merchandiſe here appeareth. There is no Mercer, chapman,
nor Pedler, which ſell ſo deere their wares, as the Pope ſelleth
his inke, paper, waxe, and leade. When the Emperour
was departed out of Italy, hee vnderſtood that the Pope and
his confederates ſought to depriue him of the Empire: whereupon
he returned into Italy and chaſtiſed the rebelles. The
Pope hearing thereof, did eftſoones excommunicate the Emperour
as then in Pauia, who now vnable any longer to endure
the couetouſneſſe, ſauſineſſe and tyranny of the Pope,
reſolued to make them knowne to all faithfull Chriſtians,
that they might fly from the error & falſe religion of the Popes.
For this cauſe he commaunded a man well exerciſed in the
Scripture, to preach in his preſence, wherein he ſhould intreate
of Excommunication, and the Roman Church. And ſo
it was. The Sermon being ended, the errours of the Romane
Church were ſo diſcouered and the craft and ſubtiltie of the
Popes ſo manifeſted, that the Emperour wrote to the Pope
theſe verſes.
            
               Roma diu titubans longis erroribus acta
               Corruet, & mundi deſinet eſſe caput.
            
            To wit Rome, that long time hath ſtumbled, ſhall fall, and ceaſe
to be the head of the world. The which we ſee dayly more and
more to be verified. How many kingdomes haue caſt off the
Romane tyranny?Tolling of the bell at the Aue Maria, and elevation. This Pope commaunded, that at the Aue
Maria, the Salue Regina: (that ſo blaſphemous Antheme againſt
Chriſt, which this Pope firſt cōmanded to be ſung in the Churches)
and alſo at the eleuation of his paſted God the bel ſhould
be tolled. To Saint Fraunces was this Pope very much deuoted:
and ſo commaunded, that the faithfull ſhould beleeue,
Saint Fraunces to haue had the fiue woundes. Frier
Iohn de Pineda (as a Frier Franciſcan) libr. 22. cap. 23. ¶. 3.
handleth this matter at large. And in the 39. cap. ¶. 3 he intreateth
of the Saints, which he ſaith had the woundes, as had
Saint Fraunces: which hiſtorie, among the ſwarme of falſe miracles
you ſhall find in the end of this booke. This Pope (as noteth
Frier Iohn de Pineda, lib. 21. cap. 33. ¶. 3.) compiled and
ordained the Decretals.Decretals. The lawes of the Popes whereby the
Cannoniſts be gouerned, ſome are called Decretals which be

(as Pineda in the place alleaged doth note it) determinatiue
Epiſtles of ſome doubtful cauſes which the Pope alone, or with
the opinion of the Cardinals and conſultation of ſome maketh.
A Decree is called that,Decree. which the Pope eſtabliſheth by aduiſe
of the Cardinals,Cannon. without requeſt of any. A Cannon is that
which in an vniuerſall Councell is eſtabliſhed. And this is a
diſtinction of the Gloſe. Cann. Omnis. Diſt. 3. vpon a Decree.
He addeth,Dogma. that the ſtatute in matter of faith is called Dogma:
and that which conſiſteth in matters of vices or vertues,Mandatum. 
               Mandatum.
And if it be prohibitiue, an Interdiction it is called without
puniſhment aſſigned:Sancion. and Sancion is the member of the
lawe, that appointeth the puniſhment to tranſgreſſors, &c.
And ſomewhat lower: Other conſtitutions, which other popes
haue ſithens inuented remaine in another volume, which wee
call Liber Sextus,
               Sextus. compiled and authoriſed by Pop Boniface the
eight and in the Councell of Lyons in France by him publiſhed.
And Clement the fift made afterwards many others, which
are called Clementines,Clementines. &c. Other Extrauagants many Popes
made,Extrauagants. &c. Extrauagants be they called, becauſe they are not
put in the titles of the Law, as other ordinarie ones be, but each
one apart by it ſelfe, euery one intreating of it diſtinct matter:
euen as Quodlibets are ſo called,Quodlibets. becauſe they be put amongſt
diuine queſtions, handled apart by themſelues, euery one
according to it matter. I thought good (ſeeing in this booke is
handled the authoritie of the Pope) to ſet downe here the
names of the lawes wherewith the Pope gouerneth his Church.
Ieſus Chriſt the only vniuerſall head of his vniuerſall Church,
with the word of God conteined in the old and new Teſtament
(which we call the Byble, and our aduerſaries ſo much abhor
and deteſt as the peſtilence, and doctrine of diuels) gouerneth
his Church: and therefore vnder ſuch rigorous paine forbid they
the reading thereof: calling it a booke of hereſies. Ariſe ô Lord,
ſleepe not, diſperſe thine enemies, and driue thoſe away that
abhorre thy holie lawe which thy Maieſtie hath publiſhed by
the mouth and writing of thine holy Prophetes and Apoſtles.
In the 1241.Anno 1241. yeare this Gregorie 9. died. Don Fernando 3. reigned
in Caſtile.
            
               Celeſtinus the fourth,Celeſtinus 4. a Milaniſt, aſſayed what he might, to

ſecute the good Emperour Fredericke: but, for that hee was
Pope but eighteene dayes,Poyſon. and (as is ſayd) poyſoned: hee
could not performe it. In the election of this Celeſtine the fourth
(ſaith the hiſtorie,) an Engliſh Cardinall called Robert Somerton,
leſt he ſhould haue ſucceeded Gregorie the ninth,Poyſon. was poiſoned.
Celeſtine being dead, becauſe the Emperour tooke the
Cardinals, the popedome was voyd almoſt 21 moneths, but
in the end, at the requeſt of Baldwin Emperour of Conſtantinople
and others, he let them go. Don Fenando 3. reigned
in Spaine.Innocent 4.
            
            When Innocent the fourth, a Genoway, was Pope, of a moſt
deere friend to the Emperour Fredericke he beame a mortall
enemie. I will here recite what ſaith Ieronymus Marius, concerning
this Pope, of him ſaith he: that being Pope he held a
Councell againſt the Emperor at Lyous in Fraunce: in which
Councell the Pope himſelfe cited the Emperour. The Embaſſadors
of the Emperour beſought the Pope to giue him time
to come to the Councell: this time the Pope refuſed to graunt,
but there, like a mad man, excommunicated and depoſed
the Emperour: commaunding that none ſhould obey him,
and the Princes to chooſe another Emperour: whom he ſo
ſollicited, and with promiſes deceiued, that they choſe for
Emperour Henrie, Lantgraue of Turingia. Fredericke the ſecond
vnderſtanding hereof, againſt the Pope and the reſt defended
himſelfe valiantly, vntill being in Pulla, he could not
eſcape the ſnares of the Pope, where a certaine man by the
Pope corrupted, did poyſon him. Yet began he notwithſtanding
to recouer,The Pope cauſed the Emperor to be poyſoned. vntill a young man called Manfredo with
money alſo (as ſome ſay) by the pope corrupted, ſtrangled
him with a towell. Concerning this good Emperour, no
credite is to be giuen either to Blundus, Platina, Eſtella, nor
Sabellicus, becauſe they wrote the ſayings of the Pope and his
flatterers to ſtirre vp the world, if they might againſt this
good Emperour.Petr. de Vinea. Who liſteth to knowe the truth, let him
reade Petrus de Vinea in his ſixe bookes of Epiſtles. Hitherto
Marius.
               Preachers preach againſt the Pope. In Sueuia at this time were preachers, that with great
libertie preached the truth, againſt the Pope and his Cardinals,
they iuſtified the cauſe of the Emperour Fredericke the

ſecond and Conrad his ſonne: and boldly affirmed, that neithe
the Pope, Cardinals, nor Biſhops had any authority, becauſe
they were ſtained with Simony, and that they held no power
which Chriſt had giuen them. The Prieſts (ſayd they) being in
mortall ſinne, did neither bind nor looſe, nor yet conſecrate at
al, &c. At the end of their ſermons, they ſaid, that the indulgēces
which they preached, were not feigned of the Pope, nor inuented
of his Prelates, but graunted by the omnipotent God. In
the foreſayd Councell of Lugdanum,Hats clokes & trapped horſes. 
               Innocent ordeined, that
the Cardinals ſhould vſe red ſhadowes (which they call hattes)
and cloakes, and ride vpon trapped horſes: and this (ſaith Platina)
to adorne his order of Cardinals. Note for this purpoſe,
concerning the Cardinals, that which Pero Mexia vpon the
life of the Emperour Henry the fourth ſaith: where to paint
Saint Ierome with a hat is made a mockerie: for Saint Ierome
died aboue 850 yeares before Innocent inuented the hattes.
This Pope Innocent the fourth had many baſtards; whom, after
the popiſh cuſtome he called Nephewes. Vntill the time of this
Pope (as noteth Bibliander) there was no article of faith,Tranſnbſtantiation & adoration of the bread & wine. nor law
of the Church, that men ſhould worſhip the bread and wine in
the Euchariſt. This Pope was the firſt that created a new God
by his tranſubſtantiation: albeit true it is, that Honorius 3. began
this building. This Pope offered to Henry 3. king of England,
the kingdome of both Sicils,Anno 1254. if he would buy it. In the 1254.
yeare he died: and Don Alonſo 10. called the wiſe, which was
Emperour, reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Alexander 4. an Italian was the firſt that perſecuted and
excommunicated Manfred king of Sicilia.Alexander. By reaſon whereof,
many reuolts happened in Italie.William de Amor againſt the begging Friars. 
               William de S. Amor, a learned
man, who wrote againſt the feigned pouertie of the begging
Friars, was in the time of this Pope, which bookes, with a terrible
edict the Pope prohibited. This good man affirmed theſe
idle poore and lazie fellowes, which liued by almes, were not
in the ſtate of ſaluation. This Alexander 4. ſecretly fauoured
Richard the ſonne of king Iohn of England,A double harted Pope. for money which
he had promiſed, if he would make him Emperour, but publikely
hee made ſhewe to fauour Don Alonſo 10. king of
Spaine, of whome hee had receiued verie much money.
            
               
A double hearted man, is neuer good. In the 1262. yeare, or
after others 1261. he died: and Don Alonſo the tenth reigned
in Caſtile.Anno 1262.
            
            
               
                  Ʋrban 4.Vrban. 4. a Frenchman, was Pope, he tooke againſt Manfred,
as his predeceſſour Alexander the fourth had done. And the
better to be enabled for his owne reuenge, he prayed Lewis
king of France, to ſend Charles his brother, Earle of Prouince
and Aniou, whom he called king of both Sicils, with a great
campe into Italie. Charles in the end, after many warlike conflicts,
ouercame and ſlew Manfred, neere vnto Benauente:
and ſo took he vnder fealty, the kingdoms of Sicilia, with Dukedome
of Calabria and Pulla (the pope againſt all right, as he
that faulteth in whatſoeuer he doth, giuing the ſame vnto him)
This manifeſt roberie was the cauſe of manie enſuing murders.
This Vrban the fourth at the inſtance of a certain woman called
Eua,
               The feaſt of Corpus Chriſti at requeſt of a woman inſtituted. a Recluſe in the land of Leege (familiarly by him knowne
before he was Pope) did inſtitute the great feaſt of the breaden
God, called Corpus Chriſti. This woman Arnoldus Boſtius,
and Petrus Premoſtratenſis report,Anno 1264. had a reuelation (a diuelliſh
one no doubt) vpon the celebration of the feaſt of
the Sacrament, which ſhee by her letters ſignified to the
Pope, requeſting him by his papall authoritie to cauſe it to be
celebrated: Which thing the pope graunted, as by a letter in
anſwere thereof appeareth. This letter thus beginneth: 
                  Ʋrbanus
Epiſcopus, ſeruus ſeruorum Dei, dilectae in Chriſto filiae Euae,
ſalutem, &c. Ʋrban Biſhop, the ſeruant of Gods ſeruants,
to Euah his beloued daughter in Chriſt, health and Apoſtolique
bleſſing: We know ô daughter, that with great deſire
hath thy ſoule deſired the ſolemne feaſt of the body of our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt to be inſtituted in the Church of God, and for euer
celebrated of all faithfull Chriſtians, &c. The Letter is long,
and therefore contenting my ſelfe to haue put downe the
ſumme, I haue ſpared here to recite it. Behold heere, my
brethren the cauſe of this ſolemne feaſt, with ſo manie daunces,
Caſtles, Maygames, playes, maydes borne vpon mens
ſhoulders, ſtreetes ſtrowed with boughes and decked with
Tapiſtrie. A day it is of moſt great ſuperſtition and Idolatrie:
a day wherein more villanies then vertues are committed. For

who, (he or ſhee) vpon this day, will not ſee, and be ſeene;
& that beſide which paſſeth, more to be lamented then laughed
at. True it is, that Pope Honorius the third laid the foundation,
and made the ground-worke of this building. In the 1265.
or after ſome others,Anno 1265. 1264. yeere died 
                  Ʋrban: and Don Alonſo
10. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Clement 4.Clement. 5. a cruell Pope. a Frenchman was like his predeceſſors, cruell, and
a great bloodſhedder. He called into Italy againſt Manfred
king of Cicill, Charles Earle of Aniou: Charles vanquiſhed and
killed Manfred, whom this vngentle Clement made king of Sicilia,
and Ieruſalem,Sicilia prayeth to Pope 40000. duckats for tribute. with this condition to pay him yeerely
40000. duckats. This cauſed infinite numbers of men to be
murdered. For Conradino, the ſonne and heire of Conrade, king
of Sicilia, ſought to defend his right: but Charles ouercame and
tooke him priſoner, together with Fredericke Duke of Auſtria
neere vnto Naples; and by the counſell of the pope did behead
them. For Charles wrote to the Pope what he ſhould doe with
Conradino his priſoner? The Pope anſwered, The life of Charles,
the death of Conradino &c. After him, Adrian 5. againſt this
Charles,
               Naples French. demanded aide of Rodolph the Emperour. The kingdome
of Naples, by meanes of this curſed Pope, came to the
French,Anno 1270. and the Dukedome of Sueuia tooke end. In the 1270.
yeere,A moſt great vacation. this butcher died. The ſeat of Sathan was long time, to
wit, two yeeres and nine moneths, and two dayes, voide. And
Don Alonſo 10. then reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Clement the fourth being dead,Cregorie 10. the Cardinals which were
17. number, to chuſe a new pope aſſembled together; Amongſt
whom ſo great diſcord aroſe, that in almoſt three yeeres ſpace,
they could not agree: for euery of them pretended to be pope.
Philip king of France, and Charles king of Sicill, hearing of this
great diſcord, came to Viterbo where the Cardinals were, and
prayed them to diſpatch and chuſe a chiefe biſhop; but ſo great
was the ambition of the Cardinals, that all this trauell and ſute
of the two kings, were to no purpoſe: & ſo they returned without
any thing done. When they were in the election, inuocating
the holy ſpirit, biſhop Iohn Cardinall Portuenſis, ſeeing
the great forwardneſſe of the Cardinals, ſaid vnto them: My
Lords, let vs vncouer this chamber: for the holy ſpirit through

ſo great roofes cannot enter vnto vs. When the ſame Cardinall
vnderſtood that Gregory was Pope, he cōpiled theſe two verſes:

                  Papatus munus tulit Archidiaconus vnus:
                  Quem patrem patrum, fecit diſcordia fratrum.
               
            
            To wit, an Archdeacon attained to the Popedom, whom the
diſcord of brothers, made father of fathers. All this reporteth
Panuinus an Auguſtin Frier. Behold here what the Romiſts thē
               ſelues
report, of the elections of their Popes: behold here Ambition
the holy ſpirit, which in their election gouerneth. Gregory
10.Anno 1273. thus elected, in the yere 1273. at Lyons in France did celebrate
a Councell: where Michael Paleologus Emperour of Conſtantinople,
who approued the doctrin of the Romaine church,
his predeceſſors hauing 12 times done the like,The Grecians 12. times approued, and as often reuoked the popiſh doctrine. & as many times
more reuoked the ſame, was preſent. In this councell it was ordeined,
that the Pope being dead, the Cardinals ſhold ſhut thē
               ſelues
in the Conclaue. And that moreouer which Panuinus in
the note vpon Platina, vpon the life of this Gregory 10. ſaith. He
renued a freſh the warre of the holy land. And in 5 yeres that he
poped,Anno 1276. neuer ſaw Rome. In the 1276. yere he died, and Don Alonſo
10.Innocent 5. the firſt begging friar that was made Pope. reigned in Caſtile. Innocent 5. a Burgonion, was the firſt
begging friar that was made pope: for which cauſe, he much fauored
his dominicks. And hauing poped 6. moneths & 2. daies,
the ſame yere with his predeceſſor he died.Adrian 5. 
               Adriā
                5. a Genoway
was the nephew, or as is thought the ſon of Innocēt 4. whē he was
Pope, he went frō Rome to Viterbo: frō whence he wrote to Rodulph,
the Emperour to aide him againſt Charles king of Sicilia:
which Charles, had the former popes againſt all right made king
of Sicil, as in the life of Clement 4. we haue noted: but the Emperor
occupied in the wars of Bohemia, could not ſuccor him. He
poped but one moneth, & 7 daies & then died. Iohn 22. (or 21 or
20) before he was pope called in latin Petrus Hiſpanus,
               Iohn 12. was born
at Lisbon, & by profeſſiō a Phiſition. Albeit this mā was holden
for very learned; yet was he very vnskilfull to gouerne. And as
ſaith Platina wrought more domage thē profit to the popedom.
Many things he did, which ſhew his folly & lightnes. One good
property he had, that whē he ſaw a yong man inclined to ſtudy,
with benefits & money he would aide him. This mā (fooliſh as
he was) promiſed by the ſtars long life to himſelfe: & ſo would

tell it to all men. But it farre otherwiſe happened to him: for a
certaine chamber which Valerius calleth a ſporting chamber, &
Eſtella calleth it a precious bed chamber, which he had builded
for his pleaſure, in the pallace of Viterbo, at the end of 4. dayes,
fell ſuddenly to the ground: & the Pope was found betweene
the timber & the ſtones: who (hauing poped 8. moneths, and
8. daies) at 7.Anno 1277. dayes end, in the 1277. yere died.
            Six moneths after the death of his predeceſſor,Nichalas 3. was Nicholas 3.
choſen: for the Cardinals could not agree: at the end of which
time,The Senator of Rome was preſident in the Conclaue. 
               Charles king of Sicilia ruling as a Senator in the Conclaue:
Nicholas 3. was choſen: who after he was pope began thē to perſecute
Charles: he tooke frō him the vicaredge of Hetruria: he
tooke frō him alſo the power of Senator, giuē him by Clement 4.
he forbad, that no king or prince thenceforth ſhould dare to demand
or adminiſter that office, & tooke it to himſelfe. But Martin
the 4.What one Pope did, another vndid. his ſucceſſor, did reſtore it vnto him. For ſo agree the
Popes, that that which one doeth, another vndoeth. This Nicholas
with great wars vexed Italy. And the better to effect his purpoſes,
he perſwaded Don Pedro king of Arragon, to demand the
kingdom of Sicilia: ſeeing it was his in the right of his wife Conſtance.
This counſell much pleaſed Don Pedro: which was afterwards
the cauſe of much bloodſhed:Anno 1281. In the yere 1381. died Nic.
            
            
               Martin 4.Martin 4. a Frenchman (Panninus cals him 2.) with great humanity
receiued Charles king of Sicilia, and reſtored him to the
dignity of Senator; & that moreouer, which his predeceſſor had
taken frō him.Don Pedro excommunicated. He excōmunicated Don Pedro king of Arragon;
who leuied a great armie to inuade Charles in Sicilia: gaue his
kingdome for a prey, to the firſt that could take it: abſolued all
his vaſſals from their oth to him made, as their king &c. yet Don
Pedro of al this made no reckoning, but paſſed into Italy, & aided
by Paleologus, Emperor of Conſtantinople wan Sicilia. The Sicilians
for their pride & luxuritie, bare great hatred to the French,
ſo that they conſpired againſt Charles & his frenchmen, & toulling
the bels, they iſſued out, & killed all; nor ſex nor age regarded;
yong & old, men and women, albeit great with child they
deſtroyed.The Sicilians Euenſong. Theſe be the Euenſongs, which the Sicilians call ſo
famous. After this, Charles with his armie comming to Naples
was vanquiſhed, taken, & (as ſaith Platina) ſent into Arragon.

This Pope Martin tooke the concubine of his predeceſſor Nicholas
3.Anno 1215. when Martin had 4. yeares and one moneth poped, in
the 1285. yeare he died, of whom (ſaith Platina) that after his
death, he wrought great miracles. Don Alonſo 10. then raigned
in Caſtile.Honorius 4. 
               Honorius the fourth following the ſteps of his
predeceſſor Martin 4. confirmed the excommunication, and
interdiction againſt Don Pedro, which held the kingdome of
Sicilia.Anno 1288. In the 1288. yeare, and the ſecond yeare of his popedome,
died Honorius. Don Sancho the braue raigned in Caſtile.
When ten moneths and eight dayes of the vacation were expired:
Nicholas the fourth was choſen.Nicholas. 4. In this time were great
tumults in Rome. So that in the 1292 yeare,Anno 1292. for very griefe
and ſorrow (ſay they) he died. When Nicholas was dead, the
Cardinals for more quiet election of a new Pope, went from
Rome, to Peruſio. But notwithſtanding ſo great were the diſcordes
among them:A great vacation of the Popedome. that in two yeares, three moneths, & two
dayes, they could not agree together. Don Sancho 5. raigned
in Caſtile. After ſo great a vacation Celeſtine 5. by the fauour of
Charles king of Naples,Celeſtine 5. & of Cardinall Latinus was made pope.
This pope in his firſt Conſiſtorie, (as ſayth Chriſtianus Maſſeus)
willing to reforme the church for example vnto others,The Pope that ſhall ſpeake of reformation ſhall not long liue. began
the reformation of the eccleſiaſtical perſons, reſident in Rome:
for which the church men were ſo offended with him, that they
called him blocke, and foole: among whom was a Cardinall
named Benedict, or to ſpeake better Maledict, which after being
Pope was called Boniface 8.Boniface 8. He I ſay, placed a certaine perſon
in a chamber of the pope:A notable hiſtorie declaring what religion haue the Popes. which perſon many nights thorough
a trunke, ſhould ſay theſe words: Celeſtine, Celeſtine, renounce:
for the burthen is greater then thou art able to beare:
Celeſtine being a good man, without deceit, and not malicious
as Maledict was, ſuppoſed it was an Angell, that ſpake to him
by night: and ſo for diſcharge of his conſcience, began to treat
of renouncing: which heard of king Charles, he beſought him
with great inſtance, in no wiſe to renounce. And all the people
did the ſame: but Celeſtine anſwered, he would doe that which
God willeth. In the end being exhorted by many of the Cardinals,
and chiefely by Maledict that ſucceeded him, hauing
firſt made a decree by conſent of all the Cardinals that the pope

might renounce after he had 6. monethes bene Pope; he renounced,
and ſo Boniface was made Pope: who when hee was
Pope, fearing (as ſaith Colemucius in his Neapolitaine hiſtorie)
the holines of Celeſtine, laid hand on, and tooke Celeſtine, after
he had renounced, and in the way to Yermo, where before he
was Pope, he had liued. Celeſtine thus taken, in the thouſand
two hundred ninetie fiue yeere died.Anno 1295. 
               Boniface like a ſubtill
and craftie man yeelded (albeit but friuolous) his excuſes.
Be it as it wilbe (ſaith Platina) this is notorius; that verie
vngratefull and craftie was Boniface; ſeing by his ambition he
deceaued ſo holie a man, cauſed him to renounce his Popedome,
and going to Yermo, tooke him, and put him into a
Caſtle; where before the time of a yeare, and fiue moneths,
after he was made Pope he cauſed him to die. Of this Celeſtine
(ſaith Genebrardus) by authoritie of ſome hioſtories, (as Pineda
lib. 22. cap. 7. 5. 3. reporteth it) that this holy Pope comaunded,
that thenceforth neither Popes nor Cardinals ſhould ride, but
on Aſſes, as rode Ieſus Chriſt, and he him ſelfe, whiles he was
Pope; as writeth Papirus, &c. Don Sancho the braue reigned
in Caſtille.
            
               Boniface 8.Boniface 8. curſed, and proud. of the Spaniſh race, through his great ambition
and deceipt, was pope: as in the life of his predeceſſor we haue
declared. So arrogant he was (ſaith Platina) that he no man
regarded: ſome of the Cardinals complained of him, to the
kings and Chriſtian princes, accuſing him of Ambition, that
againſt all right and reaſon, by deceauing, and cauſing Celeſtine
to be taken, with that moreouer which before we haue recited,
he had made himſelfe pope. So greatly this pope hated the
Gibilins,
               The hiſtory ſheweth, what account the Popes make of their religiō. that vpon a time, being the firſt wedneſdaie in lent,
Prochetus, Archbiſhop of Genoa, kneeling at his feete to take
aſhes, the pope, in ſteed of ſaying, Remember that thou art duſt
ô man, and to duſt thou ſhalt returne, he ſaid, Remember man that
thou art a Gibiline, and with the Gibilins into aſhes ſhalt returne:
and in ſtead of putting aſhes vpon his head, he caſt them into
his eyes: and depriued him of his Archbiſhoppricke, albeit
afterwards againe hee reſtored him. This Pope excommunicated
Philip king of Fraunce, becauſe hee would not
ſuffer him to draw money out of Fraunce, and banned him

and his race, vnto the fourth generation. He would not confirme
Albertus the Emperour, albeit two or three times he
had requeſted him, except (Philip depoſed) hee would make
him king of France. And ſo on a time, as by ouermuch ambition
and pride, he was beſides himſelfe, hee girt vnto him a
ſword, put a crowne vpon his head, and gloried that hee was
Emperour and chiefe Biſhoppe: and ſo denied the confirmation
of the Emperour. But of himſelfe afterwarde for the hate
he bare to the French king, did he offer it. The cauſe of this
hate recounteth Carion. lib. 5. He adunaced the excommunication,
to Don Peter king of Arragon:One Pope doth that another Pope vndoeth. euer ſought to entertaine
diſcord in Italy: gloried that hee was porter of heauen:
and that he might be adiudged of no man: he was the firſt that
appointed the Iubile, promiſing full pardon and remiſſion of
ſinnes to ſuch as ſhould viſite Rome. The Fraticellians which
ſaide that the Clergie ought to imitate the Apoſtles,The firſt Iubile he condemned.
He compyled the Sexto of the Decretals,Indulgences. and commaunded
them publiquely to be read in all Vniuerſities. Of
the Decretals read aboue vpon Gregorie the ninth.The Pope cannonizeth and vncānonizeth. He canonized
Saint Lewes king of France, and vncanonized Harmon
of Ferrara; commaunded him to be vntombed, and after hee
had beene buryed thirtie yeeres, to be burned. Of this Hermanus
(ſaith Hiſtor. Pontific. vpon the life of Boniface the eight)
that more then twentie yeeres they helde him for holy in Ferrara,
and then was he verified to haue beene an heretique, of
thoſe which were called Fraticellians. Of this Boniface (ſaith
Cornelius Agrippa, lib. de vanitate ſcientiarum, cap. 62. This is
that Boniface the great, which did three great and wonderfull
things. The firſt that with deceipt and a falſe Oracle, he perſwaded
Celeſtine to renounce the popedome: The ſecond he
compyled the Sexto of the Decretals, and affirmed the Pope
to be Lorde of all; The third hee inſtituted the Iubile, and
market of Indulgences, and he, the firſt that ſtretched them
out euen vnto Purgatorie. Thus farre Agrippa. Of the Iubile,
afterwardes vppon Nicholas the fift, and Alexander the
ſixt,Boniface ſtretched his pardons to purgatorie. and Carion lib. 5. The ende of this beaſt was thus; ſome
which for feare of him, had hid themſelues in the mountaines
and woods, holding the wilde beaſtes, not ſo cruell as he that

was Pope, came to Anagnia, where ſecure was the Pope in the
houſe of his father, and breaking the gates, they tooke, and
caried him to Rome, where fiue and thirtie dayes he remained;
after which time, hauing poped eight yeeres, nine monethes,
and ſeuenteene dayes, in the 1304. yeere of very griefe
and ſorrowe hee died.Anno 1304. Frier Iohn de Pineda, ſpeaking of this
Boniface 8. lib. 22. cap. 11. ¶3. ſayeth: he added that, which
to many others ſeemed meere noueltie; namely, that he, (as
wrote alſo Papyrus Saonenſis) was Lord of all the world; which
thing Philip king of France did denie him &c. And a little
lower, ſayth the ſame Pineda: Crantzio ſayth, that on a ſolemne
day to declare himſelfe Lord, as well of the temporaltie as of
the ſpiritualitie: pontifically arrayed as a Pope he ſhewed him
ſelfe to, and bleſſed the people; and another day clothed as
an Emperour, carying before him a ſword naked ſhewed himſelfe,
and cryed out, ſaying, Ecce duo gladij hic, &c. Beholde
here two ſwords &c. wherein he would ſay; that he was Lord
of both ſwords, ciuill and ſpirituall. This is that Pope, of whom
ſay the Hiſtorians, that he entered like a Foxe, liued like a Lyon,
and died like a dogge:Entered like a Foxe, &c. Thus died that Boniface (ſayth Platina)
that more endeuoured to terrifie Emperours, Kinges,
Princes, Nations, and people, then make them religious. He
attempted to giue and take away kingdomes, diſpatch men
and eftſoones call them backe, euen as hee liſted himſelfe,
much thirſting after golde. ſeeking for it on all ſides more
then can be ſpoken. Pandulphus Calenucius, in the fifth booke
of his Neapolitane hiſtorie, recounteth manie great villanies
of this Pope. With Boniface the eight will I conclude,
ſaying that which Frier Iohn de Pineda in his twentie and two
booke, chapter 12. ¶1. ſaith. Let ambitious men (ſaith hee)
note the life and death of Boniface, ſo openly practiſed in his
popedome: and who coueteth more (ſaith Frier Iohn de Pineda)
let him read Iohannes Vilaneus in the eight booke of his
hiſtorie.
            And notwithſtanding he was ſuch a one as manie men worthy
of credite, doe paint him out, yet did Clement the fifth
for all this celebrate a Councell in Vienna, where were preſent
(as ſaith Frier Iohn de Pineda) three hundred Biſhoppes,

with very many other Prelates: and it was there determined,
that Pope Baniface had bene moſt Catholike, a Chriſtian and
true Pope and Vicar of God. Wo vnto you, that call good euil,
and euill good. Behold here if the Pope and Councel may erre.
Don Fernando 4. the ſonne of Don Sancho reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Benedict 11.Benedict. 11. or after others, the 9. a Dominican was very liberall
to entertaine Idolatrie. When he was Pope, he cited
thoſe that had taken Boniface his predeceſſour: and for not
appearing before him, he excommunicated them for their contempt.
Hee abſolued of the excommunication the king of
France, and receiued into fauour Iohn and Iames Cardinals of
Colen, whom Boniface ſo much abhorred. This good is reported
of him, that he would not ſee his mother poore, but poorly
clothed.Anno 1305. In the 1305. yeere, 9 moneths of his popedome not
fully complete, he died, and of poyſon (as is thought) giuen him
in certaine figs ſent him by an Abbeſſe:Poyſon. 
               Don Fernando 4. then
reigning in Caſtile.
            After great differences,Clement 5. who ſhould be Pope, Clement 5. a
Gaſcon, was choſen being abſent. His election being knowne,
he departed from Burdeux, where he was Archbiſhop, and
came to Lyons in Fraunce, whither he commanded (and they
ſo did) all the Cardinals to come,In the 1305. yere the Court of Rome paſſed into France & there remained almoſt 74. yeers. and ſo the Court of Rome in
the 1305. yeare paſſed into Fraunce, and there continued almoſt
74. yeares. At the coronation of this Clement, Philip king
of Fraunce, Charles his brother, and Iohn Duke of Brittaine
were preſent: vpon whom, and other twelue alſo, fell a wall,
whereof they all there died. The king alſo himſelfe receiued
ſome part of the euill; and the pope ſawe himſelfe in ſo great a
ſtraite, that he fell from his horſe, and loſt a Carbuncle, which
he bare in his Miter, or as they call it Reyno, worth 6000. Florences.
How could he ſay with Saint Peter, whoſe ſucceſſour
(ſaith he) he is, Gold and ſiluer haue I none? The pompe of this
coronation ended, many Cardinals he made, & all were French
men. To Rome he ſent three Cardinals, with authority of Senatours
which ſhould gouerne the ſame, and Italy alſo. He
made a decree that to the elected Caeſars in Almaine (albeit
they were called kings of the Romanes) the pope notwithſtanding
ſhould giue both authoritie and name: a Brotheller was

this Clement, and Patron of whores, and ſo for his pleaſure and
delight, ſetled his Court at Auignon. At Vienna in the 1311.
yeare,The Templars diſſolued. he celebrated a Councel: in which (for their goods ſake,
wherewith he inriched thoſe of S. Iohns order of the Rhodes)
moſt cruelly he diſſolued the Templars, which were more rich
then the French king himſelfe. The great maiſter of the Templars,
& one of his companions in the preſence of the Cardinals
he burned at Paris.The Fraticellians Begardians and Begninians condemned. Againſt the Fraticellians, Begardians, and
Begninians, that denied to adore the bread in the Sacrament,
he publiſhed a Bull. He excommunicated the Venetians, Florentines
and Lucqueſians. The feaſt of the Recluſes dreame in
the life of 
                  Ʋrban 4. before mentioned, which feaſt is called Corpus
Chriſti, he confirmed. Celeſtine 5. he cannonized. But why
condemned he not Boniface 8. who was a traitor to his Pope &
Lord Celeſtine?
               Anno 1314. In the 1314. yeare Clement died. In which ſame
yeare, as the Emperor Henry from Lucemberg meant to come
into Sicilia, offered and giuen him by the Sicilians themſelues,
a curſed man called Bernardus de Monte Policiano, a Dominick
Friar,Poyſon in the Sacrament, wherewith the Emperor dieth who fained of ſet purpoſe great ſeruice to the Emperor,
gaue him poyſon in the Sacrament. And whē the good Emperor
perceiued that he had giuē him poiſon, he ſaid vnto him: Sir,
depart hence: for if the Almaines perceiue what thou haſt done
thou ſhalt die an euil death. The curſed Dominick fled to Sena,
where like another Iudas, he receiued the money promiſed
for his treaſon. But his fellow Dominickes could he not deliuer:
for in Tuſcan,The Dominicans and their monaſteries deſtroyed, and the cauſe. Lombardie and diuers other partes,
many of them were murthered, and they and their monaſteries
by fire and ſword periſhed. Fryar Iohn de Pineda lib. 22. cap. 24.
¶4. of this Clement ſpeaketh theſe words; Saint Antoninus Iohannes
Villaneus and Papirius ſay: that hee was very couetous
of money and thence it happened, that he ſuffered Simony in
matter of benefices, to goe ſo openly through his court: meerly
ignorant bee they, which ſay the Pope cannot be a Simoniſt:
ſeeing we know by deuine law,The Pope a Simoniſt. that to buy or ſell things
holy and ſpirituall, is called ſinne, and is that of Simony &c. It
is no marueile (being ſuch) though he approued that good
peece Boniface 8.A great vacatiō
                Two yeares, 3 moneths, and 17. dayes the
Sea was voyd. In the time of this Pope, Don Alonſo 11. reigned in

Caſtile. After many contentions among the 23 Cardinals, Iohn
23,Iohn 23. au heretique & cruel or 22. or 21 was choſen. The Cardinals (as ſaith Saint Antoninus
whom Friar Iohn de Pineda alleageth) diſagreeing, they
yeelded the court to this Iohns diſpoſing, and whomſoeuer hee
ſhould name, was to be holden for Pope, &c. & he named himſelfe.
And ſomewhat lower ſaith Pineda,
               Iohn 23. elected himſelfe. 
               Titus, Liuius ſaith, that
the Romans were offended, becauſe Apius Claudius had choſen
himſelfe of the Decemuiri, and Lucius Furius Camillus to be
Conſull, and they were pagans; and to be named Pope he being
a Chriſtian, held it no let, &c. Such like vnto him was this
Iohn 24.The terrible crueltie of the Pope. that elected himſelfe. This Pope depriued Hugh, Biſhop
of Catura, diſgraded, and deliuered him to ſecular power
to be tormented, embowelled, and burned till he were dead.
The cauſe of his great crueltie was this, that the ſaid Biſhop (he
ſaid) had conſpired againſt the Pope. This Iohn much affected
nouelties, of one Biſhopricke he made 2, and contrarywiſe of
2, one. Of an Abotſhip, he made a biſhoprick: and of a biſhoprick,
he made an Abbotſhip.Caragoca an Archbiſhoppricke. 
               Caragoça he made an Archbiſhoprick;
and fiue biſhopricks of 11, in the Prouince of Taracona hee
gaue it for ſuffraganes.The knights of the order of Chriſt in Portugal. The Knights of Chriſts order (as they
call it) to fight againſt the Moores, he inſtituted in Portugale:
and by conſent of Don Alonſo king of Portugal, gaue them the
goods of the Templars. Thoſe he condemned for heretiques,
which ſaid, Chriſt and his Apoſtles had nothing proper. He forbad
this queſtion in the vniuerſities, to be diſputed. He condemned
one Peter a Franciſcan Friar, becauſe he exhorted men
to follow Chriſts pouertie.Note why the Pope cōmaunded men to be burned. For which cauſe, many were condemned,
and burned. This Pope ſo cruell againſt ſuch as he called
heretiques, erred in the faith, and was an heretike: For hee
taught that the ſoules,The Pope erreth in faith touching the eſtate of ſoules departed. ſeperated from the bodies, ſaw not God,
nor reioyced with him before the day of iudgement. For ſo (as
ſaith Maſſeus) deceiued by the viſions of one Tundall an Iriſhman,
had his father taught him. By that ſaying of the Lord to
the theefe vpon the Croſſe (This day ſhalt thou be with mee in
Paradice Luke 22.The hereſie of the Pope confuted. 43.) and by the ſpeech which he vttered concerning
Lazarus, whoſe ſoule (ſaith he) was in Abrahams boſome,
Luke 16.Luke 24. 46. 22. by that which ſaith S. Stephen Act. 7. 59.
Lord Ieſus receiue my ſpirit, imitating therein, his maiſter, who

being vpon the croſſe, ſaid, Father Into thy handes I commend my
ſpirit. And by the ſaying of S. Paul Phil. 1. 21. To me Chriſt is gain,
whether in life or death. and verſe 23. I deſire to be diſſolued and to
be with Chriſt, and that (he ſaith) is better for him. Alſo Eccle. 12. 7.
And duſt returne to the earth &c. & the ſpirit returne to God that
gaue it. Alſo Matth. 22, 23. the Lord ſpeaking of Abraham, Iſack
& Iacob, (who were dead as touching the body) ſaith, that God
is not a God of the dead, but of the liuing. And Luke 16. 9. Make ye
friends of the vnrighteous Mammon: that when ye ſhall haue neede,
to wit, when ye ſhall die. They may receiue you into euerlaſting habitation.
And 2. Cor. 5. 8. (we loue to be out of the body, and
to be with the Lord) is this hereſie confuted. Whereupon it followeth
that the ſoules of the faithful which die in the Lord,True happines conſiſteth in ſeeing of God, and enioying his preſence. ſee
God; and at the parting from their bodies, enioy his preſence,
in theſe two thinges, to ſee God, and enioy his preſence, our
happineſſe conſiſteth. To, teach and preach this hereſie, this
Pope ſent 2 Friars to Parris the one a Dominican, the other a
Franciſcan, vnto whom Thomas Vales an Engliſh Dominicke
oppoſed himſelf, for which the Pope caſt him into priſon: many
others likewiſe oppoſed themſelues. In concluſion, the vniuerſitie
of Paris ayded by the fauour of their king Phillip the faire,
who had withdrawne himſelfe, and all his kingdome from the
Popes obedience; compelled the Pope (as he did) to recant: &
not without ſound of trumpet, for feare of looſing his Popedome:
as Iohn Gerſon in the ſermon of Eaſter, doth witnes. The
errors of this Pope which now we will reckon are according to
the papiſts,Pope Iohn 23. diſalowed Images, errors; but according to Chriſtian religion perfect
truth. He commaunded the Nunnes, called Beguinas, to marry.
He could not abide to ſee pictures, nor Images. He affirmed
that Ieſus Chriſt gaue no other rule to his Apoſtles, then that
which he had giuen to all faithfull Chiſtians. The Apoſtles (ſaid
he) neuer vowed Chaſtitie; And that vowes make not them
perfect, which vowe them; nor put them in the ſtate of perfection.
We will now returne to his wonders. Iohn Mandeuell lib.
1. cap. 7. reporteth this Pope to haue written a large Epiſtle to
the Greciās,The Grecians anſwere to the Pope is well to be noted. ſaying, That there was but one church, whoſe head
he was, & the vicar of Chriſt. Whereunto the Grecians in few
words anſwered, thy power ouer thy ſubiects we verily beleue
to be great, thy excaeding pride we cānot ſuffer thy couetouſneſſe

we cannot ſatiſfie; the deuill be with thee: for the Lord
is with vs. In this Laconiſmo, or breuitie, well declared the
Grecians the whole ſtate of the Pope. This Pope Iohn proclamed
the Emperour Lodowicke of Bauiera for a Rebell, Siſmatique,
and heretique. The cauſe was (as ſaith Ieronymus Marius)
for that the Emperour being elected by the Princes, without
othe of ſubiection to the Pope, as Clement 5. had commanded,
tooke vpon him the adminiſtration of the Empire. The Emperour
to auoyd contention, ſent his Embaſſadours to the Pope,
being then at Auignon: requeſting at his hands the authority
and title of the Emperour. But ſo farre of was the Pope from
graunting this, that he ſent home with a miſchiefe, and verie
euill intreated the Ambaſſadours;Nothing is giuen by the Pope to the Emperour. peremptorily cyting the
Emperour himſelfe, perſonally to appeare in Auignon, and ſubmit
himſelfe to the decrees of the Church: But the Emperour
knowing the tyrannie which the Pope vſurped in the Church,
and perceiuing that he had receiued onely of God his Emperiall
Maieſtie, would not, as a ſeruant, ſubiect himſelfe, nor
come to Auignon. Affecting peace notwithſtanding, he eftſoones
by Embaſſadours did gently requeſt him to graunt
what he demaunded. The Pope was ſtill obſtinate, and for
the hate which he bare to the Emperor, excommunicated the
Vicounts, whom the Emperour had placed to gouerne Millan.
When the Emperour ſawe his obſtinacie, he came to
Rome: where he was very magnifically receiued: and demaunded
of the Romanes that which the Pope had denyed
him: The Nobles of Rome hearing this, ſent their meſſengers
to the Pope, beſeeching him to come to Rome, and graunt that
which the Emperour deſired: which if he denyed to doe, they
would doe (ſaid they) according to the law and auncient cuſtome
of the Romans: yet for all this was the Pope nothing
moued, but rather much more incenſed, and caſt them from
his preſence, with many iniuries and threatnings. When the
people of Rome ſaw this, they determined to graunt that which
the Emperour demaunded: and ſo the Senators Stephen and
Nicholas, by commaundement of the Clergie & people crowned
the Emperour, with his wife the Empereſſe. This knowne
to Pope Iohn; he made great proceſſe againſt the Emperour

calling him heretique, and ſaying he had committed high treaſon:
he depriued him of all that he had, excommunicating
him a new, with a moſt cruell excommunication. Thus farre
Ieronymus Marius. Diuines and lawyers in thoſe times were
not wanting that affirmed Chriſt and his Apoſtles to haue
had nothing in proper, and that the Emperour in temperall
thinges was not ſubiect to the Pope. The Emperour and
Nobles of Rome well perceiuing the villanies of the Pope; and
the Romans much ſtomacking their meſſengers bad intreatie
with the Pope; all with one conſent determined that the ancient
cuſtome of chooſing the Roman Biſhop, ſhould bee
eftſoones obſerued:The ancient cuſtome of Pope chooſing renewed. namely, that the Pope being choſen by
the people of Rome, ſhould be confirmed by the Emperour.
And ſo declaring Iohn to be an heretique, tyrant, and no paſtor,
but a perturber of the peace publique of the Church, they choſe
Petrus Corbarenſis, a Minorite,Nicholas 5. Siſme 28. whom they called Nicholas 5.
This Pope graunted tenthes to Charles the faire, king of France
for the conqueſt of the holy land; and willing them againſt
the Emperour Lodwicke Bauare. The king was ill thought of,
and worſe alſo the Pope, when it was knowne (which was
a ſcandalous theft) that to the halfes they were graunted: as
ſaith Fryar Iohn de Pineda lib 22. cap. 25. ¶6. In this Popes
time (ſaith Carion lib. 5.) was the queſtion handled, if the Emperor
ought to depoſe the Pope, when he ſhal not doe his dutie
in his office, and put another in his place: as did Otho 1. who
depoſed the Pope after that his cauſe had bene heard in the
Councell.Anno 1335. In this time, and the 1335. yeare, dyed Pope Iohn,
beeing 90. yeares old. He left ſo much treaſure, as none of
his predeceſſors had done, to wit, 205000. dragmes of gold:
or as ſaith Friar Iohn de Pineda lib. 22. cap 26. ¶4. a millyon
he left in money and 700000 duckets: and in the margin, he
ſaith: ſome ſay 25. millions, how ſhall he ſay with Saint Peter
whoſe ſucceſſor he boaſteth to be. Siluer & gold haue I none.
The Bull of this Popes recantation,The Pope recanted. touching the hereſie of
the Soules; in the Hiſtorie of Petrus Premoſtratenſis appeareth.
In the time of this Iohn, Don Alonſo 11. reigned in Caſtille.
Don Alonſo the ſonne of Iames 2. in Aragon, and another Don
Alonſo in Portugale.
            
               
               Benedict.
               Benedict 12. 12. (or 10.) was no better to Lodowick the Emperour
then was Iohn 23. his predeceſſor. He confirmed the excommunication,
and that moreouer which Iohn had done. For
which cauſe the Emperor aſſembled in Almaine all the Electors,
Dukes, Earles, Biſhops, and learned men. In whoſe preſence
he ſhewed, that the Electors of the Empire, and none others,
ought to chuſe the king of the Romans; who being ſo elected
(as Emperor) without the Popes confirmation,The Emperor is Emperour without confirmation of the Pope. might
exerciſe, and adminiſter the office of the Emperour. This
good Emperour ſhewed further, that ſaying of the Pope to
be falſe, that the Imperiall ſeate being voyde, the Pope was
the gouernour of the Empire. He ſhewed, that this was againſt
the libertie,The County Palatine, and not the Pope gouernour of the Empire. dignitie, law, and Maieſtie of the ſacred
Empire, and that the good and approued cuſtome, which hitherto
had beene obſerued, was, that the County Palatine of
Rhin, in the time of ſuch vacation, ſhould gouerne the Empire,
graunt the fees, and (the Clementine notwithſtanding)
further diſpoſe of the affaires of the Empire. In concluſion, ſo
great was the goodneſſe of this Lodowicke, that Benedict receiued
him into friendſhip, and abſolued him of the excommunication.
Albeit, in very deede, the Pope did this, not
ſo much for the goodneſſe of the Emperour, as that he might
ayde him againſt the King of France, whom hee feared:
and ſo by publike edict,One Pope vndoth that another hath done ad
                  •
               ulled and made voyde, all whatſoeuer
his predeceſſors had done againſt the Emperour, ſaying:
that Iohn had exceeded his dutie in excommunicating
of the Emperour,The ſiſter of Petrarca the Popes minion. &c. And that which in his defence the Emperour
had done like a good Chriſtian he had done it. In the
time of this Pope liued Franciſcus Petrarca, who had to ſiſter a
beautifull woman: whom this old lecher the Pope, with great
ſummes of money bought,Anno 1342. for his pleaſure, of her other brother
called Gerrard. For the Popes abhorre to haue lawful wiues,
and loue to embrace ſtrumpets.Clement 6. In the 1342. yeare, dyed Benedict
12. Don Alonſo 11. reigning in Caſtile.
            
               Clement 6. (as ſaith Ieronymus Marius Euſebiocatiuo) was
was much giuen to women; very ambitious, deſirous of
honour, and power, and with a deuilliſh furie furious. He
cauſed writinges to be fixed vpon the dores of the Churches,
wherein, with terrible threates and puniſhments, menaced

the Emperour Lodowicke, if within three dayes he did
did not that which he commaunded The Eemperour being a
peaceable man, and enemye to blod ſhed: ſet his embaſſadors
to the Pope, beſeeching him, to pardon and receiue him into
his fauour▪ But the Pope anſwered, that by no meanes he would
pardon him, vntill he ſhould confeſſe all his errors and hereſies,
depriue himſelfe of the Empire, put himſelfe, his children, and
all that he had into his handes to doe therewithall as he beſt
pleaſed and had alſo promiſed not to take againe theſe things,
without his fauour and good will. To all this that the Pope demanded,
for the auoiding of warres and ſlaughter, which he ſaw
imminent, if he ſubiected not himſelfe, the Emperour yeelded:
and ſo ſware to obſerue that which the Pope commanded.
Whereat the Pope himſelfe wondered: and neuer thought
the Emperour would ſo haue done: yet for all this, was not
this vnmercifull Clement appeaſed:The Pope a Tyrant. but frō day to day, became
worſe: he confirmed all that which Iohn 23. had done againſt
Lodowicke the Emperour: commanded the Princes to chooſe
another Emperour: tooke the Archbiſhopricke from the Archbiſhop
of Maguncia: and becauſe the Archbiſhop, ſeeing the
innocencie of the Emperor, wold not be againſt him, depriued
him of the Electorſhip. With great ſummes of mony were the
reſt of the Electors corrupted by Iohn K. of Boheme, to the end
they might vow for Charles his ſon: & ſo they choſe him Emperor.
Which election this vnmerciful Clement thē approued. Thus
left Lodowike the gouernment of the Empire. But the Pope not
herewith contented,The Pope cauſeth poiſon to to be giuen to the Emperour. ſent one in wine to giue him poiſon, wherof
he died. Haſten ô Spaine to know this cruel beaſt. Frier Iohn
de Pineda lib. 22. cap. 28. ¶2. ſaith: Leaue we Pope Clement in his
Court at Auignon, where Symony hath free paſſage in the exchange
of benefices, &c. This pope to rake together mony, reduced
the Iubile from an hundred to fifty yeares: which in his
abſence, & the 1350. yeare was celebrated at Rome. Boniface 8
did inſtitute the ſame from 100 to 100 yeares.Iubile from 50 yeares to 50. This Clement 6.
authorized the Biſhop of Bamberg to abſolue all ſuch as had takē
part with the Emperor:Anno 1350. but with 3 cōditions. The 1. to ſwear
fealty to him, as to the Vicar of God: the 2. to beleeue that the
Emperor had no right in the electing or depoſing the Pope: the
3. not to acknowledge any for K. nor Caeſar, if he wer not by the

Pope confirmed: Euidently ſhewed this Clement 6. the authoritie
hee tooke in heauen, Purgatorie and Hell. For in his Bull
of Iubile, ſpeaking of the Pilgrime, that iornying to Rome to
obteine the Iubile, ſhould die in the waie: We graunt (ſaith
he) that if being truly confeſſed, he ſhall die in the waie, he
ſhall be free, and abſolutely abſolued from all his ſinnes: And
moreouer,The Pope cō
                  mandeth the Angels. we commaund the Angels, to place the ſoule (wholly
freed from purgatorie) into Paradice. And in another Bull,
he ſaith: We will not that the paines of hell ſhall any way touch
him. He graunteth to ſuch as take the Cruzado to goe a warfare;
that they may drawe 3 or 4 ſoules,The Pope ſpeaketh blaſphemy. of whome they will,
out of Purgatorie. The popiſh Bulles, are very mockeries. Bulla
is a Latin word,What thing a Bull is. as much to ſay as a litle bubble, which the raine
maketh in the water; being a vaine thing, and of no continuance.
There is alſo in Latine a prouerbe, which ſaith, Homo
bulla: man is vanitie. The popes purpoſely (it ſeemeth) haue
put this name in their Indulgences and pardons; whereby, they
ſignifie their bulles, to be mockeries, and vanitie. For ſuch then
let vs hold them.Anno 1352. In the 1352. yere Clement 6. being alone in his
chamber, ſodainly died. Don Alonſo 11. then reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Innocent 6.Innocent 6. a Frenchmen, was very ſparing to giue, and very
liberall to take, and ſo gaue he benefices moſt liberally to ſuch
as gaue moſt for them. He ſent his Legate into Italie, Don Gill
Carillo of Albornoz a Spaniſh Cardinall,Don Gill Carillo of Albornoz. and Archbiſhop of Toledo.
A great warrier was this Don Gill, and ſo more exerciſed
in armes, then in the Bible. In Rome gaue he the crowne Imperiall
to Charles, ſonne of the king of Boheme: But with this
condition, that the Emperor ſhould no longer remain in Rome
nor Italie. This Cardinall at his owne charge, buylded a notable
Colledge for the poore Spaniſh Students in Bologna. Thus
far Tarapha vpon the life of Don Pedro. Fryar Alonſo venero in
his Enchiridion of times, ſaith, that in the 1351. yeare, this Cardinall
commanded he ſhould after death, be brought on mens
ſhoulders to the Church of Toledo: and ſo was he carried, the
Pope giuing great Indulgēces to whom ſo euer would be partner
in that traueile. For which cauſe, all the people by whom
he came, went out to receiue him, and one people carried him
to another, and the other, vnto another, vntill they came to Toledo.

In ſaying this Don Gill to haue bene in the time of Martin
5. Venero is deceiued. Platina, and Tarapha place him in the time
of Innocent 6. In the courts which at this time were held in Perpinan,
he commanded, that not at the incarnation, which is the
25.The yeere began at the incarnation. of March: but at the Natiuitie, the yeare ſhould beginne.
This cuſtome to begin the yeare at the incarnation, is yet to
this day obſerued in England. When Innocent heard the difference
happened betweene the king Don Pedro, & the Queene
his wife; Cardinall William, to make friendſhip betweene the
king and Queene, and the ſtates of Caſtile which tooke parte
with the Queene: but ſeeing the king obſtinate, without ought
effecting, he returned, and the Queen for griefe & ſorrow afew
dayes after died Auignon in the 1362.Anno 136
                     •
                  . yeare, this Pope died in.
            
               Vrban 5.Vrban 5. being abſent, and no Cardinall was choſen Pope.
Cardinall Don Gill Carillo he ſent into Italie for his vicar generall:
which office he had executed, in the life of his predeceſſor
Innocent 6. as before we haue ſaid. In the 4. yeare of his
Popedome, this Pope with his Cardinals, came from Rome
to Auignon.The inſtitution of the Roſe ſent by the Pope. In the Lent time, he ſent a Roſe to Iane Queene of
Sicilia, & made a decree euery yere to giue this Roſe vpon that
Sunday in Lent which they call Laetare: & ſo returned with his
court into France.The Archbiſhop of Colonia maried. In the time of this Vrban was the Archbiſhop
of Colonia (as ſaith Petrus Premoſtratenſis) maried. D. Illeſcas
vpon the life of this Vrban 5.The heads of S. Peter and Paule loſt and found. ſaith: That when he had forgotten
where were the heads of the holy Apoſtles Peter & Paule: inſtantly
did the Emperour ſollicite the pope that they ſhould be
ſought for. And at laſt were they found in a cheſt, in the Sancto
Sanctorum of S. Iohn de Lateran, & put in the place where nowe
they remaine, &c. See here the aſſurance which our aduerſaries
haue of their ſo great relikes.Anno 137
                     •
                  . Poyſon. In the 1371. yeare, & not without
ſuſpition of poiſon, Vrban died. Don Henry 2. baſtard ſon of Don
Alonſo 11. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Gregory 11.Gregorie 11. Nephew or ſon to Clement 6. being 17 yeers old
was made Cardinal. When he was Pope, ſeeing all Italy to bee
mutinous, & almoſt all fallen frō his obedience: by the counſell
of Catalina of Sena (who was afterwards canonized) & of Baldo
his maſter (as ſaith 
                  Ʋolateranus.
               In the 1376. yere the Pope returneth to Rome.) In the 1376. yere he left France
& with 12 galleyes came to Rome. Clement 5. remoued the

Court of Rome into Fraunce: where it was holden almoſt 74
yeares. Others ſay that Saint Bridget returning from Ieruſalem,
came to Rome: & wrote to Gregory, ſaying: that the Lord wold
that the Romane Court ſhould returne to Rome. So alſo ſaith
Maſſeus. Others (among whom is Crātzio) ſay, that the Pope reproued
a certaine Biſhop, becauſe he followed the Court Papall,
and was not reſident vpon his Biſhopricke: to whom anſwered
the Biſhop: And thou Pope of Rome, why giueſt thou
not example to others, by returning to thine owne Biſhoprick.
And ſo the Court of Rome, either by the counſell of one of the
two women, or both, or by the counſell of a Biſhop, at the end
of 74. yeares returned to Rome. This Pope did excommunicate
the Floren
                  •
               ines, which had bene the heades of the Rebellions:
againſt whome he made great warres, becauſe they nought
regarded his excōmunication.Anno. 1378. In the 1378. yere died this Gregory.
In whoſe time Don Henry 2. raigned in Caſtile.
            When Gregorie 11.Vrban 6. a moſt cruel Pope. was dead, the clergie & people of Rome,
that the court of Rome ſhould not eftſoons returne into France,
ran to the cardinalls, and praied them to make choice of ſome
Italian; but in no wiſe of a French man. And as they began to
make the election, between the Cardinals (which were 17. 4
Italians, & 13 Frenchmen) aroſe great contention. The French
being many more in number, might eaſily haue preuailed, but
they durſt not, for the Romans were in armes, and threatened
them, except they choſe an Italian. For which cauſe on Fryday
the 9. of April made they a Pope, & called him Vrban 6. And (as
ſaith Platina) before he was publiſhed, & not once ſuſpected to
be pope, the French Cardinals, began a grudge, ſaying, that this
electiō was vnlawful, and nothing worth: becauſe (the Romans
requiring with weapons in their hands, that the Pope ſhould be
an Italiā) by fraud & force it was made. And ſo the Cardinals de
parted the Conclaue: ſome retired to the Caſtle S. Angello: others,
to the mountains, to eſcape the rage & fury of the people.
When Cardinall 
                  Ʋrſinus ſaw the great diſcord among the Cardinals,
he well hoped he ſhould be Pope, and ſo did hee ſurely
pretend it. Thus farre Platina. Eight of the French Cardinals,
fearing the ſeuerity and cruelty of Vrban, went to Fundo: where
for the cauſes aboue ſaid, and alleaging that the ſeat was voyd

(& yet there were 18 Cardinals) ayded by Iane Queene of Naples,
another Pope they elected,Two Popes. whom they called Clement 7.
This was the moſt pernicious Siſme,The 27. Siſme laſted 50 yeeres & longeſt laſted of any others.
For vntill the Councell of Conſtance began, which was
40 yeares after, & 10 yeres after that it continued: ſo that it endured
50 yeares. Who liſteth to know the deceipts, ſubtilties,
periuries, diſſimulations, &c. of thoſe that poped in the time of
this Siſme, let him read Theodoricus de Nyem, who as an ey-witnes,
wrote the hiſtorie of this Siſme: & Bonin Segino in the Florē
               tine
hiſtory: & Frier Iohn de Pineda lib. 22. cap. 37. ¶. 3. 4. This 
                  Ʋrban
(ſaith Eſtella) was a man ſubtil & reuengefull, bearing iniuries
in mind (not that which he had done, but that he had receiued)
Crantzio ſaith, that he was fierce, cruel & vntreatable: & ſo
being Pope, he ſought not to ſet peace but wars: & to reuenge
himſelf on the Frēch Cardinals & Queen Iane. For which cauſe,
& to make thē on his part, he abſolued the Florentins, of the excōmunication,
which Gregorie his predeceſſor had giuen out againſt
them.A cruel Pope. This Vrban cauſed 5 Cardinals to be put in 5 ſacks,
and ſo caſt into the ſea, where they were drowned. From this
kind of death, but very hardly, eſcaped Adam an Engliſh Cardinall.
The cauſe why the Pope did this, was, for that theſe Cardinals
taking part with Clement 7. had conſpired againſt him.
After this, for the better ſtrengthening of his faction, he made in
one day 29 Cardinals, three of them (ſaith Platina) were Romans,
& all the reſt almoſt Neapolitans. Pandulphus Colenucius,
a moſt learned Lawyer, addeth in his Latine Neapolitan hiſtory
another cruelty, much greater then this we haue ſpoken of.
This Vrban (ſaith he) being in Genoa, cōdemned to death three
Cardinals, commanded their heads to be cut off, their bodies to
be roſted in a furnace & being roſted, to put thē into ſackes, and
whēſoeuer he went frō one people to another, he caried them
vpō 3 horſes: & that it might be known they had bin Cardinals,
they placed their red hats vpon the ſackes. All this he did, to be
feared: & that none ſhold dare to attempt ought againſt him.
Thus far Colenucius. This Vrban vnable by force and artes, to be
reuenged on Queene Iane, ſent to intreat Charles, nephew of
the king of Hungarie, to come aid him with an hoſt, & he would
make him king of Naples. Charles aided with the counſel & people
of the king his vncle, came and ſeazed the kingdome of

Naples: tooke Queene Iane, who was retired to Newcaſtle,
a fort in Naples, and ſo taken, put her to death. The Pope vntil
this time was a great friend vnto Charles: but as peace among
the wicked doth not long continue, ſo this great loue of the
Pope turned into much more hatred. And why, deeme you,
his Diuelliſhneſſe was ſo much offended? The cauſe was, for
that Charles refuſed at the Popes requeſt, to make the Nephew
(or as ſome thinke the ſonne) of the Pope Prince Campano.
Platina, Colenucius, and others recite this hiſtorie. When the
Pope could not obtaine this, being a man vnciuill, vngentle,
and ill beloued, began to threaten. Wherere with the king was
ſo much offended, that the Pope for certaine dayes durſt not
go abroad. But the Pope a while diſſembling this iniurie, for
exceſſiue heate, as he ſaid departed by the Kings conſent from
Naples to Nocera. The Pope come to Nocera, there fortified
himſelfe, and made new Cardinals. He made proceſſe againſt
the king, and ſent to cite him to appeare before him: whereunto
the king anſwered: that he would come quickly to Nocera,
not only with words, but with weapons to iuſtify his cauſe.
The king came, and with a great campe beſieged the citie. The
Pope ſeeing himſelf ſo beſieged, eſcaped and went to Genoua,
where he acted that, which we haue before ſpoken of the Cardinals.
When Lodowicke king of hungarie, and vncle to Charles,
was dead, the Nobles of Hungarie ſent for Charles king of Naples,
to make him king of Hungarie:Anno 1385. whither Charles went, in
the yeare 1385. & by great treaſon of her that had bene Queen
of Hungarie was ſlaine. When Vrban (as reporteth Colenucius
in his Neapolitane hiſtorie) heard of the cruell death of Charles,
he tooke great pleaſure: and when the ſword, as yet bloudie,
wherewith Charles was ſlaine, was preſented vnto him, he beheld
and did contemplate the ſame with great ioy aud contentment.
So did not Iulius Caeſar being a pagan, no Chriſtian,
nor holy Father, who (ſaith Plutarch) when one preſented to
him the head of Pompey his mortall enemie, in deteſtation of ſo
great an euill, turned away his eyes, and would not beholde
it. Note that which the ſame Plutar. reporteth of Lycurgus, who
pardoned him which had put out his eye. Theſe exāples I draw
from pagans, for his greater ſhame who calleth himſelfe holy

Father, & vicar of Ieſus Chriſt. Vicar of Sathan, I call Vrban;
who was a murtherer from the beginning.A cruel hatred. With the death of
Charles ended not the malice of 
                  Ʋrban: it paſſed further; for
a yeere after the death of Charles, this Pope practiſed to diſinherite
Ladiſlaus & Iohn, ſons of Charles, as then but little ones,
but thoſe of Gaeta kept thē ſafely. The pope returned to Rome
and not without ſuſpition of poiſon,Poyſon. hauing cruelly poped 11
yeres and eight moneths in the 1390.Anno 1390. yeere, died: whoſe death
(ſaith Platina) very few lamented, becauſe he was a man rude
and vntreatable.Gunnes. In the time of this cruell Pope, was founde
the cruell inuention of gunnes in Almaine. Don Iohn 1. baſtard
ſon of Don Fernando K. of Portugal, at this time reigned in Portugal.
This Don Iohn got the victory of Aliubarota, another Don
Iohn 1. being king of Caſtile. This is that battell againſt the
Caſtillians which the Portugals ſo much prize, and glory of.
And ſo vpon a time as Don Charles the Emperor almoſt threatened
the Portugal Embaſſadour, and ſaid vnto him: Behold
Embaſſador, there are not many riuers to paſſe from hence, to
Portugall: It is true; anſwered the Embaſſador: becauſe there
are now no more riuers, then were in the time of Aliubarota.
The king of Portugall for this anſwer, rewarded the Embaſſador.
Don Iohn 1. and Don Enrique his ſon raigned in Caſtile.
            From the election of Clement 7.Clement 7. fully ſpokē of in the life of his
Antipope Vrban 6. the Siſme endured 50. yeres. Almaine, Italie
and England fauored Vrban: France, Caſtile, Aragon, Nauarre
and Cathaluna fauored Clement 7. and many there were alſo
that were neuters, and neither fauored 
                  Ʋrban, nor Clement.
This Clement celebrated a Councel in Paris, In his time, and the
1387.Anno 1387. was the queſtion of the conception yere aroſe a queſtion betweene the vniuerſitie of Paris,
and the Dominicks about the conception of the virgin Marie.
And afterwardes was much brawling betweene the Dominicans
and Franciſcans, the queſtion as yet being vndetermined.
For the Popes therein haue put them to ſilence, leſt the fooliſh
deuotion and ſuperſtition of the ignorant common people
ſhould be deſpiſed.Anno 1392. In the 1392. yeare Clement died. Very many
and terrible Bulles ſent theſe Antipopes into diuerſe partes
of the world: many famous libels caſt they one againſt the other,
where with they did bite, deteſt, and curſe, the one calling

the other Antichriſt,The Popes titles. Siſmatike, Heretike, Tyrant, Theefe,
Traitor, wicked, ſower of tares, and ſonne of Beliall. And
verily in this, that the one ſaith againſt the other doe they not
lie: neuer in their liues ſpake they more truly: For aſwell the
ſonne of Beliall, as the reſt, was both one and other. Many holding
this Pope for Antipope, count him not in the Catalogue
of the Popes. But certenly he hath wrong: for more canonically
was he choſen, then Vrban (if there be any election of
the pope canonically made) and was not in his life ſo great a
villaine, nor ſo cruell as Vrban was. Hereby moreouer great
iniurie is done to our countrie of Spaine, and to Fraunce,
which held Clement for true Pope, and Vrban for Antipope and
Antichriſt: as Clement called him. And ſo Don Iohn. 1. king of
Caſtile; that his kingdome ſhould not be ſeperate from the
communion of the Seat Apoſtolike cauſed (as ſaith Don Rodrigo
Biſhop of Palencia in his hiſtorie, ſpeaking of K. Iohn) the Prelates
and men moſt learned in diuinitie and humanitie, and the
eſtates of his Realme to aſſemble together: who after they
had well examined and debated the buſineſſe, declared, that
Clement 7. was to be obeyed. And when Clement was dead, they
gaue it to his ſucceſſor Benedict 13. as hereafter we will declare.
Boniface 9.Bonif
                     •
                  ce 9. 2 Popes. (not being as thē 30 yeares old, by the parciality &
factiō of Vrban 6. who (as ſaith Crantzio) intreated the Romans
not like a biſhop, but like a cruel Emperor or tyrant was choſen
in Rome. And for that he held them ſuſpected, put many of thē
to death) This Pope made a law, that no Prieſt ſhould inioy his
liuing without paying to the pope the firſt fruits,Firſt fruits. called the Annales,
which is one whole yeres value of his liuing. The Engliſh
only did reſiſt this decree, as Platina, Ʋolateranus, Blundus, Polidorus
Ʋirgilius, Pantaleon, &c. do note. Hee cauſed Ladiſlaus
ſonne of Charles to be crowned king of Naples. Vrban 6. (as in
his life we haue ſaid) for the hatred which he bare vnto his deceaſed
father, endeuoured to diſinherite and vtterly deſtroy
Ladiſlaus. A great Simmoniſt was this Boniface: by his Bulles, Indulgences,
pardons, and the great Iubile, which in the 1400.
yeare he celebrated at Rome, he gathered much money which
againſt al law & right he with his kindred prodigally waſted. In
the 1404. yeare he died. And Don Henry 3. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               
               Benedict 13.Benedict. 13. or 11. a Spaniard, for the ſame cauſes, as was
Clement 7. is not reckened among the Popes: but ſith our countrey
of Spaine and Fraunce held him for Pope,Two Popes. we will not diſplace
him. A Spaniard he was, borne in Cataluna, and called
before he was Pope Pedro de Lunae: by 20 Cardinals of Clements
faction, he was choſen in Auignon, a man learned he was
and before he was Pope, diſputed againſt the authoritie of the
Pope: and concluded, that he was not to be feared. For this ſo
true doctrine, he was by the Pope, which then held the ſeat of
Antichriſt, as an heretike condemned. Pope he was vntill the
Councell of Piſa depoſed him. He was afterwards depoſed by
the Councel of Conſtance: who albeit by two Councels depoſed,
yet left he not for all this to be called Pope,Anno 1424. vntill the 1424.
yeare, after he had bene Pope 30 yeares and more: he died in
his land of Cataluna. At his death he commaunded the Cardinals
when he was dead to chooſe for pope Gill Nunoz, Cannon
of Barcelona,Clement 8. 2 Popes. whom they called Clement 8. who at the inſtance
of Don Alonſo king of Aragon, created new Cardinals, and did
all that the popes were accuſtomed to do. But when pope Martin
5. elected in the Councell of Conſtance, ioyned in friendſhip
with the king Don Alonſo, Nunoz, after he had 4 yeares poped,
by commandement of the king renounced, and was made
Biſhop of Mallorca, and his Cardinals of themſelues forſooke
their functions. In the time of this Siſme liued a learned & good
man,Theodoricus de Nyem. called Theodoricus of Nyem, biſhop of Verda, who (as before
we haue ſayd) wrote the hiſtorie of this Siſme: which hiſtorie
is now hard to be found, becauſe the papiſts, for that it
manifeſted the truth, almoſt caſt it out of the world. But in the
1566. yeare was it againe newly printed, to the popes great
griefe, in Baſilea. Among other things, this Author ſaid & proued,
that the pope held no politike right ouer the Emperour:
but contrariwiſe, that the Emperour ought to chaſten wicked
Popes: & ſaid moreouer, that they which diſſemble ſuch enormious
abhominations and tyrannies, which the popes commit,
are not worthy to be called Emperours. In the time of Benedict
13. Don Henry and Don Iohn 2. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Innocent 7.Innocent 7. Two Popes. was choſen in Rome to ſucceed Boniface 9. whiles
he was Cardinall, he reproued the negligence and fearfulneſſe

of Vrban and Benedict, ſaying: that they were the cauſe of the
Siſmes ſo long continuance, which to al Chriſtendom wrought
ſo great miſchiefe. But when he was pope he changed his opinion,
and not only did that which before he had ſo much reproued,
but was alſo much offended, if any ſpake to him thereof.
In doing what he would, he tyrannized ouer the people of
Rome: but his popedome not long endured, and ſo in the
1407.Anno 1407. yeare he died. Don Iohn 2. then reigning in Caſtile.
            
               Gregorie 12.Gregorie 12. whom Thodoricus de Nyen alwayes called Errorius,
and his followers Errorians, was elected at Rome in place
of Innocent 7.2 Popes. 
               Benedict 13. then liuing in Auignon. With this
condition was Gregorie choſen, that were it for the good of the
Church, he ſhold renounce the popedome, which being pope,
he cōfirmed before witneſſes, & Notaries that wrote the ſame,
ſo that Benedict 13. would doe the like. But as Benedict would
not renounce, no more would Gregorie: albeit both the one &
the other, being great diſſemblers, and ſubtill, gaue great hope
that they would do it. And ſo they appointed Sauona whither
they ſhould come and agree, yet al was but wind. For this cauſe
in the 1410 yeare was holden a great Councell in Piſa, where
manie Cardinals on the one ſide and the other, 124 Diuines,
and almoſt 300 Lawyers were preſent. Both the Popes in this
Councell were depoſed, and Alexander 5. a Cretian in their
place elected.The Councell of Piſa depoſed both Popes, & elected Alexander a Cretian. This did al Chriſtendome approue (Spaine, Scotland
and the Countie of Ameniaco, which claue firmely to Benedict
13. excepted) Gregorie and Benedict nought eſteeming
the Councell of Piſa, yet held themſelues for Popes: but fearing
to be caught,Anno 1410. 
               Gregorie went to Arimino, and Benedict to his
land of Cataluna. Thus at this time were there three Popes, Benedict
13. made in Auignon, Gregorie 12. made in Rome, and
Alexander the Cretian made in the Councell of Piſa. Poets do
feigne Cerberus the porter of hell to haue three heads: which fable
we ſee now verified in the Popedome,three Popes. whoſe porter (which
is the Pope) hath three heads, and as touching the kingdome of
Antichriſt, as well the one as the other was the head. Gregorie
caſt Nicholas de Luca downe from the pulpit, and for puniſhment
to him, and example to other, put him in priſon: becauſe
in his preaching, for the good of the Church, he exhorted him

him to vnitie.Anno 1415. The fathers in the end, and the 1415. yeare, aſſembled
in the Councell of Conſtance, wrot vnto him, to come,
or at leaſt to ſend ſome in his place to the Councell, who ſeeing
their deſire was to haue him renounce, forthwith there renounced:
but ſhortly after, for very griefe and ſorrowe dyed.
Petrus de Luna was alwayes called Benedict 13. againſt whom
Iohn Gerſon, a famous diuine, often ſaid in the Councell, whiles
Luna liueth, there ſhall no peace be in the Church; but neither
the authoritie of the Councell, nor the threates, nor requeſts
which they vſed, could cauſe him renounce, and ſo till he died,
(which was aboue thirtie yeares) was Pope,Anno 1424. In the 1424. yeare
he dyed.
            
               Alexander 5.Alexander 5. a Cretian was made Pope in the Councell of
Piſa, as before we haue ſaid. An Alexander he was in giuing,
and ſo was he accuſtomed to ſay merily of himſelfe, that he had
bene a rich Biſhop, a poore Cardinall, and a begging Pope.
So haughty was his humour, that being in the Councell of Piſa,
Ladiſlaus king of Naples, of whō we haue made mention in the
life of Vrban 6. he depriued of his kingdome. This Pope ordeyned,
that all Chriſtians ſhould beleeue (as an article of their
faith) that his Saint Frauncis, had the 5 woundes which Chriſt
imprinted vpon him, and commaunded ſolmnely to celebrate
the feaſt of the woundes of Saint Frauncis.
               An article of faith, that S. Fraunces bare the fiue wounds Gal. 1. 2. Herein did Alexander
ſhew himſelfe to be very Antichriſt: ſeeing he vſurped authoritie
to make new articles of faith; which whoſoeuer would
not beleeue, ſhould for the ſame be condemned. Saint Paul
doth teach vs, that if any, albeit an Angel from heauen, ſhall
preach another Goſpell vnto vs, then that which he had preached
vnto vs, he ſhould be anathematized, curſed, and excommunicate,
ſuch a one then was Pope Alexander.
               Libr. 3. Ch. 15. This Alexander,
which afore time called himſelfe Petrus de Candia, being (as
reporteth Theodoricus of Nyem) at the point of death, ſaid:
that he neuer knew father, nor mother, nor brother, nor any of
his kindred, & that when he was yong he liued by begging for
Gods ſake from dore to dore. He ſaid: that a Franciſcan Italian
Friar, tooke him from that courſe of life, and taught him
Grammer, afterwardes made him Friar of his orders, and carried
him with him into Italic. And that from Italic he went into

England, and in Oxeforde ſtudied, and after he had continewed
many yeares in this vniuerſitie,Lib. 3. cap. 53. he went to Paris, where
he was made maiſter in diuinitie: from thence, he went into
Lombardie, where by the meanes of Duke Iohn Caleaço, he was
made biſhop of Vincentium, and afterwardes Archbiſhop of
Milan,Anno 1411. then Cardinall, and in the end Pope. In the 1411. yeare
he died. The cauſe of his death (as ſaith Baptiſta Panecius in his
6.Poyſon. ſermon) was poyſon, which his Phiſition Marcillias of Parma,
corrupted with money by Cardinal Baltaſſar Coſſa, who ſought
to be pope as he was, gaue him. D. Iohn 2. thē reigned in Caſtil.
            
               Iohn 24.Iohn 24. a notable villaine. as Platina calleth him. or 23. or 22. for the cauſes
before mentioned, with the poyſon which he cauſed to be giuen
to Alexander his predeceſſor, was made Pope. Hee better
knew how to manage armes, then bookes, and ſo (as noteth
Friar Iohn de Pineda lib. 23. cap. 10. ¶5.) a man he was, notable
for matters of the world, but ignorant in ſpirituall things (a very
good beginning) for confirmation hereof he aleageth Leonardus
Aretinus, Blundus, Flauius & Pius 2. More by violence, thē
free election,A ſtratagem to be Pope. as the papiſts themſelues do witnes, was he made
Pope: For when Alexander was dead, the Cardinals aſſembled
to chuſe a Pope in Bologna, he being Legat in Bologna, and
hauing like a good captaine many ſouldiars, very much threatned
the Cardinals, except they ſhould chuſe a Pope according
to his wil. For this cauſe named they many, ſaying: wilt thou
haue this? wilt thou haue this other? but with none of thē was he
pleaſed. And when they praied him to name whom he would
haue Pope.A notable election of the Pope. Giue me (ſaid he) the mantle of S. Peter, and I will
put it vpon him that ſhalbe Pope. And when they had giuen it,
he put it vpon himſelf, & ſaid: I am Pope. This is like that which
is reported of Don Fernando, grandfather of Don Charles the
Emperor, king of Spaine, maiſter, for maiſter, this let it be, & ſo
caſting vpon him the habit, made himſelfe maiſter of S. Iames.
The like election to this, was that of Pope Iohn 23. as before we
haue declared. This deed of the Pope, diſpleaſed the Cardinals:
Yet thought they it beſt to diſſemble with him, and for that he
was ſo terrible a man, to paſſe with the election. In this man
(ſaith Platina) was more fiercenes & boldnes, then beſemed his
profeſſion: all his life almoſt was ſoulderlike: ſuch were his cuſtomes,

that many things, vnlawfull to be ſpoken of, he thought
it lawfull to doe. And ſuch were his abhominations, that Platina
ſhamed to ſpeake them. When he was Pope, he wrote to the
Emperor Sigiſmund that he would crowne him. He began to
hold a Councell in Rome, whereunto when the Emperor and
diuers nations could not freely come, by reaſon of the diſcord,
that the Pope had raiſed in Italy, at the requeſt of almoſt all nations,
the Pope apointed Conſtance the 1. of Nouember in the
1414.The Councell of Conſtance. 1414. yeare. In which Councel he himſelfe would be preſent,
And albeit, that ſome did coūſel him, not to go to the Councell,
leſt he thence returned without his biſhoprick, yet went he notwithſtanding,
carying with him ſubtil aduocats to defend him, if
ought were obiected againſt him. Thē begā the general Coū
               cel,
by cōſent of pope Iohn,
               The Emperour is a Deacon. 
               Sigiſmūd the Emp. & other Chriſtian
princes. The night of the natiuitie, the Emp. as a Deacon, ſang
the Goſpel, which began Exijt edictum à Caeſare &c. When the
Coūcel was ſet, & licence of free ſpeech to each one giuē, they
obiected, and proued againſt Pope Iohn, in the preſence of the
Emp.The Pope by the Councell depoſed. more then 40. hainous offences, he was then cōſtrained,
by the Coūcels cōmand, to renounce. The cauſes were, for that
to make himſelfe Pope, he had cauſed poyſon to be giuē to Alexander
5. becauſe he was an heretique, Symoniſt, a liar, an hipocrite,
a murtherer, a witch, a gameſter, an Adulterer, a Sodomit,
&c. Wherfore, Iohn changing his garmēt, fled from Conſtāce,
& went to Friburg:The Popes cuſtomes but by cōmand of the Coūcell, after he had
5.The Pope an heretique yeares poped, he was depriued of his Popedome, & euery other
office. He was ſought for, found, caught, & impriſond in the
caſtle of Hidelberga in Germany: where he was 3 yeares priſoner
in great affliction: for that his kepers were Germans, ſimple
& rude, which neither vnderſtood Latine, nor yet Italian, & the
miſerable Pope, neither ſpake nor vnderſtood Duch From this
priſon,The Counce is aboue the Pope. he afterward eſcaped. The queſtiō whether the Pope be
aboue the Coūcel, or the Councel aboue the Pope, was in
this Coūcel debated. And in the 4. & 5. Seſſiōs cōcluded (as Caran
                     •
                  a
himſelfe ſaith) that a general Councel lawfully aſſembled,
which repreſēteth the catholike church millitāt, had it authoritie
imediatly of Chriſt, which Councel, euery perſon of what eſtate
& dignitie ſoeuer, yea the Pope himſelfe, ought to obey in matter
cōcerning the faith &c. This decre of the Coūcel of Cōſtāce,

is confirmed in the 3.Notable ſaying of Gerſon. and 18. Seſſions of the Councell of Baſile.
In the Councell of Conſtance, was Iohn Gerſon. a famous
diuine, preſent; who not onely with wordes, but alſo with writing
approued and extolled this decree, that the Pope was to
be ſubiect to the Councell. This decree, he ſaith, deſerued to be
fixed in all Churches, and in all publike places, for a perpetuall
remembrance. He ſaith, that thoſe which brought this tyranny
into the Church, that the chiefe Biſhop ought not to
obey the Councell, and that the Councell neither ought, nor
could Iudge the Pope, were pernicious flatterers. As though
the Councell receiued all that power and dignity of the chiefe
Biſhop, and could not be aſſembled but at the will of the Pope:
As though there were no law for the Pope, nor account to be
demaunded of that which he did. Such monſtrous words (ſaith
he) ought to be far from vs: as thoſe that be contrary to lawes,
equitie and reaſon. He ſaith: that all authoritie whatſoeuer
the Church holdeth, the ſame holdeth the Councell, and
that apleales from the Pope ought and may be made to the
Councell.As the whole is greater then part. So the Councell is greater then the Pope. He ſaith: that they which demaunde, whether
the Pope or Church be greater? Doe no leſſe then they,
that demaunded, whether the whole or parte bee greater?
The Councell (ſaith he) hath authoritie and right, to chuſe,
Iudge, and depoſe the chiefe Biſhop. All which, with the
Councell of Conſtance, Gerſon confirmed. This Councell
Iudged the cauſes of three Popes Gregorie 12. Benedict 13. and
Iohn 24. and finding them all there faulty, depoſed them and
elected Martin 5. Eneas Siluius, afterwardes called Pius 2.
was preſent in the Councell of Baſill, and wrote all whatſoeuer
was there debated, extolling to the clouds that was there decreed:
but afterwards being Pope, he changed his opinion, ſaying:
that the Councell ought to be ſubiect to the Pope. The vniuerſitie
of Paris (a few moneths before Luther handled the
queſtion of Indulgence) from Leo 10. appealed to the Councel
This decree of the Councels of Conſtance and Baſill, did not,
nor yet doth pleaſe the Popes flatterers, who againſt their
owne conſciences make the Pope God in the earth, & abſolute
Lord of all. Iohn Wickeliffe an Engliſhman before in England
deceaſed, for freely preaching, the euangelical Doctrin which

diſcouereth hypocriſie and falſe papiſticall doctrine,Hiſtoria Bohemia cap. 36. was in this
Councell condemned: For the ſame alſo were Iohn Hus & Ierome
of Prage, who ſuffered their Martyrdome with great conſtancie
and ioyfulnes, condemned and burned. Pius 2. ſaith: that
Iohn Hus was greater in age & authoritie, but Ierome was greater
in learning and eloquence. And a little before, he ſaith: both
ſuffered death with a conſtant mind,The Conſtancie of Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage. & as if they had bene inuited
to ſome banquet, they prepared themſelues to go to the
fire. When the fire began, they ſung a Pſalme, which the flame
& ruſhing in of the fire could hardly hinder. None of the Philoſophers
with ſuch conſtancy & fortitude of mind is read to haue
ſuffered death, as theſe men endured the fire. Eneas Siluius, albeit
an enemy, thus ſpeaketh of them. Vnder ſafe conduct
came theſe two to diſpute & maintaine their cauſe, as they did
in the Councell. But neither faith, nor promiſe regarded, they
againſt all law and reaſon were condemned and burned. The
reaſon, which the Papiſts yeeld for this deed doing, is, becauſe
no faith is to be kept with heretiques. This faith-breach, was
cauſe of great bloodſhed in the great warres which afterwards
happened in Bohemia,
               The Bohemiās Conſtancie. as Siluius himſelfe reporteth. Great praiſe
worthy are the Bohemians, that with great conſtancy, haue continewed
in the good Doctrine, and reformation, which theſe
holy martirs of Ieſus Chriſt taught them. And ſo much the more
is their praiſe, by how much the more they haue ſuffered troubles
& perſecutions for almoſt 200 yeares: & yet by the mercy
of God doe they ſtil vſe this good doctrine, and reformation,
which from thence hath crept to Morauia and Polonia the bordering
regions. In our time, hath God ſtretched the ſame
through Germany, & from thēce ſpread throughout al Europe,
and hath further paſſed the great Ocean ſea, and gone to India,
all the lets of Antichriſt, by meanes of his Inquiſitors, notwithſtanding:
and the more they ſhall burne, the more will it ſpread
abroad, becauſe (as before we haue ſaid of Tertulian) The bloud
of the Martirs, is the ſeede of the Goſpell. Carança, in his Summa
Conciliorum noteth 45 errors (as he calleth them) of Iohn
Wickelife,
               Iohn 24. for his villanies depriued of the Popedome, is made Biſhop & Cardinall. and 30 of Iohn Hus, who liſteth to knowe what
Iohn Hus taught, let him read Carion lib. 5. When Iohn 24. had
(as we haue ſaid) eſcaped out of priſon, he came to preſent himſelfe

to Pope Martin 5. who was choſen in the Coūcel of Conſtance:
to Florence came he, & proſtrated himſelfe at the feet of
Pope Martin & acknowledging him to be Pope, kiſſed his feet.
Martin moued with this humilitie, within few dayes after made
him Cardinal, & Biſhop of Tuſcan, read Friar Iohn de Pineda lib.
23. cap. 20. ¶3. O. what a Cardinal, O what a Biſhop, if that be
true (as it was) which was obiected and proued againſt him, in
the Councel of Cōſtance? But no new thing it is, that the Popes
Cardinals, & biſhops ſhould be as he was. But a few moneths,
after, Iohn in his Cardinalſhip & of very griefe is ſuppoſed, in the
1419.Anno 1419. yeare died, Friar Iohn de Pineda ſaith: that it was ſuſpcted,
they gaue him poyſon. And ſaith that moſt ſolemnly was hee
buried in the chappel of S. Iohn Baptiſt. Don Iohn 2. thē reigning
in Caſtil.Martin 5. 
               Martin 5. was made Pope in the Councel of Cōſance:
of whoſe electiō, Sigiſmund the Emp. much reioyced: & ſo thā
               ked
the Councel, for chuſing ſuch a Biſhop. And proſtrating
himſelfe before the Pope, kiſſed his feete. This pope embraced
him as his brother, & gaue him thankes, that by his meanes and
trauell the Church was quieted, after ſo great a Siſme. But for
all this friendſhip, the Pope ſecretly departed from Conſtance:
as ſaith Volateranus againſt the will of the Emp. and ſo came to
Florence: where taking his pleaſure, he 2 yeares remained. Before
he departed from Conſtance, the Emp. and other Princes
exhorted him, to giue ſome good order for reformation of the
ouermuch libertie & euill cuſtomes of the Clergie. Whereunto
Martin anſwered. That this was with time, nature & conſideration
to be done, and for confirmation of his anſwere, hypocritically
aleaged the ſaying of S. Ierome, that euery prouince
hath it cuſtomes & maners, which could not ſodainly be aboliſhed,
without great trouble and damage. How much better
ſhould he haue put his hand to the worke,The Popes will heare no man to ſpeake vnto them of reformation. & begun to reforme
himſelfe, and his court of Rome? To ſpeake of reformation to
the Popes, is to ſpeake or preach death vnto them. And this is
the cauſe, why they cannot brook to heare tel of a Coūcel: becauſe
they then know, that each one, tam in capite, quàm in membris:
Aſwell in the head as in the members,The Councels haue depoſed Popes and elected others. wil begin to ſpeake
of reformation. They remēber that the Councels haue depoſed
Popes, and placed others. They remember that in the Councell

of Piſa, celebrated in the 1410. yeare, 2 Popes were depoſed,
and Alexander elected: that in the Councell of Conſtance, in
the 1416. yeare, were 3 depoſed, and Martin choſen: And in
the Councell of Baſil, in the 1432. yeare, Eugenius was depoſed
and Amadeus choſen.The Popes enemies to the Councels. For this cauſe would the Popes haue willingly
no Councels: And albeit for ſhame they cannot but
graunt that a Councell ſhalbe, the Pope feareth (as to eate poyſon)
to be preſent therein; but ſendeth his Legats; which accuſtomably,
as in the laſt Trident Councel (which buried ſo many
Popes, and none of them appeared in the Councell) was ſeene.
The Popes doe feare (as before we haue ſaid) leaſt the like to
them (as to the others Popes) ſhould happen in the Councels.
For theſe cauſes, made Martin a decree, that no Councel, after
that of Conſtance, before 5 yeares paſſed ſhould be holden; &
after that Coūcel, ten yeares ſhould paſſe, before another Coū
               cell
were holden. See here the reformation, which the Popes
deſire. If any Pope, in maners be leſſe wicked (for in Doctrine
be they al Antichriſts) & in his Roman Court wiſheth & practiſeth
ſome reformation: then doubtleſſe enſueth ſome conſpiracy
againſt him, that they giue him a morſel wherewith they diſpatch
him. An example we haue in Celeſtine 5. whō his Cardinal
that after him was Pope, diſpatched: & in Adrian 6. as afterward
we wil declare. It is ſaid of this pope Martin, that he diſpenſed
with one to mary his own ſiſter. After 2 yeeres he went frō Florence
to Rome.lib. 23. cap. 20. ¶4. The cauſe of this going was: for that the pages
(as ſaith I. de Pineda) ſang in his diſgrace a Sonet which began:

                  El Papa Martino no vale vn quatrino.
                  Martin the Pope is not worth a rope.
               
Whē he came to Rome (ſaith Pineda) his face ſhewed him to be
quite chāged: for before he was pope, he was demed a man gē
               tle,
ſimple & vnwiſe, & wāting that gētlenes that was ſupoſed to
be in him, was afterwards diſcouered to be moſt wiſe. And a litle
lower. So ſcraping he was & couetous a mony-gatherer that he
gaue great cauſe of ſlander, chiefly: becauſe what he euilly got,
he worſe ſpēt, &c. whē he was come to Rome, he gaue himſelf to
repaire, not the true Church of Ieſus Chriſt, which is his mēbers:
but the wals of the citie & Churches: he adnulled the decrees
of the Popes, paſſed in the time of the Siſme: he depriued Dex

Alonſo king of Arragon, of the kingdom of Naples, & gaue it to
Lewes.
               Anno 1431. And in the 1431. yere died. D. Iohn 2. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Eugenius 4.Eugenius 4. a Venetian, after the death of Martin his predeceſſor
was elected in Rome. In ſo great a ſtraite was ſeene this
Eugenius, that to ſaue his life (being Pope) be left his owne garments,
& in a Friers habit, put himſelfe, with his companion in a
fiſhers boate which he found: certaine Romanes which perceiued
his flight, caſt many ſtones and arrowes at him. In the end,
he ſcaped and went to Florence:Anno 1432. where ſome yeeres he abode,
and for his better defence, made 16 Cardinals. In the 1432.
yeare,The Councell of Baſil. was the Eugenius cited by the Councell of Baſil. But he
knowing that the Councell would be aboue the Pope: and that
vpon appearance he ſhould anſwere the exhibited accuſations
againſt him, would not appeare. Eugenius not appearing, was
depoſed by the Councel: & Amadeus Duke of Sauoy, who had
made himſelf an Hermit,Felix. 5. Two Popes. and now called Felix 5. was elected in
his place: yet for all this would not Eugenius leaue to be pope.
And ſo to defeat the Councel of Baſil, hee aſſembled another
Councel in Ferrara, & frō thence went to Florence. Don Iohn 2.
king of Caſtile, albeit he had ſent his Embaſſadors, and learned
men to the Councel of Baſil, yet fauored this Eugenius. Eugenius
incited Lewes the Dolphin of France, with an hoſt to go to Baſil
and breake off the Councell, whereof enſued great miſchief.
This Eugenius was the cauſe of the vnfortunate death of Ladiſlaus
king of Hungarie,A miſerable example, for ſuch as keepe not their faith albeit to an Infidel. in counſelling him to breake his faith &
word giuen to the Turke: which counſell this poore yongling
but of 22 yeares, tooke: & ſo ſet vpon the Turke, when (by reaſon
of the peace betweene them) he leaſt ſuſpected. The Turke
ſeeing this vnfaithfulnes, reinforced himſelfe, & returned vpon
him. In which battel the king, with Cardinal Caeſarinus the Popes
Legate was ſlaine, & his hoſt deſtroyed. It hath wontedly bene
argued, whether faith and promiſe giuen to an infidell, might
lawfully be broken: wherunto I anſwer that, which Frier Iohn de
Pineda, lib. 26. cap. 28. ¶1. to this purpoſe ſaith. There is no doubt
(ſaith he) but faith is to be kept aſwel to an enemy, albeit he be
an Infidel, as to a friend & Chriſtian: the reaſon which he giueth
is this: becauſe the bond to obſerue it, iſſueth from the law of
nature, which is indiſpenſable, God hauing bin put for witnes

of the truth that each one promiſeth to another, &c. So that Eugenius
the fourth was wicked indiſpenſing: and Ladiſlaus was
periured againſt God, notwithſtanding the Popes diſpenſation.
Wickedly did the Councel of Conſtance, which brake faith
with Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage. Much better did the Emperour
Don Charles: who being but young, of 21 yeares, ſent
with ſafe conduct for Luther, who appeared before the Emperour
at Wormes, and publikely gaue an account of his faith;
and the Emperor (keeping with him his word) ſent him backe,
albeit the Spaniards did incite him to kill him. Much better did
the Captaine Mondragon in keeping the faith which he had
promiſed to the Prince of Orange,Thomas Rendon. whoſe priſoner he was. This
Eugenius moſt cruelly burned a Frenchman, called Thomas Rē
                  don,
a Carmelit, for ſaying, that in Rome were committed great
abominations: that the Church had need of great reformation:
and that when Chriſts glory was in queſtion, the Popes excommunication
ought not to be feared. Antoninus part. 3. tit. 22. cap.
10. maketh mention of this Thomas. And Baptiſta Mantuanus
in the laſt chapter of his booke de vita beata, giueth him an honorable
teſtimonie, calling him holy and a martyr. This Eugenius
(as reporteth Platina) was verie vnconſtant in his life. In the
beginning of his popedome, guided by euill counſell, he troubled
things diuine and humane. This Eugenius celebrated a
Councell in Florence, to match with that which was holden at
Baſil: He compelled in this Florentine Councell, Ioſephus the
good Patriarke of Conſtantinople, to tranſlate the bible, after
the vulgar latin editiō (which is that which the Roman Church
approueth) into Greeke: that this tranſlation might among the
Grecians, as the other among the Latines be eſteemed. In many
things did the Greekes conforme themſelues in this Councell
with the Latines: but could in no wiſe be induced to admit
of tranſubſtantiation: notwithſtanding did the Councell and
Pope allow them for faithful; as ſpeaking of Tranſubſtantiation
in the Treatiſe of the Maſſe, we will hereafter declare. After he
had bene Pope almoſt 16 yeares,Anno 1446. in the 1446. yeare he died.
This Eugenius (as is reade in the 16. and 17. Seſſions of the
Councell of Baſil) declared the ſame Councell to haue bene,
and from the beginning to be lawfully aſſembled, and ſo adnulled,

& reuoked the Buls, geuen out to diſſolue it. Don Iohn 2.
reigned in Caſtile.Felix 5. 
               Felix 5. is not accounted of the Papiſts for
Pope:Two Popes. In the Councel of Baſil he was choſen, after that Eugenius
(who wold not leaue to be Pope) was depoſed.The 30. Siſme. The 30. Siſme
was this,Anno 1439. & 9 yeres endured: in which time, al Chriſtendom was
deuided into 3 parts: ſome were for Eugenius: others for Felix:
& others were Neuters; which neither tooke the one part, nor
the other: Such as tooke part with Felix, ſaid the Councell to be
aboue the Pope: and thoſe of Eugenius part, denied it, when Eugenius
was dead, thoſe of his part, choſe Nicholas 5. in whoſe time
and the 1447.Anno 1447. yeere Felix 5. renounced, & ſo the Siſme ceaſed.
For this renunciation, Nicholas 5. to ſtop his mouth from further
barking made him Cardinall of S. Sabina: and Legate in Almaine
and Fraunce. Iulianus Taboecius, in the genealogie of the
Dukes of Sauoy, proclaimeth this Amadeus for a Cannonicall
Pope, and holy man. Two yeres after he had renounced, and in
the 1449. yeere died Felix. Don Iohn 2. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Eugenius being dead,Anno 1549. 
               Nicolas 5. was made Pope: who in one
ſelfe ſame yere,Nicholas 5. was Biſhop, Cardinal & Pope. He gaue the Hat
to Amadeus, which renounced the popedom. He celebrated the
Iubile, in the yeere 1450. Boniface (as in his life we haue ſaid)
was the firſt inuenter of this Iubile frō 100 to 100 yeres. Theſe
Iubilees the Popes did willinglie celebrate, for the great profit
therof ariſing,Platina. Of this Iubile it is reported that as the people vpō
a time came from Vaticano to the citie, they encountred a Mule
of Cardinall Barbo. And when the number was verie great of
cōmers & goers,One Mule the cauſe of 200 mens deaths & more. ſtumbled vpon the vnhappy Mule, which with
the multitude was fallen to the ground, ouer whom fell many
more, that it ſeemed they plaied the play which children vſe, called
Creſcael monton: more ſacks on the Mill, and caſt one vpon
another, ſo great was the preſſe, that 200 men were ſquized &
ſtifled with the waight. And for that this hap befel (as they cal it)
on Adrians bridge others fell into the riuer. See here the effect
of fooliſh zeale, without diſcretiō or true religion. For how many
of theſe had it bin better to haue ſtaied, and wrought in their
houſes for maintenance of thē,S. P. Q. R. their wiues & children? But S. P.
Q. R. Stultus populus quaerit Romam, to wit, fooliſh people go to
Rome, but the wiſe abide at home. The Turk in the time of this

Pope took the moſt noble city of Conſtantinople.
               Conſtantinople loſt. This Pope was
much giuen to drink, and edifie, not ſoules, but wals. Platina recounteth
his buildings. He approued that which the Baſile an
Councell, and Felix the fift had done: and alſo admitted the
Cardinals which Felix had created.Anno 1455. In the 1455. yeare died
Nicholas. In which ſelfe ſame yeare, or a little before, died
Don Iohn 2. king of Caſtile. In whoſe time liued Iohn de Mena
the Spaniſh Poet, as appeareth by the beginning of his poeſie
which he dedicated ſaying: To the moſt potent Iohn, &c.
               Caliſtus 3.
            
            
               Caliſtus 3. a naturall Spaniard of Valencia in Aragon, before
he was Pope, called Alonſo de Boria, who ſtudied and read the
Lecture in Lerida an Vniuerſite of Spaine, was a moſt learned
Cannoniſt.The Preachers of Buls called Carmerants. When he was Pope, all his care he bent to make
warre with the Turks. For which cauſe he ſent many Echacueruos
or deceiuers (in Spaine ſo commonly called) to preach his
mockeries & pardons:The Pope forbiddeth appellation to the Councell. and incited againſt the Turke the Armenians
& Perſians: he cauſed certaine countreymen to be ſtrangled:
for that they mocked at his mockeries and Buls: he commanded
that none ſhould appeale from the Pope to the Councell:
and more of theſe things would he haue done, had he longer
liued. Ouer much libertie he gaue to his Nephewes, and
chiefly to Rodrigo de Boria whom he made his Chancellor, and
which afterwards was Alexander 6.Anno 1458. 
               Caliſtus, for very age in the
1458. yere died. In whoſe time Don Henry 4. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Pius 2.Pius 2. before called Eneas Syluius was a Notary Apoſtolike
in the Councell of Baſil: In his Orations and Epiſtles he ſpake
againſt the authoritie of Pope Eugenius: but after he was made
Pope, he changed his copie. When he was Pope he treated of
making warre againſt the Turke: but nothing did, becauſe he
ſpeedily died. He wrote two excellent bookes of that which
was debated in the Councell of Baſil, which when he was
pope he endeuored what he might to hide and obſcure: as vnwilling
to remember what before he had written: for he pretended
(ambitious as he was) to magnify & greatly aduance his
authority papall. Eſtella Veneto ſpeaking of him ſaith, that they
neuer ſaw him feare either kings,The tyranni
                     ••
                   of Pope Pius. Captains, or tyrants: he tooke
part with D. Fernado baſtard ſon of D. Alonſo, whō (diſpoſſeſſing
Iohn the ſon of king Renato) with force of armes, he made king

of Naples. He excommunicated Sigiſmund Duke of Auſtria, becauſe
he chaſtiſed for his robberies his Cardinal Nich. Cuſanus.
He excommunicated Gregorie of Hamburg a moſt learned
lawyer: He tooke from Dirtherus Enſeburgus the Archbiſhopricke
of Maguncia: & put in his place Adulphus de Naſſao; becauſe
he thought euill (as he ſaid) of the Roman Church. The
chiefe cauſes of the depoſing of Dirtherus was; for that he conſtantly
oppoſed himſelfe to the Popes vniuſt exactions, wherewith
they robbed the prouinces, vnder pretence of war againſt
the Turke. This Pius made a young man biſhop: becauſe he
was nephewe of the duke of Burgonie and brother of the duke
of Burbon (as noteth it frier Iohn de Pineda) this election was
cauſe of great miſchiefe. He depriued the Archbiſhop of Beneuente:
He cited George, king of Bohemia, vpon paine of looſing
his kingdome, to appeare: many biſhops depoſed he for mony:
celebrated a councell in Mantua; where he diſabled the lawe
Pragmaticall, which was made in France, as a thing pernicious
to the Roman ſeate: gaue himſelfe much to build: made Corſiniano,
the place where he was borne, a cittie; and after his
owne name called it Piencia: imitating therein Alexander,
who after his name,Anno 1464. called a Cittie, Alexandria; and Conſtantine,
who called Bizantium Conſtantinople. In the 1464. yeare he died.
Platina and Sabellicus ſay, that Pius 2. was accuſtomed to
ſay: that matrimonie with great reaſon was forbidden to the
Prieſts,Note for this purpoſe, the following life of Paule 2. but with greater reaſon it ſhould be reſtored to them againe:
dna that moreouer mentioned in the life of Pope Gregorie
1. done and ſaid by this Pope, touching this matter. Don Henrie
1. reigned in Caſtile.
            
               Paul 2. before called Petrus Barbus, hearing that his Vncle
Gabriel,
               Paul 2. called Eugenius 4. was Pope, he changed his eſtate of
liuing. For leauing merchandiſe, which he profeſſed, he applyed
himſelfe to learning: but he was of hard and dull vnderſtanding:
and ſo, neither loued learning nor vertue. To Rome hee
went to his Vncle, and ſo was made Cardinall, and afterwards
Pope. Of him ſaith Platina, that in Pontificall habite, and
chiefly the Miter, hee exceeded all the Biſhops his predeceſſours:
wherein hee conſumed much money, buying
where, and for great price hee could Diamondes, Sapphires,

Emeralds, Chryſolites, Pearles, and other moſt precious ſtones,
furniſhed and adorned,The Pope a Simoniſt. wherwith, like another Aaron, he went
forth to be ſeene and worſhipped. Great diligence hee vſed
to gather gold,The red had. and ſold benefices alſo. He commanded that
none ſhould beare the red hatte, except he were a Cardinall,
In the firſt yeare of his biſhopdome, he preſented red cloth to
the Cardinals, wherewith they might couer their horſes or
mules when they rode abroad:Pope againſt Pope. hee endeuored with armes to
entertaine his maieſtie Papall. Very wickedly he dealt with all
the decrees and acts of his predeceſſour Pius: exceeding ambitious
he was, and (as ſaith Volateranus) gaue himſelfe to pleaſure.
Eſtaniſlaus Reuthenus reporteth: that this Paul 2. reading
certaine verſes, compiled againſt him and his baſtard daughter,
wept, and complained to his friendes of the cruell law of conſtrained
ſingle life, ſeeing that he (which ought to be not onely
Prelate of the Church, but an example of chaſtitie) ſawe his
daughter with great ſhame in the mouthes and eyes of all the
citie: who although ſhe was moſt beautiful, yet he grieued (ſaid
he) ſhe ſhould be thought to be a baſtard, knowing that by the
law, ſhe ſhould haue bene borne in lawfull matrimonie, had
not vnhappy forced ſingle life hindered it. So that he purpoſed
(ſay they to reſtore mariage to Eccleſiaſticall perſons: which
he could not do, becauſe he died. Againſt forced ſingle life note
that which Paphnucius in the firſt Nicen Councel,Gregorie 1. & that which
we haue ſaid vpon Siricius,
               Nicholas 1. 
               Gregory 1. Nicholas 1. and Pius 2. This
Paule 2.Pius 2. & Paule againſt forced ſingle life. promiſed long life vnto himſelfe: but hauing ſupped
well to his liking, in the 1471. yeare, vnſeene of any, he ſodainly
died.Anno 1471. 
               D. Illeſcas Hiſt. Pontif. of him ſaith: A moſt great eater
he was of fruits, and chiefly of Melons: and they in the ende
killed him: for one night finding in himſelfe a ſtrong appetite
he luſted to ſuppe vppon both fleſh and fiſh; and eate infinitely
of all, and afterward did eate two whole Melons, with many
other thinges of ill diſgeſtion: and a little lower: And halfe an
hower after, a chamberlaine entered, and found him fallen to
the grounde, and dead, that he neuer ſpake more. Carion. lib. 5
of his hiſtorie ſaith Paule 2. was openly infamous, and execrable,
for his moſt filthie and vnaturall luſt, the report was publique,
that he was ſtrangled of the deuill; and his neck broken,

in the verie act of his abomination. Notwithſtanding that ſuch
a one was Paule 2., yet did D. Illeſcas praiſe him for moſt
liberall, an almes-giuer, charitable and pitifull to the diſeaſed,
a friend of iuſtice, and verie mercifull. But who ſo liſteth to
know what a one he was, let him reade Platina. At him ended
Platina his liues of the chiefe Biſhops: of whom he receiued
notable loſſes,, and iniuries: he depriued him of his
goods and dignities: caſt him into priſon, and cauſed him to
be tortured: as Abbot Iohn Tritemio reporteth, Platina remained
in priſon vntill Paule died. Don Henrie 4. reigne din Caſtile.
            
               Siſtus 4. a Genowey, on the day of his coronation was in great
perill of his life: for as they carried him in his horſlitter to Saint
Iohn de Lateran,
               Siſtus 4. there aroſe great tumult againſt him among
the people, that they hurled ſtones at him. So liberall he was,
that what he had promiſed to one, he wold promiſe alſo to another,
and ſo to many, if many did demand it. He was ouermuch
addicted to his kinsfolkes, and chiefly to his Nephew Pedro
R
                     •
                  irio, a Franciſcan Frier whom he made Cardinall, a curſed,
filthy and ryotous perſon. This Seraphicall Minorit (conſumed
with fleſhly delight) at the age of 28 yeares died. Many make
mention of this curſed Nephew of the Pope. Iohn Rauiſius Textor
ſaith: that when Siſtus 4. was chiefe Biſhop, Petro Preſbitero
Cardinall, conſumed in two yeares, and that in vanities, three
hundred thouſand duckets.300000 duckets euil ſpent. 
               Iohannes Riuius, Baptiſta Mantuanus,
and Baptiſta Fulgoſus report fearfull monſtrouſneſſe of this
beaſt. For he made no reckoning to walke by his houſe clothed
with cloth of gold: the couerings of his beddes were of cloth
of gold, the baſens wherein he did his neceſſaries, were of ſiluer:
that he cauſed the ſhooes of his friend Tereſa to be couered
with precious ſtones. All this is nothing. Baptiſta Mantuanus
in his Alphonſo, lib. 4. bringeth in Pluto, that gaue him the
welcome to hell. Siſtus this Pope much cōſumed in wars: which
to entertain, he inuented & ſold new offices. A ſolemne ſtewes
he builded in Rome, where enormious and wicked ſinnes were
committed. What Pope, or what incarnate diuell is this? Euery
whore in Rome, did paie vnto him, (as nowe alſo they doe to
the Pope) a Iulio, which is euery weeke a ryall, which then
came to 20000 duckets. But the rēt (ſay they) is now increaſed

that it is brought to 40000.40000 duckets the Pope hath yearely of the Curtiſans. duckets of yearely rent. Horrible
things of this Siſtus & Fryer Peter his Nephew writeth Mantuan.
A great warriour alſo was this Pope, and that vniuſtly (as
Volateranus witneſſeth) he made warres againſt Vitellius Tiphernatus,
againſt the Florentines, Venetians, Colonniſts, againſt
Don Fernando king of Sicillia, and Duke of Callabria, and againſt
nations and Princes. He ſought to hold at his command
kings and Chriſtian Princes, whom hee aduaunced or put
downe as himſelfe liſted. He moued the Swiſſars to make wars
with the Lombards, whom he had excommunicated. He cauſed
the Iubile to be from 25 yeeres to 25 yeeres:The Iubile frō 25 to 25 yeers. which Boniface
8. did inſtitute from a hundred to a hundred yeares. And
Clement 6. from 50 to 50. and this by perſwaſion of his kindred,
which gaped for gaine by him. He inuented many offices
of Scribes, Solicitors, Breuiaries, and Apoſtolike Notaries,
which he ſold for good mony (if that may be called good, which
is euilly gotten. He curſed Laurencio de Medices a Florentine,
becauſe he hanged Raphael the ſame Popes Nephew: he grieuouſly
afflicted the Florentines: and was a great defender of
the Roman ſeat. The forenamed Volateranus lib. 5. Geograph. reporteth
a fearful impiety of this Siſtus 4. committed by his command,
at the eleuation of the ſacrament: which when we ſpeak
of the Maſſe,The Roſary inuēted by Saint Dominick. Anno 1200. & after wards renewed Anno 1470. we will afterwards declare. Leander Tritenius reporteth,
that in the 1470. yeare, one Alanus de Rupa a Dominick,
moued with certaine viſions, renewed the Roſary (as they
cal it) of our Ladie: which (the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt caſt aſide)
he preached. And that this Roſarie ſhould the more be eſteemed,
and of the common people adored, Iacobus Eſprengerus
Prouinciall in Germanie did extoll it to the heauens with falſe
miracles and illuſions of the diuell. And finally Siſtus 4. approued
and confirmed it: of which a book was made, in the beginning
whereof it is ſaid: that the bleſſed Virgin Marie on a time
entered into the ſhut cell of the ſaid Alanus, who taking of her
haire, made a little ring, where with ſhe was married to Friar Alanus:
that ſhe kiſſed him, and cauſed him to handle her teates
and dugges: and laſtly was ſo familiar with Alanus, as the wife
wontedly is with her husband.Blaſphemous diſhoneſties. At ſuch blaſphemous diſhoneſties,
and ſuch diſhoneſt blaſphemies who can haue patience.

Surely I am aſhamed to write them: but it is needefull to diſcouer
their villanies and ſhame, that Spaine and all the world
may haſten to knowe them. And for aſmuch as this fooliſh
and ſuperſtitious deuotion of praying ouer the Roſarie, is one
of the moſt principall of the papacie: I will here briefely ſet
downe, what the Papiſts themſelues report of it. The Dominican
Breuiarie, at Lyons in Fraunce, printed in the 1578. yere,
ſaith, that in the 1200. yeere Saint Dominicke did inuent and
preach it: and that when ſo holy a deuotion was put in obliuion,
the glorious Virgin did determine to renew it: and ſo in the
1460. yere ſhe appeared (Tritenio ſaith 1470.) to Frie
                  •
                
               Alanus:
and commanded him, that he in her name ſhould publiſh to all
Chriſtians this ſo needfull maner of praying, promiſing him to
confirme this deuotion with ſignes and miracles, &c. It ſaith alſo:
that in the 1466. yeare, the bleſſed Virgin, the more to inflame
the hearts of all men with this deuotion, appeared to the
Priot of the Couent of S. Dominicke at Colonia, commanding
him to preach it to the people, and tell them that verie many
and great mercies wold the Lord ſhew to all thoſe, that ſhould
offer this Pſalter deuoutly vnto her, &c. It ſaith alſo, that Siſtus
the fourth did confirme it, granting many indulgences to them
that ſhould pray it: the which many other chiefe Biſhops did alſo
confirme. It ſaith: that in the 1572. yeare, Gregorie 13. commanded,
that the feaſt of the Roſarie ſhould be celebrated the
firſt Sunday in October. There is a Spaniſh booke, printed at
Bilboe by Mathew Mares, in the 1583. yeare: which at large
recounteth this hiſtorie of the Roſarie, or Pſalter, or Crowne
of our Ladie, fol. 185. it ſaith, that Pope Clement 4. Iohn 22. and
Siſtus the fourth graunted 78 yeeres of pardon for euery time
that they prayed ouer this Pſalter. Innocent the eight graunted
alſo plenarie indulgence, &c. Alſo Leo the tenth confirming
all the pardons graunted by the other Popes, to thoſe
that ſhould pray it, &c. granted newly ten yeares, and ten times
fortie dayes pardon for euery entire Roſarie, &c. Alſo Pope Alexander
6. graunted to whomſoeuer ſhould pray this Crowne,
full remiſſion: and on the Fridayes doubled: and how oft ſoeuer
on good Friday he ſhould pray it, ſo many ſoules out of Purgatorie.
Alſo fol. 187. it ſaith, Pope Paule 3. at the inſtance of the

moſt reuerend Cardinall, Don Friar Iohn of Toledo. Archbiſhop
of Saint Iames,
               If this be not to make a mock of the death of Chriſt what ſhalbe. granted to all them that ſhould pray the Roſarie
fifty and ſix thouſand yeares, and for euery time plenarie Indulgence.
Thus far this booke. And in two words to ſpeak all;
our aduerſaries neuer ceaſe to count the great vertues of the
Roſarie with many miracles confirmed. Behold how much
hath the ſuperſtition of praying by count, the Paternoſter and
Aue Maries crept in, whoſe firſt Inuenter was Petrus Hermitanus,
without the word of God, and without any example,
of Saint of the old or new Teſtament. Behold whether the ignorant
papiſts haue great occaſion to eſteeme their Roſarie, inuented
with falſe miracles and illuſions of the diuell, and renewed
by the meanes of Friar Alanus: and what Alanus? The
husband of the virgin Mary, preached by Iames the prouincicall,
and confirmed by Siſtus 4. the holy father of Rome. All
theſe ſtrange wonders, blaſphemies, and impieties haue I reckoned,
that our aduerſaries may be aſhamed, ſeeing there
be ſome that vnderſtand them: and ſo may turne to the Lord,
who onely is he that pardoneth ſinnes: and graciouſly this for
his ſonne Chriſts ſake. In the 1477. yeare, Siſtus 4. did inſtitute
the Inquiſition of Spaine: the firſt Inquiſitors generall was Friar
Thomas of Torquemada, Pryor Dominican of Segouia: who
ſo liſt to know more concerning the Inquiſition, let him read
the life of Alexander 6. which we wil afterwards recount. Albeit
ſuch (as we haue heard) was this Siſtus 4. yet doe our aduerſaries
much eſteeme him. And ſo Felix Pireto when he was
Pope, called himſelfe Siſtus 5. Onuphrius Panuinus, an Auguſtine
Friar and the Popes great paraſite,The mother of Siſtus dreame. reporteth that the mother
of this Siſtus 4. being with child of him, ſhe ſawe in a
dreame, that Saint Frauncis, and Saint Anthony gaue to this
her ſon the habite and cord of their order. The mother for this
dreame, called him Frauncis at his Baptiſme. Proceeding in his
fable he ſaith: that on a certaine day, as the nurſe waſht him in
a bath, the Infant ſwounded, and that ſhe carried him almoſt
dead to his mother. And that the mother ſeeing her ſonne in
that plight, and remembring her dreame, promiſed and vowed
that her ſonne for ſixe moneths ſpace ſhould weare the habite
of Saint Frauncis; after which time they tooke from him the

habite: which taking away the child, beeing now but one
yeare old, became eſtſoones infirmed, and much more greuouſly
then before: But the mother renewed her vowe, and
then was he cured, who at the age of nine yeares, was made
Friar in a monſtearie of Saint Frauncis. Thus farre Panuinus.
see here,Papiſticall religion founded vpon dreames & falſe miracles vpon what is the popiſh religion founded: vppon
dreames, illuſions of the diuell, falſe miracles, and lyes. God
by his iuſt iudgement doth blinde them, and leaue them
to fall into a reprobate minde: And becauſe they beleeue
not the truth, written and manifeſted vpon men in the olde and
new Teſtament,2. Theſ. 2. 11. meete it is (as ſaith Saint Paule) that they
ſhould beleeue lies. The report, that the Duke of Ferrara
againſt the will and conſent of Siſtus had made peace with
the 
                  Ʋenetians, cauſed the death of Siſtus. For ſo highly was he
offended thereat,Anno 1484. that within fiue dayes, & in the 1484. yeare
he died. In whoſe time reigned in Caſtile & Aragon, Don Fernando
and Dona Iſabella.
            
            
               Innocent 8.Innocent 8. moſt luxurious a Genowey, before called Iohannes Baptiſta Cibo,
when he was Pope, conſpired againſt Don Fernando king of
Sicill, taking part with the Nobles, that rebelled againſt the
king: But his enterpriſe not ſucceeding, as he ſuppoſed, vnable
to doe more, he made peace with the king, with this condition:
that he ſhould haue his tribute, & the rebels, their pardons: but
the king performed neither the one, nor the other. The Pope
after this gaue himſelfe to pleaſure, which accuſtomably bringeth
& draweth with it vanities, delights, paſtimes, pompes, rio
                  •
               ,
glutony, whoredoms, & other ſuch vices, & ſins. He was of like
beautiful & fair body (wherof he much eſteemed) as was Paul 2.
he was alſo like vnto Paul 2. in hardnes of vnderſtanding; & not
giuen to learning.Sixteene ſons and daughters of the Pope. Eight ſons, & ſo many other daughters he had
without mariage, as by theſe verſes of Marcellus appeareth.
            
               Octorecens pueros genuit, totidem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   puellas:
               Hunc meritò poterit dicere Roma patrem.
               Spurcities, gula, auaritia, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ignauia deſes,
               Hoc octaue iacent, quo tegeris tumulo.
            
            To wit eight ſonnes he begot, and ſo many other daughters:
For this cauſe with reaſon might Rome call him father. Filthineſſe,
gluttony, couetuouſneſſe and negligent ſlothfulnes,

lye (ô Octaue) in this ſepulchre. With riches and dignities he
ſhameleſly aduaunced his children. He was the firſt Pope that
without any circumſtance, colour, or titles of Nephewes or
Neeces, as others had accuſtomed to doe, dared publikely to
doe this. Wicelius notwithſtanding, doth commend him for his
holy life, learning, and eloquence. He was much inclined to
lucre, and when neither his plenary Indulgences, nor his Iubile,
nor was againſt the Turke could ſuffice to fill his hands; a new
inuention he found to draw out money. And this it was, hee
had found in a wall (ſaid he) the title of the croſſe of Chriſt
Ieſus, of Nazareth king of the Iewes, written in three tongues,
Hebrewe,The Pope found the title of the croſſe & Iron of the ſpeare. Greeke, and Latine: and withall the iron of the
ſpeare, which pearced the ſide of Chriſt. Friar Iohn de Pineda
lib. 26. cap, 3 3. ¶1. ſaith: that Baiazet ſent him the Iron of
the launce, &c. that he ſhould not permit Zizimus his brother
to moue wars in Turky: This is he which now I will ſhewe
to haue bene called Geme, &c. This Geme flying from his brother
Baiazet retyred to Rhodes: afterwardes was he brought
to France; then to Pope Innocent 8. and then to Naples, in the
time of Pope Alexander 6. &c. Of this Geme will we make mention
in the life of Alexander 6. Behold what great thinges can
couetouſneſſe effect, A great drinker he was, and in his time
all the offices in Rome men might haue, and had for money.
In a certaine place called Polo, he condemned for heretiques.
8 men 6 women, & the Lord of that people, becauſe they ſaid,
that none of Peters ſucceſſors had bene Chriſts vicar, but thoſe
only which had imitated the pouertie of Chriſt.Anno 1492. In the 1492.
yeare died. Innocent Don Fernando, and Done Iſabella, then reigning
in Spaine. Alexander 6. a naturall Spaniard, borne at Valencia,
was ſo abhominable and ſhameleſſe, that his papiſtes
themſelues doe openly ſpeake it.Alexander 6. abhominable▪
                
               Panuinus an Auguſtine Friar,
vpon his life, and not without cauſe, ſaith filthie thinges of him,
and albeit he ſaid much euill of him: yet left he much vnſaid.
He ſaith then, that Alexander aided by certaine Cardinals, corrupted
with blind ambition, and auarice (a good beginning)
attained to ſuch great dignitie: who afterwardes perceiuing
the great vnfaithfulneſſe of this vngratfull Pope, receiued
the Chaſtiſement for ſelling of their ſuffrages, that their ſeruice

deſerued: the chiefe of theſe Cardinals was Aſcanius Eſforcia,
who ſold it for great giftes and promiſes which Alexander
made: and principally, that Alexander promiſed he ſhould
be his Chauncellor: which office very few yeares he enioyed.
The reſt ſuffered moreouer great miſery, and calamities: ſome
liued in baniſhment, others were impriſoned, others violently
murthered. And that moreouer, which of him writeth the forenamed
Panuinus; among other things he ſaith: Some fathers
there were in that election, which propheſied (and were not
falſe Prophets) that a Spaniard was fooliſhly choſen; who was
a man that would ſmother wickednes, a great diſſembler, and
one that in the end would be a totall reine to all, &c. The olde
Spaniſh prouerb in theſe miſerable Cardinals is verified. Plaze
la traycion, mas no eltraydor. The treaſon pleaſeth, but not the
Traytor. Ieronymus Marius, in his Euſebius, ſpeaking of this
Pope, ſaith: who can reckon the foule, & neuer heard of deeds of
Alexander 6.Alexander vpō condition to be Pope, gauehimſelfe to the deuill. He made a couenant with the deuils. He gaue
& deliuered himſelf wholly vnto them. So that by their meanes
and artes he might attaine to the Popedome: which when the
diuels had promiſed, and performed, ſo holily Alexander ordered
his life, that he neuer attempted to doe any thing, but firſt
he conſulted thereof with the diuell.Anno 1500. In the 1500. yeare, he
graunted the Iubile not to ſuch onely, as ſhould come to
Rome; but alſo to thoſe that would not, or could not come thither,
prouided that they gaue a certaine ſumme of money. Pope
Boniface 8.The firſt Iubile conditional. in the 1300. yeare, graunted the Iubile from 100
yeares to 100 yeares. Pope Clement 6. in the 1350 yeare graunted
it from 50 yeares, to 50. yeares. Pope Siſtus 4. in the 1475.
yeare, graunted the fame from 25 yeares, to 25 yeares. But it
benefited him nothing, if he came not perſonally to Rome. Our
Alexander moued with that ſpirit that made him Pope, did
grant it, not to thoſe onely, which ſhould come to Rome: but
to thoſe alſo that abode at home: conditionally to giue money,
as before we haue ſaid.The ceremony of the yeare of Iubile. And ſeeing we now intreat of the Iubile,
it ſhalbe good to recite here the ceremony which is vſed in
Rome. Among many other Churches which are in Rome, ſeuen
principall there are, where pardons are obteyned, euery one of
theſe ſeuen Churches hath one gate or wall at the leaſt faſt cloſed

ſo that none can goe in, nor out thereby, but in the yeare
of Iub
                  •
               le. The Pope ſet in a chaire, borne on mens ſhoulders,
and clothed with red goeth to S. Peters, the principall Church
there. And being brought to this ſhut gate, ſaith the 9. verſe of
Pſal. 24. Atollite portas principes veſtras, '&c. Lift vp your heads
ye gates, &c. & (this ſaying) with a golden hammer, which he
holdeth in his hand, he giueth a blow; & at the blow giuing, in
a moment, the earth, bricke, & morter which murred the gate,
fall wholl
                  •
               y downe, and ſo the people, which will purchaſe the
Iubile, enter by that gate: for if they enter by another gate, they
ſhall not obteine it. The matter that murreth the gate, is ſo
within vndermined and prepared, that when the Pope ſtriketh,
then falleth it downe. And ſo great is the preſſe of the people
to enter, that ther is no Iubile wherin ſome or more perſons be
not ſtiffled. And ſuch is the ſuperſtition of the common people,
and fooliſh and ignorant deuotion: that it leaueth neither ſmall
ſtone, nor morter, nor earth, nor duſt of that broken wall. Each
one ſtriuing, endeuoreth to take ſome thing, which they reſerue
for relikes, & carrie with them to their coūtries. This gate
call they, the holy gate.The holy gate. 
               Clement 6. (as in his life we haue ſaid)
commanded the Angell of Paradice, to carry into heauen, the
ſoule of the pilgrime, which going to Rome to obteyne the Iubile,
ſhould die by the way. What a grement hath this Iubile, inſtituted
by the Pope,The Iubile by God inſtituted with that Iubile, which Iehoua who is the
true Almightie God, in the 25. chap. of Leuiticus, did inſtitute.
From 50 yeares, to 50 yeares, did God inſtitute the yeare of
Iubile, that therein euery ſeruant of the Iewiſh nation, ſhould
depart out of bondage, and haue freedome as the reſt, and that
the gaged poſſeſſions ſhould returne to their firſt owners. So
that the yeare of Iubile was a yeare of freedome generally to
al the children of Iſrael. The papiſtes are very apes, which imitate
and follow, either the Iewes or gentiles. But returne we to
our Alexander 6. who inuented allwayes poſſible to gather money:
and ſo made a new Colledge of notaries of writing,
which were So in nomber, euery of which offices he ſold for
750 duckets. He created 36 Cardinals, or (as ſaith Panuinus
43) 18 Whereof were Spaniards. And of theſe 18 three
were his alyes, verie neerekinne, and of his name Boria. Much

inclined he was to building: Comedies, and enterludes, he heard
with great pleaſures: neuer in Rome had ſword players, fencers,
and baudes more libertie then in his time; and neuer the
people of Rome had leſſe freedome: A great multitude of promoters
were in his time, and for the leaſt matter, or word, the
puniſhment was death. All this the diuelliſh father permitted,
for the fooliſh loue, that he bare to his children. For he imitating
his predeceſſor Innocent, put all his felicitie in aduancing,
and without all ſhame enriching his baſtards: The leaſt of his
ſonnes he made prince in Sicilia the ſecond, called Caeſar, he
made Cardinall, the greateſt of all made he Duke of Gaudia.
This Duke (as ſaith Panuinus) after both brothers had ſupped
that night together, in the houſe of their mother Zanochia,
Caeſar his owne brother murthered, and caſt him into
Tyber. All this the Pope his father vnderſtood and knew;
yet diſſembled the ſame: For this Caeſar, which was the worſt
of all, did the Pope his father loue more then all: for through
ambition and auarice he ſlew him. The brother beeing dead,
Caeſar eſteemed not the hat, but gaue himſelfe wholly, to
milytary excerciſes: and carrying with him great treaſure, he
went into France, where he married with a neere kinſwoman
of the King, and was made Duke of Valence. This Caeſar,
by meanes of the king of France, and the Pope his father,
came to doe what he would in Italie. So much did king Lewes
12. in regard of his bond to the Pope, for the ſonne of the
Pope: who had diſpenſed with him to forſake his lawfull wife,
ſiſter of Charles his predeceſſor, and to marry with the Duches
of Brittaine, Charles his widdow: as Pineda in his 26. booke 38
chap. ¶1. and 2, declareth. Who liſts to know the abhominations,
and villanies that this Popes ſonne committed, let him
reade Panuinus. When Alexander 6. was dead: Caeſar his ſonne
fell from the Maieſtie and power wherein he had liued. For
by commaundement of the king Don Fernando, was he taken
and caried into Spaine: where he remained priſoner 2 yeares
in the Caſtile of medina, from which priſon he eſcaped & fled
to the king of Nauare: whom in ſome wars he ſerued, whereof
an harguebuſh (as ſaith Carion) he died: or as ſaith Pineda lib. 27.
cap. 4. ¶4 a young gentlemen of the Garceſes of Agreda, with a

flew him in Nauare. The daughter of this Alexander 6. called
Lucrceia (whom like a wicked irreligious man he carnally
knewe) was 3 times married, the firſt with Iohn Efforcia Duke
of Epidauro, the 2 hauing forſaken the Duke her firſt husband,
with Don Lewes of Aragon, baſtard ſonne of king Don Alonſo:
the ſecond husband being dead, the third time ſhe married
with Don Alonſo Duke of Ferrara. At whoſe nuptialls (as declareth
Panuinus) the father made great mirth and feaſting.
Note here the ſmall ſhame of Pope Alexauder. By an Epitaph
made Iohannes Iouianus Pontanus, how holy and chaſt was the
ſingle life of this Pope, and what was his religion manifeſtly
appeareth. Then ſpeaking of Lucretia, he ſaith.
            
               Hic iacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, ſedre,
               Thais, Alexandri filia, ſponſa, nurus.
            
            As much to ſay, as here in this tombe lieth in name, Lucretia;
but in deede, Thais, the daughter, Spouſe, and nourſe of Alexander.
Zanazaro, a famous man of that time, and excellent
port, of Alexander ſaith.
            
               Policitus caelum, Romanus, & aſtra, Sacerdos,
               Per ſcelera, & caedes adſtyga pandit iter.
            
            The Roman Biſhop, who heauens and ſtars did promiſe, by his
villanies, and murders is gone the way to hel, the fame alſo.
            
               Ergo te ſemper cupiet, Lucretia ſextus?
               O Fatum diri numinis: hic pater eſt.
            
            How then, Lucrrtia, will ſextus euer deſire thee? Gvnluckie
fate: he is thy father: Of Alexander 6. they ſay, that he ſould
the croſſes,The Symony and ſacriledge of Alexander. the Alter, & Chriſt himſelfe. All this he had bought
before, and therefore might ſell the ſame: So Alexander committed
Simonte in buying it, and ſacriledge in ſelling it. This
Alexander is he, that cauſed Geme, or as others cal him Zazimo
brother of the great Turke Baiazet, whom he held priſoner in
Rome, to be poyſoned: and this did Alexander for 200000
duckets which the great Turke ſent him: what good example
was this to worke the Turkes conuerſion? Of this Geme began
we to ſpeake in the life of Innocent 8. & here with him will we
make an end. Charles 8. K. of Frāce made war with Pope Alex.
in Rome, the pope ſeing himſelf vnable to reſiſt the Frenchman
made peace with him: amōg other acords this was one, that the

Pope ſhould deliuer ouer to the king, Geme the Turkes brother.
This put the Pope into great pēſiuenes: becauſe he ſhould
looſe 40000. duckets, which the Turke yearely gaue him: that
he ſhould not let Geme goe. The Turke in the end promiſed
200000 Duckets, to cauſe Geme to die, as with poyſon hee
performed. In Naples Geme died, to the great griefe of the king,
as ſaith Guiciardine, & others, or after Iouius, in Goeta: but all
agree that he was poyſoned, with yoyſon which Alexander
cauſed to be giuen him. This is he, that to mainetaine his tyranny,
called the great Turke aforenamed, againſt the king of
France:The Pope calleth the Turke againſt the French king. wherein he gaue example to Frauncis, of Fraunce, to
call afterwardes the Turke, againſt our king Don Charles the
Emperour. This is he, which commaunded both the handes
and tongue, of Antonius Mancinellus, a moſt learned man to
be cut off for an elegāt oratiō, which he made againſt his abhominable
cuſtomes, moſt filthie life, and not heard of villanies:
But God, who is iuſt, gaue him his hire: And thus it was; that
being at a banket, which he made to certaine Cardinals, and
Senatos of Rome, of purpoſe to poyſon them, with the ſelfe
ſame poyſon that he poyſoned Geme the Turkes brother
withall, the ſeruitors ill aduiſed, miſtaking one flaggon for
another vnwillingly gaue drinke to the Pope of that flaggon
wherein was the poyſon,Poyſon. and ſo (after he had 11 yeares Poped)
he and ſome of the ſeruants,Anno 1503. and Cardinals, in the 1503.
yeare died.Anno 1499. In the time of this Pope, and the 1499. yeare, Ieronymus
Sauanarola a Dominican,Sauanarola his life & doctrine. that excellent preacher, a
man admirable in life, and doctrin, with other his companions,
was burned in Florence. He maintained the communion in
both kindes, condemned Indulgences: ſharply reproued
the wicked life, and great carleſeneſſe of the Pope, Cardinals,
and moreouer of all the Clergie, in their office: denyed
the Popes ſupremacie, taught, that the keyes were not
giuen to Peter onely: but to the whole: Church. He ſaid: that
the Pope followed neither the life, nor doctrin of Chriſt, ſeeing
he attributed more to his indulgence & trifling traditions then
to the merit of Chriſt. He affirmed that the Popes excommunications
were not to be feared: & foretold ſome things which
were to happen, namely the deſtruction of Florencr, & Rome, &

the reſtoring of the Church: which in our time haue come to
paſſe. For this cauſe, the Count Franciſcus Picus Mirandula,
called him an holy Prophet: and defended him by writing againſt
the Pope. Marcillius in a certaine Epiſtle, and Philippus
Comineus in his French Hiſtorie ſay, that he had a propheticall
ſpirit, and many other learned men defended his Innocencie.
D. Illeſcas, in the life of Alexander 6. ſpeaking of Sauanarola,
ſaith theſe wordes: Many opinions there were, and yet wantes
there not ſome which iudge of the iuſtification of this fact. This
onely reſteth, to referre the ſame to the Iudgement of God:
who knoweth the ſecret of all things. I heard the moſt learned
father and maiſter, Friar Mancius of the order of Saint Dominicke
ſay, that he heard it affirmed of a faithfull witneſſe and
familiar of Biſhop Remolinus (which afterwardes was Cardinall)
that it repented the Biſhop all his life time to haue pronounced
this ſentence. And that for ſatisfaction thereof before
God, he faſted three daies in the weeke. And verily, who ſo readeth
ſome ſpirituall things, which he left vs in writing would
not deeme them to proceede from an hypocriticall, but a true
religious man: Hitherto Illeſcas. In the time of this Alexander
Don Fernando and Dona Iſabella reigned in Spaine.Sixe notable things happened to Spaine about the yeare 1492. In whoſe
time, about the yeare of the Lord 1492. ſomwhat more or leſſe,
ſixe notable things hapned in Spaine. The 1. the Pope was a
Spaniar dthe 2. Grananda was won. The 3. the diſcouerie of the
Indies. The 4. The inquiſitiō of Spaine. The 5. the holy brotherhood.
And the 6.1. the diſeaſe called Bubo. Abhominable (as we
haue ſeene) was the Spaniſh Pope Alexander) neuer good,A Spaniſh and abhominable Pope. but
great miſchiefe did he to Spaine, or any land of the world. The
taking of Granada wrought great good vnto Spaine in freeing it
from continuall wars, & ſlaughters betweene the Chriſtians &
the Moores, and in baniſhing out of all Spaine, the falſe ſect of
Mahomet. The diſcouerie of the Indies that (being well conſidered)
hath done more hurt then good,The taking of Granado. to the ſoules of the Spaniards,2
that went thither. Caſaos the biſhop (who was an eie witnes,
& a natural Spaniards) wrote a booke of the cruelties of the
Spaniards towards the poore Indians, would God thoſe which
went thither, had had more zeale to teach,3 & augment the holy
catholike faith,The diſcouerie of the Indies conteyned in holy ſcripture, then to enrich thē
               
ſelues, and for the enriching of themſelues, to murther and
on all ſides robbe (as they ſay) that ſimple people, which had
reaſonable ſoules, aſwell as we; and for whom Chriſt alſo
dyed. The Indians (as Auguſtine de çarate complayning, reporteth
in his Hiſtorie of Peru; ſaid that the Spaniardes tooke from
them their Idols, and gaue them the Idols or Images of Spaine,
croſſes, the Virgin Marie &c. to worſhip: They ſaid: that the
Spaniardes had taken from them their many wiues, telling
them that the lawe of Ieſus Chriſt permitted but one onely
wife, and tooke them for themſelues. Had they taught them
to worſhip God in ſpirit and truth, as he ſaith that he will be
worſhiped:Iohn 4. 23. no mention at all had beene made, of Idols or
Images: ſeeing that God, in the ſecond commaundement
of his holy law forbideth them. And chiefly the Indians being
ſo addicted to Idolatrie. If the law of Chriſt permit but one only
wife,Gen. 2. 24. according to the firſt inſtitution of mariage, wherefore
kept our Spaniardes many whores and concubines? What
manner of Doctrine was this? If the blind leade the blind,
both fall into the ditch. The which to our Spaniards and their
Indians hath hapned.4 God ſend them better teachers. Of
good zeale and intention,The Inquiſitiō. was the Inquiſition ordeyned; and
after ſome, it was ordeyned before the warres of Granada,
by the ſame Don Fernando, whiles Siſtus Poped. But be it
as it was.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                In the time of Alexander the fixt, and after the
wiuing of Granada, was it trulie executed. Then commanded
king Don Fernando, that all the Iewes ſhould be Baptiſed
which would liue in Spaine: or otherwiſe depart: and ſo (as
ſaith Sabellicus) departed a hundred and twentie thouſand.
The Inquiſition then was inſtituted, to teach the Chriſtian
religion, to Iewes, and Moores which were turned Chriſtians,
and yet ſecretly returned to their olde cuſtomes.
But hauing now almoſt ceaſed, with the Iewes and Moores,
from day to day, hath it done more and more tiranny againſt
the faithfull,The manner of the Inquiſitors teaching ſheweth the ſpirit that moueth them. Catholique and true Chriſtians, who deteſting
Popiſh Idolatrie, and vaine ſuperſticions, confeſſe that only
God, the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt is in ſpirit and
trueth to be worſhipped. Their manner or teaching them,
whome they ſuppoſe to erre, is iniuries, diſgraces, tortures,

whippinges, and euill life, Sanbenitos galleies, perpetuall
impriſonmentes, and in the end Fier, wherewith they
burne thoſe, whom God, by his mercie, maketh conſtant
in the confeſſion of his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus. Who ſo liſteth
to ſee the craftes, deceites, ſtratagemes, and cruelties, which
the Lord Inquiſitors, or to ſpeake better Inquinators of the
faith vſe, with the poore ſheepe of Ieſus Chriſt, appointed
to the ſlaughter, or furnace, let him reade the booke intituled
Inquiſitio Hiſpanica, tranſlated into French, Engliſh, and Flemiſh.
In this booke it is liuely depainted, and with many notable
exampeles confirmed. This is to be noted, that how
many ſoeuer entred into the Inquiſition (for what cauſe ſoeuer)
all came out with confuſion, and loſſe of goods,
and many, of their liues, and none at all inſtructed. Such
is the intreatie wherewith the Fathers of the faith doth intreat
them. They haue not leyſure to teach them, but to robbe
and kill them. Would God, that according to the lawdable
cuſtome of Spaine, in other Audienecs, Iudges of reſidence
ſhould be ſent, men learned and voyd of paſſion, which
might examine the Inquiſitors, and thoſe that be, and haue
bene priſoners in the Inquiſition: O what would then bee
diſcouered? Aragon as it were by force, receiued afterwardes
the Inquiſition: and ſo they killed the firſt Inquiſitors. In the
1546. yeare, Don Pedro of Toledo attempted to place it in
Naples, but could neuer effect it, (as Doctor Illeſcas vppon
Paul 3. reporteth. For the Neapolitanes, did vehemently withſtand
it. Thinges ſtanding in theſe termes, Pope Paule before
certified of what paſſed in Naples, diſpatched forth a
writ apoſtolique, whereby he declared, that the knowledge
of cauſes, touching the offence, of hereſie apperteyned to
the eccleſiaſticall Court and Iuriſdiction apoſtolique, commaunding
the viceroy, and all whomſoeuer ſecular Iudges,
to ſurceaſe in them, and not entermedle to proceede againſt
any hereſie, by way of Inquiſition, nor any other manner:
reſeruing to himſelfe the determination of ſuch cauſes, as
of a thinge concerning the Eccleſiaſticall Iuriſdiction.
Thus farre Doctour Illeſcas. Some yeares after, one Sayavedra
Cordoves, perſwaded the king of Portugale that he was

ſent a Nuncio from Paul 3. vnto him. And ſo in the 1545. yeare,
thus brought in the Inquiſition into Portugale. There went
out of Portugale 30000. Iewes. Time brought it to light, that
the Pope had not ſent him, and ſo was he condemned to the
gallies. Another pleaſant conceate haue I heard of this Nuncio,
an excellent writer he was, and well knewe to counterfeite
what handſoeuer. This Nuncio, remayning in the gallies,
came a poore woman to beſeech the Generall of the
gallies, to ayde her with ſome almes, for the mariage of her
poore daughter. The General made anſwere; that very willingly
would he helpe her: but preſent want of money, was the
cauſe he could not. The poore woman with this anſwere departed
weeping; of whom, when the Nuncio ſaw her weepe, hee
demaunded the cauſe of her weeping: She told him, that
which ſhe had paſſed with the Generall. Then did he comfort
her, ſaying: that he would effect what ſhe deſired. And taking
inke and paper, he wrote theſe words: Steward, vpon ſight of
theſe preſents, giue ſo many thouſand marmades (the number
I remember not) to her that ſhall giue you this ſcedule, which
ſcedule the Nuncio ſubcribed, as if the Generall himſelfe had
done it. The poore woman departed with her ſcedule to the
Stewarde. The ſteward anſwered: that he wondered his Lord
would in ſuch a time ſend that ſcedule. But ſith ſuch was his
pleaſure, he would giue her that which he commaunded
him to giue her: and ſo gaue it indeede. When the day came
that the Generall tooke account of the ſteward, the ſteward
preſented the ſaid ſcedule vnto him: which he read againe,
and ſaid to the ſteward. True it is, that ſuch a poore
woman came to me to aske an almes: but I anſwered her,
that I could not helpe her for the preſent. And beholding the
ſubſcription ſaid: this is my hand, but I wrote it not. Wherefore
he made inquirie in the gally who had written it: and it
was proued to be the Nuncio. For which cauſe the generall
would haue cauſed his hand to be cut off: but at requeſt of many,
his hand cutting was ſpared and he put to the oares. For
by reaſon of his wealth, he rowed not-before. D. Illeſcas in the
life of Clement 6. ſaith: that he ſaw him in the gally rowing. One
of the chiefe cauſes of the low countries reuolt: wherein ſo many

thouſands of Spaniards and other nations haue died, and ſo many
millions of crownes haue bene waſted, y aun el rabo (como dizen)
eſtápor deſollar:
               4 & yet the taile (as the ſay) is to be fleyed (for
to begin anew is each day needfull) was,The Inquiſitiō is the cauſe of the reuolt of the low countries. that the Duke d' Oliua
ſought to bring in the inquſition. You ſee here the profit which
the Inquiſition hath brought to Spain. This ſaie I not, as though
I would that there were neither king, nor ruler, but that each
one might doe, and beleeue what he liſted. Good lawes be neceſſarie
in euery cōmon wealth, for this cauſe committed God
the ſword to the Magiſtrate,1. Pet. 2. 14. for the chaſtiſement of the wicked
and praiſe of the good; as ſaith the Apoſtle Saint Peter.
Let them then that doe euill be puniſhed; but not tyrannically.
All lawes permit the delinquent to know who is his aduerſarie,
and the witneſſes that depoſe, and who they be, that he may
except againſt them, if they be infamous, or his enemies, &c.
In this Inquiſitorie Audience, the Lo. Treaſurer, who it may be
neuer knewe nor ſaw the delinquent, is made partie, the witneſſes,
howe infamous, what villaines ſoeuer, or great enemies
they be, are neuer named, and ſo cannot be excepted againſt.
The which is contrary to all diuine and humane Iuſtice. If the
witneſſes haue witneſſed againſt one, three or foure things, the
Inquiſitors doe charge him, as though the witneſſes had ſpoken
of ten or twelue things, much more horrible then the witneſſes
haue depoſed. And ſo maie the Inquiſitors doe what they liſt,
knowing that there is no reſidēt Iudge, which is to take account
of that they haue done. Againſt this tyrannie doe we ſpeake.
Maie it pleaſe the diuine Maieſtie, which hath geuen to the
king the ſword, authoritie, and commaund ouer all whatſoeuer
that liue in his kingdomes, be they ſecular (as they terme
them) or eccleſiaſticall; to put into the kinges heart willingnes
to be informed of the wronges and grieuances which the
Inquiſition doth, and to geue (as is his dutie) remedie for the
ſame, which one day I hope the Lord will performe, & reuenge
the blood of the iuſt, which the Inquiſition vniuſtly hath ſpilled.
The blood of the Iuſt,Apoc. 6 9. is as the blood of Abell, crying for vengeance.
How long (ſay the dead) for the word of God &c.5 Lord
holy and true,The Brotherhood. wilt thou not iudge & auenge our blood. &c. The
brotherhood hath done, and doth great good to Spaine: for it

clenſeth the waies, and waſt places of the eues, and robbers and
ſo men may walke, and ſit ſafely, vnder their figge trees, and at
the foote of their vine.The 3 holy ſiſters of Spaine. A common prouerbe it is, that in Spaine
are three holy ſiſters: the holy Inquiſition, the holy Croſſe, and
the holy brotherhood: frō the one, which is the Inpuiſitiō, they
pray God to deliuer them: from the other, will they keepe
themſelues. The tyrrany of the Inquiſition, in this ſaying is
noted:6 God of his great loue deliuer vs from it.The Bubos a diſeaſe called the French pockes. The Bubos
(a diſeaſe vntill then vnknowne in Spaine) they brought
with them, which returned from the Indies; wherewith God
did puniſh them, for taking the wiues that were not theirs.
This filthie and contagious diſeaſe, hath ſpread it ſelfe ſo greatly
throughout all Europe, that they make now almoſt no
reckening thereof. And he is not holden for a gentleman which
hath not had two or three times the bubos (as they call them)
Other nations call them, the French euill. The Frenchmen call
them the diſeaſe of Naples. A diſeaſe it is, wherewith God
puniſheth ſuch as liue in that filthie ſingle life, diſpiſing mariage,
which God in Paradice,Iohn 2. 11. & the ſtate of innocencie ordeined;
and Ieſus Chriſt with his firſt miracle (as ſaith Saint Iohn)
at a mariage in Cana of Galile confirmed: albeit the popiſh votaries
call it filthie, &c. Returne we to Alexander 6. Of him
ſaith the Enchiridion of times, that many thinges in his time did
he licenſe, which neither for his perſon, his eſtate, nor for
Rome (being that it ought to be) were lawfull and honeſt.
Machauell lib. de Principe, cap. 18. of him ſaith: Nought elſe
but deceiue men did euer Alexander the ſixt, nor euer
did hee thinke vppon other thinges: and found meanes ſuficient
to effect it: and neuer had man more efficacie in ſtriuing
to affirme, and with greater oathes would promiſe a thing,
and leſſe performe it, notwithſtanding his deceit did alwayes
proſper with him, &c. Guicciardine, a graue author and of
much credit (as faith Doctor Illeſcas) in the life of Alexander
6. ¶2. lib. 2. of his Hiſtorie giueth this notable teſtimonie
of him. The moſt vile nature (ſaith he) of the biſhop made what
wickedneſſe ſoeuer in him credible. Who liſteth to know further
of this abhominable Alexander 6. great ſhame of our countrie
of Spaine,Anno 1503. let him read Paulus Iouius. In the 1503. yeare,

               Alexander with poyſon, as before we haue ſaid, died. Don Fernando
and Dona Iſabella, then reigning in Spaine.
            
               Pius 3.Pius 3. of Sena, nephewe of Pius 2. was thus choſen: when
Alexander was dead, Caeſar his ſonne which murdered his brother,
&c. aduanced with al the treaſure, and iewels of the Pope,
and with twelue thouſand men, garded the Vaticano, a place
where the Cardinals vſe to aſſemble for a new election. And
this he did, that the Cardinals ſhould make Pope, whom he beſt
pleaſed. But to another place they went, called Minerua, which
when Caeſar vnderſtood, he ſent thither his people, and beſet thē
about. Then ran the report through Rome that the Cardinals
were priſoners, and that there was nothing but death to be expected
throughout all Rome. So great was the feare, that it only
ſeemed Haniball was eftſonnes to enter Rome. Caeſar in
the end, at the requeſt of the Romans, and the Embaſſadours
of Spaine and Fraunce. And for that his purpoſe he ſaw would
not preuaile, with all his people departed from Rome. And
ſo the Cardinals went to their Conclaue; where after long contention,
they elected Pius 3. who being Pope, he preſently conſpired
againſt the French, which occupied a great part of Italy:
But he proceeded not further, for hauing Poped but 27. dayes,
in the 1503.Anno 1503. he died.
            
               Iulius 2.Iulius 2. a warriar. a Genowey, nephew of Siſtus 4. by his great and
ſubtill wit, obteined great dignties, and in the end, to be Pope.
A man he was naturally inclined to warres: which inclination,
albeit he were Pope, yet mortified he not; but holding rather
abſolute power (as the Popes faine to haue) put the ſame in
execution. He had great warres with the Venetians, the king of
France, the Duke of Ferrara, the Bentiuolians and other Princes.
This Iulius, in the ſpace of 7. yeares, that he warred with
his excommunications, and armes, he tooke many things from
Chriſtian Princes. In which ſeuen yeares, through the intollerable
tirany of the Pope,200000. men ſlaine by occaſion of Iulius 2. ther died by the ſword aboue 200000
men. And yet nothing at all he grieued, imitating therein, the
cruell Nero, who hauing cauſed Rome to be fired, reioyced to
ſee it burne, as ſaith the Spaniſh ſong.
            
               Mira Nero de Tarpeya,
               A Roma como ſe ardia:
               
                  
Gritos dan ninos y vieios,
               Y el de nada ſe dolia.
               Tarpeyan Nero did behold
               Rome Citie how it burned:
               Yeeld ſhrikes and cries did young and old,
               His heart yet nothing turned.
            
            This Iulius was the cauſe of that ſo cruell and bloudy battell of
Rauenna, betweene the Spaniards and Frenchmen: wherein
both the conquerors and the conquered remained looſers. He
ſeeing himſelfe vnable to vanquiſh the French king by armes,
attempted another way, and ſo excommunicated him, and alſo
with him the king of Nauarre, which tooke part with France,
he gaue their kingdomes for a pray, to ſuch as could get them.
By vertue of this excommunication, Don Fernando the king
that wanne Granada, entered into Nauarre, and in the 1512.
yeare,Anno 1512. by force of armes tooke it. Guicciardine in his 11. booke
of his hiſtorie,Nauarre taken. ſpeaking of this taking of Nauarre, ſaith theſe
words: The king of Nauarre being vnprepared and hopeles of
power to make reſiſtance, fled to Bierna on the other ſide of
the Piren mountaines: The kingdome of Nauarre being abandoned
(except certaine forts, kept for the fled king) without
any coſt or difficulty, and this, more through the reputation
and neerenes of the Engliſh, then his owne force, came into the
power of the king of Aragon, who vnable with other title to
auouch his lawfull poſſeſſion, alleaged the occupation thereof
to be rightfully for the ſeate Apoſtolique. The noble Acts of
king D. Fernando, be ſummed vp in this Sonnet.
            
               Iunté Aragon con Caſtilla,
               Gané à Nauarray Granada,
               Puſe in Napoles mi ſilla,
               Conquiſte deſde Sevilla
               Otro mundo con miarmada.
               Caſtile with Aragon I ioyned:
               I wanne Nauarre and tooke Granada:
               In Naples my ſeat I placed.
               Another world from off Seuilla
               I conquered with my Armada.
            
            In this ſelfe ſame yeare 1512.Anno 1512. (as Frier Alonſo Venero) in his Enchiridion
               
of the times reporteth) died Paſcall Biſhop of Burgos.
In this Biſhopricke he ordeyned,Vigils prohibited in Bu
                     •
                  gos. that no vigils ſhould be kept
in Churches, for the diſſolute behauiour, dauncings, and other
thinges much offenſiue to God, which there paſſed, and oft
times whordomes, and other grieuous ſinnes. Thus farre 
                  Ʋenero
fol. 117. For the ſame cauſes in all Spaine were they alſo taken
away, for Pilgrimages were commonly turned into whoredoms.
Doctor Illeſoas vpon the life of Eugenius 1. ſaith: that in the
time of this Eugenius was celebrated the Councel of Cabilona,
&c. In which it was cōmanded, that in Churches, hermitages, &
other houſes of deuotion (where it is accuſtomed to goe on pilgrimage,
& to make watches) no dauncing nor vauting ſhould
be vſed, &c. & alittle lower: This is a thing that requireth remedy;
& I hold it for good: if the prelates ſhould cōmand to ſhut by
night, the houſes of deuotion; & that there ſhould not be in thē
the crie & ſmall deuotion, & the other inconueniences, which
we ordinariely ſee in ſuch like places, &c. And vppon the life
of Benedict. the eight ſaith, the ſame Illeſcas: That it ſhould not
be amiſſe for the prelates to commaund: that none remayne
by night in ſuch like hermitages, for many wicked thinges
which are there committed ſhould be excuſed, &c. This Iulius
with his hoſte, vpon a time, iſſuing out of Rome, hurled
the keyes of Saint Peter into the riuer Tyber, ſaying. Sith the
keyes of Peter are now of no force, et, the ſword of Paule
preuayle: and ſo drewe he the ſword out of the ſcaberd: For
like a good captaine, he carried the ſword at his ſide. Vppon
this ſo notable a deede, many Poetts made verſes, of which
I will recite fower, that declare the Hiſtorie.
            
               Inde manuſtrictum vagina diripit enſem,
               Exclamanſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   truci talia voce refert.
               Hic gladius Pauli nos nunc defendet ab hoſte,
               Quando quidem clauis nil iuuat iſta Petri.
               From ſcaberd then his naked ſword he drew.
               Exclaming &, with cruell voyce he ſaid:
               This ſword of Paul ſhall make our foes to rew.
               Sith Peters keyes nought ſerue vs for our ayd.
            
            What religion had this Pope, that ſo ſhameleſly mocked
with Saint Peter, and Saint Paule? When hee was made Pope,

he promiſed, & that with an othe, that within 2 yeares, he would
hold a Councell. Of this oath maketh mention, Friar Bartholmew
Carrança, ſpeaking of the Lateran Councell, that in the
time of this Iulius was holden. But when the 2 yeares, & yeares,
& yeares more paſſed, and no hope of a Councell was ſeene,
the Pope being far of from any ſuch matter (for that the Councels
are too bitter purges for the Popes: as before in the Coūcels
of Piſa, Conſtance and Baſile we haue ſeene) 9 Cardinals (whereof
Barnardino Carauaiall a Spaniard was one) together with the
procurators of Maximilian the Emperour,The Councell of Piſa. and of Lewes 12 king
of France, aſſembled at Millan and nominated Piſa for the
Councel to be holden, which ſhould begin the firſt day of September,
in the 1511 yeare.Anno 1511. The cauſes that moued them ſo to
doe,The Pope periured. were, that the Pope had broken the othe which hee had
made: ſith ſo many yeares paſſed, yet made he no ſhowe of a
Coūcel: & therfore, to accuſe the Pope of enormious offences,
had they called a Councell: Their purpoſe was, to depriue him
of his Popedome: where vnto he had aſpired through ambition
and bribes. But Iulius vnderſtanding hereof commaunded
vnder a greiuous paine, that no perſon, of what condition,
or eſtate ſoeuer, ſhould goe to Piſa and that nothing of that
ſhould be obeyed,The Councell of Lateran. which thoſe of Piſa decreed, ordeyned, and
nominated Rome for the celebration of a Councell, the yeare
following;Anno 1512. which was to begin the 9. of Aprill, 1512. At this
time liued in Padua, Philipus Decius, an excellent lawer: who by
writing, defended againſt the Pope, the cauſe of theſe Cardinals.
When the king of France perceiued that the Pope had
ioyned with the Venecians to make war with him;Eſaias 5. he called a
Councell at Tours,Anno 1513. and there propounded theſe 5 queſtions:
whether it were lawfull for the Pope to moue warres, and that
cauſeleſſe, againſt any Prince: whether ſuch a Prince defending
his countrie, might ſet vppon him that had inuaded him,
and depart from his obedience? It was anſwered, that it is not
lawfull for the Pope to moue warres, &c. and that it is lawfull
for ſuch a Prince, in defence of himſelfe, to doe that a
foreſaid: and that for the kingdome of France, the law pragmaticall
ought to be obſerued. That no account was to bee
made of the Popes cenſures and excommunications, if then
hee ſhould paſſe them. The King receiuing this anſwere, ſent

it to the Pope, praying him eyther to be content with a peace,
or elſe to call a generall Councell, purpoſely to examine and
determine this buſines: but the Pope admitted, neither the one
nor the other. This wretched Iulius, as ſome authors report, was
reputed for a great Sodomite. Queen Anne of France (ſay they)
ſent 2 youthes to Cardinal Robertus Nanetenſis to be inſtructed:
whom the Pope abuſed: the like report, another author maketh
of an Almaine youth, & great Lord, with whom he committed
the like wickedneſſe. Theſe be things, which neither
honeſt pen ought to write, nor chaſt eares to heare: yet is it
needfull to diſcouer the ſhames of the Roman Courte; that
Spaine thereby be no longer deceiued. And for this, pardon
mee good Chriſtian reader. Albeit that ſuch a one was Iulius;
yet wanted he not thoſe, that did extoll him for very Godly,
wiſe, prudent, and a man of Counſell. Woe vnto you that
call euill good, and good euill. When Iulius had Poped 10.
yeares, in the 1513. yeare, he dyed. In whoſe time died alſo
Dona Iſabella Queene, and in her place Dona Iane her
daughter, which married with Don Phillip of Auſtra, ſonne
of Maximilian the Emperor reigned. And ſo the low countries
were ioyned with Spaine.Leo 10.
            
            
               Leo 10.An Atheiſt. a Florentine, was of his owne nature, quiet and gentle:
but leauing himſelfe to be ruled by vnquiet and cruell men, he
ſuffered many Inſolencies to be commited. Much giuen he was
to Idlenes. pleaſure taking, and carnall delights, many baſtards
he had: whom he greatly enriched, making them Dukes, and
mightie Lords, and marrying them with great Ladies. At the
age of 13 yeares, was this Leo made Cardinal; what age was this
to be a pillar of the Church? At this Coronatiō, were made moſt
great feaſts which ſhould be long to recount: Aboue 100000
duckets (they affirme) were caſt among the people, as ſaith D.
Illeſcas vpon the life of Leo, &c. Leo 10. at one time created 13
Cardinals among whō he would make Raphaell Vrbinas, a moſt
excellēt painter, that this way, he might recōpēce the great ſum
of money which he owed him for his picturs. See here wherfore
the hats doe ſerue; & yet is this to be paſſed ouer, for they are
wontedly giuē for other abhominatiōs. Liberal he was in granting
of Indulgēces, & much more in taking money for them, to

enrich his children. In the 1515. yeare, Leo graunted a Iubile
to Fra
                     •
                  ucis king of France: which Iubile paſſed alſo, into
many other prouinces. The comiſſares Echacueruos deceiuers
did preach, that whoſoeuer would giue the ſumme of
money which was taxed ſhould draw one, what ſoule he would
out of Purgatorie. They ſaid: that God (according to the promiſe
made to S. Peter,
               Mat
                     •
                  h. 16. whatſoeuer thou looſeſton earth ſhalbe
looſed in heauen) would doe all whatſoeuer they would.
But not a farthing (ſaid they) muſt be wanting of that which
was taxed. They pardoned thoſe that tooke this Iubile, for
thinges done, and to bee done; which gayne (as they ſaid)
diſpleaſed many Godly and learned, and ſo they began to
debate the queſtion of the authoritie, and power of the Pope.
Which queſtion, was the ruine of the Popedome. Martin
Luther,
               Martin Luther among others, oppoſed himſelfe to theſe Inſolent
Pardons, and preached againſt them in Almaigne (as ſaith Bartholomew
Carança a dominican Friar) whoſe wordes, be theſe:
In the time of Leo 1
                  •
               . Martin Luther an arch heretique, aroſe
vp in Germany: who firſt preached, and wrote againſt the Indulgences
of the Pope, afterwards againſt the Primacy of the
Roman Church, then againſt conſtraned ſingle life, and other
rites, and cuſtomes of the ancient Church. Carança our aduerſarie,
doth herein witneſſe, what was the cauſe that moued Luther
to ſpeak againſt the Church of Rome. Who liſteth to know
this, let him read Sleidons Hiſtorie. Eckius tooke part with the
Pope:What the cauſe was that moued Luther to ſpeake againſt the Church of Rome. and Luther and Eckius in the pulpits, preached, the one
againſt the other. When Leo 10. heard of theſe rufflings, he condemned
Luther for an heretike, which condemnation vnderſtood
by Luther, he apealed to the firſt General Coūcel: wherin
he did imitate the vniuerſitie of Paris, which a few moneths
before had appealed frō the ſame Leo, to the Coūcel. In Rome
Leo cauſed Luthers bookes to be burned,Lnther burneth the Cannon Law. which when Luther
vnderſtood, he burned in Wittenberg the Cannon Law, which
is the decretals, and Popiſh decrees, ſaying as they haue
done vnto mee: So haue I alſo done vnto them. VVho
will not wonder, and be aſtoniſhed at ſo great a courage, and
daring boldneſſe, that a poore begging Auguſtine Friar
ſhould dare to doe ſuch a diſgrace, and to giue ſuch a

blowe? and to whom thinkeſt thou? to the Pope. Was not the
Pope he, whom in times paſt the potentates, Princes, kinges
and Emperours, fell proſtrate vnto, and worſhiped? How commeth
it then to paſſe, that a meane man of no eſteme, gaue him
ſuch a blow, that hee left him for dead? Not Luther, but God it
was,1. Cor. 1. 26. that chooſeth the low thinges to confound the moſt high.
T
                  •
               e ſtinke of the villainies and abhominations of the Popes, &
Clergie, was gone vp to heauen: now were the iniquities of the
Amorites come to their height. And God caſt downe the pride
of the Pope a ſecond Lucyfer. God gaue vs the grace, that acknowledging
ſuch a benifit, we may be thankfull, and in holines
and righteouſnes ſerue him, all the dayes of our life. By this
meanes, hath God brought vs out of darkeneſſe into light, and
out of thralldome, into libertie. And Luther, not content here
with, came to Wormes or Wormacia where Charles the Emperour
held his firſt Dyet, & preſenting himſelf before the Emperour
& ſo many▪ Papiſts as were with him, he diſputed, & mainteined
his cauſe:Charles the Emperor kept his word with Luther. and in the end departed (the Emperour, better
keeping promiſe with him, then it had formerly bene kept,
with Iohn Hus, and Ierom of Prage in the Councell of Conſtance.
One thing here I cannot leaue to ſpeake of: that Luther
going to wormes; his friend aduiſed him in the way: before
they came at wormes, to beware of going thither: becauſe
they would doe to him, as they had done to his bookes: which
they had burned.The magnanimity of Luther Whereunto Luther with great courage anſwered,
that albeit he knew there were ſo many diuels againſt
him in Wormes, as there were tyles vppon the houſes: yet for
all that, would he not let to appeare there, and giue account
of his faith, in ſo ſolemne, an aſſembly. And ſo he dyed. In
the 1522.Anno 1522. yeare. Leo 10 hearing that the Frenchmen, by the
Imperialls were vanquiſhed, ſlaine, taken, and caſt out of Italy,
and that through his aſſiſtance,Leo dyed for ioy. died by his exceſſiue ioy, and
laughter, his ſoule departed from him, but of poyſon that they
gaue him,Poyſon. as Panuinus ſuppoſeth. An Atheiſt he was, & thought
there was after this life, neither heauen nor hell. And ſo he died
without receiuing the ſacraments. He could not (ſaith Sanazaro)
receiued them; becauſe he had ſold them. And ſo almoſt
no chiefe biſhop (as noteth Panuinus vpon the life of Pius 4)

receiued them.The Atheiſme of Leo. His Atheiſme plainely appeared by an anſwere
which he made to Cardinall Bembus; who had alleaged vnto
him a paſſage of the Goſpell: Whereunto in theſe wordes, he
diſſolutly āſwered: what profit this fable of Chriſt hath brought
to vs, and our company: All the world knoweth. Leo by this anſwere,
well ſhewed himſelfe to be Antichriſt. Obey him then
Spaine, and hold him for Chiſts vicar. Paulus Iouius wrote the
life of Leo 10. where among other thinges. he ſaith theſe words:
Leo had alſo an euill report, becauſe it apeared that he affected
vnhoneſtly ſome of his chamberlaines (which were of the greateſt
nobles of all Italic) & hartely and freely played with them.
It is not Luther his enemie, that ſaith this againſt him: but his
friend, an Italian, and Biſhop Paulus Iouius. Albeit that ſuch a
one was Leo, as the hiſtorians of his time doe paint him: yet ſo
great is the flattery of D. Illeſcas, that vpon his life ¶12. theſe
words of him he ſaith: After that he came to the Biſhopdome
his care was alwaies to eate litle, & of meats but meanely▪ hot,
becauſe they ſhould not prouoke him to diſhoneſty. Hither to
Illeſcas. In the time of this Leo, Charles the Emprour reigned in
Spaine.
            
               Adrian 6.Adrian 6. a Hollander, was tutor to Don Charles the Emperonr,
and by his meanes, came to be biſhop of Tortoſa, Cardinall,
and (ioyntly with Don Franciſco Zimenes Archbiſhop of
Toledo) gouernour of Spaine: & being reſident in Spaine, after
the death of Pope Leo, was in his abſence elected▪ when he was
Pope, he promiſed to the princes by his letter to cauſe the court
of Rome, which had giuen occaſion of commiting great wickedneſſe,
to be firſt of all reformed & amended: to the end, that
that which had giuen cauſe of the malady, ſhould giue alſo the
beginning of the medicine, & health: but all was but words. For
Adrian following the ſteps of his predeceſſor▪ the▪ Antichriſt of
Rome, gaue himſelfe to perſecute Luther▪ Ecolampadius & other
godly miniſters of the word of God. He changed not his name,
nor yet in cuſtomes & life was ſo wicked, as the other Popes: &
for not being ſo wicked,Poyſon. many ſay, he was diſpatched with
poyſon,Anno 1523. & in the 1523. yeare dyed. In whoſe time Don Charles
the Emperour reigned in Spaine.
            
               Clement 7.Clement 7. (or as after ſome others) 8. or 9. for the cauſe we

haue ſpoken of in the life of the other Clement 7. Florentine was
nephew, or as others ſay, the ſonne of Pope Leo 10. Panuinus
ſaith: he was the ſonne of Iulianus de medices, and of another
not certenly, or manifeſtly his lawfull wife. D. Illeſcas vpon the
life of this Clement ¶5. ſaith: It is a thing much to be noted, that
Clement hauing all his life time, bene moſt liberall, and a ſpender,
& here with al affable, and well ſpoken, exceeding diſcreet,
and a great Negociator, when he came to be Pope, he was not
knowne, for he wholly changed his conditions, and became
moſt ſparing and remiſſe. So great is the change which dignities
& honours doe often make, &c. In the time of this Clement,
was great war betweene the Spaniards and French, which this
Clement did much kindle to his owne ſhame and Infamie. And
this by his vnconſtancie: for now was he a Spaniard, now a
Frenchman: and contrariwiſe, now a Frenchman & now a Spaniard.
Three great things in his time happened in Spaine.The king of France priſoAnno 1525. 1. The
taking of Frauncis K. of France, & ſo his nobilitie in Pauy: who
was carried into Spaine, and there was priſoner. 2. the ſacking
of Rome,Rome Sacked Anno 1527. as we will declare in the yeare 1527. in which yeare
was borne Don Phillip the prince ſonne of the Emperour Don
Charles 3.The Coronation of Don Charles Anno 1530. The coronation of Don Charles the Emperour, king
of Spaine, by the hand of this Pope Clement in Bologna, and in
the 1530. yeare. In the ſame yeare, the Germaine princes preſented
to the Emperour in the Diet, held at Auguſta their confeſſion
of the faith,The confeſſion of Auguſta for which they are called proteſtants which they called the confeſſion of Auguſta:
and for that they made publike proteſtation at the preſenting
thereof, therfore euer ſithens are they called Proteſtants. Such
was the ſacking of Rome by the Spaniardes, Italians, and. Germaines,
that ſince Rome was Rome, there was not another
like it, The Spaniſh prouerbe is verefied: Lo mal ganado
elloy ſu dueno (ſe pierde) euill gotten euilly ſpent. Rome
had robbed them,He that of a theefe doth ſteale 100 daies pardon doth not ſaith and many other nations of all that treaſure:
God ſent them ſuch theeues, robbers, and Ruffiians,
which neither pardoned men, nor women, ſmall, nor great,
Prieſt, nor Friar, eccleſiaſticall, nor ſecular perſon. Theſe theeues,
(if that be true which the Spaniſh Prouerbe ſpeaketh) Quien
hurta al ladron cien dias gana de perdon gained a hundred dayes
pardon. Clement himſelfe, that Sathanicall father was taken priſoner

in his owne caſtle S. Angelo, and the Spaniards made him
rime a new Paternoſter: which they ſang together at the Popes
windowe, to giue him muſique.
            
               Padre nueſtro en quanto Papa,
               Soys Clemeynte, ſin que os quadre:
               Mas reniego yo del padre,
               Que al hijo quita la capa, &c.
               O father our as being Pope,
               
                  Clement thou art, though not a right:
               In him for father haue I no hope,
               That his ſonnes cloake doth take by might, &c.
            
            This cloake was the ſtate of Milan, which the Pope pretended
to take from the Emperor. Among others that wrote this Hiſtory
of the ſacking of Rome, was a Spaniard, which at that time
liued: the booke is intituled 
                  
                     •
                  Dialogo; wherein the thinges
are particularly handled, that in the 1527. yeare happened in
Rome. In it will very well appeare what a one was this Pope
Clement, and how he, and his Court of Rome, were iuſtly
handled of our Spaniardes. Paulus Iouius doth alſo recount
it. Iohn Tilius ſaith: that Pope Clement was ranſomed for 40000
florences. In the time of this Pope, and in a monaſterie of Auſerra
in France, a notable hiſtorie happened, of that which in
the 1526. yeare was done with the vomited Sacrament. The
which when we ſhall treat of the maſſe, for that ſhalbe his proper
place (if God pleaſe) we wil declare. Moſt great vices had
this Clement,
               The vertues of the Pope. a witch he was, a manſlayar, a brotheller, a Simoniſt.
a Sodomit, periured, a rauiſher of young maids, a nigromā
               cer,
& a ſacriliger. Adorned with theſe precious ſtones, he exerciſed
his papal office: which is neuer to preach the Goſpel, but
to perſecute them that doe preach it, and caſt them out of the
Church:The Pope is Diotrephes. 3. Iohn 9. Another Diotrephes (as were alſo the other Popes) was
this Clement, of whom S. Iohn in his laſt Epiſtle ſaith: that he loued
to hold the chiefeſt roomes, &c. And a litle lower, ſpeaking
of the ſame Diotrephes he ſaith: He not onely not receiued the
brethren: but alſo forbad thoſe that would receiue them, & caſt
them out of the Church. Note the place: & that the Pope at this
day doth fully the ſame. Into France went this Clement, & liued
in Marſille with Frauncis K. of France, with whō he made great

friendſhip: for confirmation whereof, he gaue in mariage his
neece, Catalina de medices, to Hennry 2. ſome of Frauncis. This is
ſhe, whom they call Queene mother, ſo ſpoken of in Hiſtories,
who died in the yeare 1588.Anno 1534. After the pope returned frō France,
but a ſhort time he liued, In September and in the 1534. yeare
he died of poyſon, which was put in the ſmoke of a torch:
wherewith he and ſon
                  •
               e Cardinals his familars,Poyſon were poyſoned.
Don Charles at this time reigned in Spaine▪
            
            When Paul 3.Paul 3. accurſed. a Roman was Pope, he endeuored by al waies
poſſible to aduance his baſtards, of whom he had ſtore: and to
beat downe & oppreſſe Luther. For reformation of the Church,
(as he ſaid) he firſt appointed Mantua, to celebrate there in a
generall Councel: but al was but words. He afterwards appointed
Vincencia, as little was ought done. The 3. time, he appointed
Trent, al was but wind. The 4. time, he again nominated Trent,
where it began the 13. day of Dceember, 1545. & ended in the
yeare 1563. in the time of Pius 4. So that it 18 yeare continued;
and for the hate as we haue ſaid, which the Popes beare to the
Councell, nothing euer had bene done; had it not bene for the
inſtāt v
                  •
               ging of the Emperor, & his inſtigatiō of Pope Paul therunto.
To recount his enormious & horrible vices, his murthers,
robberies; witcheries, treaſones, tirannies, inceſts, and wicked
whoredomes, we ſhould neuer make an end. Some notable
things wil I declare, notwithſtanding that thou Spaine mayeſt
open thine eies, & haſten to know him, whom thou worſhipeſt
as God in the earth: as the ſucceſſor of S. Peter; as the vicar of
Chriſt. Paul 3. was a great Aſtrologer, ſouthſayer, Inchanter, &
nigromancer, & ſuch as were of that arte, he loued & aduanced.
A great friend he was of Dioniſus ſeruita, whom he made Cardinall:
of Gauricus Luſitanus of Cecius and Marcellus notable nigromancers,
of theſe he ſought to know the fortune of his baſtards:
which by their horoſcopicall aſpects, and houſes of the
ſtars, and planets, they gaue him to vnderſtand. To haue the hat,
as he had it, he gaue his owne ſiſter▪ 
               Iulia Farneſia to the Spaniſh
Pope Alexander 6. His owne mother, and ſiſter he poyſoned:
Another ſiſter he alſo poyſoned,Poyſon. with whom he had an euill report:
the cauſe why he poyſoned her, was for that ſhe loued not
him, as ſhe loued others, &c. Whiles he was Legate in Ancono

with promiſe of mariage, he deceiued a young gentlewoman:
& ſo the miad not thinking, it was the Legate, but one of his
gentlemen, was deceiued. Of this coniunctiō ſprang that good
peece Pero Luis prince of Sodome, captaine Generall of the
Roman Church, & Duke of Parma, & of Plazencia. The wicked
abhomination he committed againſt Colmus Cherius Biſhop of
Fana all the world knoweth. This Pero luys, his owne gentlemen
(vnable longer to endure his tyrannies, and wicked abhominations)
in the 1548. yeare murdered. He was the eye of the
Father, vpon whom he looked, and looked againe: And when
the Pope heard any of his abhominations, 
                  •
               e ſhewed no great
ſorrow: but ſmiling as it were ſaid that his ſon had not learned
thoſe vices of him. This notwithſtanding, there are ſome Paraſites
of the Pope, that againſt their owne conſcience, affirme
Panl 3. to haue bene married. And ſo D. Illeſcas vpon the life of
this Paul 3. ¶17 ſaith: Paul 3. was married, and after he had put
away his wife, of whom he had Poro luys, he was made Prieſt
& obteyned the hat, &c. ¶23. he ſaith: the vnthought of death
of Pero luis,
               Poyſon lawfull ſon of this Pope &c. But Illeſcas telleth not
who was the mother of Peroluys, nor how lōg time he was married;
nor wher he was married; nor yet where he liued married.
This Paul poyſoned Fulgoſius and Contarenus Cardinals, & Iohannes
Baptiſta Vergerius Biſhop of Pole, becauſe they taſted
how ſweete and good was Chriſt, and how bitter and euill
was Antichriſt. Paulus Ʋergerius Biſhop of Iuſtinopole, brother
of the aboueſaid Iohn eſcaped, and fled into Germany,
and from thence with his writings made warre againſt him. In
his time, with fire and blood, &c. Suffered the Church great
perſecution. In the 1546. yeare Alexander Farneſius Cardinall:
and Octauius his brother, Duke of Parma, ſonnes of the curſed
Poro luys, and nephews of the Pope, going to make war in Almaigne,
bruted it a broad; they there purpoſed to ſhed ſo much
blood of the Lutherans, that the horſes might ſwimme therin.
This Paul enioyed the rent of aboue 40000.40000 Curteſanes in Rome whores, or as
they call thē, Curteſanes, which were in Rome. The rent (as before
we haue ſaid) is a Iulio, or Spaniſh royal euery weeke. Multiply
the ſame, & thou ſhalt ſee, if the Pope may make a mighty
birthright of his whoriſh rents. This Paul 3. did excommuncate

& an anathemiſe Henry.
               Henry 8 made no reconing of the Pope 8. king of England, and gaue his kingdome
for a praie to them that could take it. Al which this Magnanimious
king nought eſteemed, but ſo valliantly defended
his kingdome, that they, whom the Pope had incited againſt
him, themſelues ſought peace with him. In the biginning of his
Popedome, & the 1534. yeare, hapned one notable villany,
done by the Franciſcan Friars in Orleans. The tale is this: that
in that yeare,Anotable villany, done by the Franciſcan friars at orleans died the wife of the Corregidor, or maior of Orleās
who commanded that ſhe ſhould ſimply, without any pomp at
al be buried. With her father, and grandfather did they bury her
in S. Frauncis Church of Orleans. The Friars (the perſon being
qualified and rich) ſuppoſed they ſhould haue a rich reward; &
commanded many maſſes to be ſaid &c. but they were deceiued.
For they had but only ſix crownes, which the widdower
Corregidor ſent thē: whereat the Friars were highly offended,
and for reuenge, with deui
                  •
               liſh minds, they ſuborned one of
their nouices,The Franciſcans deceiue the people with falſe apparitiōs. whom they placed aboue in the feeling of the
Temple, that he might make a great noiſe frō thēce, at the time
whē they ſaid their mattens: which the Nouice perſormed, and
ſaid he was a ſoule (as they cal it) ſinful & damned. By ſome that
knew the miſtery of Iniquitie, was this ſoule coniured, & being
demāded of the cōiurers whō he was? he anſwered, that he was
the ſoule of the wife of the Crrregidor, which a little before was
deceaſed, & that ſhe was for euer cōdemned; being demanded
whereof? anſwered: for Lutheraniſme. Whē the Friars hard this,
they made great exclamations; heald their Church for excommunicate,
drue thēce the ſacramēt, & wold not there ſay maſſe
but went within the monaſtary. The fame hereof ran throughout
all the citie. when the Corregidon vnderſtood his villany,
he called the Friars before the Chauncellor of Paris: where the
cauſe being examined before the Chauncellor Antonias praetentis
the villanie was proued: and ſo Colimanus, and Stephen
of Arras both preachers, and chiefe authors of this tragedie,
were by publique ſentence condemned. But to what? To
ſhame the villanies deſeruing a 1000. deathes, for mocking at
God & his religrō, & defaming of men. So gentle was the puniſhmēt,
becauſe they ſeemed not to faourthe Lutherans. In the
time of this Paul 3.Ieſuites. aroſe vp frō the depth & bottōe of hell, the
new ſect, called of the fellowſhip of Ieſus, or Ieſuites: Whom

with greater reaſon may we call Iebuſites, or Iebuſeans. Their
firſt author, inuentor, and founder was Inigo Layola: whom the
more to authorize his name, they called: father Ignacius. This
Inigo was a Guipuſcuan borne, who being a ſimple and ignorant
man, applyed himſelfe to the the warres, and ſo in the yeare,
las Comunidades as they call it in Spaine (which was about
eyeare 1520. or 1521.) he was a ſouldiour in the caſtle of
Pamphona: which Caſtle was then beleagred by the king of
Nauarre, and the Frenchmen. And vpon a day as the enemies
ſhot at the Caſtle, one of the bullets ſtroke a ſtone of the
Caſtle, and brake it, ſome of the peeces of the ſtones, ſtroke
into the feet of this ſouldiour Inigo; ſo that vnable to ſtand, he fell
to the earth Inigo finding himſelfe vnfit for the war, changed his
purpoſe, and ſo of a ſouldiour, became a holy hypocrite (yet
recouered he his feete) and ſo gaue himſelfe to fooliſh deuotion
and ſuperſtition, which men of themſelues, without the
word of God haue inuented: and ſo deceaue all thoſe, whoſe
names are not written in the booke of life. Inigo then hauing
bene a ſouldiour, and anignorant man, gaue himſelfe to ſtudy;
and when he vnderſtood ſomewhat of the Grammer, to proſecute
his ſtudy, he came to Alcala de Henares, where, to
gaine the greater credit, &, reputation of a holy man, he went
barefooted: which maner ofliuing, when the ſtudents of Alcala,
laughed and Ieſted at Inigo, confounded and aſhamed, that
they nought eſteemed his courſe of life: leauing Alcala, he
went to Salamanca: where the Students much more mocked
him then before: For which cauſe. Inigo leauing Salamanca,
went to Paris, where he was made maiſter, and gayned the
opinion of an holy man:Anno 1537. began the Iebuſites or Ieſuites. with whom in the 1537. yeare there
ioyned ten companions, and ſo went they into Italie. Whiles
Panle 3. Poped, the Ieſuits began to be knowne in Italie: but
not without great gaineſaying and contradiction. They were
permitted in the end, to heare confeſſions: and by this meanes
they obteyned great reputation of holy, chiefely among Ignorant
people. Theſe ten companions, in the 1538. yeare were
all together in Rome: whereof they obteyned of Pope Paul
3. confirmation of their ſect, and were receiued vnder the
protection of the Romane ſeate: but this holy viua vocis oraculo,
               
remitting them, in aſmuch as touched the diſpatch of the
perpetuitie of their ſect, to Cardinall Guidiccion Luques: And
being ayded by him, they were approued and confirmed by
Letters and Bulles of the firſt of October, in the 1540. yeare,
geuen at Tiuoli, vnder the name and title of the fellowſhip of
Ieſus, with licence and power to receiue into their companie
(which then was onely ten) to the nomber of of ſixttie per
               
                  •
               ons.
In the 1543. yeare of the ſaid Paul 3. they obteyned licenſe,
to receiue into their companie ſo many as they would:
which Paul in the 1545. yeare, did graunt them all the priuilledges,
faculties, and graces, which at this preſent they enioy.
Shortly after the maiſter Petrus Fabrus, and Antonius de Araoz,
and then others alſo came to Caſtile. When Paul 3. was
dead. Pope Iulius 3. almoſt with the confirmation of this ſect,
in the 1550. yeare began his Popedome. By the conuerſation
which Don Franciſca de Boria Duke of Gandia, and Marqueſſe
of Lombay had with the ſaid Araoz, he bare great loue and
liking to this ſect; wherein he was much more confirmed by
the perſwaſions of his wife Dona Leonora de Caſtro a Portugale,
much deuoted to the Ieſuites: And ſo went the Duke to Rome,
in the company of the ſaid Araoz, who was the firſt prouinciall
in Caſtile.The Duke of Gandia a Ieſuite. VVhen they both two returned into Spaine; the
Duke was made a Ieſuite in the Colledge of Onate: where he
tooke all the orders. In Rome built Inigo Layola, the Almaigne
Colledge, to inſtruct the youth of that nation againſt the Doctrine
which they cal Lutheran: & ſaw befor he died 16 Prouincials
of his owne Inſtitution and more then 70. Colledges. he
died in Rome in the 1556. yeare, and in the 61 yeare of his
age,
            The Ieſuits were commonly, and yet in Italy and Spaine, are
called Theatinos, but ſo be they not. For the Theatinians had another
beginning, and manner of liuing, certaine gentlemen,
and other people they were, which moued with deuotion, were
giuen to praiers, & ſinging other ſuch exerciſes: and were called
at the beginning, the fellowſhip of Godly loue. Of this company,
was made Iuan Pedro Carraſa a Neapolitan, Biſhop of
Chiety: who holden (a perſon famous as he was) for the principall
and head of theſe religious perſons, they began to bee

called Chietinos & after corrupting the word, for Chietinos were
they called Theatinos. This paſſed in the time of Clement 7.
Theſe Chietinians or Theatinians by reaſon of the ſacking of
Rome, fled from Rome to Aſtia: where they found certaine venecian
galleys, and in them paſſed to Venice. And this was 11.
yeares before Inigo layola & his 10 cōpanions came to Venice, to
go to the holi-land. The Ieſuits ſtopped in this voyage, by the
wars between the Turk & Venecias, went frō Venice to Rome.
The Romans ſuppoſed they were the Chietinians or Thiatiniās,
which returned to Rome, and ſo through ignorance they confounded
theſe two ſects, which are far diferent the principal of
the Thiatinians Iuan Pedro Carraf
                     •
                  
                was afterwards Pope & called
Paul 4. Of the Thiatinians, but few Colledges or monaſtaries
are foūd (to wit) in Venice, Rome, Naples; & Pauia. The Ieſuites
alſo, in Arogon of Inigo their founder are called Iniguiſtes:
& in Portugal, Apoſtles: but in al places elſe, they are called Ieſuits:
and ſo in the buls & proceſſe of the Pope are they called.
Greatly in ſhort time haue theſe Ieſuites multiplied. For the locuſts
be they, wherof ſpeaketh S. Iohn in the 9. chap. of his Reuelation,
which iſſued out of the bottomleſſe pit, whoſe K. which
is the Angell of the deepe, in Hebrewe is called Abaddon, & in
Greeke, Apolyon: both the one and the other word, as much to
ſay as deſtroyer. And who but the Pope can be this Abaddon,
which Popeth, and all deſtroyeth? And who be his locuſts but
the Ieſuits, which whereſoeuer they come doe deſtroy & conſume
all things? They Inſinuate themſelues into the houſes, caſtles,
& palaces of princes, kings, and monarches, and ſtay not
till they know the very inward ſecret, and intents of the hart:
with fire & blod doe they incite them to war vpon thoſe which
ſpeake not, nor thinke as they doe. And if force and violence ſuffice
not, then by crafty treaſons & poyſonings do they practiſe
to kill them. And ſo no Lord, prince, king, nor monarche, in his
owne houſe is ſecure, if he ſpeak, & think not as they doe: Sufficient
exampls hereof we haue had within theſe 20 or 30 yeares
let the Hiſtories be read.Ieſuites attempt to kill the Queene of England. Lady Eliſabeth the moſt illuſtrious
Quene of England (wel knowing thē for ſuch, as ſhe, that of the
Ieſuits great treaſons, hath ſo great experience, whō ſo, & ſo often,
they haue practiſed to murther; &▪ God the father of mercies

hath as often againe deliuered her, for the comfort of his
Church, advancemēt of the kingdome of his Chriſt, & the confuſion
and contempt of Antichriſt, that Abaddon: hath baniſhed
them from her kingdome; commanding vpon paine of life, that
they enter not into it. Theſe Ieſuits haue alſo practiſed to murther
Henry 4.Ieſuites attempt to kill the French king. king of France. And ſo one of this company called
Iohn Caſtell did wound him; but by the prouidence of God, hee
miſſed his blow, and willing to ſtrike him in the throat, hit his
vpper lip, & brake one of his teeth. The murtherer was caught,
and as a traitor adiudged to death, and ſo Iuſtice was executed,
on Thurſday the 29 of Decēber, in the 1594. yeare: The houſe
where the ſaid Ieſuit was borne, was pulled down, & in it place,
a Piramides ſet; wherupon the cauſe why the houſe was puld
downe, and the pyramides erected, are written in marble with
letters of gold: which in latine ſay thus.
            
               Audi viator, ſiue ſis extraneu
                     •
                  ,
               Siue incola vrbis, cui Paris nomen dedit:
               Hic alta quae ſto Piramis, domus fui,
               Caſtella, ſed quam diruendam funditus:
               Frequens ſenatus Crimen vltus Cenſuit.
               Huc me redegit tandem herilis filius,
               Malis magiſtris vſus, et ſchola impia,
               Sotericum, eheu, nomen vſurpantibus.
            
            Which in Engliſh is this:The cauſe why the Ieſuites baniſhed France. Liſten O thou traueller, whether thou
be ſtraunger, or inhabitant of the Citie, which Paris named. In
this place where I ſtand the high Piramides, was the houſe of
Caſtel: which the cōmon conſent of the ſenate, for puniſhment
of the fault, appointed to be pluckt downe. To this hath the ſon
of my maiſter, brought me, becauſe he had ill maiſters, and was
trained vp in a wicked ſchole, which (ô griefe) vſurpe the name
of the Sauiour Ieſus. There was alſo written.
            D. O. M. which is: Deo Optimo Maximo.
            
               Pro ſalute Henrici▪ 4. clementiſſimi, ac fortiſſime Regis, quem
nefandus Parricida pernicioſiſſimae factionis haereſi peſtiferra imbutus,
quae nuper abhominandis ſceleribus pietatis nomen obtendit,
vnctos Domini, viuaſque maiestatis ipſius Imagines occidere
populariter docuit, dum confodere tentat, caeleſti numine ſceleſtammanum
inhibente, cultro in labrum ſuperius delato, & dentiū
                  
occurſu faeliciter retuſo violare auſus eſt. Which in Engliſh is thus.
For the health of Henry 4. moſt mercifull and potent king,
whom whiles the wicked homicide (infected with the peſtiferous
hereſie of the moſt pernicious ſect, which with abhominable
wickedneſſe here lately, pretended the name of pietie,
taught the people to murther the annoynted of the Lord, and
dared to violate the ſacred Images of his maieſtie attempted
to ſtabbe. But the dyuine maieſtie letting the curſed hand,
cauſed the knife to wound the vpper lip, and ſo by the teeth
to be moſt happily hindred. Alſo: Pulſo praeterea tota Gallia hominum
genere nouae ac maleficae ſnperſtitionis, qui rempublicam turbant,
quorum inſtinctu piacularis adoleſcens dirum facinus inſtituerat.
As much to ſay as: Baniſhed from all France that kind
of men, which with their new and peſtilent ſuperſticion diſturbe
the weale publique: by whoſe inſtinct and perſwaſion
that miſerable young man committed ſo great abhomination.
It was alſo by the ſame Parliament of Paris (which is the Chaū
               cery
royall of France) commanded; that the Prieſts and ſtudents
of the Colledge of Claremont, aud all the reſt of the
ſame fellowſhip, as corrupters of youth, perturbers of the publique
quiet, enemies of the king, and common-wealth, ſhould
within three dayes after the publication of the preſent ſentence,
depart from Paris, and from the other Cities and people;
where they haue their Colledges; and auoyd the whole
Realme, within 15 dayes after: vpon paine, whereſoeuer they
were found (the ſaid time expired) to be puniſhed as offenders,
culpable of high treaſon: their goodes aſwell moueable as vnmoueable
to them any wayes belonging, to be imployed in
Godly workes: and the diſtribution thereof, to be made according
to the oder which the Parliament ſhall preſcribe. Moreouer
it was commaunded to all the kings ſubiects, that none of
them ſend their ſtudents to any Colledge of the ſaid company,
which were out of the kingdome, to be in them inſtructed, vpon
the ſame paine Laeſae Maieſtratis. All that which I haue ſaid
be the ſelfe words of the Sentence. Thus then were the Ieſuits,
for their treaſons and villanies out of all France baniſhed. But
they, as vnquiet ſpirits, and friends to blodſhed, haue not
ceaſed to effect their buſines, And ſo haue printed a booke,

wherein wickedly they ſpeake againſt the king, and the Parliament,
that gaue ſuch Sentence. They iuſtifie, ſanctifie, and
Canonize the foreſaid traitor Iohn Caſtell, incite the people,
and euery one of them, either by force or treaſon to kill their
Princes and Lordes, if in and by all things they agree not with
that which the Ieſuites teach. This their ſhameleſſe boldneſſe,
cauſed the moſt prudent Parliament in the 1598. yeare, eftſoones
to confirme the Sentence which it had formerly giuen
againſt the ſaid Ieſuites. Don Sebaſtian king of Portugale, for
liſtening to theſe Ieſuites, and being gouerned by them, deſtroyed
himſelfe and his kingdome. They perſwaded his going
into Barbarie, where he valiantly fighting, with the whole
Niobilitie of Portugale, was deſtroyed, Theſe Ieſuites are the
cauſe of the vprores in the kingdome of Swethland. They of
the kingdome being proteſtants, would not that the king (at
his returne from Polonia) ſhould place Ieſuites about him. The
king, who was gouerned by the Ieſuites, would place them.
So that of neceſſitie it came to blowes. Then let other princes
and Lordes beware of ſtrange directions, and in no wiſe ſuffer
the Ieſuites in their lands: becauſe they nought ſerue for, but
ſpies, and diſturbers of the peace publique, ſetting Princes againſt
Princes. And that which worſe is, all this which they do,
they ſanctifie with the title, pretext and collour of religion.
Much puffed vp they are with the title which they haue taken
of the fellowſhip of Ieſus: as though the reſt of the Prieſts
and Fryars, and all other Chriſtians were of the fellowſhip of
the deuill. Many of their owne Papiſts, doe now begin to ſmell
and vnderſtand. And ſo the Franciſcans, Dominicans, & others
eate no good crommes (as they ſay) with them. I wil here conclude
this matter of the Ieſuites, with a terrible lie: which to aduaunce
the kingdome of their king Abaddon (that is to ſay, deſtroyer)
they haue forged.
            All the world knoweth,The Citie Geneua in the lād of Sauoy. that in the land of Sauoy, is a Cittie
called Geneua. This Citie in theſe laſt times, hath God perticularly
bleſſed with the true knowledge of his holy word.
With theſe weapons hath this Citie warred againſt the Ignorance,
ſuperſticion and Idolatrie of the Popedome. And that to
the great aduauncemēt of the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt, & confuſion

of Antichriſt. The Antichriſtians for this cauſe, and cheifly
the Ieſuits beare ſecret hatred towards the citie, & haue practiſed
the totall ruine and deſtruction thereof. And ſeeing they
could not by violence deſtroy it (becauſe God did helpe & defend
it) with notable lies haue they often practiſed to defame
it. And ſo inuented they that, which their father the deuill (who
is the father of lies) could not more inuent.A qualified lie of the Ieſuites. They wrote one to
another with great reioycinges, that Geneua was reduced
(as they call it) to the lappe of the Church. They ſayd, that
Theodor de Beza (the chiefe miniſter of Geneua) who with
his learned ſermons, and writinges in that citie, hath aduaunced
the kingdome of Chriſt for fortie yeares ſpace,
and more, beeing readie to die, had repented and turned
to the Church Catholique: and that being in this holy purpoſe,
he ſent to requeſt the Lordes of Geneua, and the miniſters
to come viſit him: which had ſome what to impart
vnto them: they came (ſay they) and that Beza exhorted
them to be come Catholiques. And that with ſuch vehemencie
he ſpake vnto them, that he conuerted them: and that hee
alſo reduced al▪ Geneua to the catholique Roman faith. They
proceede with their lie: The Lantgraue of Heſſen (ſaid they)
hearing this newes; ſent ſome of his Gentlemen to Geneua, to
vnderſtand what had paſſed; who returning from Geneua, ſaid,
that Geneua was reduced to the catholique Roman Religion.
They ſaid alſo; that their Ieſuites had gone to diſpute with the
miniſters of the elector of Brandenberg: and that they had ſhamed
& confounded them. To theſe moſt notable lies, anſwered
the moſt learned Beza: the other miniſters of Geneua did briefly
alſo anſwere, but very liuely, in their proper coullours and
ſhaddowes depainted the Ieſuites. To which anſwere I referre
me.Iohn 8. 44. The deuill, (as our redeemer painteth him out) hath
bene a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth: for there is no truth in him. When the deuill ſpeaketh lies,
he ſpeaketh of himſelfe: For he is a liar, and the father of lies.
The ſonnes of ſuch a father, cannot be but murderers, and liars:
Perque de mal Cueruo (conforme al Commum refran) mal hueuo.
For of an euill crow, (after our Spaniſh Prouerbe) an euill
egge. Such (except by miracle) cannot leaue their nature.

When the Blackmore ſhall change his skinne and the Leopard
his ſpots,Ier. 13. 23. then theſe ſonnes of the deuill, taught to worke
wickedneſſe, to murther, and lie, may doe good, and ſpeake
the truth. The gaine which theſe wretches haue gotten by
their lie, is that very many which before well conceited them,
ſeeing their lies ſo palpable, & knowne, that God (to aduaunce
his holy catholique faith hath no neede of lies, now nought account
of them. Amongſt wiſe people, and ſuch as feare God, by
little and little, will they looſe their credit; and ſo returne to the
bottomleſſe pit from whence they came. For God abhorreth
all thoſe that worke iniquitie,Pſal 5. 6. 7. and thoſe that ſpeake lies will he
deſtroy. The bloodie and deceitfull man (as are the Ieſuites,
murderers and lyars) will the Lord abhorre. Returne we now
to Paul the third, who approued, ſanctified, aduaunced, and extolled
ſuch monſters in nature. Paule 3. hauing Poped 15 yeares
in the 1549.Anno 1549. yeare dyed. In whoſe time Don Charles the Emperour
raigned in Spaine.
            
               Iulius 3.Iulius 3. a blaſphemer. an Aretinian, after great diſcord had among the
Cardinals, was choſen; who (for that by the ancient cuſtome he
might giue his hat where his liſted) gaue it to a youth called
Innocent, whom he had fauoured being Legate in Bologna; &
ſo made him Cardinall,The Pope giueth the bar to whom he liſt. and receiued him to his ancient office,
This pleaſed not the Cardinals. And albeit one of them ſpake
freely vnto the Pope, ſaying: what ſaw your holineſſe in this
young man, for which he ought to be placed in ſo great dignitie?
The Pope anſwered: what ſaw yee in me, that ye elected
me chiefe Biſhop? So that (ſeeing it is the play of fortune,
which aduaunceth whom ſhe pleaſeth) as your aduaunced
me without deſert of mine,The Pope ſaith that fortune is it that maketh the Pope. we aduaunce this young
man, and make him Cardinall: and ſo he was. This Innocent
the Romans called Ganimedes: and the Pope they called
Iupiter: The Fable of Iupiter and his Ganimedes is filthy:
and therefore will I paſſe it ouer. When the ſame Iulius was
merry, he ſaid of his Innocent, that he was very la
                  •
               ciuious, &c.
O what a vicar of Ieſus Chriſt? ô what a holy father? D. Illeſcas
(albeit the Popes paraſite) vttereth theſe wodes, Iulius 3. gaue
his hat with the tittle of Cardinall de monte to a youngling of
15 or 16 yeares, whom he held with, him and moſt
                  •
                ſtrangely

affected him. He ſhortly made him rich: & Caeſar holpe him with
ſufficient penſions, and all this to gaine the fauour of the chiefe
Biſhop, that the Councell ſhould eftſoones returne, and be holden
in Trent: hitherto Illeſcas vpon the life of Iulius 3. Iulius was
a great blaſphemer, very filthie in his wordes, and much more
filthie in his deedes: the ſame blaſphemyes he vſed, that the
deſperate ſouldiers and horſekeepers, are accuſtomed to vſe:
which, for that it is ſo much againſt the maieſtie of that good
God, that with ſo great patience ſuffereth the blaſphemy of him
who boaſteth to be his vicar, & calleth himſelf moſt holy father,
(A ſathanicall father I call him) I omit to write them. Swines
fleſh, & peacoks he greatly loued (which fleſh is euill for the
gout) & therefore his Phiſitions forbad them to be ſet on the
table:Pope Iulius 3. his blaſphemy for ſwines fleſh but notwithſtanding, he would haue them. And when vpon
a time they failed to ſet them on the table, the Pope miſſing
them, demaunded where the porke was become? And when
the ſteward anſwered, that the Phiſitions had commanded not
to ſet it on the table: he curſed with his curſed mouth, diſpiting
God, with the ſame words, which ruffians & villaines in Italie
blaſpheme, ſaying, that they ſhould bring him the porke.
Another time as he was eating, they brought vnto him a peacocke,
which was vntouched: and the Pope commanded they
ſhould reſerue it for ſupper. And when he ſaw not at ſupper that
cold peacoke, albeit he had hot peacokes, he was terribly enraged,
& blaſphemed, as he was wont. A certaine Cardinal which
ſupped then with him, ſaid: Let not your Holineſſe be ſo angry
for a thing of ſo ſmall importance: whom Iulius anſwered. If
God would be ſo angry for an apple,Terrible blaſmy for a peacocke. that he caſt our firſt parēts
out of Paridice: why ſhall it not be lawful for me, that am his vicar,
to be angry for a peacocke, ſeeing a peacocke, is a thing of
greater importance then an apple? If this be not to profane the
ſcripture, what ſhalbe? So wicked was Iohn of the houſe of Florence
Archbiſhop of Beneuent, Deane of the Chamber Apoſtolike,
and this Iulius his Nuncio in Venice, that he compiled a
booke in prayſe of the wicked ſinne: which booke was printed
at Venice, in the houſe of Troyano Nauo. Behold, if the abhominations
of the Ammorits be come to the height. Awake
Lord, remember, and iudge thine owne cauſe: behold for thy

Churches ſake, that ſwine doe deſtroy her: Qual Abad (Aizen)
tal Monazillo ſuch Abbot (ſay they) ſuch nouice. An abhominable
Sodomite was Pope Iulius, an abhominable Sodomite
was his Nuncie; which ſat to Iudge the cauſe of Chriſtians. Open
thine eyes, O Spaine. Vpon the money made by Iulius, he
put this circumſcription.
            
               Gens quae non ſeruierit tibi, peribit.
               The people that will not ſerue thee ſhall periſh.
            
            Wherein Iulius 3. appeareth to be another Nabuchadnezzer K.
of Babilon,Anno 1555. of whom theſe words are ſpoken. Ier. 27. 8. In the
1555. yeare he died. In whoſe time the Emperour Don Charles
reigned in Spaine.
            
               Marcellus 2. a Tuſcan changed not his name; who being
meanely learned in humanitie,Marcellus 2. was made maiſter of Grammer
and afterwards Paul 3. made him tutor of Alexander his grandchild,
whom he had made Cardinall, being a youth of 12 yeares
old.A youth of 12 yeares old Cardinall. What a pillar of the Church was this? Thus by little and
little came Marcellus to be Cardinal, & afterwards to be Pope:
He was one of the three Legats,The Popp permitteth not any to ſpeake his mind freely in the Councell. whom Paul 3. ſent to the Coū
               cell
of Trent. This man (as he whom the Pope moſt truſted) the
Pope commaunded, that nothing in the Councell ſhoud be ſuffered
to be ſpoken, which might any way preiudice the Maieſtie
of the ſeat Appoſtolique. & that all thoſe which any ſuch
thing attempted, ſhould be expulſed the Councell: and when
Iacobus Nachiantes Biſhop of Clodia Foſſa, ſaid: that he could
not approue the decree which ſaid: That traditions ought to
be receiued and kept with the ſame Godly affection and reuerence
as the Goſpell which was written.The blaſphemy of the Trident Councell. This Marcellus was
the cauſe, that the ſaid Biſhop was expulſed the Councell: and
when Gulihelmus venetus a Dominican Friar, ſaid in the Coūcel;
that the Councel of Conſtance was aboue the Pope. This Marcellus
ſent for him, and moſt ſharply reproued him, and when
the Friar anſwered, that experience ſhewed the Councell to
haue bene aboue the Pope, ſith it deſpoſed him: Marcellus anſwered,
it is not ſo. For that the Pope willingly depriued himſelfe:
& ſaid moreouer; that this he could proue by a bul of lead:
and ſo commanded him to depart the Councell. Petrus Paulus
vergerius, Biſhop of luſtinople, was at this time come to the

Councell ſome held this man ſuſpected in doctrin. For that he
had bene often the Popes Legate in Almaine. The other two
Cardinals Legats of the Pope: Poole, & monte, & the Cardinall
of Trent himſelfe, and Pachecus would haue permitted the fore
named Vergerius, to haue entred the coūcel: & this leſt in ſhould
be ſaid the Councell was not free, if they chaſed away 
                  Ʋergerius,
a man well knowne in Germany. But Marcellus the
Popes third Legate, neuer ſtayed vntill hee ſaw him forth of
the Councell. Many Biſhopes hearing that the purpoſe was to
expulſe 
                  Ʋergerius. The Councell agreed, to write to the Pope
that in no wiſe he ſhould ſuffer ſuch a thing to be done: becauſe
many would ſay the Councell was not free, ſeeing that
the Biſhops were expulſed the ſame. Ier
                     •
                  nimus Ʋida Biſhop of
Cremona, had in the name of the other Biſhops, indited the
letter to the Pope. Which knowne to Marcellus, with moſt vehement
words he warned 
                  Ʋida, in no wiſe to ſend the letter to
the Pope. For that it ſhould be a thing euill in example, that the
Biſhops aſſembled in the Councell ſhould write ſuch letters to
the high Biſhop, as though they would ſeeme to preſcribe him
a law: which would be ſo great a miſchiefe, that they ſhould be
holden for ſuſpected. 
                  Ʋida vanquiſhed with this ſaying ſo
tempered with the other Biſhops, that the letter was not ſent.
When 
                  Ʋergerius was to departe the Councell he went to
ſpeake with Marcellus, and among other thinges that he
ſayd vnto him, he demaunded, for what cauſe he did caſt
him from the Councell, and what Articles he could obiect,
why he would exclude him from the company of the other
Biſhops? To this anſwered Marcellus, becauſe I haue heard,
thou haſt ſayd the Legends of Saint George, and Saint Chriſtopher,
were not true. 
                  Ʋergerius anſwered: ſo it is, I ſayd ſo;
and ſo I ſay ſtill. For I relie vpon the authoritie of Pope
Paul 3.The Legends of S. Chriſtopher end Saint George falſe after Paul 3. who hauing commanded, that both the one, and the
other Legends ſhould be ſpunged out of the Roman Breuiarie.
In the preface of the ſaid Breuiarie he had commaunded
(ſaith he) the Legends, which were not true to be taken away;
Marcellus thus caught, anſwered: that they ought not to be
holden for good men, that ſeeme in the leaſt thing, to conſent
with the Lutheranes, and ſo ſaid he vnto him: depart then

from our Councell. This haue I ſaid, that it may appeare,
what hope is to be had of the Councelles, where the Pope
and his Legates gouerne. If there be any that will ſpeake with
good zeale of Gods glorie; his mouth they will ſtoppe: and if
he will not yet be ſilent, caſt him out of the Councell. Behold
how free is that Councell,It is no Councell except it 
                     〈◊〉
                   free. where each one is not ſuffered to
ſpeake that is meet? Such a one was Marcellus, before he was
Pope: and ſuch, and worſe being Pope would he haue bene,
had not God taken him from the world, when he had Poped
but twenty three dayes, and ſome ſay that hee dyed of Poyſon.
            
               Paul 4.Poyſon. a Neapolitane, before called Iohannes Petrus Carafa
Cardinall Chietino or Theatino in the 1555.Paul 4. an enym
                     •
                  e to the Spaards. yeare with ful conſent
of the Cardinals, who deſired to pleaſe Henry the French
king,Anno 1555. was choſen Pope. He being in Venice, before he was
Pope, with his hypocriſie and fayned holyneſſe did Inſtitute,
or reforme the new order of the fellowſhip of diuine loue,
which of him (that was Biſhop of Chiety) was called Chietinos
or Theatinos, as we haue ſaid vpon Paul 3. He forſooke this
order, by him inſtituted or reformed: and being ready to depart
Venice, his religious conſort demaunded whither he went.
Whether I goe, anſwered he, can ye not come: giuing them
to vnderſtand, that he went to Rome, to be Pope, if he might.
He gaue it out before he was Pope, that he nought elſe deſired,
but reformation of the Church: and ſo of this argument wrote a
booke, which he dedicated to Paule the third. But when he
was Pope, he for nothing leſſe cared. Who liſteth to read this
booke,The vices 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Roman Church. ſhall ſee, that almoſt he confirmeth thoſe Articles,
whereof we accuſe the Papiſts. To wit, that ſo ruyned is the
Church among them, that it is not now the Chuch of Chriſt,
but of the diuels. The Popes (ſaith he) hauing itching eares,
haue heaped vp Maiſters, which entertaine them in their
luſtes and concupiſcence. That through the Cardinals, and
Biſhops, the name of Chriſt is blaſphemed among the Gentiles.
That the power of the keyes, ſerueth onely to 
                  •
               ake
together money. That wicked men are ordeyned. That
nothing but Symony is ſeene in the Church: That the
Prelates bee verie ambitious, and couetous: That in

monaſteries, are committed enormious offences: That Rome
is full of whores. Theſe thinges and other ſuch, doth this booke
conteyne: of wicked cuſtomes and life, it onely ſpeaketh: but
not once intreateth of the falſe doctrine, Idolatrie, and ſuperſtition,
which is taught in Rome: nor yet of the tyranny of
fire & bloud, wherewith ſuch are handled, as indeauor to ſerue
God in ſpirit and truth doth it ſpeake. But when he was Pope,
how did he amend it? As did Benedict 13. Pius 2. Pius 4. his predeceſſors
and others (who before they were Popes, much ſpake
of the dutie of the Pope; but being Popes, did the like, or
worſe then the reſt) euen ſo did he. For the cauſe of Religion,
certaine Auguſtine Friars, many Biſhops, and a great nomber of
the faithful, he impriſoned, tormented, and did them in the end,
what euill he could: Not for that they were adulterers, nor
Inceſtuous perſons, Simoniſts, nor blaſphemers: was all this:
but for the Chriſtian religion, which they profeſſed. Reformation
then caſt aſide: he was occupied in the warres, againſt
Don Phillip our king, and the Spaniſh blood. Deny him then
(O Spaine) for father, who from the ſonne taketh the cloake.
The which this Paul from the king Don Phillip, and Clement 7.
from Don Charles the Emperour indeauoured to take; as in the
life of Clement 7. we haue before declared. This Paul being a
Neapolytan, and ſo vaſſall to the king, was to him a traitor, &
teacher: taking part with Frauncis his kinges enemy. His great
ſeruant Panuinus ſaith: that ayded by the French & Swizzars, he
raiſed great warres againſt king Phillip: and renewed the old
hatred. For the Spaniſh name, had he long before deteſted,
that (as ſaith Panuinus) for publique and particular Iniuries, and
ſo the Neapolitanes he well hoped, would haue riſen againſt
their king. When he was Cardinall, he perſwaded Paule 3. to
warre againſt the Imperials in the kingdome of Naples: promiſing
him his ſeruice, and the ayd of many Neapolitans: of
whom he had many friends (ſaid he) within that kingdome:
But Paul 3. was more wiſe, and refuſed his Councel. Then Duke
Dalua vnderſtanding that this Pope Paul 4. conſpired againſt
the king to take Naples: with a great camp, came vpon Rome
and ſent a letter to the Pope, wherein he ſhewed all, that ſithens
he was Pope, he had practized againſt the king, &c. and

vehemently exhorted him to peace, warning him, that if hee
ſaid not, and that quickly, what he would doe touching warre,
or peace, that he ſhould be aſſured, the warre was proclamed:
To the Colledge of Cardinals, he wrote alſo to the ſame purpoſe:
and after fifteene dayes, when the Duke perceiued that
the Pope prolonged the time, he entred vpon the Church lands
and very many of them tooke, which he kept (ſaid he) for the
Church, and the ſucceeding Pope. All this notwithſtanding
would not the Pope yeeld to peace; vntill he heard newes of
the great victorie,Anno 1557. which the king in the yeare 1557. hadhad againſt
the French at the taking of Saint Quintanes:The taking of S. Quintanes. wherein all
the nobilitie almoſt of France,The death of Don Charles the Emperour, and of Mary Queene of England. and Saint Quintanes alſo were
taken. In the 1558. yeare, and the moneth of September, died
in Spaine Don Charles the Emperour. And the 17 of Nouember
the ſame yeare, dyed Mary Queene of England and Cardinall
Poole, & in her place reigneth Ladie Elizabeth by whoſe
meanes, the great perſecutions of fire and blood, priſonment
and baniſhment,Anno 1558. which the Church, in the time of Queene
Mary had ſuffered in England,Elizabeth Queene of England. ceaſed. Fortie whole yeares
that this magnanimous and moſt prudent Queene hath reigned,
hath this kingdome by the mercie of God enioyed this
freedome. In which time, this kingdome hath bene, and is, a
refuge and ſanctuarie for many ſtraungers, who eſcaping the
tallons of the haukes,England a refuge for ſtrangers. and the teeth of the lyons, and woulues,
haue thither retired. God for his infinite mercie, enrich it, with
his ſpirituall and temporall riches: ſith it hath entertayned and
holpen poore ſtraungers, in the time of ſo great affliction and
calamitie.Perſecution in Seuill. In the time of this Pope Paul 4. began the great
perſecution in Spaine, and chiefly in the Cittie of Seuill, and
Valladolid. At the end almoſt of the 1557. yeare, this peſecution
began: as we will afterwardes declare. The Cittie of Seuil,
is one of the moſt Ciuill, populous, rich, ancient, fruictfull, and
of moſt ſumptuous buildings, that is this day in Spaine. To be
moſt rich it plainely appeareth, ſeeing all the Treaſure of the
weſt Indies cōmeth vnto it, & that the king hath thence euery
yeare a million and a halfe of Duckets. Which rent is ſo great,
that fewe kings there be, that haue ſo much of one whole entire
kingdome. Moſt ancient it is: For (if we credit Hiſtories)

               Hiſpalo Nouono king of Spaine (of whom it is called Hiſpalis)
built it, and Hercules before the deſtruction of Troy did augment
it. That it is fruitfull, is proued by that place Axaraſe
where be ſuch, and ſo many oliue trees, from which is drawne ſo
great plenty and aboundance of oyle, that it ſtoreth not onely
a great part of Spaine: but many other landes alſo farre diſtant
from Spaine: It is ſeene alſo by the fieldes, of Carmona, and
Zeres, ſo abounding with wheate: and by the paſtures ſo full
ſtored with vines, oreng trees, figge trees, pomgranate, and other
infinit fruites. And where nothing is ſowne, the earth bringeth
forth much ſpirage and palme trees, &c It hath alſo much
cattle: & chiefly ſheepe, from whence much woole is ſent into
Italy, and flaunders. The father of mercy hath not onely enriched
this citie, making it ſo ciuill, populous, rich, auncient, fruitfull,
and of ſuch ſumptuous buildings: but hath alſo enriched &
bleſſed it with all ſpirituall bleſſings, in heauenly thinges in
Chriſt:Epheſ. 1. 3. electing it before the foundation of the world (all this
ſaith Saint Paul of the citie of Epheſus) to be the firſt citie of our
Countrey of Spaine;Seuill the firſt Citie in Spaine where the Goſpell in our time was almoſt clerely preached. that in theſe times ſhould knowe the abuſes,
ſuperſticions, & Idolatries of the Roman Church. Wherwith
Spaine hath ſo long time bene deceiued; and knowing
them to cauſe it to amend, ſhould publiſh (as it hath publiſhed
and dyuulged) the ſame. And ſo Ieſus Chriſt might reigne
in his Church, and Antichriſt be baniſhed, deſtroyed, and
ſlaine.Rodrigo de Valer. About the yeare 1540. one Rodrigo de Ʋaler borne
at Lebrixa, liued in Seuill, where alſo was borne, the moſt
learned Aentonius de Brixa, reſtorer of the Latine tongue
in our Countrie of Spaine. This 
                  Ʋaler paſſed his youth,
not in vertue, nor ſpirituall exerciſes, not in reading, nor meditation
of holy ſcripture, but in vaine and worldly exerciſes
as rich youth accuſtomably doth. Hee delighted to haue
good and well barded horſes. To day was he ſuited in one
apparell, and to morrow in another: hee gaue himſelfe to
play, to hunt, and to ſuch other exerciſes, whereunto knights
and Gentlemen applye themſelues. In the middeſt of which
his vaine exerciſes, he knew not how, nor by what meanes,
God touched, altered and changed him into a new man, farre
different from the former. So that by how much the more

he formerly loued and followed his vaine exerciſes: by ſo much
the more did he afterwardes abhorre, deteſt and forſake them,
hartely applying himſelfe, and bending all the forces of his
body and minde, to the exerciſe of pietie, reading, and meditation
of holy ſcriptures. Some ſmall knowledge he had
in the Latine tongue, did much herein auayle him. For now
is the tyranny of Antichriſt knowne, which ſuffereth not
in Spaine, the bookes of holy ſcripture in the vulgar tongue.
Many that vnderſtood not the miſteries, which God wrought
in Valer, held for fooliſhneſſe and want of Iudgement, ſuch
a ſuddaine and great alteration. For this is the Iudgement,
which fleſh holdeth of ſpirituall and diuine thinges: it holdeth
them for fooliſhneſſe,1. Cor. 1. 18. and drunkenneſſe, as ſaith S. Paul 1. Cor.
1 18. The word of the croſſe is truly fooliſhneſſe to them that are loſt,
&c, And in the 12. verſe. It pleaſed God by the fooliſhnes of the Goſpell
to ſaue thoſe that beleeue. And in the 2. chap. 14. The Carnall
man vnderſtādeth not the things that parteine to the ſpirit of God: for
to him they be fooliſhnes, &c. And S. Luke Act. 2. 13. reporteth that
many,Actes 2. 13. ignorant of the ſuddaine alteratiō which the ſpirit of God
wrought in the Apoſtles, ſaid, they were drunken; but thoſe that
haue eies, may ſee, that it was not folly, nor drunkenneſſe,
but a change, wrought by the hand of the moſt high: and that
the ſpirit of God it was, that moued 
                  Ʋaler. When Valer was
thus changed, he conceaued great ſorrowe and repentance
for his vayne life paſſed, and ſo imployed himſelfe wholly in
the exerciſe of Godlineſſe, alwayes ſpeaking and intreating
of the principall poyntes of Chriſtian Religion: reading
and meditating in the holie Scriptures, and gaue himſelfe
ſo to read them, that he knewe much thereof by hart: which
he very aptly applyed to that which he handled. In Seuill
where he dwelled, had he dayly diſputations and contentions
againſt the Prieſtes and Friars: And told them to their
faces, that they were the cauſes of ſo great corruption, as was,
not in the eccleſiaſtical ſtate onely, but alſo in euery Chriſtian
common-wealth: which corruption (ſaid he) was ſo great, that
there was none, or very little hope of amendmēt. For this cauſe,
he reproued thē ſharply, & that not in corners, but in the middeſt
of the markets, & ſtreets, & vpon the exchange in Seuill,

a place where Marchants twiſe a day meete about their buſineſſe:
he pardoned nor ſpared them not. S. Paule (as ſaith Saint
Luke Actes 17. 16. and 17. ſeeing the citie of Athens ſo greatly
giuen to Idolatrie was much moued, and diſputed with the
Iewes in their Sinagogue, and in the open market or aſſembly
of men, with thoſe that encountred him. Euen ſo our Valer
ſeing ſo noble a citie as Seuill is, giuen to ſo great ſuperſtition
and Idolatrie, and ſo full of ſcribes and Phareſies, of ſo many
prieſts and Friars, he diſputed with them in the markets &
ſtreetes, and reproued and conuinced them by the ſpripture.
The ſame God which of old: made Saint Paule to ſpeake: the
ſame made Valer alſo to ſpeake, And as Paule was holden for
a Preacher of Nouelties, and fooliſh: for ſuch another was

                  Ʋaler held alſo. The newe Phareſies ſeeing themſelues
thus handled, demaunded whence he had ſuch wiſedome, and
knowledge of holy thinges? whence (being a ſecular man, not
hauing ſtudied, nor giuing himſelfe to vertue: but ſo euill ſpent
his youth in vanities) proceeded his bouldneſſe ſo vnreuerently
to handle the eccleſiaſticall perſons, which be pillars of the
Church? By what authoritie (demaunded they) did hee this?
Who had ſent him? What ſigne had he of his callings? The ſelfe
ſame demaundes,Matth 21. 23. made the old Phareſies to Ieſus Chriſt, and
his Apoſtles, when they could not deny their villanies, nor
well be ſilent, when he ſhewed them their wickedneſſe. Behold
how the old Phareſies, and the new be all one, and the
ſonnes of the deuill. To theſe demaundes, excellently and with
great conſtancy anſwered 
                  Ʋaler.
               Iohn 7. 38. This knowledge of holy
thinges, he had obteyned (ſaid he) not of his owne ſtincking
pudles, but of the ſpirit of God, which maketh flowing riuers
of wiſedome runne from the harts of thoſe which truly beleeue
in Chriſt. He told them, that God and the cauſe he had in hand,
gaue him courage and bouldneſſe: that the ſpirit of God was
not tyed to any eſtate how eccleſiaſtical ſoeuer; the eccleſiaſticall
ſtate eſpecially of any other being the moſt corrupted and
neereſt to deſtruction. That the ſpirit of God in old time made
of ſecular, vnlearned, and fiſhermen, Apoſtles: that they might
clerely ſhew the blindneſſe, & ignorance of all the Synagogue,
ſo well inſtructed in the law, and call by their preaching, the

That Chriſt had ſent him: That in the name and authoritie of
Chriſt, he did that he did: But the adulterous generation (ſaid
he) which hath long time degenerate from the true race of
the ſons of God, ſeeing that darkneſſe to be much manifeſted
by the light and reſhining of the ſunne, demaundeth a ſigne.
In concluſion, for ſo liberall and conſtantly ſpeaking, was he
called before the Inquiciſitors▪ valiantly did Valer diſpute of the
true Church of Chriſt, her markes and ſignes, of the Iuſtification
of man,The Principall pomtes of Chriſtian religion. and other like chiefe points of Chriſtian religion:
the knowledge whereof 
                  Ʋaler had obteyned, without any
miniſtery, or humane helpe, but by the pure, and wonderfull
reuelation of God. His fooliſhneſſe (as the Inquiſitors called
it) did then excuſe him, and ſo firſt confiſcating all that hee
had; they ſent him away. To take away his goods, pleaſant
meanes to reduce a mad man to his ſence. 
                  Ʋaler notwithſtanding
this loſſe of goods; ceaſed not to proſecute what he had
begun. A few yeares after, for the ſelfe ſame cauſe they called
him againe: and yet ſuppoſing, that he was a foole indeede,
they burned him not, but made him to recant or deny, not in open
audience, but to himſelfe alone, in the great Church betweene
the two quiers. For all his fooliſhneſſe, they condemned
him to continuall wearing of a great Saint Benito (or diuels
coate) and to perpetuall priſon.About the yeare 1545. From this perpetuall priſon,
euery Lords day, they carried him, with many other penitents,
to heare maſſe and ſermons in the Church of Saint Sauiour;
where, ſet to heare the Sermon (albeit a priſoner) he oft times
roſe vp before all the people, and when he preached falſe Doctrine,
gaine ſaid the preacher. But the Inquiſitors, as then not
ſo wicked, with conceit of his folly, excuſed him. Much did it
alſo auaile Valer, to haue bene an old Chriſtian, and not deſcended
of the Iewiſh or Moriſh race. The Inquiſitors in the end,
drew him from this perpetuall priſon in Seuill, and ſent him to
a monaſterie in Saint Lucas, called of our Lady of Barrameda;
where being 50 yeares old and vpwardes, he died. By the
meanes of this 
                  Ʋaler, many that heard and conferred with him,
had knowledge of the true religion: & chiefly that famous and
good Doctor Egidius,
               D. Edigius. Cannon & preacher in the great Church
of Seuill, that ſo much good did in Seuill, both with his good

good life and Doctrine. I haue long dwelled vpon diſcourſe of
this Hiſtorie of 
                  Ʋaler: but pardon me; for this 
                  Ʋaler was the
firſt, that openly, and with great conſtance, diſcouered the
darkeneſſe in our time in Seuill. After this perſecution of Rodrigo
de Valer, many others were perſecuted, ſome of whom
eſcaped: as Doctor Iohn Perez, who came to Geneua: where
he imprinted the new Teament, & other bookes in the Spaniſh
tongue, others aboade there ſtil, of whom many perſeuered.
And others of the Inquicitions conceiued ſuch feare, that they
denyed the truth: and which is worſe, were perſecutors therof
as was doctor Herman Rodriguez, & maiſter Garci Arias, whom
commonly they called maiſter White. But God ſhewed mercy
vpon White, and of a woulfe, made him a lamb, & ſo was he with
great conſtancie burned. This White, when God had made him
truly White, ſaid freely vnto the Inquiſitors, whē they examined
him in the audience, that they were fitter to follow a droue of
aſſes, then to ſit and Iudge matters of faith, which they nothing
vnderſtood.Anno 1555. In the 1555. yeare, ſeuen perſons, men and
women went out of Seuill, and came to Geneua, where they
made their aboad.Anno 1557. In the 1557. yeare happened maruelous
things in Seuill, & worthy of perpetuall memorie: namely, that
in a monaſterie called S. Iſidor, the moſt famous and rich in all
Seuil, the buſines of true religion went ſo, & ſo plainely forward:
that vnable with good conſcience, there to ſtay longer, 12 of
the Friars in ſhort time departed, ſome one way, and ſome another:
al which within a yeare came to Geneua; whither at their
departure, they determined to goe. None of thē there was that
paſſed not great dangers & perils: but from all theſe perils God
did free them, & with a mighty hand brought them to Geneua.
Theeſ, that abode in the monaſterie (for it is to be noted, that almoſt
al thoſe of the monaſterie, albeit they went in woulues
habits, had knowledge of Chriſtiā religion) ſuffered great perſecution:
taken they were, tormented, diſgraced, very hardly &
cruelly intreated, and in the end many of them burned: and in
many yeares almoſt was there no act of Inquiſition in Seuill, in
which there went not more or leſſe, out of this monaſterie: Among
thoſe that went out, and came to Geneua, was the Prior,
vicar & procurator of S. Iſidor, & with thē the Prior of the Vale

of Ecija, of the ſame order. And God with his mightie arme, did
not only deliuer theſe 12 from the cruel grype eſ the Inquiſitors
before the great perſecution began in Seuill: but afterwards alſo
in the time of the great perſecution, deliuered other 6 or 7
from the ſame monaſterie, making fooliſh; and of no worth nor
effect, all the ſtratagems, Councels, ſubtelties, craftes, & deceits
of the Inquiſitors, that ſought, but could not find them: for who
ſhall deſtroy, whom God wil preſerue? In the ſame yeare of the
Lord: 1557. another memorable thing hapned alſo in the ſame
citie of Seuill. And this it was, that one called Iulian Hernandez
(whom the French, by reaſon of his ſmall ſtature, called Iulian
le petit) with the great deſire, and zeale that he had to doe
ſome ſeruice to God, and his countrie, drewe out of Geneua
two great drifattes, full of Spaniſh bookes, of thoſe which before
we haue ſaid Doctour Iohn Peres to haue printed in Geneua;
Which bookes, and moreouer all thoſe that taught
true Doctrine and Godlineſſe, had the Inquiſitors forbidden:
becauſe the ignorance, and darkenes of Antichriſt, loueth not
the wiſedome, and brightneſſe of the Goſpell of Chriſt: for
feare that their workes ſhould be conuinced and reproued.
Iulian by Gods great miracle, carried all theſe bookes, and
put,Iulian brought many bookes to Seuill. and diſperſed them in Seuill. Yet ſo ſecretly could he not
doe it, but (by meanes of a fearefull man, an hypocrite,
which ſould himſelfe for a brother, and was in deede a Iudas)
it came in the end to the Inquiſitors eares: and ſo
they tooke Iulian, and many others more. So great was
the takeing, that they filled the priſons, and ſome particular
houſes alſo.800. priſoners for the teligion in Seuill. There was eight hundred then taken for
the Religion in Seuill: a thing which aſtoniſhed the Inquiſitors
themſelues. Among theſe priſoners, and them alſo,
which were afterwardes taken, were found many men, excellent
in life and doctrine. As were Doctor Conſtantine, maiſter
White, the licenciate Iohn Gon
                     •
                  ales, the licenciate Chriſtopher de
Loſada Phiſitiō, & miniſter of the priuate Church in Seuil, Chriſtopher
de Arellano Friar of S. Iſidor, a moſt learned man, euen by
report of the Inquiſitors themſelues, & maiſter Ieronimo Caro, a
Friar dominik, Olmedo, a man learned, & the beneficed çafra.
There were alſo people both men & women, rich & of qualitie;

among whom, was that truely illuſtrious, in pietie and goodnes,
Don Iohn Ponce de Lyons, brother to the Countie of Baylen,
and eldeſt ſonne of the Duke of Arcos: and Lady Iane, wife
of the Lord de la Higura; to whom (newly deliuered of childe)
the Inquiſitors gaue the torment called del Borro, in the Caſtle
of Triana: and ſuch was the torment, that thereof ſhe dyed. For
the cordes pearced the very bones and marrow pipes of the
armes, of the muſcles, and of the legges. And ſo tormented,
they caried her to her priſon as dead, caſting out of her mouth
bloud in great aboundance; by reaſon that her intralles were
broken in her bodie. Eight dayes after this cruel torment, without
company, or any aſſiſtance (ſaue onely a young maide,
which a few dayes before was likewiſe tormented) in the end
ſhe died. Oh Inquiſitors, more cruell then wilde beaſtes, how
long ſhall the Lord ſuffer your tyrannies and cruelties. O yee
Spaniardes, that ſo much loue your wiues; and ſo zealouſly,
keepe them: how long will ye ſuffer that theſe curſed Elders of
Suſanna, ſhould ſee your wiues and daughters in their ſmocks,
yea in a manner naked, taking pleaſure to behold them, and after
giuing them torments, hauing ſometimes formerly made
loue vnto them, ô that all that were knowne, which in the Inquiſition
paſſeth. A certaine Inquiſitor there was, which in
merriment and ieſt, ſaid of his companion; that he contented
not himſelfe to beate a cutle, but alſo to eate it. This ſaid hee,
becauſe the Inquiſitor, had whipped a faire young maid, that
was taken for a Iewe, thē lay with her, & burned her afterwards.
By this ſubtillty may the reſt be vnderſtood, which the Lords
Inquiſitors vſe with the women, which they hold priſoners. Of
this great number of priſoners, where many burned by twēties,
or fewe leſſe, it chaunced that they burned them. The reſt were
vnhappily handled.The like was done of the houſe of Doctour Cacalla in Vallodalid. The houſe of Iſabella de Ʋaena, where the
faithfull aſſembled to heare Gods word, was plucked downe
and ſowne with ſalt, that it ſhould neuer be built againe: and
fot a perpetuall memorie that the faithfull Chriſtians, whom
they called Lutheran heretiques, there aſſembled. In the middeſt
thereof they placed a marble pillar. The Licenciat Loſada,
miniſter of Gods word, was burned: many deceaſſed, were
vntombed and burned:D. Vargas. D. Egidius. namely Doctour Vargas, and Doctour

yeares was this Egidius in the Inquiſition priſoner, part of them
in the caſtle of Triana, and the reſt in other places; where they
ſhut him vp.D. Cōſtantine. D. Conſtantine (who by infirmitie and ill intreatie
was not long before dead in the caſtle of Triana) and ſo knewe
by ſuch as were preſent at his death, and ayded him in his ſicknes)
was alſo vntombed: which notwithſtanding, the ſonnes of
falſhood bruted it abroad, that Conſtantine murdred himſelfe.
This ſo great a lie, they inuented, that the vulgar ſort, which neither
know nor beleeue, but that onely, which the Inquiſitors
command them to know and beleeue, ſhould abhorre the religion,
and the preachers thereof, ſith being deſperate like Iudas
they killed themſelues. This D. Conſtantine, was one of the moſt
learned, and eloquent men, that of long time our country of
Spaine yeelded: confeſſor, & preacher he was, to Don Charles
the Emperor & K. of Spaine; & thereby might (if he had would)
haue attained to great dignities: but as one that nought eſteemed
the vaine honors of this world,The perſecutiō of Voll odalid &c. he diſpiſed them al and returned
to Seuill: where, of the Inquiſition, he was taken; therin
died, and by the ſame was afterwards burned. About this ſame
time,D. Cacalla. or a little after, began the great perſecution in Vallodalid,
where Doctour Caçalla preacher to the Emperour, the moſt
eloquent (as ſaith D. Illeſcas) in the pulpit, of any that preached
in Spaine, his mother, brethren and ſiſters, Don Charles a knight
qualified, aud many others, were burned: The ſonne of the
marques of Poza, and others were diſgraced, and the houſe
where they aſſembled was pulled downe; and in like ſort vſed
as was that of Iſabell de varna in Seuill. The vulgar ſort beleeued,
that they met by night in theſe houſes; and that the
ſermon ended, they put out the candles, and abuſed themſelues
together without reſpect of kindred or other, & of many other
abhominations were they ſlaundred. Theſe lies be not newly
ſtamped: many yeares are ſince paſſed that to defame the Goſpel,
and profeſſors there of, Sathan did innent them: as by the
apologies made by the fathers of the Church that then liued, to
Iuſtifie their cauſe doth appeare. Read Iuſtine Martir lib 1.
of his queſtions, and the anſweres to the 126 queſtion. Tertulian,
in his Appologie. S. Ciprian againſt Demetrianus. Origen againſt
Celſus, Arnobius in ſeuen bookes, and chiefly in the firſt

againſt the Gentiles Saint Ambroſe & Prudencius, againſt Symachus,
& much to the purpoſe S. Auguſtin in the 5 firſt bookes
de Ciuitate Dei: and Oroſius lib. 7. Of the ſelfe ſame things that
were the Chriſtians in old time ſlaundered, of the very ſame
thinges are we now falſely ſlaundered. About the ſixty fiue
yeare Nero cauſed Rome to be fired: which burned nine
dayes: and the tyrant gaue it out, that the Chriſtians had done
it. About the 170. yeare, the Gentiles forced with tormentes
the ſeruants of the Chriſtians, to ſay of their maiſters, many abhominations:
and among others, that they eate their owne children.
Celſus the Gentile Philoſopher, accuſed the Chriſtians for
diſloyall, and traytors: and ſaid: that their religion they had
taken from the Barbarians and Iewes. Origen defended the
Chriſtians, with 8 bookes which he wrote againſt this Celſus.
In the time of S. Auguſtine, were great calamities and wars, the
which Symachus an orator, and many other imputed to the
Chriſtians,Cap. 7. 
                     •
                  8. ſaying: that whiles the Roman Empire adored their
Gods,Cap. 44. 17. &c. it proſpered. The like Hiſtorie reciteth Ieremy, that when
they worſhiped the Queene of heauen: then all thinges proſpered.
Read the bookes intituled of the citie of God, where Saint
Auguſtine wrote againſt this ſlaunder in defence of the Chriſtians.
In the time of the glorious martyr Saint Ciprian, who
many yeares liued before S. Auguſtine, there was a Proconſull
in Africa, called Demetrianus a great enemy of the Chriſtians:
he, and others ſuch like with him, ſaid: that all the wars, famine
and peſtilence, wherewith the world was then afflicted ought
to be imputed to the Chriſtians; becauſe they did not worſhip
the Gods. Againſt this Demetrianus, wrote S. Cipriā, ſaying, that
not the Chriſtians, but the Gentiles were the cauſe of theſe calamities:
becauſe vnwilling to worſhip the true God, they adored
falſe Gods, and afflicted the Chriſtians with ſo great, and
ſo vniuſt perſecutions: not that they ſhould confeſſe God, but
that they ſhould denie him. The weakeneſſe of their Gods he
ſhewed them, ſeeing they could not defend themſelues, &c. Al
this in our time fully paſſeth: For the ſelfe ſame cauſes are we at
this day ſlaundered, and vniuſtly, to the moſt cruell and ſhamfull
kind of death condemned: The ſame ſtate of the Church
is now, as it was in the time of Saint Ciprian, and of the other

Saintes by vs named: And as they were defended againſt
the Gentiles. So we, againſt the Antichriſtians doe now, make
our defence. We tell them, that God ſendeth in our dayes, ſo
many calamities of wars, famine, and peſtilence, becauſe they
haue profaned the diuine worſhip,The cauſe of the preſent calamities. and in the place of the creator,
they honour the creatures: They worſhip not God (as he
hath commaunded) in ſpirit and truth, but after the doctrines
and commaundements of men, and God alone doe they not
worſhip: but alſo the Saints, their Images and pictures. They adore
not, will they tell me, the Images, but that which they repreſent
albeit their ſecond Nicen Councell (not the firſt which
is holy and good) commaundeth Images with the ſame adoration
to be worſhiped, as that which they repreſent: as in
the beginning of this Treatiſe we haue declared. Alſo our aduerſaries
ſeing themſelues in ſome affliction, inuocate the ſaints
of Paradiſe, without any commandement or example in al the
holy ſcripture ſo to do, where they ought to inuocate none but
God alone. Alſo wheras ther is but one only mediator, Interceſſor
& aduocate, betwixt God & mā, which is Chriſt Ieſus, as the
Apoſtle calleth him: they not contented with the only Interceſſiō
of Chriſt (for were they cōtented Chriſt is ſufficient for thē)
many mediators do they inuent, & each one maketh choice of
one for himſelf. Alſo they take away, & ad to the law of God (he
which ſo doth being curſed of God) & ſo take they away the 2.
cōmandement againſt Images: & to fil vp the number of ten. of
the tenth, doe they make two commandements. Alſo we read
in holy ſcripture, that the Lord in his catholike church did inſtitute
but two ſacraments, baptiſme & the holy ſupper: they haue
made 7.The Pope, the Councell and Inquiſition can not erre. They alſo ſay that neither the Pope, nor Coūcel nor the
Inquiſition can erre: hence commeth it that they giue ſo much
credit to the decrees & conſtitutions of the Popes, Councels, &
Inquiſitors, as if they were the word of God it ſelfe: & yet would
God they gaue not more credit to them, then to the word of
God. Very common are ignorance, ſuperſticion, & Idolatrie in
the Romane Church: This is the height of al their wickedneſſe,
that with fire & bloud doe they perſecute the true & catholique
Chriſtiās: becauſe ſo inſtructed & gouerned by the word
of God, they worſhip one only God in ſpirit & truth; & becauſe

they hold Ieſus Chriſt for the only, and alone mediator and becauſe
they ad not, nor ought diminiſh from the law of God, nor
his worde. When our aduerſaries ſhal then ſay; that we trouble
the world with our new doctrine, we will make them the ſame
anſwere that Elias (inſpired with the diuine ſpirit) freely made
vnto K. Achab.
               1 Kings 18. 17. 
               Art thou he (ſaith Achab) which troubleſt Iſraell?
Elias anſwered. Not I, but it is thou & thy fathers houſe, that trouble
Iſraell: becauſe ye haue forſaken the commandements of the Lord
and followed Baall. yee then (will we ſay to our aduerſaries) are
they, that haue forſaken the commandements of Chriſt, & haue
followed the traditiōs of Antichriſt, your father the Pope; ye are
they, which worſhip not, nor honour God, but ye worſhip and
honor Images, againſt the expreſſe cōmandemēt of God Exod.
20. Deut. 5. with many other places. Let our aduerſaries (at laſt)
vnderſtand, theſe & others ſuch like, to be the cauſe why God
afflicteth the world, with ſo great wars, famine, peſtilence, & diuers
other calamities, within our dayes we haue, & yet doe ſuffer.
His maieſtie for his infinit mercy, & for his Chriſts ſake, opē
their eyes: that they may conſider the works of God, & ſo may
ſoften, & not harden their harts, as did Pharo: who by the more
God did afflict him for his rebellion & contempt, by ſo much
the more was he hardened againſt God, & the people of God.
            But leauing ancient hiſtories, come we to that which in our
dayes happened, let vs come to our countrie of Spaine. God by
his iuſt iudgement hath many times in the ſpace of 40 yeares afflicted
Spaine, with wars, famine, peſtilence, and other calamaties,
which began a little after that great perſecution, againſt
the faithfull and catholique Chriſtians: This perſecution beginning
in Seuill, hath ſtretched almoſt throughout all Spaine, againſt
the noble & learned people (as after we wil declare) The
prieſts of Baall in their pulpits, cōfeſſiōs & diſcourſes do affirme
all this of right to be imputed vnto thoſe whom they cal Lutheran
heretiques: The common people which neither know, nor
other thing beleeue, but that which theſe Baalamites tell them,
& cōmand thē to beleeue, doe beleiue it ſo to be. For confirmation
of my ſayings, I wil here recite that which D. Illeſcas cap. 31.
vpon the life of Pius 4. ſaith. His wordes be theſe. In the 1561.
yeare, on Saint Mathewes day the 21 of September being the

Saboth,Fire in Valladolid. two howers before day in the morning, aftre was kindled
in the ſtreete called Coſtanilla of Valladolid ſo terrible and
fearefull, that without hope of remedy, in the 30. howers ſpace,
it ruined aboue 400. of the moſt principal & rich houſes of that
famous citie. So wonderfull, & almoſt neuer ſeene was this calamitie,
that it was taken for a thing myraculous: For the neighbour
houſes, and neere adioyning to thoſe that burned, were
not onely burned: but the fire in a moment did leape from one
ſtreete to another farre of diſtant, and beginning at the top of
the houſe, brought the whole preſently with it, to the earth. Many
marchandizes, much wheat, wine, and other thinges, which
by reaſon of the great furie and fierceneſſe of the fire could
not be put in ſafe keepeing were loſt. The whole Citie
was greatly troubled: becauſe none could know, how, or by
whom the fire was kindled. And all feared, that it was ſome
coniuration of the Lutherans, And a little lower: There is
made euery yeare vpon Saint Mathewes day a moſt ſolemne
proceſſion, to intreat our Lord, to be pleaſed by the meanes
of his holy Apoſtle, to deliuer the citie from the like plague
& tribulatiō. Thus far D. Illeſcas. To the ſelfe ſame purpoſe wil I
here alſo recount a very pleaſant tale, which I read in a hiſtorie,
& I my ſelfe alſo heard D. Bourne, who in Queene Maries time
was biſhop of Bathe in England tell the ſame. The hiſtorie is
this:A hiſtorie of Iohn Fox. In the time of K. Henry 8. one Malary maiſter of Arte of the
vniuerſity of Cambridge, was for profeſſion of the Goſpel of Ieſus
Chriſt, condemned to doe publique penance in the Church
of S. Mary, in the vniuerſitie of Oxford. The penance was, that he
ſhould publiquely recant, and beare vpon his backe a faggot,
for the terrour of the ſtudentes of that vniuerſitie. And for the
more ſolempnitie of this recantation D. Smith diuinitie reader
preached. The principall and only matter, which he handled in
his ſermon was, concerning the Sacramēt of the altar. The Doctor
for more confirmation and credit of that he had to ſay in
his ſermon, cauſed their holy and catholique peace of White
bread, which they call the Sacrament of the altar, to be hanged
in the pulpit before him: To this ſpectacle, ran very much
people; aſwell ſtudents as citizens: which heard the ſermon
with great attention: hardly had the doctor halfe finiſhed

his ſermon, when a voyce of one that cried in the ſtreete Fire,
fire, was ſuddenly heard in the Church. The cauſe of the crie
was, for that one comming along the ſtreete, eſpied a chimnie
on fire, and after the Engliſh vſe in ſuch caſes, he cried through
the ſtrete Fire fire. Whē they within the Church, & nere to the
doore heard fire fire: they alſo began to ſay, fire, fire. And ſo frō
mouth to mouth went fire fire. euen to the doctors & the preacher
himſelfe: who at the hearing of fire fire, remayned aſtoniſhed
with the great feare he conceiued, and marueyling what
it might be, began to lift vp his eyes, and behold on all ſides the
roofe and walles of the Church. His auditorie ſeeing him looke
vp, began with a loud voyce to crie, Fire, fire: ſome demaunded
of other ſome, where ſee yee the fire? To this demaunde
one anſwered: In the Church
                  •
                Hardly had the other anſwered:
In the Church:Imaginary fire in the Church. when all in a moment began to crie out, The
Church burneth, the heretiques haue ſet the Church on fire.
And albeit no man ſawe any fire, all notwithſtanding together
cryed Fire, fire, and each one ſuppoſed that was truth
which he heard. Then feared they indeede: ſuch was the concourſe
and tumult in the Church, that cannot with wordes
be expreſſed: ſuch as haue found themſelues in the like caſes,
haue experience thereof. This ſtrong Imagination of fire
poſſeſſing their heades; all whatſoeuer they ſaw or heard, confirmed
and increaſed in them the imagination conceiued. The
principall cauſe that augmented this ſuſpition, was to ſee him
with his faggot, whom they held for an heretique. This made
them beleue, that al the other heretiques had ioyntly conſpired
with him, to ſet fire on the Church. The great duſt which with
the vnquietnes, concourſe, & tumult of the people was raiſed in
the Church, did augment in thē alſo this ſuſpitiō. This duſt then
ſeemed to be ſmoke of the fire which they had imagined. This
concourſe was alſo the cauſe that many came to their deathes:
for the ſmall ribs & bones were broken, whereof many died.
The people flocked to the doores of the Church: but ſo great▪
was the throng & preſſe; that none could go out of the Church
In the end ſeeing no remedie, they begā to crie out againſt the
cōſpiracie of the heretikes, which had kindled the fire, to burne
thē aliue. It was a world to ſee thoſe great rabbines, thoſe great

doctors, with their long ſcarlet robes & doctorall habits, runne
from one ſide to another, blowing, panting, and ſweating, ſeeking
ſome corners where to hide themſelues. In all this cōpany
was there none more quiet, then the poore penitent heretique
who, throwing from him the faggot, it fell vpon the head of a
Friar that was next him, & ſo abode quiet, expecting what God
would doe with him. Among thē al was there none more feareful,
nor more cried out for feare; then Smith the preacher; who
with the firſt began to crie from the pulpit, ſaying. Theſe be the
webs & crafts of the heretiques againſt me: Lord haue mercie
vpō me, Lord haue mercy vpō me: But his breaddē God, which
he called Lord, & was hanged as we haue ſaid neere vnto him,
could not quiet him. Nought in this garboile more cauſed thē
to feare, then when the lead was to begin to melt (for ye muſt
know, that many Churches in England are couered with lead)
& many of thē began now to affirme, that the molten lead fell
vpon thē. Then were they amaſed, & many of them that had authoritie
& cōmand, ſeeing that neither by force, regard of their
learning, nor authoritie they could ought preuaile, they chāged
their purpoſe & began to vſe very gentle words; promiſing to
them they would pull them from that daunger (albeit by the
eares) a good reward. There was a man that gaue 20 pound
(euery pound is forty Spaniſh ryals) an other promiſed his garment,
& others, other like thinges. They that might, placed thē
               ſelues
in the hollownes betweene pillar & pillar, that the lead,
which they ſaid was moltē, ſhould not fal vpō thē. A maiſter of
the Colledge ther was, which vnnailed a table, & couered therwith
his head & ſhoulders, that the lead ſhould worke him no
anoyance. There was a mā, albeit very groſſe, who ſeeing there
was no meanes to goe out of the Church, needs would be breaking
of the glaſſe, to go out by the pane of a window, but half of
his body being forth, he ſtuck faſt in the grate; ſo that he was
not maiſter of himſelfe, nor could he go forward nor backward.
The poore paunched monke ſaw his danger doubled: for if the
fire, or moulten lead ſhould fal without, that part then that was
without the window, would be in danger, & if it fell within the
Church, the part then within was in the ſame danger.
            To another monke, another chaūce hapned. And this it was▪ A

certaine boy (ſeeing that by reaſon of the great preſſe and multitude
of people, he could not goe forth clymed as he could,
vpon their ſhoulders and heades; and ſo came and placed himſelfe
on the top of the Church dore, where he aboade, not able
to paſſe further: Thus reſting vpon the height of the dore, he
eſpied by chaunce (among thoſe that came crawling vpon the
heades of others) a monke comming towards him, who bare
at his backe, a great and large cowle: the boy ſeing good occaſion
offered,A boy put himſelfe in the cowle of a Monke. let it not ſlip: and ſo when the monke was neare
vnto him, he let fall himſelfe from the height of the dore, and
very wittily put himſelfe into the monkes cowle; ſuppoſing if
the monke eſcaped, that he alſo with him (as it hapned) ſhould
goe out of the Church. In concluſion the monke crawling vpon
the heades of others, at laſt eſcaped, carrying the boy at his
backe that was placed in the cowle, & for ſome time perceiued
not any weight or burthen vpon him. In the end, within a while
the monke came ſomewhat to himſelfe; felt his cowle more
weightie, then wontedly it was, and hearing the voyce of one
that ſpake in his cowle, then began he afreſh to feare, more thē
before, when he was thronged among the people, ſuppoſing
(& that verely) that the euill ſpirit, which had fired the Church,
was placed in his cowle: & then preſently began he to coniure
the ſpirit, ſaying: In the name of God, and of all the Saintes I
commaund thee, to tell me whom thou arte, that hanges at my
backe? To whom the boy anſwered: I am Beltrams boy (for
ſo was his maiſter called) But I coniure thee (ſaid the monke)
in the name of the indiuiſible Trintie, that thou wicked ſpirit
tell me, who thou art; whence thou comeſt, and that thou depart
hence. To whom the youth anſwered, I am Beltrams boy:
I beſeech you ſir let let me goe: and ſo ſpeaking, aſſayed to
goe out of the cowle, which, with the weight, and the boyes
endeuour to goe out, began to rend vpon the ſhoulders of
the monke. When the monke well vnderſtood the matter, he
drew the boy out of the cowle. The boy ſeeing himſelfe out of
daunger; tooke him to his heeles, and ranne with what ſpeede
he could. In the meane time whiles this paſſed, they that were
with out the Church, beholding on all ſides, and ſeeing there
was no cauſe of feare, marueyled to ſee them in ſuch a ſtraight,

and made ſignes & ſhowes, to them in the Church, to be quiet,
and told them abroad, there was no cauſe of feare. But for aſmuch
as they that were in the Church, could not for the great
noyſe, and ruſhing within, heare that which was told them; the
ſignes which they made, they interprete to the worſt ſence,
as though all without the Church had with liuely flames burned,
and that for the diſtilling downe of the molten lead, and
for that it fell in many places, they ſhould abide within the
Church; and not aduenture to goe forth. So that ſignes, and
voyces much increaſed the feare. For the ſpace of ſome howers
indured this confuſion. The day following, and that whole
weeke alſo, were many billets fixed one the Church dore: one
ſaid. If any haue foūd a payer of ſhooes, lately loſt in the Church
of Saint Mary: another ſaid, if any haue found a garment: In
another it was prayed that a hat ſhould be reſtored: In another,
a girdle, with a purſe, and mony which was loſt: In another was
demanded a little ring, & other ſuch like thinges: for there was
no one perſon almoſt in the Church, which had not loſt or forgotten
ſome thing. As touching the poore penitent, him they
commaunded, that for aſmuch as he had not by reaſon of this
tumult, done his pennance as was meete, he ſhould doe it
the day following, in the Church of Saint Frideſwid, and ſo he
did it. Theſe Hiſtories of the fire of Rome, of the fire of Vallodalid,
and the imaginarie fire of Oxford doe very wel confirme
that which wee haue ſaid: that the poore Chiſtians▪ haue at all
times bene ſlaundered, and vniuſtly condemned. Therefore
are they called ſheepe appointed to the ſlaughter▪ God, who is
Iuſt, will not leaue without puniſhment, ſuch monſtrous lies,
ſuch falſe teſtimonies, and ſuch fierce cruelties: his day (albeit
he ſlacke) will come vpon the Inquiſitors. For the bloud of the
Iuſt, holy, faithfull, and catholique Chriſtians, by them ſhed,
cryeth vnto God,Apoc. 6. 10. as did the bloud of Abell, ſaying. How long
Lord holy and true, wilt thou ſlacke to Iudge and reuenge our
bloud on thoſe that dwell vpon the earth? To whom it was anſwered:
that they ſhould reſt yet a while, vntill their fellow ſeruantes
were fulfilled, and their brethren which were alſo to be
ſlaine with them. This day let vs then expecte with pacience.
God one day ſhew mercie to Seuil, that this monaſterie of Saint

               Iſodor, be conuerted to an vniuerſitie, where diuinitie may be
chiefly profeſſed. The rents of this monaſterie, which be great,
ſuffiſe, with ouer plus to maintaine the ſaid vniuerſitie: and the
ruyned houſe of Iſabella de Vaena, may be conuerted to a publique
Church, where the word of God may be preached, and
the Sacraments without adding or diminiſhing, according to
the inſtitution of Ieſus Chriſt, adminiſtred. So great and greater
things then theſe, hath the Lord in our time brought to paſſe. It
ſhall not be from our purpoſe to recite that which D. Illeſcas reporteth
to haue happened in Spaine in the time of this Paule 4.
touching the great nomber of Spaniards, of the religion (which
he calleth Lutheranes) that was diſcouered. His words be theſe:
In the former yeares were Lutheran heretiques accuſtomed to
be taken & burned whatſoeuer, in Spaine: but al thoſe that they
puniſhed, were ſtraungers, as Dutchmen, Fleminges, or Engliſhmen,
&c. And of thoſe which came from theſe kingdomes.
And a little lower: vile people and of moſt wicked race afore
times did wontedly goe out to the Scaffoldes, and to
weare the Sarbenitos in the Churches: but in theſe latter
yeares, haue we ſeene the priſons, ſcaffolds, and fires alſo furniſhed
with famous people. And (which is more to be moaned)
of illuſtrious perſons alſo and of ſuch, as to the eie of the world,
in learning and life were farre before others, &c. And ſomewhat
lower: The buſineſſe came to termes, that they practiſed
now among themſelues, a moſt fearefull conſpiracie,
ſuch, as had it not happened ſo ſoone to be diſcouered (as it
was afterwardes vnderſtood) al Spaine had run in great hazard
to be loſt, &c. And a lttle lower: In Valladolid D. Caçalla, his
fiue brothers and mother, with moſt great ſecrecie, & ſingular
diligence, were taken. In Toro was taken Herrezuelus, & many
other in Cemora, & in Pedroſa, many men & women, Nunnes,
maried women, and damſels, famous and of great qualitie, &c.
Among thoſe that were burned, were alſo certaine Nunnes, very
young, and beautifull: who not contented to be Lutherans,
were teachers of that curſed doctrin, &c. And alittle after. Al the
priſoners were of Valladolid, Seuill, and Toledo, perſons ſufficiently
qualified, &c. And ſo many & ſuch they were, that it was
thought if they had two or three moneths more ſlacked to remedy

this miſchiefe: all Spaine would haue burned, and we
ſhould haue come to the moſt bitter miſchaunce that euer was
ſeene therein. Hitherto D. Illeſcas. Whereof we will conclude,
that God hath reuealed the light of his Goſpel in Spaine to learned
people, and people of renowne, famous & noble. He will
ſhew like mercy when he pleaſeth, to the vulgar and common
ſort. When they ſee in Spaine a man well lettered and learned
then ſay they, Que es tan docto, que eſtà en peligro de ſer Luthrano
he is ſo learned, that he is in danger to become a Lutheran: And
there is not almoſt any noble houſe in Spaine, that hath not
had in it ſome one or more of the reformed religiō. His maieſtie
for his Chriſts ſake our redeemer increaſe the nomber, for his
glory, & the confuſion of Antichriſt. But returning to Paul 4. In
Auguſt, and the 1559. yeare, after he had poped 4 yeres, and almoſt
three moneths,Anno 1559. he died. The ſeat was voyd 4 moneths, & 7
dayes, Don Phillip 2. being king of Spaine.
            
               Pius 4.Pius 4. a Millaniſt was not much liked nor loued of his predeceſſor
Paul 4. which Paul in the conſiſtorie, did publiſh, &
openly ſpeake againſt him, ſaying: that by euill meanes he had
procured the Archbiſhoprick of Milan. Then Pius knowing the
diſlike of Paule 4. againſt him, departed from Rome: & thence
was abſent all the time that Paule the fourth Poped. But when
Paule was dead, and he choſen after great diſcord, and foure
moneths & 7 dayes: that the ſea was vacant, he reuenged himſelfe
of him.Pope againſt Pope. For many things which Paul had commanded, did
Pius countermaund: & ſo pronouncing Don Charles the Emperour,
& Don Phillip his ſon, kings of Spaine innocent and faultleſſe,
he abſouled them of all whatſoeuer Paule 4. had obiected
againſt them. He confirmed the reſignement of the Empire,
made by Don Charles, to Ferdinādo his brother, which Paul
whiles he liued, neither would approue, nor cōfirme. To maſter
Antonius Columna, he reſtored his patrimony, whereof Paul had
depriued him:So did Benedict. 3. Pius 2. many otherlike thinges he did, in deſpite of his
predeceſſor Paul 4. by Panuinus vpon his life recited. The ſame
Panuinus,
               Martine 5. and Paul 4. of Pius 4. ſaith: that when he was Biſhop, he became
another man; entertaining other cuſtomes, & maners (not better
but worſe) For he which till then was holden curteous, pacient,
a well doer, gentle, and not couetous, ſuddaynely

ſeemed to haue changed his nature. Such is the ſeat papall, that
he which once ſitteth therein; albeit before he were not euill,
becometh euill. And if he were euill, becometh worſe, and in
the end moſt euill: as to this Pius 4. it happened. The ſame
Panuinus ſaith: that Pius had no grauitie, either in countenance
gate, or geſtures: that more ſcoffing he was, then beſeemed
the maieſtie which he repreſented: of him (ſaith he) that whiles
he liued without charge he was of good life & reputation, and
whiles alſo he had charge, vnder the high biſhops his predeceſſors.
When he was Pope, great ſhewes he gaue of a good
Biſhop, inſomuch that he held the Councell of Trent (note the
hypocriſie) whiles the Councell continewed,The hypocriſie of Pope Pius 4. he fayned to be
good, but the Councell once ended, Pius vſing great libertie,
did many thinges that pleaſed not all men. And a little lower,
Pius was a glutton, and ſwillar: but chiefly in eating, for at ſupper
he exceeded. Giuen he was to delights and pleaſure: he was
openly collerique, enuious he was, but in ſecret: impatient to
heare. In his anſweres ſometime hard and bitter, ambitious, to
commaund, crafty, a fayner and diſtembler. When he ſa
                  ••
               e it
needefull, fearefull, but bould in diſſembling his feare, and ill
be loued. Panuinus his friend, all this▪ and yet much more ſaith
of him: Albeit true it is, that as a Paraſite of the Popes, much
good he ſaith of him alſo. But what vertues could poſſeſſe a
man ſubiect to ſuch manifeſt and enormious ſinnes? He had
(ſaith he) a ſingular memorie, and ſo could aptly, and ſuddenly
recite the whole volume of the auncient lawyers, Poets, and
Hiſtorians (but not of the Bible, which I ſuppoſe he neuer read▪
for by his profeſſion, he was not a diuine▪ but a lawyer) of him
(ſaith he alſo) that at the handes of Cardinall Borromeo his nephewe
and ſiſters ſonne, with great deuotion he receiued all
the Sacraments of the Church, the which (to my knowledge)
we doe not read (ſaith the ſame Panuinus) to haue happened to
any of the chiefe Biſhops. Doctour Ille
                     •
                  cas ſpeaking of Paſcall
2. ſaith. That hauing firſt receiued the holy ſacraments, he died.
Of the other Popes I doe not remember that he ſaith any ſuch
thing. The reaſon is (as ſaith Sanazaro ſpeaking of Leo 10.)
that the Popes being great Simoniſts, haue ſould the Sacraments,
and ſo not kept them for themſelues. Or to ſpeake better,

the cauſe is, that the Popes hold and ſay in their harts there
is no God: and ſo in the time of ſicknes, and at poynt to die,
they make no eſteeme of the ſacraments,The Popes eſteeme not the Sacraments be caſe they be Antichriſts. or Chriſtian religion,
but die like ſwine. This Pope Pius 4. ordeyned a confeſſion of
faith, which all they ſhould make, that were to be Biſhops: the
which in his life Panuinus placeth. This confeſſion is a ſummary
of all the ignorances, ſuperſticions, and Idolatries of the Antichriſtianiſme
or papiſme. This Popes whole ſtudy was, by right
or wrong, to get money: and whereof he had ſtore: which vpon
his kindred, friends, & buyldings, Whereunto he was much
inclined he waſted. In the 1565. yeare, after he had Poped almoſt
ſix yeares, he dyed (as in Rome went the common voyce
and fame) in the armes of his minion (which is not much out of
ſquare, ſith Panuinus his friend of him ſaith, that he was giuen to
delightes and pleaſures) and (as ſaith the ſame Panuinus) he
procured his owne death. Morbo ex victus intemperancia hauſto)
to wit by diſorder in eating, and glutting, whoſe belly was
his God: our king Don Phillip 2. then reigning in Spaine. In
the time of this Pius 4.Anno 1563. and the 1563. yeare, a thing very ſtrange
happened in Seuill,Confeſſion was almoſt the cauſe of the ruine of the Popedome. the which, had it proceeded further, & the
Inquiſitors bene a little more careleſſe; ſo likely it had brought
the whole papaſie to the ground: elſe ſhould it at the leaſt haue
receiued ſome notable damage. The matter is this. In Seuill
where ſome more curious, then was mete for the papaſie: which
of the prieſts and Friars complained bitterly to the Inquiſitors,
becauſe they abuſed confeſſion (as others alſo afore time had abuſed
it) in courting and making loue to honeſt matrons and
damſels;Confeſſion ſerueth for a band and for ſuch end moreouer, as ſuch beginnings accuſtomably
ſucceede. The holy office thought meete, that ſuch
confeſſors ſhould be puniſhed: But for that the matter was
obſcure, and none in particular but generally were accuſed;
they made an edict, & publiſhed it throughout al the Churches
of the Archbiſhoprick of Seuil, commanding al & euery perſon
of what eſtate or condition they were, which had knowne,
heard or vnderſtoode, if any Fryar or Prieſt whatſoeuer, that
with their daughter or daughters at confeſſion had to this end
abuſed the ſacrament of confeſſion; that ſuch perſon vpon moſt
grieuous payne, ſhoud declare it to the holy office within 30

dayes. This decree once publiſhed, ſo great was the multitude
of women, which from Seuill only went to accuſe their filthie
confeſſors to the Inquiſition, that 20 notaries, and ſo many Inquiſitors,
ſufficed not to take their depoſitions. The Inquiſitors
finding themſelues much wearied and vnable in 30 dayes to
diſpatch the buſineſſe, gaue them other 30, and yet theſe 30
not ſuffiſing, againe and againe, they prolonged the time. Many
honeſt matrons, and many Ladies of qualitie, held great
warres within themſelues: The ſcruple of conſcience, on the
one ſide, to incurre the ſentence of excommunication impoſed
by the Inquiſitors vppon ſuch as ſhould conceale it, moued
them to goe. And on the other ſide, they feared leſt their
husbandes holding them for ſuſpect, ſhould become iealous of
them. And ſo, neither durſt they, nor yet found oportunitie, to
goe and ſpeake with the Inquiſitors. But at laſt diſguiſed
and masked after the manner of Andaluzia, as couert as they
could, they went to the Inquiſitors: yet how diſguiſed, and
ſecret ſoeuer they were, many husbands left not to follow
them, and watche them earely to knowe whither they
went: which was the cauſe of great iealouſie. On the other
ſide it was a ſport to ſee the prieſts and Friars fathers of confeſſion,
to goe ſad and ſorrowfull hanging downe their heades,
by reaſon of their guilty conſcience: euery hower and mynute
expecting, when the Familiar of the Inquiſition would
lay handes vpon them. Many of them ſuppoſed, that a great
perſecution was to come vppon them; yea and greater then
that which the Lutherans then ſuffered, yet was all their
feare but winde, and ſmoke which paſſeth away: For the Inquiſitors
by experience foreſeeing the great damage that
would redound to all the Romane Church, if their eccleſiaſtical
perſons ſhould be deſpiſed and pointed at: and the ſacrament
of confeſſion ſhould not be ſo priſed nor eſteemed as before:
would no further proceed in the buſines; but interpoſing
their authoritie, huſhed all thinges, as though nothing had
euer happened. And ſo no cōfeſſor was chaſtiſed, no not thoſe,
whoſe villanies were ſufficiently proued: which thing freed
the eccleſiaſticall order from great anguiſh of mind, and all
their ſorrowe was turned into ioy. But his day will come

vppon ſuch, and the Inquiſitors that ſmothered ſo great villanies,
and abhominations: Who pardoning their friendes,
and houſhold fathers of confeſſion: turned all their hate and
fury againſt their enemies the Lutherans: whom with fire
and bloud, they did not onely perſecute in Seuill and Valladolid:
but in many partes of Spaine alſo. And thus was Ieſus
Chriſt againe in his members condemned, and Barrabas let
looſe. About the 1550. yeare one Don Pedro de Cordoua prieſt
made confeſſion an Inſtrument to abuſe his deuout penitents.
About 1576 yeare for the like buſineſſe, were many Theatinians,
or Ieſuites (called Alumbrados) in Erena condemned:
the principall of whom was called Father Ternan daluares who
dyed in the gallies. Not many yeares ſince, in Sicilia another
ſuch like chaunce happened, not that which to this purpoſe
ſaith Machauile, in the third booke and firſt chapter of his
diſcourſes. I alleage not Machauile becauſe I hold him for
Godly, but for a wicked polititian doe I hold him: the Hiſtorie
that he recounteth, doe I alleage.
            Of all the Romane Biſhops (as ſaith Panuinus vpon the life
of this Pope) very fewe there were,Pius 5. that from ſuch lowe beginnings,
and in ſuch ſhort time had attained ſo great dignities
as did Pius 5. for being a friar Dominick, without any other
office, he came on foote to Rome: and within 15 yeares obteined
all theſe offices: Inquiſitor he was, Biſhop, Cardinall and
Pope. His name at the font was Anthony: becauſe he was borne
on S. Anthonies day: when he was fifteene yeares old, he placed
himſelfe a Fryar, in a monaſterie of the Dominicks, and called
he was Michaell: This name he held, vntill he was Pope: and
would then neither be called Anthony, which was his Chriſtian
name: nor Michael, which was the name of his order, but called
himſelfe Pius 5. which name well agreeth with the figure called
Antiphraſis, as when we call a Negro White Iohn; So he being
Impious, called himſelfe Pius. Cōcerning his electiō might
well be ſaid, that which ſaid Iohn Biſhop and Cardinall of Porta
ſaid (as Panuinus reporteth) of Gregorie 10.
            
               Quem patrem patrum fecit diſcordia fratrum. The diſcorde
among the Cardinals, made Pius the fift; Pope. After hee
was made Pope, he gaue out againſt the moſt gracious Queen

of England, defendreſſe of the true & Catholique faith, a moſt
peſtilent bull; wherin he abſolued all her ſubiects from of their
oathe of obedience which they had made: and exhorted the
Chriſtian Princes, to take armes againſt her. This furious and
brutiſh lightning effected no miſchiefe, al was turned to ſmoke
nothing was heard but a certaine thunderclap, & noiſe of gunſhot
or childernes ſquibbes. And ſo his bull was fooliſhneſſe,
a little bubble it was, which when is rayneth, is made vpon the
water, and preſently vadeth away. He that brought this bull to
England, was caught; and as a traitor ſentenced to death: and
quartered; the Pope his God on earth being vnable to helpe
him, nor with all the Maſſes, they ſayd for him, could draw him
out of hell. And the Queene in her kingdome liueth and reigneth;
triumphing ouer her enemies, maintaining and defending
the holy catholique faith, and making her kingdome a receptacle,
refuge and ſanctuarie for poore ſtrangers, which from
ſo many parts of Europe (flying the tyranny of the Roman Antichriſt)
haue theſe 40. yeares ſpace with drawne themſelues
to it. The powerfull arme of the moſt high God, all ſufficient,
whoſe name is Iehoua hath done this: to him be the glory for
euer & euer amen.Pſal. 97. 7. For beſides him is there no God: cōfounded
then be they that ſerue and worſhip carued Images; thoſe that
worſhip Idols: ſith they neither can helpe them, nor yet doe
goodneſſe.Pius 5. tooke out of the bookes that which the authors with great truth ſaid againſt the Pope. This Impius 5. ſpunged out of Petrarque and Bocace
the famous Italian Poets, all that, which with great liberty and
truth they had ſaid concerning the Pope, the court of Rome,
and eccleſiaſtcall perſons. For ye muſt note, that before God
raiſed vp Luther, and others more that ſucceeded; the Italians,
and chiefly, the ſubtill and free witted Florentines, were thoſe,
that with their liuely collours, and proper ſhaddowes painted
out the Pope, his Roman Court and clergie. Read Dant, Petrark
and Bocace (but beware they be not thoſe which the Pope
hath gelded, and thou ſhalt ſee if I ſpeake truth. Great ſhame
it is for our Spaniards, who eſteemed themſelues of as free and
good conceit as the Italians, that they diſable, and deiect themſelues
ſlaues to the Pope; not daring to whiſper againſt him,
what villanies ſoeuer they ſee him commit. Libertie of conſcience:
Libertie, away away with the Pope this proud Antichriſt.

Some of theſe places which Pius 5. hath gelded, among the ſayings
of learned men, which haue ſpoken againſt the Pope, will
we afterwards alleage.Anno 1572. In the 1572 yeare, and firſt day of May
died Pius 5. Don Philip being king of Spaine.
            
               Gregorie 13.Gregorie 13 a Bolonniſt, before called Hugo boncompagno the
15. day of may, & 1572. yeare was ſet in the ſeat of Antichriſt. 13
yeares little more, or leſſe he Poped, when he was Pope, he renewed
the old hatred of his predeceſſor Pius 5. againſt the
Queene of England: & ſo practized by al poſſible meanes, one
while by force (as appeareth by the great Armada ſent into Ireland,
& had a miſerable end) another while by craft and deceit,
(as was ſeene in the great traitor Parry, and others by him ſent,
who had alſo a miſerable end, and were quatered into 4 parts,
as they had deſerued) to doe her all the miſchiefe he could.
But God deliuered the Queene from all thoſe curſed inuentions,
and the ſame God a iuſt iudge, in the end chaſtized
this Gregorie, by killing his body, and ſending his ſoule into
hell. It was the common voyce and fame in Rome, that Gregorie,
before he was Pope, and alſo being Pope, like a father,
but not moſt holy: nor yet holy, but carnall, had his concubyne
of whom he had alſo little ſonnes, which ſaid vnto him
ſuch graces, as made him to laugh. And beeing Pope, ſuch
was the grace that his little ſonne Philippicus ſayd, that the
Pope his father gaue him fiue thouſand crownes of rent.
Marke ô yee Spaniards, how the Patrimony which you call
Saint Peters, is imployed. And he is not alone, he which hath it
doth ſo alſo imploy it: as we haue ſeene in the liues of the
Popes. The ceremony of the ſtoole, needed not this Gregorie:
for very well was he knowne to be a man, and not a woman.
In the time of this Pope, was the moſt fierce & bloudy battaile
betweene the Portugales, and Moores in Africk: wherein 3
kinges died. Don Sebaſtian the king, being dead in this battell;
the Cardinall Don Henry, brother of king Don Iohn the third
grandfather of Don Sebaſtian, was elected king, who like another
Anius was king and Prieſt, of whom 
                  Ʋirgill ſaith in the 3.
of his Aeneads.
            
            Rex Anius, rex idem hominum, Phaebi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſacerdos.
            Of this Cardinall ſay the Portugales, that in the Epiſtle of the

moone he was borne, and in the Eclipſe of the moone he died.
In the 1581 or 82 yeare, & in the time of Gregorie 13. his Popeing,
a very ſtraunge chaunce happened in Valladolid. There
dwelled in Valladolid,The crueltie of a father. a knight quallified, who in the Inquiſition
had 2 daughters, which conſtantly perſeuering in the good
religion, they had learned of the good D. Ca
                     •
                  alla, and other
martyrs of Ieſus Chriſt; were condemned to be burned. The father
being a moſt rancke Papiſt: beſought the Inquiſitors to
permit thē for their better inſtruction to be carried to his houſe:
which thing, the Inquiſitors, in regard of the great credit they
repoſed in him: graunted. And brought thus to his houſe, the father
endeauored to diuert them from their conſtant reſolution.
And ſeing he could not conuince them; he cauſed Prieſts and
Friars to diſpute with them: but in vaine were all their diſputs.
For the Lord (as in Luke 21. 15. he had promiſed) gaue them vtterance
and wiſedome, which the new Phareſies, Prieſts, and
Friars were not able to reſiſt, nor gaineſay, The father then ſeeing
al his endeuour nought auailed, went himſelfe to his groue,
cut downe wood, and cauſed it to be drawne to Valladolid, he
himſelfe kindled the fire, & ſo were they burned. And no maruell:
Seing the Lord in the ſame place of S.Luke 21. 18. 
               Luke forwarned vs,
that it ſo ſhuld happē. Ye ſhalbe (ſaith he) deliuered vp, euen of your
owne fathers, brothers, kinſflolkes & friends, & they ſhall kill you, &
ye ſhalbe hated of all men for my names ſake, thus farre of the afflictions
& miſeries of the poore faithful: yet that which the Lord
then addeth, is for our comfort. But one haire, ſaith he, ſhall not
periſh or fall from your head: in pacience poſſeſſe ye your ſoules.
So did theſe two bleſſed of the Lord poſſeſſe, and now enioy
that celeſtiall glorie, which the Lord, for whom they died, had
prepared for them before the foundation of the world. This
cruell father, in doing that he did againſt his daughters, vndoubtedly
ſuppoſed, he did great ſeruice to God. Of this alſo
hath the Lord foretould vs,Ioh. 16. 2▪
                
               Iohn 16. 2. The hower commeth
ſaith he, that whoſoeuer ſhall kill you, ſhall thinke he doth God ſeruice.
And that we ſhould not bee diſmayed, but coragious
in ſuch afflictions, the Lord, in the end of this chapter ſaith.
Theſe things haue I told you, that in me ye might haue peace: in the
world ye ſhall haue trouble, but be of good comfort, I haue ouercome

the world. This Gregorie careleſſe to correct himſelfe, or Clergie
either in life or doctrin, by āticipating 10 daies in the yere, gaue
himſelfe to correct the callender. And to eternize his name, this
callender he called Gregorilanum. At this time, were reunited al
the kingdomes of Spaine, which from the enterance of the
Moores into Spaine 880. & ſo many yeares ſithens, haue bene
deuided, & ſo Don Philip our king and Lord in all Spaine reigneth
I beſeech my God, from the bottome of my hart, to giue
him vnderſtanding to know who the Pope is.
            In the 1521.Siſtus 5▪
                yeare & the yeare of famine, the 13 of December,
and in a village of 25 or 30 houſes, called Montalto neere
to the citie of Firmo, which is in the marches of Ancona, was
borne Felix Pereto called Siſtus 5. In this Siſtus 5. the common
ſaying in Spaine was fulfilled: Rex por natura y papa por Ventura.
A king by nature, a Pope by aduenture: for ſo poore was his father,
that he was a ſwineheard. Felix in his childhood was very
poorely brought vp, but ſhewing ſome ſufficiencie of wit, a gē
               tlewoman
for Gods ſake, clothed him with the habite of Saint
Frauncis, & intreated the warden to receiue him into his couent
where he ſtudied Grāmer, logique, Philoſophie, & ſchoole diuinitie:
and in thoſe ſciences much proffited. In the end, being
nowe of age hee was made Inquiſitor. In which office,
ſuch was his cariage, as few could abide his crueltie: And ſo it
happened, that he called before him, a magnifico of Venice, who
(being come) very diſcourteouſly, & inhumanly he intreated.
This gentleman vnaccuſtomed to heare ſuch iniuries and diſgraces,
(as by that which after he did for reuenge to the Lord
Inquiſitor appeareth) did ſtomacke the matter. A few dayes
after, this gentleman encountered the Inquiſitor, & when he
ſaw him, he cōmanded his ſeruant with a good cudgell, which
he carried, to abate the fearcenes of the vnhappy Pereto. Inf
                     ••
                  lix
being thus cudgelled, returned to Rome, and recounted his
miſchaunce to Pope. Pius 4. very much complayning vpon the
Magnifico. The Pope hereat diſdayning: ſent him backe to Venice,
with much more authoritie & power then before. When
Felix was returned vnto Venice, he preſented his cōomiſſion
to the Segniory. The Segniory being wiſe & prudent, & knowing
the quarrilous humor of this man, & wel perceiuing that he
came with a deſire to reuenge, commanded a wax candle to be

kindled and Felix if he were wiſe, preciſely to depart their dominion
and iuriſdiction, before that candle were conſumed.
This Infoelix vnable to doe otherwiſe,A notable acte of the ſeigniory of Veni
                     •
                  . returned eftſoones to
Rome, & complained to the Pope. The Pope ſeeing this man
meete for his ſeruice. made him maiſter of his Pallace. After this
when the Spaniſh Inquiſition (of all men how high ſoeuer feared,
& liked of none (held the Archbiſhop of Toledo for ſuſpected
of hereſie; the Pope ſent Felix into Spaine to heare this
cauſe. The General of the Franciſcās, the chiefe dignitie among
them, now happened to die. This dignitie gaue the Pope to
Felix, whom a few yeares after, the ſame Pope made Cardinall.
In concluſion, when Gregorie 13 was dead: Felix by meanes
of his good friends in Spaine, was made Pope, and called himſelfe
Siſtus 5. This name he tooke in memorie of Siſtus 4. who
was, as was he a Franciſcan Friar. So abhominable truly are
the thinges read of this Siſtus 4. that their memorie with him,
deſerueth to be buried in hell, and perpetuall obliuion. Read
his life, which we haue culled out of diuers authors. Notwithſtanding,
all this, would Felix be called Siſtus 5. becauſe he
thought to be another, and yet worſe then Siſtus 4. When he
was Pope (as though in himſelfe, his Romane court, his Rome,
his Babilon, which for her cuſtomes, is the mother of all fornications,
and more then beaſtly abhominations, and for Doctrine,
the ſchoole of error, and Temple of hereſie ſaid her renowned
Petrarque) now 200 yeares paſt, nothing there were to
be corrected or amended) he gaue himſelfe I ſay (as though in
his owne houſe he had nothing to doe) to ſeeke to correct & after
his maner, to entermedle in the houſes of others. And ſo by
all poſſible wayes, deceites, crafts, treaſon and violence, he practized
to diſturbe the quiet and happineſſe of the kingdome of
England, ſuborning, and animating moſt wicked men, and
abhominable traitors: promiſing them that, which he neither
had for himſelfe, nor could giue to others: at leaſt the kingdome
of heauen; if they ſhould murder the moſt illuſtrious
Queene of England, who for forty yeares ſpace, with ſo great
peace, & clemencie, moſt prudently hath gouerned her kingdome.
In which time with temporal riches & abundance of bodily
neceſſaries, & with ſpiritual riches, which is the preaching

of the Goſpel, hath God bleſſed this kingdome. From all theſe
treaſons, God as a moſt mercifull father, maugre Antichriſt of
Rome hath deliuered the Queene. Let the Pope then burſt for
anger. So alſo hath this Pope oppoſed himſelfe to the moſt illuſtrious
king of Nauarre, and his firſt brother the prince of Conde,
curſing and depriuing them of all whatſoeuer they had, and
were to haue, and chiefly of the vndoubted right which for wāt
of right heire male, hath the king of Nauarre to the crowne of
France. God for his infinit goodnes, haue mercy on his poore
Church, which this Antichriſt in theſe princes doth perſecute.
Ariſe Lord, put to flight thine enemies, break the hornes of this
beaſt, that he doe no more harme to thy poore children: haſten
to deſtroy Antichriſt with the ſpirit of thy mouth, with the preaching
of the Goſpel. The God of peace beate downe Sathan, &
that ſpeedely vnder our feete,Epheſ. 1 21. and exalt his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus,
ſubiecting al things vnder his feete, & placeing him aboue all
things, for head of his Church: which is his body, & he the fulnes
thereof; which filleth al things in al perſons. This moſt Chriſtiā
prince of Conde, whom Siſtus 5. bāned, in the 1588 yeare died
of poyſon.The French K. cauſeth the Duke of Guiſe to be ſlaine. In the ſame yeare did Henry 3. K. of France cauſe the
Duke of Guiſe to be ſlaine, & another day the Cardinal, brother
to the Guiſe: the cauſe was, for that the Duke had cōſpired to kil
the king, & vſurpe the kingdom. Shortly after (but of her natural
death) died alſo the mother of the king. The death of the Duke
of Guiſe, & of his brother, cauſed many, & the moſt principall
cities of of Frāce, as Paris, Roan, Lyons, Tholous, & others to rebell
againſt the king. The yeare following, which was the 1589
the king came vpon Paris, and beſieged it ſtraightly. The Pariſians
ſeing themſelues in that eſtate, reſolued of no other remedy
for deliuerance frō their preſent miſerie, but to kill the king:
To him that would kill him, did they promiſe great rewards: &
ſo there wanted not ſome deſperate perſons,A Dominican Friar killeth the French K. which offered to
doe it. Amongſt al theſe, was a Dominican Friar called Clement
before the reſt preferred, aman vnlearned, & of little honeſty: &
for ſuch a one, had oftē bene chaſtiſed, with the diſcipline of the
couent. To the kings campe came he, fayning buſines to deal
with the king, of moſt great importance: The king in affection
much inclined to theſe Friars, cōmāded he ſhould come in. The

Friar being entered, kneeled on his knees befor the king▪ the
king, who was ſitting the better to heare him, ſomewhat dubled
his body: The curſed Sinon then drawing a poyſoned knife,
which he had brought for that purpoſe, thruſt it into the bowels
of the king. The king feeling himſelfe wounded, cried out: to
the crie ranne many, who ſtabbed and killed this vnmercifull
Clement, albeit the king commaunded they ſhould not kil him.
This wound of the king, cauſed ſadnes and ſorrow in the kings
campe▪ contrariwiſe, great mirth amongſt the enemies: who inſtantly
demanded aloud, if the Friars knife were ſharp enough.
The king (after he had appointed the king of Nauarre his brother
in law, called Henry 4. who was the neereſt in bloud, for
his ſucceſſor) the night following died. When newes of the
kings death came to Rome, Pope Siſtus 5. made a ſolemne Oration
in the conciſtorie of Cardinals, the 11. of September 1589.
where he not only compared the treaſon of this curſed Dominick,
with the act of Eleazar,
               Iudith 13. 10. and of Iudith: but ſaid alſo it ſurpaſſeth
them. (Of Eleazar is made mention 1. Macha 6.) who
ſeing an Elephant more mighty then the reſt, armed with the
armes of the king ſuppoſing that king Antiochus was vpon him,
to deliuer his people, and purchace eternall glorie, he aduentured
himſelf, & ran couragiouſly to the Eelephāt, through the
middeſt of the ſquadron, killing on the right hand, and on the
left, and all ſides throwing downe, vntill he came vnder the
Elephant, and placing himſelfe vnder him, ſlew him: the Elephant
fell to the ground vppon him, and there he dyed. Iudith
cutte of the head of Holophernes. The warre that Antiochus
and Holophernes made againſt the people of God was vniuſt:
but the warre which Henry the third made againſt the league,
which had conſpired againſt him, to kill him, and take from
him his kingdome; was moſt iuſt: So that herein was hee
no tyrant. Beſides this, both liuing and dying, hee was of
the ſame religion of the league: as at his end appeared. For
in that ſmall time that he liued, after he was wounded, hee
confeſſed, communicated, and was anoynted. But leauing
theſe humane reaſons, come we to the holy ſcripture. It
appeareth by the ſcripture, that Saule was a wicked king,
an hypocrite, a tyrant, forſaken of God: and ſo hath God

to Samuel. How long doeſt thou morne for Saul, ſeeing I haue forſaken
him, and that he ſhall not reigne ouer Iſraell? And commanded
him to goe,1. Samuel 
                     •
                  6. 4 and anoynt for king, one of the ſonnes of Iſſai:
which was Dauid, and in the ſame chap. verſe 14. it is ſaid. The
ſpirit of the Lord, departed from Saul, and the euill ſpirit of the
Lord did torment him. Albeit ſuch a one was Saul, yet did not
God commaund Samuel or any other to kill him. And ſo Dauid
(although God had choſen him, and Samuell annointed him for
king) when manifeſt occaſion and meanes were twiſe offered
him, to kill Saul; yet killed he him not. Alſo when Dauid and
his followers were hid in a caue for feare of Saul (as 1. Sam. 24.)
appeareth Saul entred the ſame caue to doe his needs: then did
Dauids men aduiſe him not to let ſlippe occaſion, but to kill
Saule. But Dauid inſtructed in a better ſchoole then were
they, anſwered: The Lord keepe me from doeing ſuch a thing againſt
my maiſter, and the annointed of the Lord, that I ſtretch not
out my hand againſt him: for he is the Lordes annointed: And not
only did not kil him, but grieued to haue cut of the lap of his garment,
as if herein he had done ſome great diſgrace. And in the
26. chap. of the ſame booke, it is reported; that Dauid & Abiſai
came by night to the camp of Saule, & found him ſleeping, &c.
Then Abiſai ſaid to Dauid, God hath cloſed thine enemy into thine
hands this day: now therfore I pray thee let me ſmite him once with
a ſpeare vnto the earth, and I will not ſmite him agayne. And Dauid
ſaid to Abiſai: Deſtroy him not: for who can lay his hand on
the Lords Annoynted,
               2. Sam. 1 
               and be guiltleſſe. Moreouer, Dauid ſaid:
As the Lord liueth, either the Lord ſhall ſimite him, or his day
ſhall come to dye; or he ſhall deſcend into battayle, and periſh. The
Lord keepe me from laying myne handes vpon the Lordes annoynted,
&c. And when one brought newes of the death of Saule, ſaying;
that hee had ſlaine him: what gaue Dauid vnto him for
his good tidings? He ſaid vnto him, How waſt thou not affraid
to put forth thy hand to deſtroy the Annointed of the Lord? Then
Dauid commanded one to kill him: who wounded him, and ſo he died.
And Dauid ſaid vnto him. Thy bloud be vpon thine owne head: for
thine owne mouth hath teſtified againſt thee, ſaying, I haue ſlaine the
Lords annointed. And Dauid mourned for Saule, &c. Whereupon
we will conclude, that wickedly did this Friar, and thoſe

of his counſell, in murthering their king: and that wickedly did
the Pope, in praiſing and cannoniſing this fact. What reuelation
had Siſtus 5. that God had wholly caſt off Henrie the third,
that he ſhould forbid any obſequies and honours, accuſtomed
to be made for the dead, ſhould be made for him, & commanded
alſo, that they ſhould not pray for him? Samuel and Dauid
had moſt ſure reuelation that Saule was forſaken of God, and
that (as ſuch a one) was he fallen into a reprobate ſence: yet
notwithſtanding did they let him liue, & cōſpired not his death.
If a Prince in our time, be he heretike (as they call him) or Catholike,
ſhall not fully obey whatſoeuer the Pope commandeth
him, albeit it be to the depriuing him of his kingdome, and giuing
it to another, then ſhall he be curſed and excommunicate
both in bodie and ſoule, and the moſt vile perſon (if we beleeue
Siſtus 5.) with good conſcience may kill him. And ſuch a one
that ſhall murther him, ſhall haue done an act very meritorious
and holy, for the which he deſerueth to be cannonized. What
Chriſtian religion is this, that one ſhall be cannonized for committing
that which by the word of God (as by exāples we already
haue proued) is expreſly forbidden? Oh times! oh cuſtomes!
But vpon ſuch will his day come: theſe ſwine ſhall not eſcape
(as they ſay) without their Saint Martin.
            
            With Siſtus 5. conclude we ſaying, that in the moneth of September,
and 1590. yeare he died, whom Vrban 7. which poped
12 dayes ſucceeded. At the end of the yeare 1590. Gregorie 14.
ſucceeded him, and died in September 1591. Innocent 9. ſucceeded
Gregorie 14. who a ſmall time poped. So that in the
ſpace of 14. moneths, foure Popes died: Siſtus, Vrban, Gregorie,
and Innocent: and it is to be thought, the moſt, or all of them died
of poyſon. For Brazuto is not dead that giueth thē poyſon. This
Brazuto killed 6 Popes with poiſon (as vpon the life of Damaſus
2. we haue declared.) In the 1592. yeare Innocent 9. being dead
Clement 8.A Capuchan fryar practiſed to kill the French king. or 9. or 10. ſucceeded. This Clement poping, in the
1599. yeare, a Friar Capuchan, incited by the Ieſuits, attempted
to kill the French king Henry 4. but his treaſon was diſcouered,
and ſo was he caught. In the time of this Pope, & in September
1598. died the king Don Philip 2. aged 70 yeares: & Don Philip
3. ſonne of the forenamed Don Philip 2. and of the daughter

of Maximillian the Emperour, and of the Empreſſe Dona Maria
de Auſtria, ſiſter of the king Don Philip 2. ſucceeded him. God
grant him grace, as the dutie & office of a king requireth, night
and day to meditate in the law of the Lord,God commandeth the king to read the holy ſcripture. & accompliſh that
which God (Deut. 17. 18.) commandeth a king ſhuld do: When
he ſhall ſit (ſaith God, ſpeaking of the king) vpon the throne of his
kingdome, he ſhall cauſe to be written the booke of this law, &c. And
it ſhall be with him, and he ſhall reade therein all the dayes of his life.
Note ye Spaniards, that God commandeth the king to reade
the holy Scriptures: and then (ſaith he) he is to reade them, that
he may learne to feare the Lord his God, that he may keepe all the
words of this Law, and theſe ordinances to do them: That he lift not
vp his heart aboue his brethren, nor turne f
                     •
                  rm the commandement,
to the right hand nor to the left: that he may prolong his dayes in his
kingdome, he and his ſonnes, &c. And God not onely comaundeth
the king to reade the holy ſcripture, but his captaines alſo,
when they be in warres, to reade the ſame. So comaunded he
Ioſua the Generall, and moſt warlike captaine of the people of
God, ſaying vnto him: The booke of this lawe, ſhall neuer
departe from thy mouth: but daie and night ſhalt thou
meditate therein: that thou maiſt obſerue and do according to
all thinges, that are written therein. For then ſhalt thou make
thy way proſperous. And then ſhalt thou vnderſtande. God of
his infinite goodnes, giue to our king and Lord, his captaines
and gouernors, the grace, to reade the ſcripture (which god
hath comaunded them, and the Pope hath forbidden) that
ruled thereby, they may well gouerne his ſubiects.
            Albeit, by that we haue ſaid it clerely appeareth the popes,
I meane from Boniface. 3. which was in the yeare. 605. vnto
Clement the 8. or 10. which nowe tirannizeth) to be of euill
life, and of worſe doctrine, by reaſon whereof, they neither
are, nor in any wiſe can be ſucceſſors of Peter, nor vicars of
Chriſt, but truly Antichriſts: yet, for better confirmation, with
reaſons, and notable ſayinges of the doctors of the Church;
with Decrees of Ancient Councels; & cheifly, with 3. paſſages
of holy ſcripture admirable for this purpoſe, we will confirme it
not with ſtanding. But before we do this, we wil ſet downe, certaine
ancient Spaniſh prouerbs, declaring what are the liues of

theſe eccleſiaſticall perſons, and how we ought to flye them.
            The Spaniſh toung, is not only eloquent, and copious,
but ſententious alſo. Many prouerbes it hath, by vs called
Refranes: which be certen breife ſayinges, ſentencious, and
true; ſo by common conſent, and that of long time allowed.
To ſuch prouerbes, in all tongues, aſwell learned as vnlearned
geue great credit: becauſe they be ſome cheife principles,
which the latines call Perſe nota. Contrary whereunto; whoſoeuer
will ſpeak, ſhalbe holden for vnlearned, and ignorant.
That the Spaniſh toung is plenteous in prouerbes & briefe
ſentences, the booke called Celeſtina (the firſt part I ſay, for the
reſt is falſified) a booke doubtleſſe, did it intreat of ſome other
matter, worthy to be read, doth very euidently declare. The
book of Prouerbs, which Hernan Nunes, the Comēdador, moſt
excellent profeſſor of Rhetho
                  •
               icke and Greeke in Salamanca
collected, doth ſhew alſo the ſame. Whoſe purpoſe was not
only to collect ſo infinite a number of Spaniſh prouerbes, but
alſo would (had not death preuented him) haue gloſed and
commented vpon them, as did Eraſmus vpon the Latine prouerbes.
Verily had the Comendador effected his purpoſe, our
Spaniſh tongue ſhould haue had a great treaſure. But to what
end, wilt thou ſay vnto me, intreating of the Pope and his Clergie,
ſayeſt thou this? To great purpoſe (I anſwere) haue I ſayd
this:Prouerbes againſt the Eccleſiaſtical perſons. becauſe here I will alleage many Spaniſh prouerbes, which
very briefly, and moſt truly do naturally, & with liuely colours,
paint out the life of the prieſts, and Fryers, and of all the other
eccleſiaſtical perſons▪ from the little Nouice that helpeth to ſay
Maſſe, euen to the Pope himſelfe. Of the wicked life of the
Clergie, their deceits, ſubtilties, & hypocriſies, couetouſneſſe,
robberie, whordoms, ambition and ſimonie, &c. ſpeake theſe
vndoubted true prouerbes, and ſo command vs to fly from thē.
All theſe prouerbes following, are drawne out of the ſaid book
of the Comendador.
            
               
                  
                     
                        OF THE WICKED LIVES OF Eccleſiaſticall men.
                        Sin Clerigoy palomar teruas limpio tu lugar.Euill life.
                        
                        
                           Of prieſts and doues where is a want,
                           There's cleanneſſe rife, and foulneſſe ſcant.
                        
                        
                        Siboo negocio trazedes frade, podeys falar de la calle (Potuguez.)
                        
                           Speake Frier, if good: it light doth craue:
                           If bad, it darkeneſſe ſeekes to haue.
                        
                        
                           Entrays Padre ſin licencia,
                           o os ſobrà favor, o falta verguen
                                 •
                              a.
                        
                        
                           Here freely father entreſt thou,
                           Or vnder leaue, or ſhameleſſe now.
                        
                        Cregos, frades, pegas, e choyas do à ordemo quatro joyas (Gallego) clerigos,
frayles, pica
                              •
                           as, y grajas do al diablo tales quatro alhajas (
                              •
                           
joyas.
                        
                           Prieſts, Fryars, Pyes, Dawes and ſuch like chaffer,
                           All iewels foure to the diuell I offer.
                        
                        Frayle ni Iudio nunca buen amigo.
                        
                           Nor Friar nor Iew,
                           euer friends true.
                        
                        
                           Hize ami hijo monazillo,
                           y tornoſeme diablillo.
                        
                        
                           A nouice young my ſonne do make,
                           For demi deuill do him take.
                        
                        
                           Quien quiſiere ſu hijo vellaco del todo,
                           meta lo miſſario, o mo
                                 •
                              o de cor
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Of knauery who liſteth to haue his ſon heire,
                           Make him a Maſſe prieſt or youth of a Quire.
                        
                        Moço miſſero, y Abad ballaſtero y frayle cortes reniego de todos tres.
                        
                           A maſſing youth, a flattering Friar,
                           A hunting Prieſt, a hatefull lyar.
                        
                        
                           Monja para parlar,
                           y frayle para negociar, jamas ſe vido talpar.
                        
                        
                           A Nunne to prate, a Fryer to proule,
                           Who ere two ſuch hath ſeene ſo foule.
                        
                        Ni amiſtad con frayle, ni con monja que te ladre.
                        
                           With flattering fryar, nor puling Nunne,
                           No friendſhip, els thou art vndone.
                        
                        
                           Ni fies en monje prieto,
                           ni en amor de nieto.
                        
                        
                           In coale blacke fryar haue thou no truſt,
                           Nor reſt on grandchilds loue thou muſt.
                        
                        Ni à frayle deſcalço, ni à hombre callado, ni à muger baruuda no le
des poſada.
                        
                           To barefoot Friar, nor ſilent man▪
                           
                           Nor bearded ſhee, ſubiect thee than.
                        
                        
                           Nunca vide de coſas menos,
                           que de Abrilee y Obiſp
                                 •
                              s buenos,
                        
                        
                           Things leſſe I neuer vnderſtood,
                           Then Aprils faire, and Biſhops good.
                        
                        
                        Bendita la caſa que no tiene corona raſa (quiere dezir rapada.) Eſte Refran es tomado de Italiano. Beata quella caſa que non ha cheregaraſa.
                        
                           The dwelling houſe is ſurely bleſt,
                           Wherein no ſhaueling hath his neſt:
                        
                        This Prouerbe is taken from the Italian, Beata quella caſa que nen ha cherega raſa.
                        
                        Ni fies muger de frayle,Whoredome. ni barajes con alcayde.
                        
                           No woman truſt a holy Freyr,
                           Nor yet ſcolde with a Iudge for feare.
                        
                        Ni mula mohina, ni moça Marina, ni poyo à la puerta, ni Abad por vezino.
                        
                           No Mule of colour ſad,
                           Nor bench haue at thy doore:
                           Nor maid of Marians trade,
                           Nor prieſt for thy neighbour.
                        
                        Ni frayl
                              •
                            por amigo, ui Clerigo por vezino.
                        
                           A Frier for friend ſee thou forſake,
                           And prieſt for neighbour do not make.
                        
                        
                           Ni buen frayle por amigo,
                           ni malo por enemigo.
                        
                        
                           No good Frier for a friend do chooſe,
                           Nor bad for foe, els ſhalt thou looſe.
                        
                        
                           Por las haldas del vicario
                           ſube la moça al campanario.
                        
                        
                           By Vicars skirts, the mayd
                           Vp to the Belfry goeth,
                           Yet nought at all afrayd,
                           What makes ſhe there, who knoweth?
                        
                        
                           Muchas vezes de hombres caſados
                           Clerigos y ſoldados no ſon amados
                        
                        
                           Holy Prieſts and Souldiers then,
                           Are oft not lou'd of maried men.
                        
                        Obiſpo d
                              •
                            Calahorra haze los aſnos de Corona.Couetouſneſſe.
                        
                        
                           For bribes do biſhops orders giue
                           To Aſſes ſhorne, ô that they liue!
                        
                        Ni de frale, ni de menja no eſperar de recebir nada▪
                        
                        
                           Of Frier nor Nunne ought to receiue
                           The hope that is will ſure deceiue.
                        
                        
                           Si con Monia quieres tratar,
                           cumplete de guardar.
                        
                        
                           If with a Nunne thou liſt to deale,
                           Stand on thy gard for thine auaile.
                        
                        
                        
                           El frayle que pide pan,
                           carne toma, ſi ſe la dan.
                        
                        
                           The holy Frier, that bread doth craue,
                           Will take fleſh, if he it may haue.
                        
                        De los biuos muchos diezmos, de los muertos mucha oblada (q. d. offrenda)
en buen ano renta, y en mal ano doblado.
                        Of the quicke many tithes, of the dead many oblations (to wit,
offerings) In a good yeere a good rent, and in an euil yeare
doubled.
                        Al cabo delano mas come elmuerto, que el ſano. (Eſto ſe entiende por
las offrendas q̄ los Ecleſiaſticos tienē por las animas de purgatorio.)
                        At the end of the yeare, eate the dead more, then the whole.
(This is meant by the offerings which the Eccleſiaſtical perſons
haue for the ſoules of Purgatory.)
                        Andad diablos tras aquel finado, que no mandò nada (q. d. à los clerigos
que lo entterrauan no dexó dinero para Miſſas, &c.)
                        
                           The Deuil foule that corps do take,
                           Which gaue vs nought good cheere to make.
                        
                        That is to ſay, which left nothing to the Prieſtes for ſaying of
Maſſes.
                        Hurtar elpuerco,Hypocriſie. & dar los pies por amor de Dios.
                        
                           To rob, to ſpoyle, to ſteale a ſwine,
                           And giue the feet for cauſe diuine.
                        
                        
                           
                              Ʋnas de gato,
                           y habitos de beato.
                        
                        
                           Fell Wolfe in Lambe-skin queintly clad,
                           Like Cats nailes Frier, though habit ſad.
                        
                        
                           Cuentas de beato,
                           y unas de garauato.
                        
                        
                           A Friers beades, a graple hooke,
                           A guilefull heart, though holy looke.
                        
                        
                           La Cruz en los pechos,
                           y el diablo en los hechos
                        
                        
                           The holy croſſe vpon the breaſt,
                           Yet there the diuell hath his neaſt.
                        
                        Haz lo q̄ dize el fraile, y no lo q̄ haze. (Son pues phariſeos hypocritas)
                        What ſaith the Frier that do: what doth he, that do not. (They
be then hypocriticall Phariſies.
                        
                           Seaſe milagro,
                           y hagalo el Diablo.
                        
                        
                           A miracle is it,
                           and the deuill doth it.
                        
                        La carcely la quareſma para los pobres es hecha.
                        
                           The priſon and lent
                           for the poore are meant.
                        
                        
                        Camino de Roma ni mula coxa,
                              
                                 ••
                              monie. ni bolſa floxa. (Q. D. que el que va à
Roma por algun beneficio, o por meior dezir maleficio, ha de tener
buena cavalgadura para bolar, ſi pudieſſe, de medio quo otro no ſe
adelante, y ſe lo coja. Y no baſta ir preſto, es meneſter tambiē llevar
la bolſa fornida para comprar el beneficio: lo qual es Simonia.)
                        Neither a halting mule, nor emptie purſe is the way to Rome.
To wit: he that for any benefice, or, to ſpeak better, malefice,
goeth to Rome, muſt haue a good horſe to flie if he could,
leſt another come before him, & catch it vp. And to go ſpeedily
is not ſufficient, a purſe well ſtuffed muſt he carie alſo, to
buy the benefice, which is Simony.)
                        
                           Roma, Roma, la que à los locos doma,
                           y à los cuerdos no perdona.
                        
                        
                           Rome, Rome which tameth fooles,
                           And ſpareth not the wiſe:
                           To prie, and proule for gaine,
                           Hath Linx his piercing eyes.
                        
                        
                           Quien tiene pie de altar,Idleneſſe the mother of many vices.
                           
                           come pauſm amaſſar.
                        
                        
                           Idle Maſſe of the Altar,
                           Eate the fruit of others labour.
                        
                        
                           No ay caſa harta,
                           ſino donde ay Corona rapada.
                        
                        
                           No houſe there is thats fitly ſtored,
                           Which wants a crowne not finely ſhared.
                        
                        Quien es Conde, y deſſea ſer Duqut, metaſc frayle en Guadalupe.
                        
                           Who ſo is an Earle, and would be a Duke,
                           Put he himſelfe Friar in Guadelupe.
                           
                        
                        Que la fortuna, como ellos llaman, y no el eſpirtitu ſanto elija al papa.
                        
                           That fickle fate, not Spirite diuine,
                           Doth chooſe the Pope (they ſay) in fine.
                        
                        
                           Rey por natura,
                           y Papa por ventura.
                        
                        
                           A king by nature,
                           and a Pope by aduenture.
                        
                        That we ought to fly theſe Eccleſiaſtical perſons: by that which
is ſaid, and this prouerbe appeareth.
                        A frayle hueco ſoga verde y almendro ſeco.
                        
                           A hollow hearted Fryar,
                           A rope that's very greene,
                           A withered Almond tree
                           Are neuer gainefull ſeene.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            This thē being ſo (as theſe moſt true prouerbs affirme) bleſſed

are they,Ier. 51. 6. that knowing them, depart from them, and do that
which God by Ieremy commandeth: Fly ſayth hee out of the
middeſt of Babylon and deliuer euery one his owne ſoule, leſt
ye periſh by reaſon of her wickedneſſe, &c. And feare not pouertie:
for God is the God of all the roundneſſe of the earth:Pſal. 147. 9 he
will prouide for you For if (ſaith Dauid) it be God that giueth
food to the beaſts, and to the yong rauens which cal vpon him,
according to that which God himſelf demādeth of Iob:Iob. 39. 3. 
               Who pre
pareth (ſaith he) for the Rauen his meat, whē his birds crie vnto God,
wandering for lacke of meat. If God then take care for beaſts, rauens,
and young rauens, and feedeth them, how much more
ſhall he feed man, made to his owne likeneſſe, and bought with
the bloud of our Chriſt his ſonne? chiefly, if ſuch a man, abhorring
ſuperſtition and idolatrie, deſire in holineſſe & righteouſneſſe,
to ſerue his creator?Pſal. 37▪ 25. 
               I haue bene yong (ſaith Dauid, well
experienced in the power and mercies of God) and now am old:
yet neuer ſaw I the righteous for ſaken, nor their ſeed begging their
bread. The godly will he neuer faile, ſeeing he neuer faileth the
beaſt, from whom by this or that meanes, their need is ſatisfied.
For example,1. King. 17. 6. the Rauens that brought bread and fleſh to Elias,
               Dan. 14. 32.
and the pottage brought by Habacuc to Daniel, in the den of
the Lyons. Notwithſtanding all that I haue ſaid touching the
wicked life of the Cergie: I confeſſe (as the truth is) that there
be ſome good, honeſt, & deſirous to ſerue God among them:
which more offend of ignorance, then malice: who, when the
Lord ſhall ſhew them mercie to know the vices, both in life &
doctrine, will reproue them: and if that ſuffiſe not, go out from
among thē.Two Roman Empire. As the Lord in all times hath euer preuented ſome,
in our time chiefly, and hath made them notable preachers of
the Goſpell of his ſon Ieſus Chriſt. His Maieſtie ſhew the ſame
mercy to the reſt, that the kingdom of Antichriſt may wholly
fall to the earth, and that of his Chriſt be exalted. Let vs now
come to the reaſons.
            Two Roman Empires haue bene (the firſt will we call the
old, and the ſecond the new) Of verie mean beginnings, began
the one and the other, & by little and little ſo greatly climbed,
that they became the greateſt & moſt mightieſt Empires that
euer were, or ſhall be in the world.
            
               
The firſt tooke beginning in two ſhepheards, Romulus and
Remus, his brother: who made a receptacle of euill doers
and offendors, and a gate (as it were) whereby they retyred
and eſcaped: of that multitude was a citie buylded which they
called Rome. Romulus, not brooking a competitor in the
Empire, ſlew Remus his brother. From this citie, did they
great violence and outrage to their neighbour nations; not
only robbing them of their goodes, but of their young maidens
alſo. This was the firſt occaſion of the warres: This warre
ended, others much more great, had they: wherein they ſo
much increaſed and inriched themſelues, that not contented
with Italy, they made warres alſo vpon forreigne nations, and
leauing their owne limits,The beginning of the Popedome, which is the new Empire. they inuaded Affrike and Aſia. Thus
were they dayly increaſing, vntill another Prince and Lord aroſe
vp in Rome, thruſting himſelfe into the ſame ſeat of the
Empire, and at the ſide (as it were) of the Roman Emperour.
This new Prince at the firſt made no ſhew, that he purpoſed
ought to diminiſh the authority of the Emperor: but only took
care of the affaires of the Church: wherein, whiles he was ſo
employed the ſtrength of the Emperour, & Empire flouriſhed.
But afterwards, he began to thinke, how to benefite himſelfe
of that opinion of religion, and holineſſe which he held: and to
attaine hereunto, he doubted not to intreat the Emperour, that
by his authority he might hold the ſouereignty ouer all Churches.
The cauſe that this new Prince alleaged was, that Rome
was alwayes the Lady of the whole world: and therefore was it
meet that the Biſhop of that city ſhuld go before other Biſhops
in degree & dignity. To obtaine this was a thing moſt difficult:
For albeit that the Emperour let it ſlip: yet did the Biſhops of
other nations confidently gaineſay him: alleaging lawfull cauſes
why they withſtood him: vnwilling to acknowledge the Biſhop
of Rome, otherwiſe then for a brother, companion, and in
power equall with them. Notwithſtanding all this he of Rome
forſlowed not, but continually vrged to attaine to his purpoſe,
vntill he obtained of Phocas the Emperour (who murthered
Mauricius his good Lord and Emperour) that which he would:Boniface 3.
and ſo called himſelfe vniuerſall Biſhop, and what beſides he
beſt pleaſed. Here may ye ſee, that olde Rome was founded

vpon one murder,The Popedom founded vpon murder. and the new, which is the Popedome vppon
another. In this concerning the primacie, was the Pope merely
opoſit to Chriſt,Marke 13. 41. who ſharpely in his diſciples reproued the like
ſtrife and ambition,Luke 22. 25. But the Pope mounted to this height by
the benefit of the Emperours, did nowe further dare to promiſe
to himſelfe greater matters: yet long time proceeding
with great diſſimulation. A hundred yeares almoſt after the
death of Conſtantine the great, was the Empire much weakned:
it loſt Fraunce, England, and Almaine, The Hunnes held
Italie, the Vandals, Africke. Such was the diſſipation, that
the Emperours leauing Rome, which is in the Weſt, went
to Conſtantinople,The Pope taking occaſiō of the queſtion about Images denyeth obedience to the Emperour. where they made their abode. The Biſhop
of Rome, ſeeing the ſcattering of the Empire, minded
not to let ſlippe occaſion: but armed a queſtion for his parte
againſt the Emperour: The chiefe cauſe was; that the Emperour
commaunded all ſtatues and Images to be taken out of
the Churches: So greatly did the Pope withſtand this commaund,
that hee dared to excommunicate the Emperour: ſo
much nowe was the horne increaſed. At this time in the Eaſt,
aroſe vp Mahomet, who tooke many landes form the Empire.
The Emperours notwithſtanding, would haue it vnderſtood,
that all the dignitie, power and Maieſtie, which the
Pope did hold, depended vppon them. The Pope then to bee
freed from this ſubiection, and the warres which the king
of Lumbardie made in italie, deuiſed a notable policie; and
this it was. To aduaunce of himſelfe another, whom he liked,
and to name him Emperour of the Romans. Who accknowledging
the benefit,Charles the great made Emperour and why. ſhould deeme himſelfe happie, to pleaſe
and ſerue him in all that he would: And ſo Charles the great
he elected, and declared Emperour, who had chaſed out of
Italie, the king of Lumbardy, and enemie to the Pope. This
cauſed great anger, and ſtrife betweene the Eaſterne and Weſterne
Emperours: and not betweene them onely, but the
Churches alſo of both the one and other partie: of all which,
the couetouſnes, and ambition of the Pope of Rome were the
cauſe. Much contention was there afterwards, among the Italians,
French and Almaynes, about the election of the Emperour.
But in the end, when Otho the third Duke of Saxoni
                  •
               
               
was Emperour, and Gregorie 5. an Almayne Pope, order was
giuen, that ſeuen electors ſhould chooſe the Emperour, (as in
the life of this Gregorie the fift we haue declared) And this
was done, to exclude ſtraunge nations, that none but an Almayne
ſhould be Emperour. Great garboyles aroſe afterwardes
betweene the Pope and the Emperour, who could
no longer endure, the vnmeaſurable arrogancie and ambition
of the Pope. Reade the Hiſtories of Henry the third and
fourth, and of Frederick the firſt & ſecond, and to come neerer
our time, thoſe of the Emperour Charles 5. whoſe hoſt in the
1527. yeare, ſacked Rome▪ tooke Pope Clement 7. and held him
priſoner. This Clement (as ſang the Spaniardes at the Popes
windowe, whiles hee was priſoner) would haue taken away
the cloke from the Emperour, as vppon the life of this Clement,
we haue before declared. So alſo ſought Paule the fourth
to take away the cloake from our king Don Philip the ſecond.
The kingdome of Naples would he haue taken from him: but
the hoſt of the king, whoſe captaine was the Duke Dalua
put the Pope into ſuch a ſtraight, that he was contented to
make peace, and chiefly hearing of the taking of Saint Quintans,
which was in the 1557. yeare (as vppon the life of this
Paul the fourth, before we haue ſaid. So proud is the Pope become,
that he hath made the forme of an oath, the which he
cauſeth the Emperour to ſweare (being in time paſt his maiſter
and Lord, and ſo Saint Gregorie called Lord, the good Emperour
Mauricius) but now,The oath which the Emperour maketh to the Pope. is he his ſeruaunt and vaſſall. This
forme of oath, conteyneth; that the Emperour, by all poſſible
wayes keepe, increaſe and defend the goodes of the Roman
Church, and chiefe Biſhopes, their dignitie, priueledges, and
decrees. And ſo no Emperour (but if he would be holden infamous
& a faith breaker) durſt in any thing contradict him. The
oath which the Emperour Charles 5. made to Clement 7. or 8. in
the 1530.The 1. oath of the Emperour. yeare, at the time of his Coronation, will I here put
downe. Ego Carolus Romanorū rex, &c. That is to ſay. I Charles
king of the Romans, which by Gods aſſiſtance, hold to be Emperour,
promiſe, proteſt, affirme, and ſweare to God & bleſſed
S. Peter, that I will henceforth be protector and defendor of
the chiefe Biſhop, and of the holy Church of Rome in all

their neceſſities and profits, keeping, and preſeruing their
poſſeſſions, dignities, and rightes, &c. When he had made
this oath, was Don Charles made king of Lumbardy, and
after he was king of Lumbardy, another oath in this forme
hee made:The 2. oath▪
                
               Ego Carolus, &c. I Charles king of the Romanes
and Lumbardes, promiſe and ſweare, by the father, ſonne,
and holy Ghoſt, and by the word of the liuing fleſh, and
by theſe holy reliques, that if the Lord permit mee to come
to be Emperour, I ſhall to my power, aduaunce to holy Romane
Church, the holineſſe thereof▪ and her Rector, and
that by my will, Councell, conſent, nor exhortation, he ſhall
looſe neither life, member▪ nor honour which he holdeth.
And I ſhall not make in Rome any decree or ordynation of
all that, to his holineſſe, or to the Romans perteyneth, without
your conſent: And all that of Saint Peters landes, which ſhalbe
in our power, we ſhall then reſtore, and to whom ſoeuer I
ſhall deliuer ouer the gouernement of Itali
                  •
               , I ſhall cauſe
him ſweare to be an ayder of his holineſſe, to defend to his
power, the landes of Saint Peter, as God me helpe, and by
theſe holy Goſpells of God,The Emperour made a chanon and kinght of S. Peter. &c. After this 2. oath Don Charles
was made a Chanon of Saint Peter, and after, a knight of Saint
Peter. Theſe two oathes ſhall ye find in the Hiſtorie and 10.
booke of the marqueſſe of Peſcara. Here may yee ſee, how
the world goeth contrary. The Pope of a ſubiect to the Emperour,
hath made himſelfe his Lord. This which I haue
ſayd, touching the originall and growing vp of the Pope, in an
information, preſented to the princes, and ſtates of the Empire
in the time of Don Charles the Emperour, our king and Lord,
is handled more at large. Hence will we conclude, that the
authoritie, which the Pope boaſteth to hold, is neither by diuine
nor humane right, but diabolicall: with ſubtilty he thruſt
himſelfe into it, with ſtraunge force (as ſaith Daniell) he doth
and ſhall maineteine the ſame, vntill God deſtroy him
with the force and power of his word. By which ſaying it
appeareth, that the Popedome built (as it is) vppon hypocryſie,
craft,Matth. 16. 16. auarice, ambition and tyranny, is not builded
vppon the firme rocke which is Ieſus Chriſt, whom Saint
Peter confeſſed ſaying: Thou art the Chriſt, the ſonne of the

liuing God. And if the Popedome be not founded vpon Chriſt,
much leſſe is the Pope the head, or vniuerſall Biſhop of the
Church of God, but of the deuill. And that he is not vniuerſall
Biſhop, I will confirme it prouing with ſhort and apparant
reaſons, that Saint Peter whoſe ſucceſſor they ſay the Pope
to be,The 1. Reaſon. Clemens ad Iacobum. was not vniuerſall Biſhop of the Church. The firſt reaſon
Saint Clement, Biſhop of Rome, writing (as ſay our aduerſaries)
to Saint Iames, called him the brother of the Lord,
Biſhop of Biſhops, Gouernour of the Church of Ieruſalem,
and of all others through the whole world. If this be true, it
followeth,The 2. Reaſon. Actes 15. that ſo was not Saint Clement, albeit he were Biſhop
of Rome. 2. Alſo in the firſt Chriſtian Councell, whereof
Saint Luke in his Hiſtorie maketh mention, not S. Peter as vniuerſall
Biſhop but S. Iames gouerned. Who heard each one, and
among them S. Peter: and when all had ſpoken, Saint Iames, as
Preſident, concluded, in the 19. verſe, ſaying: wherefore my ſentence
is &c. Read the chapter, and you ſhall ſee that which I ſay
to be truth. Notwithſtanding all this D. Illeſcas the Popes paraſite,
in his part 1. fol. 20. ſaith: That Saint Peter as chiefe Biſhop
was preſident in this Councell.The 3. Reaſon. 3. Alſo the Apoſtles (as reporteth
Saint Luke) hearing that Samaria had receiued the doctrin
of the Goſpell; to teach and more fully inſtruct them; ſent Peter
& Iohn thither. But who ſhall now, ſend the Pope to preach?
Suerely the Counſell wil not be ſo bould: and though the Coū
               ſel
ſo ſhould, yet would not the Pope do it, ſaying: he is Immediate
from God. The Apoſtles ſent Peter, and Peter, as a faithfull
member of the. Church,The 4. Reaſon. Gal. 2. 11. obeyed, went and preached. 4.
Saint Paule, reproued Saint Peter becauſe (faith Saint Paule)
he ſo deſerued, Saint Peter liſtened thereto and allowed the reprehenſion.
That he was imediate from God, that he was vniuerſall
Biſhop, and therefore greater then he, anſwered he not
neither did he anſwere, that none ought, nor could reproue
him, nor yet demaund account of him, why he did ſo, or ſo:
as the Popes nowe, and many yeares alſo, to kings, Emperours,
yea and generall Councels, haue anſwered. So ſhameleſſe are
ſome of our aduerſaries, that notwithſtanding Saint Paule
ſaith, that beeing come to Antioche, I withſtood Peter to
his face, &c. And verſe 14. hee ſaith: whom when I ſaw that

they walked not rightly, according to the truth of the Goſpell,
I ſaid to Peter before all, &c. yet ſay they, that Saint Paul reproued
not S. Peter, but another, which was called Cephas▪
                Read
D. Illeſcas part 1. fol. 21. Whoſe words be theſe. Before that S.
Peter (ſay they) came to Rome, he held equality with S. Paul in
Antioch, &c. Illeſcas beleeueth not that which S. Paul witneſſeth
of this equalltie: and therefore; as one doubting, ſaith: They
ſay, what credit ſhall we giue to ſuch a one, that doubteth of
that which Saint Paul affirmeth?The 5. Reaſon. 1. Theſ. 2. 3. That Antichriſt, whoſoeuer he
ſhal be, which Saint Paul calleth the ſonne of perdition, & man
of ſinne,Apoc. 17. 9. ſhall ſit in the temple of God; and as addeth S. Iohn, in
the citie ſituate vpon 7▪ mountaines. This citie as S. Ierome and
many others declare, is Rome: Only the Pope ſitteth in the
Temple of▪ God, in the citie of ſeauen mountaines, which is
Rome.The 6. Reaſon. Therefore onely the Pope is that Antichriſt. 6. Alſo,
in the firſt Councell of Nice aſſembled by Conſtantine, that
good Emperour, to confound and deſtroy the hereſie of Arrius
(who with this blaſpheamous mouth tooke away the diuinitie
of Ieſus Chriſt) the Legats of the Biſhop of Rome, not in
the 1. 2. nor 3. but in the 4. place did ſitte: Ergo the Biſhop of
Rome, was not then head, nor vniuerſall Biſhop of the Church.
In this Nicen Councell, the Limits of the Patriarkes were
bounded, to whom the ſame authoritie, ouer their Churches,
was giuen, as held the Biſhop of Rome ouer his neighbour
Churches. The Papiſts (as they knowe, which haue read
Hiſtories) haue endeauoured, what they could, to falſifie
this decree. Reade for this purpoſe, the ſixt Councell of
Carthage, whereof we will afterwardes make mention. Cardinall
Cuſanus alleaging the Nicen Councell, ſhewed the rialtie
of the truth, ſaying as followeth. The Biſhop of Rome,
of the ancients,Lib. 2 de concordia Cathol, cap. 12. is often called Patriarke, or Archbiſhop: and
like authoritie was giuen him in the Councell of Nice, as to
the other Patriarkes. Here wee ſee, what great authoritie
hath the Pope newly in our times vſurped, more then that
which the holy and ancient conſtitutions gaue him, and
all this by continuance, and cuſtome of ſlauiſh obedience.
Neither Iu
                     •
                  us, who then was Biſhop of Rome, nor his Legates,
which were in this Councell, gaine ſayd this decree. And

that which more is, the ſame decree, was afterwareds, in the
Councell of Antioche, and in the Councell of Conſtantinople,
confirmed. In the firſt Councell of Epheſus, Cyrillus, In the 2.
Dioſcorus, Patriaches of Alexandria did gouerne, albeit the Legats
of the the Biſhop of Rome, were there preſent. In the 5.
Coūcel of Cōſtantinople, Menas, as patriarke of the city where
the Councel was holden, gouerned. In the General Councell
holden in Aquilea, S. Ambroſe biſhop of Milan was preſident, &
not the biſhop of Rome: albeit the Councel was holden in Italy.
But what forceth it to alleage ſo many Councels: ſith in one
Councell this queſtion was heard and determined, and both
parties heard alſo? The biſhop of Rome, with the title of Patriark,
tooke vpon him much authoritie, ouer the Churches of
Affrique.The Councell of Mileuant againſt the Primacie So that the Siſmatiques of Affrick as to a refuge, retired
vnto him. For this cauſe, the Councell of Maleuant
(wherein was Saint Auguſtine, and a great number of fathers)
pronounced al thoſe excommunicate, which ſhould appeale to
parts beyound the ſeas. The Biſhop of Rome grudging here at,
ſent his Legates, to the 6. Councell of Carthage (wherein alſo
was S. Auguſtine preſent) to defend his right. This queſtion, in
this Councell, was truly handled; Zozimus, Boniface, and Celeſtine,
ſucceſſiuely being Biſhops. Aurelius, Archbiſhop of Carthage,
where the Councell was holden, and not the Legates of
the Pope (albeit they were three, and preſent: namely, Fauſtine
Biſhop, Philip & Aſelias presbiters) there gouerned. Theſe had
the Biſhop of Rome ſent to the Councel of Carthage, to defend
the authoritie, which the Nicen Councell (ſaid they) had giuen
to the Biſhop of Rome: to wit, that appeale might be made to
the Biſhop o of Rome, from the ſentence giuen by any metropolitaine
whatſoeuer. One Daniell a notarie red the whole 5.
chap. of the Councel of Sardice, which the Biſhop of Rome ſaid
(but very vntruly) was of the Councell of Neece. The Pope
like a good apothecarie, when it is for his profit, well knoweth
to giue quid pro quo. All the Biſhops and Archbiſhops much
marueyled, and ſaid, that ſuch a thing was neuer read in the
Councell of Nice: and ſo the ſame Councell of Nice, which
they had then in writing, they commaunded to be read: which
beeing read, and no word of ſuch appellation found: yet did

the Romane Legates inſiſt, that it was ſo. Needefull it was
then, to ſend certaine men, to Conſtantinople, Alexandria,
and alſo to Rome it ſelfe,The deceit of the Pope diſcouered. that they might bring other copies
of the Nicen Councell. Within one yeare were they brought,
and the originall it ſelfe chiefly, which was kept in Conſtantinople:
Read they were, and no mention, nor ought elſe
that might giue ſuſpition of this priueledge, which the Romans
alleaged, to haue bene graunted them in the Nicen
Councell: was at all found in any of theſe coppies. A letter
then was written by conſent of the whole Councell of Carthage,
to the Biſhop of Rome, wherein no ſuch thinge (ſaid
they) but the contrary rather was found in the Councel of Nice:In thoſe times euery Biſhop was called Pope.
that the Biſhop of Rome, as did other Popes and metropolitanes,
ſhould medle within his owne limits and boundes. And
that therefore, if he were wiſe, hee ſhould thenceforth be
content with his owne dioces, and biſhorick; & not intrude
vpon an others poſſeſſion. This letter was ſubſcribed by 230 fathers,
and among them, the Popes ſelfe ſame three Legats before
named. If the Pope and his Legats, when they vſed not
ſuch tyrāny as now they vſe, did dare to falſifie a Councell: in
almoſt a thouſand, two hundred, and ſo many yeares paſſed, after
this Councell of Carthage, vnto this yeare 1598. What ſhall
they not haue done? Quien haze vn ceſto, hara ciento: He that maketh
one basket, wil make a hundred. And no wonder it is, that
they haue dared to falſifie the Councels, ſeeing they haue
ſhameleſly taken from the law of God the 2. Commandement,
Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any image, &c. And ſeeing but 9
Commandements, of the tenth commandement, Thou ſhalt not
luſt, &c. haue they made two commandements, as in the beginning
of this Treatiſe we haue noted. Our Spaniſh Caran
                     •
                  a in his
Summa Conciliorum, ſetteth down no one of ſo many Cannons
in it) of this 6. Councell of Carthage the cauſe is, leaſt he ſhuld
therein haue diſcouered the falſhood of the Biſhop of Rome,
in alleaging of the Nicen Councell, that which the Councell
neuer, but the contrary rather determined. A Summarie onely
he made, and verie briefe ſaying: that the Councell determined,
what the Nicen Councell demaunded of the Eaſterne
Biſhoppes: but ſaieth not vnto what purpoſe.

O great ſubtiltie. This Councell of Carthage, albeit it was generall,
called he prouincial. So alſo calleth it Panuinus, notwithſtanding
they both cōfeſſe that there were found there preſent
217 Biſhops, and three legates of the Pope: what letteth it then
to be generall? The Papiſts, what they may, wil forget this ſixt
Councell of Carthage: albeit, ſaith Panninus, it was confirmed
in Trullo. Gracian alſo interpreting the words of the
Councell,Curſed is the gloſe that corrupteth the text. vſeth the ſame malice: That none appeale (ſaith he)
to partes beyond the ſea, except it be to the Biſhop of Rome.
The cauſe why it was commanded in this 6. Councell of Carthage,
that no appeale ſhould be beyond the ſea, was, for that
the ſiſmatikes of Affrike, condemned by the good Biſhops of
Affrike, appealed to Rome: Therfore commanded the councel
they ſhould not appeale, but that the buſineſſe, without ſeeking
further, ſhould be concluded in Affricke. And ſo was the concluſion
of this Councell: That the Biſhop of Rome ſhould not
receiue thoſe, that were excommunicate by the Biſhops of Affricke,
nor accept their appellations, which had in Affrike bene
condemned: and thoſe that appealed to him, ſhould be, for
the ſame matter, excommunicate. The reaſons whereuppon
this Councell was founded, ſent by it to Celeſtine Biſhop of
Rome, be theſe: That in no Coūcel was any ſuch thing determined:
But that the Nicen Councell contrariwiſe gaue the charge
of the Biſhops, and Eccleſiaſticall perſons to the Metropolitane.
The grace of the holy Spirit (ſaith it) will aſſiſt euery prouince
to iudge controuerſies: that each one which felt himſelfe
greeued, might appeale to a prouinciall Councell: For it
is more to bee beleeued, that God will rather inſpire manie
Prieſts in a Councell aſſembled then one only man, &c. By that
which wee haue alleaged of the ſixt Councell of Carthage, it
clearely appeareth: how falſe is that, which the Pope ſaid, that
in the Nicen Councell the primacie was giuen him: and yet
want there not ſome in our times alſo, which renewe this falſhood.
And ſo D. Illeſcas vpon the life of Boniface 3 in the marginall
note ſaith theſe words: Phocas de clared by the Law, that
the Roman Church is head of the Church vniuerſall. Alſo he
ſaith: This ſuperiority of the Roman Church hath euer ſithens
bene, and by all faithfull and Catholike Chriſtians is holden

for a thing proued, & without diſpute: as the Councell of Neece
chap. 6. and Raimundus Rufus againſt the heretiks of this time,
for louers of nouelties, &c. moſt plainely proueth. In the ſeuenth
Councell of Carthage,Anno 600. the matter of the primacie was
alſo debated. The cauſe was this: That Iohn, Biſhop of Conſtantinople,
ſeeing himſelfe fauoured of Maurice the Emperour,
called himſelfe Biſhop of Biſhops, and vniuerſall biſhop.
And this becauſe he was Biſhop of the citie, where the Emperour
was reſident. Mauricius willing to aduaunce his citie, and
abaſe Rome, did ſupport, and maintaine him. A curſe then was
pronounced in this Councell, not againſt Iohn of Conſtantinople,
but generally, againſt whomſoeuer ſhould take vpon him
the title of vniuerſall Biſhop.The Doctors againſt the primacie. The Doctors which at this time
liued, and chiefly Saint Gregory, do witneſſe the ſame. Let them
read his epiſtles of the firſt booke the 76.Saint Gregory againſt the primacie. 78. 80. 85. and of the
ſecond booke, the 188. and 194. In none of theſe epiſtles ſaith
S. Gregorie, that the ſaid Iohn wronged S. Peter, nor withheld,
nor yet vſurped the right and title of the Biſhops of Rome: but
proteſteth, that it is title profane, ſacrilegious, and the forerunner
of Antichriſt. And in the 4. booke and 48. chap. of the
Regiſter, the ſame Saint Gregorie doubteth not to pronounce
him, that ſuffereth himſelfe to be called vniuerſal and chiefe Biſhop,
to be the forerunner of Antichriſt. Reade for this purpoſe
the ſame Saint Gregorie lib. 4. Epiſt. 76. 78. 30. lib. 7. and
69. epiſt. And in the 35. epiſt. which he wrote to Iohn Biſhop
of Conſtantinople, who vſurped this title, he ſaith: All that was
propheſied is fulfilled: the king of pride (namely Antichriſt) is
neere at hand: and that which is abhomination to ſpeake, an
hoſt of Prieſts make preparatiō for him. And in an epiſtle, which
he wrote to Mauricius the Emperour, hee ſaith: And I ſay
boldly, that whoſoeuer is called vniuerſall Prieſt, either in his
pride deſireth ſo to be called, or is the forerunner of Antichriſt:
for that in waxing proud he preferreth himſelfe to the reſt, and
with incomparable pride, walketh in the way of error. For, as
that peruerſe man wil aboue al men be holden for God:A notable diſcourſe made by Edward biſhop of Salisburg. ſo neither
more, nor leſſe is he (be he what he will) that ſeeketh to be
called Prieſt ouer the other prieſts, &c. About the 1240. yeare,
Edward Archibiſhop of Salisburg, ſpeaking in the Councell holden

at Ratisbon to repreſſe the inſolencie and tyranny of the
Popes,How the Popes employ themſelues; ſaid theſe words: we might haue perceiued, had we not
bene blind, vnder the title of chiefe Biſhop, a moſt cruell wolfe
in ſhepheards clothing. The Roman biſhops daring, deceiuing
and ſowing the warres of warres, drawe weapons againſt all
Chriſtians. And becomming great, they kill the ſheepe, caſt
peace and concord out of the world: draw from hel ciuil wars
and domeſticall ſeditions: more & more weaken the ſtrengths
of all men to triumph ouer all men, to deliuer vp all men, and
to put all men in bondage and captiuitie. It is now (ſaith he) 170
yeares, ſince Hildebrand (he was called Gregorie 7.) vnder colour
of religion, laid the foundations of the Empire of Antichriſt:
he was the firſt that began this abominable warres:
which his ſucceſſors: vntil this day haue cōtinued. And then, the
chiefe Biſhops of Babylon, deſire to reigne, they cānnot endure
an equal. Beleeue me, that haue made experiēce: ceaſe they will
not, vntil (hauing ſuppreſſed the Emperor, defaced the maieſty
of the Roman Empire,All this is fully accompliſhed. & oppreſſed the true Paſtors) they deſtroy
by the ſame way, all whatſoeuer remaineth: they put al vnder
their feet: they ſit in the temple of God, & lift vp thēſelues
aboue all that is worſhipped. He which is ſeruant of ſeruāts deſireth
(as if he were God) to be Lord of Lords. In his breaſt toſſeth,
he new Coūcels to eſtabliſh a proper empire: lawes he chā
               geth,
and eſtabliſheth his owne: This man of perdition, whom
they wontedly call Antichriſt (in whoſe forehead is written the
name of blaſphemy, I am God: I cānot erre, polluteth, robbeth,
ſpoyleth and killeth.The title of the Pope. He is ſet in the temple of God, making
himſelfe Lord of all. And that moreouer, which ye may reade
in the 7. booke of the Annales of Auentino fol. 685. If ſuch were
the Popes 357. yeares ſince, when malice was not yet come to
the height, what maner of men ſhall the Popes of our times be?
Surelie, much worſe: for in nothing do euill men profite, but
in doing more euill.
            
               Arnulphus Biſhop of Orleans,Arnulphus. openlie in the Councell
at Remes, holden more then 560. yeares ſince, called the
Pope Antichriſt.Bernard. Saint Bernard, who liued in the 1150.
yeare, in his ſecond, third and fourth books of Conſiderations,
called the Pope Antichriſt.Ioachin. The Abbot Ioachin Calabres, who

liued 350 yeeres ſince, called the Pope Antichriſt. About
the 1101.Fluencius. yeare liued Biſhop Fluencius, that called the Pope
Antichriſt.Nicholas Gallus. About the 1245. yeare, liued Nicholas Gallus, who
ſeeing the deformitie of the Church, wrote a booke againſt
the Popes intituled Ignea ſagitta,
               Marſilius. a fiery arrow. Marſilius, a learned
man,Ceſenas. wrote more then 200. yeares ſince, againſt the Pope
and his lawes. At the ſame time almoſt liued Michael Ceſenas,
Generall of the Minoritts, who openly called the Pope Antichriſt.
Aboue.Wickliffe. 200. yeres paſt, Iohn Wicliffe wrote and preached
againſt the Pope;Iohn Hus. Ierom of Prage Petrarcus. and reformed many popiſh abuſes in England.
The ſame did after wardes Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage
in Bohemia Franciſco Petrarca, an Italyan borne in the 1304
yere, and in the 1374. yere dyed, very truly wrote, againſt the
Pope, and his court. Read this 20. Epiſtle, wherein he calleth the
court Papall, Babylon, & Babiloniſh ſtrūper, which is ſet vpon
many waters. Mother of all Idolatries, and whoredomes. Read
his 92. which beginneth: Del' Empia Babilonia, &c. which word
for word thus ſoundeth in Engliſh. From wicked Babylon,
whence all ſhame is fled, where no goodneſſe remaineth: Harbour
of ſorrowe, mother of errours, to prolong life am I
fled. Item the 106. Sonet, which beginneth Fiamma d'oal ciel,
&c. The flame of heauen vpon thy hayres (or curled lockes)
O caytife, which from the fountaine and wallet (to wit from
drinking of water, and poorely feeding) by impoueriſhing
others, art become rich and great: Sith ſo much thou reioyceſt
in doing euill. Neaſt of treaſons, wherein what
miſchiefes are now ſpread through the world, be hatched.
Seruant of wine, bed, and belly cheere, in whome whoredome
hath made her laſt proofe: For thy Chamberlaines
young and olde goe playing the wantons, and Baelzabub in
the middeſt, with bellowes, fire, and looking glaſſes. In the
fether at the ſhadowe waſt thou not brought, but naked to
the winde, vnſhod among the buſhes, &c. Such now is thy
life, that the ſtinke is gone vp vnto God.
            Alſo in the 107. Sonet, which beginneth, L'auara Babylonia,
&c. Couetous Babylon ſo full hath heaped the ſacke of
the wrath of God, and of wicked and peruerſe vices, that
it burſteht: and not Iupiter, nor Pallas, but Bacchus and

               Venus hath made her gods. Expecting reaſon doth torment and
conſume me, &c. And foure verſes further. Her Idolles ſhall
be holden for earth, &c. Alſo the 108. Sonnet, which beginneth:
Fontana di dolore, &c. Fountain of griefe, harbor of wrath,
ſchoole of errors, and Temple of hereſie: Rome in elder time,
now falſe and peruerſe Babylon, for whom I ſo much weepe &
ſigh. O ſhop of deceit, ô priſon of wrath, where goodneſſe dyeth,
and euill is maintained and nouriſhed: hell of the liuing:
great wonder ſhall it be, if Chriſt in the end be not wroth with
thee, founded in chaſt and humble pouertie, lifteſt thou vp
thy hornes againſt thy founders? Shameleſſe ſtrumpet, where
haſt thou put thy truſt? In thine adulteries, in ſo great abundance
of euill gotten riches? &c. If Petrarch 260 yeares and
more ſithens, with great reaſon and truth ſaid this againſt the
Pope and his Court papall: what ſhall be ſaid now, when the
malice, tyranny, vngodlineſſe and idolatrie of the Pope and his
court are come to the height?Dante. 
               Danter an Author more ancient
then Petrarch, and Bocace, of the ſame time with Petrarch, as litle
flattred the Pope: other things as much as Petrarch ſay they.
Dante in his 7. ſong of hell, accuſeth the Pope of couetouſneſſe.
In the 11. ſong and 6. circle he accuſeth him of hereſie. In the
15. ſong he accuſeth him of ſodomie. And in the 19. he accuſeth
him of ſimonie.The Popes foure cardinall vertues: auarice hereſie, ſodomy and ſimonie. Bocace. (Theſe bee the foure cardinall vertues,
which are found in the Popes, Couetouſneſſe, hereſie, ſodomie,
and ſimonie. Bocace in the ſecond Nouell of the Iornada
of his Decameron, in the name of a Iew called Abraham, ſaith,
that generally all the Court of Rome, from the greateſt to
the leaſt, diſhoneſtly ſinned in the ſinne of whoredome: and
not naturally onely, but alſo ſodomitically, without any bridle,
without any remorſe of conſcience, or ſhame, &c. They
haue not (ſaith he) either holineſſe, deuotion, or good works,
&c. And in manie other places doth he the ſame. Theſe three
Dante, Petrarch and Botace bee ancient writers, Italians, and
fathers of the Italian tongue,Sanazaro. and well experienced in the affaires
of the Pope and his Court. Sanazaro the moſt excellent
Italian Poet of our times, ſpeaking of the Pope, thus ſaith
in his Epigrams.
            
            
               In vaticano noſter latet, hunc tamen alto,
               Chriſte vides coelo, proh dolor, & pateris.
            
            To wit, In the Vaticano (which is the pallace of Saint Peter in
Rome) our (Barbarian) lieth hid: but yet thou Chriſt from the
high heauen beholdeſt him: ah griefe, & doeſt thou ſuffer him?
What more could Luther, or Caluin, or the reſt of the late writers,
which haue written againſt the Pope and his Romiſh court
ſay, then theſe his Italians haue ſaid. Petrarch calleth it wicked
Babylon, mother of errors: he wiſheth fire to fall from heauen
and conſume it (ſuch abhominations had ſeene therein) he calleth
it a neaſt of treaſons, &c. gluttonous and luxurious. God
cannot (ſaith he) longer be patient with her, &c. Idols he ſaith
ſhall be throwne to the ground,The Church of Rome erreth in faith. &c. Hee calleth her
the fountaine of griefe, harbour of wrath, ſchoole of errours,
temple of hereſies, &c. Behold if the Pope may erre in faith:
And it is to be noted, that Pope Pius the fifth, (as in his life wee
haue ſaid) hath ſpunged all theſe places by vs alleaged, out of
Petrarch and Bocace. The cauſe is, leaſt men ſhould know their
wickedneſſe, abominations and impieties, but may hold him
for holy, and for God vpon earth. Great ſhame was it for the
Pope,Thomas Rendonio. that ſo famous Italian Authours, that Italian books, and
printed in Italy, ſhould ſo roundly tell the wickedneſſe of him
& his. About the 1430. yeare liued Thomas Rendon, a Carmelite,
of whom in the life of Eugenius the fourth, we haue before
made mention: He ſaid in his ſermons, which in Italy & France
he preached:Laurencius Valla. that in Rome were committed great abhominations,
&c. For which cauſe Pope Eugenius 4. did cauſe him to be
burned in Rome. Aboue a hundred yeares is it, ſithens Laurencius
Valla Patricius, a Roman oppoſed himſelfe to the Pope, and
called Rome Babylon: for which cauſe he was baniſhed: but
the king of Naples,Sauanarola. receiued, and very honorably entertained
him. Ieronymus Sauanarola a Dominican Friar, preached in Italy,
the Pope to be Antichriſt, &c. For this that our curſed Spaniſh
beaſt Alexander 6. (as in the life of this Alexander 6. we haue
ſaid) did cauſe him in Florence moſt cruelly to be burned.
Within theſe 80 yeares ſpace, haue bene infinite numbers, that
in Almaine, France, Italy, England, yea, in Spaine, and other
nations alſo haue written againſt the Pope and his Popiſh doctrine:

let their workes be read, and their reaſons agreeing
with the word of God conſidered, which is the true and onely
ſquire & rule, whereby euery life and doctrine ought to bee ruled
and confirmed. Returne we now to the Primacie, which the
Pope as another Diotrephes (of whom ſpeaketh S. Iohn in his 3.
catholike Epiſtle) loueth to hold,3. Io. 9. and ſo doth vſurpe it. A hiſtory
wrote S. Auguſtine, very wel declaring the equality which hath
the Biſhop of Rome with other Biſhops. Donatus (ſaith S. Auguſtine)
de caſas negras, of whom the Donatiſts take their name, had
grieuouſly accuſed Cecilianus Archbiſhop of Carthage.Epiſtle. 162 
               Conſtā
                  tine
the Emperour (the cauſe being ſimply eccleſiaſticall) committed
the ſame to Miltiades Biſhop of Rome, & other certaine
Biſhops of Italy, France, and Spaine. Had there bene ordinarie
iuriſdiction no commiſſion from the Emperour, nor to appoint
him aſſociates had bene needfull. But liſten a litle: Donatus was
condemned by them aboue named, who ſeeing himſelf condemned,
appealed to the Emperour: the Emperour remitted
the appeale to the Archbiſhop of Areletum, either to allow or
diſallow of the ſentence, which the Biſhop of Rome and his aſſociates,
had giuen. Where then was the Primacie of the Pope
his iuriſdiction: his ſentence without any appellation: his knowledge,
& hearing of all appeales, his fulneſſe of power, whereof
he ſo much glorieth? And the Emperor, wil they not ſay, was an
infidel, or tyrant: for it was Conſtantine the Great, who (by their
owne reckoning) ſpoiled himſelf of a good part of the Empire,
to giue it vnto them. That Conſtantine the Great appointed Miltiades
iointly with the reſt, for Iudge, to heare the cauſe of Cecilianus.
Onuphrius Panuinus in his note vpon Platina, in rhe life of
Miltiades doth witneſſe the ſame: and confirmes it with Optatus
Mileuitanus in his firſt booke, and with that which ſaith Euſebius
in the tenth booke and fift chap. of his eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie.
But Panuinus as a Flatterer of the pope maketh no mention
of the appeale we haue ſpoken of, becauſe it impeached
the authoritie,The Emperors called the general Councels which the Popes haue vſurped. As touching the
calling of the Councels, the Emperours called the General, the
Patriarks and Metropolitans called the Nationall, or prouincial
Councels: The Patriarkes and not the Biſhop of Rome did
gouerne in the Councels, which they held in their Patriarkedomes:
for all being equall, and vnder one head Chriſt, the

Biſhop of Rome did not exceede them either in dignity or
power.Epiſtola ad Liberium Epiſe opum Romanū. So ſaith Athanaſius, writing to Liberius Biſhop of
Rome. All the Apoſtles (ſaith he) in honour and power be equall.
Saint Cyprian likewiſe, more ancient then Athanaſius:
There is not (ſaith he) but one biſhopricke through the world,
wherof euery biſhop holdeth his part.De ſimplice Prelat. Alſo that none in his time
was called,In ſen
                     •
                  entiis Epiſcoprum. libro 1. epiſt. 1. or made Biſhop of Biſhops, nor had by tyranny
ſubiected his companions to obey him. Alſo he complaineth
that the prophane Siſmatikes withdrew themſelues to the Biſhop
of Rome. There was none (ſaith he) that would doe this,
but certaine loſt and deſperate men, making men beleeue,
that the Biſhops of Affrike had leſſe authoritie thē he of Rome.Hieronymus in Epiſt. ad Euagrium repetitur in Decreto Graciani.
S. Ierome to this ſelfe ſame purpoſe ſaith: Whereſoeuer a Biſhop
ſhal be, be it in Rome, or in Egubium, be it in Conſtantinople,
or in Regium, one ſelfe ſame dignity he hath, and one ſelfſame
prieſthood:Hieron. ad Nepotianum. riches nor pouertie either make him ſuperiour or
inferior. And ſo the ancient Doctors, as Ireneus, Tertullian, Hillarius,
Cyprian, &c. when they wrote to the Biſhop of Rome, they
gaue him not the glorious titles, which the flatterers of our
times now giue him: Moſt holy father, moſt bleſſed Pope, chiefe
Biſhop, our Lord, & God vpon earth: they called him brother,
fellow Biſhop, companion in office: & other ſuch like titles,
which ſauored of loue & Chriſtian ſimplicitie, & not of flattery
& pride, wherewith the miſerable Popes are puffed vp, & reſt
much contēted. And if it ſeemed to thoſe Fathers, that the Biſhop
of Rome countermāded, or in any thing faulted (ſeeing he
was a man) either in life or doctrine, they aduiſed him, & if need
ſo required reproued him. Thus not once by chance, but many
times, & that very ſharply did Cyprian handle Stephen Biſhop of
Rome. Ireneus reproued 
                  Ʋictor, for that through an impudent
ambition, he excōmunicated the Churches of Aſia, for the differēce
in celebration of Eaſter. Who ſhould now dare to do this,
albeit the Pope were another Iohn 8. 12. 13. 14. 23. or 24. or
were he another Boniface 8. another Sylueſter 2. another Gregory
7. another Alexander 6, Paule 3. & 4. or Pius the fift. By diuine
law all Biſhops are equall: and ſo as brothers, are to aduiſe
and correct one another. If any difference there bee of
Maioritie, or Minoritie, by poſitiue lawe it commeth,

as the Cannoniſts themſelues, when the truth doth inforce thē,
confeſſe, ſaying: Quod omnis maioritas & minoritas, etiam Papatus,
eſt de iure poſitiuo. That all maioritie and minoritie, yea the
verie Popedome it ſelfe, is by the poſitiue law: as much to ſay,
that men haue made it. And yet go I further. The maiority, ſay
I, which the Pope hath vſurped ouer all the Churches, being againſt
the Lambe of the Apocalyps, and againſt his Saints, is
not by diuine, nor yet humane law, I ſay it is de iure diabolico, of
the diuell: that it is, an infernall tyranny, againſt which, all the
world is to riſe vp, as againſt a fire and generall burning, which
toucheth euery particular perſon. Note here, that which in the
life of Iohn 24. we haue noted: where the Pope by a decree of
the Councell of Conſtance and Baſile is proued to be ſubiect
to the Councell: and that more ouer which there we haue ſaid.
Not bluntly and fooliſhly (as they ſay) but with good reaſon
me ſeemeth, do I ſay this: as by the ſayings of the Fathers, and
decrees of ancient Councels, we haue ſufficiently proued the
ſame. And had there bene none to haue ſaid it, yet their proper
life and doctrine, which we haue in the beginning mentioned,
are moſt euident teſtimonies to confirme our ſayings. By their
liues may each one ſee (if of wilfull ignorance he become not
blockiſh,Anno. 605. fooliſh, and blind) the Popes, which haue bin biſhops
of Rome, from Boniface the third (who was a creature of Phocas
the Emperour, an adulterer, murderer, and tyrant) vntil Clement
8. or 10. which now tyrannizeth) to haue almoſt bene al noted
(read their hiſtories) of terrible, enormious and wicked vices,
and ſinnes. Witches they haue bene, murtherers, ill beloued,
tumultuous troublers of common wealths and kingdomes, ſeditious,
reuengefull brothellers, ſimoniſts, ſodomites, periured,
inceſtuous, Nigromancers, ſacrilegious, wicked, without God,
without religion. They then being ſuch, we conclude them not
to be ſucceſſors of Peter, but of Iudas: not to be vicars of Chriſt,
but of the Diuell, and verie Antichriſt. But now for more confirmation
of that which is ſaid, we will alleage certaine paſſages
of holy Scripture, which the Papiſts themſelue vnderſtand
and interpret of Antichriſt: we will conſider if that which the
Scripture ſaith Antichriſt ſhall do and ſay, the Pope doth and
ſaith. And ſeeing that the doctrine and life of the Pope is the

very ſame, which the ſcripture doth ſay ſhalbe that of Antichriſt:
by the Papiſts owne confeſſion, will we conclude, the
Pope to be Antichriſt.
            The firſt paſſage,Dan. 11. 36. is taken out of Daniel the 11. chapter: which
ſaith: And the king ſhall doe what he liſt: By king, aſwell in
this place, as chapter 8. 23. and 24. is ment Antiochus, a great
perſecutor of the people of God; This Antiochus was a figure
of Antichriſt, which is the Pope. Antiochus burned the Bible,
aduanced his God Mauzim, forbad marriage, made Idols
of gold and ſiluer, adorned them with rich ornaments, &c. and
the ſame doth the Pope. Daniell proceedeth. He ſhall exalt, and
magnifie himſelfe againſt all that is God, and ſhall ſpeake marueylous
thinges againſt the God of Gods: and ſhall proſper
till the wrath be accompliſhed: for the determination is made;
Neither ſhall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the deſires
of women, nor care for any God: for he ſhal magnifie himſelfe
againſt all,Three markes wherewith Antichriſt ſhalbe marked. &c. Note here in Daniel. 3. notable markes which
(ſaith he) Antichriſt ſhall haue: In whomſoeuer then we ſhall
ſee them, hold we him for. Antichriſt. The 1. is that he ſhall
not acknowledge the God of his fathers: 2. is that he ſhall not
regard the loue of women,The Pope is an Apoſtata in religion. 3. nor care for any God. The cauſe
of all this (ſaith he) is the exceſſiue pride. The Pope being of the
race of Chriſtians, which haue worſhipped the true God, father
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, hath brought into the Church of God,
where he holdeth his ſeat, Idolatrie and ſuperſtition, commaunding
men, in afflictiō & calamitie, to inuocate another, & others
then God:Exod. 20. contrary to the expreſſe cōmandemēt of God. Thou
ſhalt haue no other Gods before me: and contrary to that
which he commaundeth by his Prophet:Pſal 50. 51. Call vpon me in the
day of trouble. There is no commaundement of God, either in
the old or new Teſtament, that commaundeth vs to inuocate
any other but God alone. Neither is there any example of Patriarke,
Prophet,Rom. 10. 14. or Apoſtle, which hath called vpon any, ſaue
God alone. For how ſhall they call vpon him, in whom they
haue not beleeued? as ſaith Saint Paule. In one onely God we
beleeue, vpon him onely let vs call. This new Doctrine hath the
Pope brought into the Church, to call vpon others then God
alone: Therefore is he Antichriſt. Who hath forbidden Chriſtians

to reade the law of the Lord, the bookes of the Prophets,
Apoſtles, and Euangeliſts? The Pope. Who burneth
theſe holy bookes, and thoſe that for inſtruction of their
conſcience read them? The Pope. Who hath taken vppon
him authoritie to pardon ſinnes, and that for money, it being
God alone which doth graciouſly pardon thē? The Pope. Who
hath cauſed a little peece of white bread to be worſhipped ſaying:
it is the true God, which created heauen and earth? The
Pope. Therefore is he Antichriſt, which neither honoreth nor a
doreth the God of his fathers,The Pope abhorreth matrimony by God ordained. who in the bookes, that the Pope
burneth, hath manifeſted himſelfe to his faithfull. The 2. marke
is, that he ſhall not regard the loue of women (to wit) that vnder
colour of chaſtitie, holines, & meritorious works, he ſhall
abhorre marriage. So greatly hath the Pope abhorred marriage
that a law he hath made, that no Pope, Cardinal, Patriarke,
Archbiſhop, Biſhop, Deane, Archeacon, Prieſt, nor Friar, Deacon,
nor ſubdeacō, nor any Nunne ſhal marry. And wherefore?
For pure hypocriſie; to be ſold to the ignorant people, for
holy; for Angels, which are not fleſhly, but wholly ſpirituall:
And the miſerable people, diſpiſing the meanes of marriage,
which God hath giuen them. Will rather burne then marry.
And ſo God deliuereth them vp to ſhamefull & vile affections,
and in their luſts doe they burne (as ſaith S. Paule) Fornicators
they are,Rom. 1. adulterers, Inceſtuous perſons, & that moreouer which
the Apoſtle mētioneth. Theſe be the fruits of his cōſtrained chaſtitie,
of his angelical, & not fleſhly life, of his vowe of chaſtity,
vowed of ſo many, and kept of ſo fewe. Of ſuch like, the ſame S.
Paul fore warneth his diſciple Timothie,
               1. Timothy 4. 2. ſaying: that they ſhall
ſpeake lies through hypocriſie, hauing their cōſciences ſeared;
that they ſhall forbid marriage. What nation in the world, hath
bene ſo barbarous, ſo cruel, ſo tyrannous, & Godleſſe that hath
forbidden marriage to ſo many thouſands of men and women
as are at this day of Prieſts, Fryars, and Nunnes? Onely ſuch
law maketh Antichriſt: Only the Pope maketh it, therefore is
the Pope Antichriſt: which regardeth not his owne lawful wife,
but his Ganimeds and ſtrumpets. Much paine hath the Pope of
long time taken, to cauſe this his tyrannicall lawe to bee obſerued:
Many people and nations, ſeeing it a law tyrannous,

and preiudiciall to the Common-wealth haue withſtood him:
becauſe that prieſts and Friars, not hauing proper wiues, and
being luſty men, which liue in idleneſſe, and abundance (a life
inclyning men to luxuritie) beſtow themſelues among the
wiues & daughters of their neighbours & friends.The Councell of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . S. Gregorie permit mariage. In the Councell
of Nice, was this buſines propoſed: but through the Councell
of good Paphnucius not affected. S. Gregorie forbad marriage:
but (taught afterwards by experience of 6000. heads of
young Infants, which they foūd in a pond) adnulled & reuoked
his decree: as before in his life, we haue declared. Note that
which we haue ſaid to this ſame purpoſe vpon the life of Siricius
who ſo againſt the hayre alleaged the ſaying of S. Paul. Thoſe
which be in the fleſh cannot pleaſe God. And that which we noted
vpon Nicholas 1. & in the life of Pius 2. & of Paul 2. experience at
this day ſufficiently ſheweth, how impious and tyrannous this
law is. And ſuppoſe it were good yet is it not obſerued. Much
better ſhould it be to leaue to each one the liberty which God
hath giuen them, and not to lay ſ
                  •
               ares for the conſcience. He
that can paſſe without marriage, ſhall doe very well not to
mar
                  •
               y: and chiefly the miniſter in time of perſecution which
i
                  •
                to be free to preach the word of God whereſoeuer they
ſhall call him. But the guift of chaſtitie is not giuen to all: and
if to any, yet is it not perpetuall. The ſureſt way then not to
offend God, nor defile his owne body, w
                  •
               ich is the tem
                  •
               le
of the holy Ghoſt,1. Cor 7. 2. and 
                  •
               herefore to be kept cleane is that euery
man (as Saint Paul doth aduiſe vs) haue his owne wife and euery
woman her owne husband to the great griefe of the Pope,
who is Antichriſt,The Pope an Atheiſt. and commaundeth the contrary. The third
marke is, that Antichriſt ſhall not care for any God: to wit, hee
ſhalbe an Atheiſt; a Godleſſe man, and without religion. This
in many Popes haue wee fully, and clerely ſeene which neither
liueing, nor dying, had any religion. He is not one alone,
that entred into the Popedome like a fox,Boniface 8. liued in the Popedome
like a Lyon, and dyed like a dogge: Let their liues
be read. the reaſon of all this giueth Daniel, ſaying: for hee
ſhall magnifie himſelfe aboue all Antichriſt, which is the
Pope, hath made himſelfe vniuerſal Biſhop, head of the Church
abſolute (or diſſolute) Lord, aſwell in the temporaltie, as the

ſpi
                  •
               itualty, euer all the Monarkes. kings and Princes, of the
world: that he may diſplace and place them, when he pleaſeth,
and no man ought to demaund why doeſt thou ſo? And ſo
cauſeth Emperours, kings, and great Lords to fall proſtrate
on the gorund, in token of vaſſallrie, ſlauerie, and ſubiection,
kiſſe his feete, and worſhip him: The Pope truly is proud as the
diuell, who ſaid to Chriſt. All this will I giue thee, if thou wilt
fall downe and worſhip me. And ſo ſhall haue the wages,
that had the diuell. Which thing Daniell declareth, in the 36.
verſe of the 11. chapter ſaying, that he ſhall proſper, vntill the
wrath bee accompliſhed: for the determination is made:
and in the laſt words of this chapter he ſaith. And his end
ſhall come, and none ſhall helpe him. This is the comfort of
a Chriſtian, that Antichriſt, the Pope, his enemie, and perſecutor:
ſhall ſo end, as he hath deſerued. And ſo ſhall the Church
be from hi
                  •
                tyranny.The 2. paſſage 2. Theſ. 2. 3. The 2. paſſage is, of S. Paul to the Theſſalonians,
where clerely and plainely he calleth Antichriſt,
man of ſinne, and ſonne of perdition, which oppoſeth, & li
                  •
               teth
vp himſelfe againſt all which is God,Verſe. 9. or that is worſhipped: So
that, as God, he ſitteth in the temple of Cod ſhewing himſelfe
that he is God. And a little lower: whoſe cōming is by the working
of Sathan,What thing is Antichriſt. with great power, & ſignes, & lying wonders,
& with all deceiueableneſſe of vnrighteouſneſſe (working) in
them that periſh, &c. The papiſts themſelues cōfefſe, that Saint
Paul here ſpeaketh of Antichriſt. Now let vs fee, if the Pope doe
the ſame things: and if he do them, then is he Antichriſt. By Antichriſt,
muſt we not vnderſtand one man alone, which is to be
and happen: but an eſtate, a ſeat, a ſucceſſion of men▪ & an Empire
exalted againſt Chriſt: yet with the name and title of paſtor,
and Biſhop of the Church, and with the title of the vicar of
Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe. Through hypocriſie, and fayned humilitie,
he calleth himſelfe, the ſeruant of Gods ſeruants: but
through diueliſh pride, he maketh himſelfe Lord of all. In the
time of S. Paul, began this Empire of Antichriſt, as he witneſſeth
ſaying: For all ready the miſterie of Iniquitie beginneth
to worke,Verſe 7. onely he which now ruleth, ſhall let, vntill he be taken
out of the way. This ſhalbe, when the Lord ſhall ſlay him,
with the ſpirit of his mouth (as there ſaith the Apoſtle) Now

haue we proued that of the ruyne of the Romane Empire,
the Pope, who is Antichriſt, by little and little hath erected
his kingdome. All this to one man cannot be applyed:
but to an eſtate, and condition of men. Antichriſt is a Greeke
word, as much to ſay, as contrary to Chriſt: See wee then
ſome thinges,Iohn 6. 15. wherein the Pope doth oppoſe himſelfe to
Chriſt.Contrarieties between chriſt & the Pope. The people ſought to make Chriſt a king: but Chriſt
would not: For his kingdome, he ſai
                  •
               h: is not of this world.
The Pope without demaunding,The firſt Contrarietic. or ſeeking it of the people,
hath made himſelfe vniuerſall king ouer all the kings of this
world. and ſo at his fantaſie, doth place and diſplace them.
The ſecond oppoſition.Phil. 2. 6. Chriſt, being God, humbled himſelfe,
and to ſaue vs,The 2. Contraritie. became man, reconcyling vs with the
father. The Pope being a man, maketh himſelfe God, ſaying:
that in hell he hath authoritie and power caſting into it, whom
ſoeuer he will, and alſo drawing out from thence (If he pleaſe)
as did Pope S. Gregorie (ſay they) drawe the ſoule of the Emperour
Traian,
               To this purpoſe read Damaſcen in the ſermon of the dead. who was an Infidel, & perſecutor of the Church.
Authoritie hee hath in purgatorie, drawing ſoules from thence
(as ſay they) hee doth dayly. Hee hath authoritie in earth
binding and looſing whomſoeuer hee will: He hath authoritie
alſo in heauen, placing therein whom hee will, commaunding
the Angels to carrie the Soule of whomſoeuer he
ſhall pleaſe without paſſing the paynes of purgatorie (as by
the bull which Pope Clement the ſ
                  •
               xt graunted to ſuch as comming
to Rome to obteyne the Iubile, ſhould die by the way)
doth appeare. All this ſaith the Pope that hee can doe. And
ſo alſo ſaith his Paraſites: Yet all is but lies, to condemne,
and carry vs with him,The 3 Contrarictie. to the houſe of his Father the diuell.
The third oppoſition. Chriſt doth commaund vs to ſearch
the ſcripture:Iohn 5. 39. and giueth a reaſon, for by them ſhall we know
him. The Pope vnder moſt greiuous payne, commaundeth
vs not to reade them, nor looke vppon them: leaſt that wee
knowing Chriſt by reading of the Scriptures, may alſo know
him to bee Antichriſt. And to buſie vs with ſome thing,
hee commaund
                  •
                vs to reade lying Legends, he commaunds
vs to pray the Roſarie, which Alanus with ſo great falſehood
and impietie, as we haue ſaid in the life of Siſtus 4. renewed. So

many Paternoſters, and ſo many Aue Maries, before a c
                  ••••
               
               fixe,
before the Image of the virgin Mary, or of this or that other
he, or ſhe Saints, he commaunds vs to pray. To a certaine
great Lady, called Iſabell graunted Pope Leo pardon of all her
ſinnes, if kneeling in her owne lodging, before the Image
of any he or ſhe Saint, ſhe ſhould ſay fiue Paternoſters, and fiue
Aue Maries. Behold what agreement is there betweene the
Aue Marta and the Crucifixe: or the Paternoſter, and the virgin
Mary?
               The 4. Contrarietie. What maner of prayer is this, when he that prayeth, neither
knoweth, nor vnderſtandeth what he prayeth? Oh blindneſſe!
Oh ignorance.Matth. 11. 28. The fourth oppoſi
                  •
               ion. Chriſt calleth vnto
him all thoſe that trauell, and be afflicted in conſcience,
that he may refreſh them. The Pope commands vs to goe to
the virgin Marie, and to hee and ſhe Saints. What other thing
is this,Ieremy 2, 1
                     •
                  . but to leaue the fountaine of liuing water (as ſaith Ieremias)
and to dig pooles, that can hold no water? Between Chriſt,
and the Pope are there many other oppoſicions yet will we ſet
downe but the laſt of all: that Chriſt with great triumph is aſcended
into heauen,The 5. Contrariette. and there ſitteth at the right hand of his
father: And ſhamefully the Pope deſcendeth into hell, and to
the depth of hell falleth in the company of Iudas, whoſe ſucceſſor
hee is, and there by his owne Father the diuell ſhalbe
euerlaſtingly tormented. Yee ſee here, that the Pope is an
aduerſarie, and oppoſeth, and lifteth vp himſelfe againſt all
that is God, or that is worſhipped, and ſitteth in the Temple
of God, ſhewing himſelfe to bee God. By that which
the Apoſtle ſaith, that Antichriſt ſitteth in the Temple of God,
hee giueth to vnderſtand, that Antichriſt ſhall neither bee
Turke, Moore, Iewe, nor Pagan, but a Chriſtian, and that
profeſſeth Chriſtian religion. The Pope ſitteth in Rome, a
City very ancient in Chriſtian Religion, where were ſo many
good Biſhops, for almoſt the ſpace of 300 yeares: which
ſealed with their bloud the Doctrine, which preached, and
nowe alſo in Rome, notwithſtanding the tyranny of Antichriſt,
hath God his Church, as hee had in Sodome, where
was Lot and his familie. That which Saint Paule ſaith, that
the comming of Antichriſt ſhalbe with great power, ſignes,
and lying woonders: is to be noted: and all this ſhall hee

doe, by the working of Sathan. Here alſo it appeareth, that
the diuell worketh his miracles.The diuell alſo worketh miracles. Which confirmeth the
Spaniſh prouerbe. Seaſe milagro, y hagalo eldiablo. Be it a
Miracle, and the diuell doth it: but all, to dec
                  •
               iue. The mightie
power of the Pope who is ignorant of?Matth. 28. 18. That which Chriſt
of himſelfe ſaith, dareth the Pope to ſay of himſelfe. Data
est mihi omnis poteſtas, all power is giuen vnto mee. O blaſphemy
intollerable! As touching his ſignes, and lying wonders,
the world is full: The very papiſts themſelues, that
haue any vnderſtanding, are aſhamed of them. But the ſimple,
the Idiots, the vulgar ſort beleeue, and holde them for
true miracles, and for them rather will die, then for the
Doctrine of the Prophetes, or Apoſtles, or Chriſt Ieſus
himſelfe, whereof they are wholly ignorant! Oh ignorant
blindneſſe,Lying wonpers and blinde ignorance. How many Images haue
ſpoken? How many haue ſweate, and that droppes of bloud?
The ignorant people beleeueth that the beard, haires and
nayles of the crucifixe of Burgos, doe grow. How many miracles,
ſay they, doe the Images of our Lady of Guadalupe,
and that of Monſarrate? How many Capti
                  •
               es deliuer they?
How many dead doe they rayſe againe? How many blind
giue they ſight vnto? &c. Either this which they ſay, is vntruth,
and not therefore to bee beleeued: or elſe verily doe
they theſe miracles (if they doe them) by the operation of Sathan;
that the vnbeleeuers, 
                  •
               hich wil not beleeue the truth may
beleeue lies:2. Theſ. 2. 11. as in this ſelfe ſame chapter Saint Paule doth aduiſe
vs, not to beleeue ſuch miracles, as are 
                  •
               or founded vpon
the word of God. In the Treatiſe of the Maſſe more ſhal be
ſaid concerning miracles. Not to make an Image▪ nor any
likeneſſe, &c. Not to worſhip or do them reuerence doth God
commaund vs. To make Images, to worſhip and doe reuerence
vnto them doth the Pope commaund vs,Purgatorie. that purgatory
ſhould be better beleeued. O how many m
                  •
               r
                  •
               cles, howe many
dreames, viſions, & apparitions haue there bene? only one I
will recite▪ which is read in the Enchiridion of times, compoſed
by Friar Alonſo Ʋenero. Thus then ſaith hee fol. 118. In the
yeare of our Lord 1164. a certaine holy Hermit before deceaſed,
appeared in viſiō to the biſhop of Ligoniū, & ſaid vnto him;

there dyed in all parts with him 30000.Of 30000. men one only went to heauen 3 to Purgatory, and all the reſt to hell. men, and onely Saint
Barnard without any payne, flew to heauen, 3. deſcended into
purgatorie, and all the reſt into hell, perpetually to be
damned. Thus far 
                  Ʋenero. He that reporteth this, was no Ideot,
but a preacher; and of the order of preachers. Who will
not beleeue an holy hermite, come from another world?
a Biſhop, and a preacher alſo? O happie Biſhop which knew
what paſſed in Heauen, Purgatorie, and hell. Bleſſed be our
God, which hath opened our eyes, and made vs to vnderſtand,
ſuch apparitions, to be illuſions of the diuell. For confirmation
of this our Doctrine,Luke 16. 27. Reade the Parable, which
our Sauiour propoundeth, of the rich worldling, who prayed
Abraham, to ſend Lazarus before deceaſed to the houſe
of his father, that he might declare to his fiue brethren, that
which he paſſed. But Abraham anſwered: they haue Moſes
and the Prophets, let them heare them: whom if they
will not heare; neither will they bee perſwaded though a man
ſhould riſe from the dead. Luke 16. So that euery Chriſtian,
which readeth, ſearcheth, and meditateth the holy ſcripture,
doth know, that all this which they ſay concerning Purgatorie,
is lies: albeit the Pope will haue it an Article of faith. Were
it an article of faith, it ſhould be founded vpon the ſcripture:
On the ſcripture it is not founded: therefore it is no Article
of faith. Alſo, were it an Artticle of faith, it ſhould be
one of the twelue of the Apoſtles creede: but it is not, therefore
it is not an Article of faith. But it is (as ſaith Doctour
Conſtantine) the head of the wolfe. It ſerueth to mainetayne
idle bellies. Conclude wee this then of the falſe myracles of
Antichriſt, with that which the Lord ſaith. Falſe Chriſtes,
and falſe Prophetes ſhall ariſe,Matth. 24. 24. and ſhall worke ſignes great
and wonderfull, ſo that, if it were poſſible, the verie elect
ſhould be deceiued. Well hath our Redemer forewarned
vs, well hath his Apoſtle Saint Paule foretold vs. See we now
to our ſelues: for of ignorance now ſhall we not ſinne, we are
forewarned. And as Daniel for our conſolation foretold vs of
the miſerable end of Antichriſt: ſo alſo ſaith Saint Paule, and
that more plainely then Daniel, that the Lord will deſtroy
him with the ſpirit of his mouth, and conſume him with the

brightneſſe of his comming: which we ſee dayly more and
more accompliſhed. How many kingdomes and prouinces do
now know the Pope to be Antichriſt? And how came they by
this knowledge? not forced, but by reading and hearing the
word of God.Verie ſubtill was the Pope in forbidding the reading of the holy Scripture. Very wiſe was the Pope in forbidding the Bible,
in forbidding the reading of the holy Scripture: well did
he vnderſtand, that all his euill, his whole ruine and deſtruction
ſhould there thence proceede. But I commaund it. The Lord
(ſaith Saint Paule) will deſtroy him with the Spirit of his
mouth, with his word, with the holy Scripture, with the doctrine
of the olde and new Teſtament, with the Bible, which
he ſo much abhorreth. Many nations haue forſaken him, onely
Spaine and Italy giue him life. But albeit they ſo do, yet is his
ſickneſſe vncurable, and doubtleſſe ſhall he die thereof.
            The third and laſt paſſage, wherewith we confirme the
Pope to be Antichriſt,The 3. pas
                     •
                  age of the holy, Scripture. is taken out of the ſeuenteenth chapter
of the Reuelation of Saint Iohn. Reade the whole chapter.
Here will we note the principall points. Saint Iohn ſaith, hee
ſaw a woman ſit vppon a beaſt: the woman and the beaſt
with their quallities and attire he depainteth. The woman
(ſaith hee) was the great whore, which ſitteth vpon manie
waters, with whom the kings of the earth haue committed
fornication: He ſaith, that ſhe was ſet vppon a beaſt: That
this woman was clothed with purple and Scarlet, and guilded
with golde, and adorned with precious ſtones, &c. Who had
in her forehead a name wri
                  •
               ten, A Myſterie. Great Babylon,
mother of fornications, and abhominations of the
earth: that this woman was drunken with the bloud of the
Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Ieſus. And
concluding the chapter, he ſaith: that this woman is the great
citie, wh
                  •
               ch reigneth ouer all the kings of the earth. Concerning
the beaſt (ſaith he) which was of the colour of Scarlet,
full of the names of blaſphemie, which had ſeuen heades and
ten hornes. Saint Iohn ſaith, that when he ſaw this woman ride
vpon the beaſt, he greatly wondered. The Angell declareth
vnto him the ſecret of the woman and of the beaſt. The beaſt
(ſaith the Angell) which thou haſt ſeene, was, and is not, &c.
He ſaith vnto him that the ſeuen heades be ſeuen mountaines,

whereupon the woman ſitteth. He ſaith: that the ten hornes be
ten kinges,The vi
                     •
                  tory of the Lambe. ſubiect to the beaſt: That theſe kings ſhall fight
againſt the Lambe: but the Lambe ſhall oue
                  •
               come them.
That the waters whereupon the Whoore ſitteth,The waters be kindreds, &c. bee peoples,
and kindreds, and nations, and tongues. Hee ſaieth,
that the ten hornes of the beaſt ſhall hate the whore,The 10 kings hauing altered their minds ſhall perſecute the whore. ſhall
make her deſolate, and deſtroy her. Who ſeeth not Antichriſt,
the Pope of Rome, here figured and liuely painted
out? to whom can all theſe things be applied, but to him alone,
The whore is the Pope:The whore is the Pope. the beaſt is the Romane Empire,
whereupon the Pope ſitteth, a
                  •
               d wherewith hee hath lifted
vp himſelfe.The Beaſt is the Romane Empire. It is a common p
                  •
               raſe of ſpeech in the Scr
                  •
               pture,
to call Idolatrie and ſuperſtition, fornication: and t
                  •
               e
Idolaters it calleth ſtrumpets and whoores. Reade the ſ
                  •
               
               cond
chapter of Ieremie and 3. verſe. Ezech. 16. chap. Of 
                  〈◊〉
               
chap. 1. 2. and 3. The Pope then is called Whore and gre
                  •
               t
whore, for his idolatrie and ſuperſtition which he committeth,
and teacheth to ſo many people and nations. Note that which
we haue ſaid in the paſſage, cited out of the 11. chapter of
Daniel.
            
            How much more yet, by the great prouidence of God,
hath this thing fully, and plainely happened; ſeing a Pope hath
bin, which was a woman and a greate whoore. Reade the life
which we haue recited of Iohn 8. where he ſaith: that the woman
was clothed with purple and ſcarlet, and gold &c. Euen
ſo, is the Pope in his pontificall habite, and chiefly the day
of his coronation fully clothed. Platina, ſpeaking of Pope
Clement the fifth (as in his l
                  •
               fe we haue decla
                  •
               ed) ſaith: that at
his coronation, fell a wall, which killed many, and that the
Pope falling from his horſe, loſt a Carbuncle which fell from
his Miter, or as they call it Reyno, that was worth ſ
                  •
               xe thouſand
Florences. D. Illeſcas, chap. 24. ſpeaking of the coroantion
of Leo the tenth▪ ſaith theſe words: The day of this coronation
in Rome was ſo ſolemne and ioyfull, that any hardly remembred
to haue ſeene the like thing. For beſides the other
feaſtes made, which ſhould be tedious to recount, they affirme
aboue an hundred thouſand duckets to haue bene caſt among
the people, &c. How could this Pope ſay that which ſaid Saint

Peter, Siluer and gold haue I none? This woman he calleth Babylon,
as much to ſay as confuſion. He calleth her the mother
of whoredomes and abominations. The ſame alſo is Rome
fully and plainely. What citie is there nowe in the worlde,
wherein are ſo great confuſions of vices, and ſo many thouſands
of common whoores, which they call Curtiſans, of
whom the Pope hath ſo great a rent, that hee may make
thereof a great inheritance? Yet this is nothing, compared
with other infinite abominations, which in Rome are committed.
What place in Chriſtendome is the wicked ſinne
more ſuffered without puniſhment, then in Rome? This woman,
ſaith Saint Iohn was druken with the bloud of the Martyrs
of Ieſus. How many, and how many hath the Pope cauſed
to be burned, and to die by the ſword, for ſaying and beleeuing
Ieſus Chriſt to be our only and chiefe Biſhop, Interceſſor
and Mediator, as the Apoſtle calleth him? For beleeuing that
the body which he once offered vpon the tree of the croſſe, is
the onely and alone ſacrifice, wherewith the wrath of the Father
is appeaſed? For beleeuing that by faith onely, without any
reſpect of our owne workes, we are iuſtified? In our times
of theſe threeſcore or foureſcore yeares, how much innocent
bloud hath this rauening wolfe, for this cauſe ſhed and ſpilled
in Almaine, France, England, and in Italy alſo, and within fortie
or fiftie yeares, in our countrey of Spaine? The fires and
perſecutions of Seuill, Valladolid and other partes of Spaine,
do witneſſe. What ſatisfaction ſhall this ſo cruell beaſt make
for one Doctour Conſtantine, the onely pearle of our countrey
of Spaine? For one Doctour 
                  Ʋargas? For Doctour Egidius?
For Don Iohn Ponce of Lyons, ſonne to the Countie
of Baylen, ſo neare kinſman to the Duke of Arcos? For
one Chriſtopher de Arellano, a man, by the confeſſion of the
Inquiſitors themſelues, moſt learned? For one Ieronymo Caro?
For one Licenciate Iohn Gonçales? For the Licenciate Loſada?
All theſe were men of ſingular life, which the Papiſtes
themſelues that knewe them, cannot denie: and godly they
were in doctrine. All theſe in Seuill, and many others, men
and women, were either condemned aliue, or elſe vntombed
being dead, by the fire conſumed. At one time,

were all theſe, and ſo all at one time almoſt burned in Seuill.
O Seuill, Seuill, that killeſt and burneſt the prophetes which
God ſendeth vnto thee. Name me ſome eight of thy ſeruants
of the Pope, at this day liuing in thee, which aſwell in
life as doctrine, may compare with or paragon thoſe eight
which I haue named, as thou then burnedſt. As the bloud of
Abell cried out to God:Gen. 4. 10. ſo now the bloud of theſe Martyrs do
likewiſe crie vnto God. Vnder the aſhes of theſe bleſſed men
hath God hidden many ſmall ſparkles, which when he ſhall
pleaſe, he will blowe away, and ſo kindle them, that a farre
greater fire ſhall they make, then that which is paſſed: and ſo
ſhall increaſe the number of the faithfull:Tertullian. For the bloud of the
martyrs is the ſeed of the Goſpell. Saint Iohn concludeth his
chapter,The woman is he great citie. ſaying: That this woman is the great Citie, which
reigneth ouer all the kings of the earth. Is not this a mainifeſt
deſcription of the Court of Rome? what other citie, but Rome,
reigned ouer all the kings of the earth? From all parts of the
world they went to Rome: The riches of the world they
caried to Rome: the Pope onely was king of kinges, and
Lord of Lordes. And woe to him that ſhould diſpleaſe him. Of
the beaſt, ſaith S. Iohn, that he had 7 heads, and 10 horns: which
S. Iohn himſelf declareth, ſaying: that the ſeuen heads which the
beaſt hath, are 7 mountaines. The holy Spirit▪ which ſpake this
by the mouth of Saint Iohn, nothing wanted but the naming of
Rome. The ancient Poets, as Virgil & Horace, which liued in the
time of Auguſtus Caeſar the Emperour,7. Mountanes. in whoſe time alſo S.
Iohn liued, called Rome Septicollis, of 7 hils or mountaines. The
Grecians call it Eptalophos, which is the ſame with Septicollis:
               
                  •
               o ſeuer it from all the cities of the world, this Epitheton they
giue it:
            Calepin. Septicollis, vrbis Romae Epitheton, à ſeptem collium numero
impoſitū. Tertullian in the 35. chap. of his Apologie, ſaith:
Ipſos Quirites, ipſam vernaculā ſeptem collium plebem couenio, &c.
            
               
                  Horace in the end of his Epodon.
               Dijs quibus ſeptem placuere colles.
               
                  Dicere carmen. He ſpeaketh of Rome.
            
            
               And Virgil Aeneid. 6.
Septemque vna ſibi muro circundedit arces,
               
               And Propertius:
Septem vrbis alta ingis, toto quae praeſidet orbi.
As much to ſay, as the loftie citie with ſeuen hils, which is Lady
of all the world.
            
               The names of theſe ſeuen mountaines are: Capitolino, Palatino,
Quirinal, Auentino, Celio, Viminal, and Exquilino.
            By theſe words of Saint Iohn we cleerely ſee, that Antichriſt
hath his ſeat at Rome: and no other there is that hath his ſeat at
Rome,Ten Hornes. but the Pope. Therefore the Pope is Antichriſt. The ten
hornes, ſaith Saint Iohn, be tenne kings, ſubiect to Antichriſt,
who ſtoutly fight in defēce of their Monarch Antichriſt: & they
ſhall fight, ſaith he againſt the Lambe. What more ſorceleſſe
thing is there,Apoc. 13. 18. without weapons and ſubtiltie then a Lambe?
Notwithſtanding the weake, ſimple and diſarmed Lambe ouercommeth
theſe ten kings, which with Lyonlike & Wolfelike
force, ruſh vpon him, and not preuaile. And when by force
they cannot, as old Foxes, by craft will, they ſeeke to catch and
kill him. But come as they will, the Lambe ouercomes them
all. Who is this Lambe? The ſame is he of whom Saint Iohn ſaith
that he is ſlaine from the beginning of the world▪ How? The
ſlaine Lambe, doth he ouercome? Yea verily. This is the power
of God.Iohn 1. 29. That Lambe he is, of whom witneſſeth the other
Saint Iohn, ſaying: Behold the Lambe of God, which taketh away
the ſinnes of the world. Ieſus Chriſt is this Lambe, who killeth
Antichriſt with the ſpirit of his mouth: as in handling the ſecond
paſſage which we alleaged of the Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians,2. Theſ. 2.
we haue before declared. Saint Iohn ſaith further, That theſe
ten hornes are ten kings (who perceiuing the inuincible power
of the impotent Lambe) ſhall forſake Antichriſt, diſgrace him,
make warre againſt him, and deſtroy him. Before 80 yeares
paſt, what king in Chriſtendome durſt whiſper againſt the
Pope? All were his vaſſals, all were his ſouldiers, and all hee
commanded. But ſeeing the mortall wounds which the Lamb
with his only word▪ hath giuen the Pope. How many haue forſaken
him within theſe foureſcore yeares? In Almaine, England,
Scotland, Denmarke, and Swethland, we haue manifeſt
examples: France alſo and Polonia are falling away from the
Pope. Who ſo ſhall liue ſhall one day heare the ſame of Spaine.

God hath begunne his worke; he will not leaue it imperfect,
nor yet end in the middeſt. Behold, how Daniel, Paule, and
Iohn concurre and agree together. All they three with one
Spirite which cauſed them to ſpeake declare that 
                  •
               his ſo
                  •
               e 
                  •
               f
perdition, and man of Sinne, ſhalbe very abhominable in his
life, and much more abhominable in his doctrin. Very rich,
verye mightie, clothed with ſilke, and clothe of Gold and
precious ſtones; a great warrior, and perſecutor of the Lambe,
and his followers. Saint Paule noting the place of his abode,
ſaith: that he ſhall ſit in the temple of God. Saint Iohn goeth
further: he ſhall ſitt, ſaith he, in the cittie that hath. 7 mountaines;
which is Rome.Ierome in prçfat. lib. de ſpiritu ſancto, & in vita Marci. And ſo vnder ſtoode Saint Ierome, when
he ſaid: This Babilon, and this whore, which in the Apoc: is
painted out to vs, no other thing then Rome can ſignifie vnto
vs: In the life of Mar
                  •
               k he repeateth the ſame: Verie blinde is
he which ſeeth not through a boulter. That this can agree with
none but only the Pope, who ſeeth not? Therefore is he Antichriſt.
Concerning his ende, the holy Spirite by Daniel, Paule,
and Iohn, before alleaged, ſa
                  •
               th: (as we haue ſaid) that it
ſhall be miſerable; wherewith he helpeth▪ comforteth, and
animateth the poore faithfull which with his tyrannie are
afflicted and oppreſſed. Come Lord Ieſus. Bleſſed are thoſe
that reade, and thoſe that hea
                  •
               e the wordes of the propheſies
of this booke, and keepe the thinges which are written
in them,Apoc. 
                     •
                  . 3. as ſaith the ſame Saint Iohn in the beginning of his
Re
                  •
               elation.
            By that which we haue ſaid touching the life and doctrine
of the Popes, and by that which the Doctours▪ and ancient
Councels haue ſaid, and the holy Scripture alſo it ſelfe: which
we haue before alleaged: each faithfull. true, and Catholike
Chriſtian, which hath any iu
                  •
               gement or litle ſpark of faith ſhal
clearely vnderſtand the Pope, not to bee vniuerſall Biſhop,
not to be Peters ſucceſſor, nor the vicar of Ieſus Chriſt, but contrariwiſe,
to be the ſucceſſour of Iudas, to be the Vicar of Sathan,
to be the man of ſinne, and ſonne of perdition, which as
God, ſitteth in the Temple of God▪ to be the whore of Babylon,
which hath her ſeat in the great Citie, that hath 7 mountaines,
which is Rome: to be the Antichriſt, which in all and by all oppoſeth

himſelfe to Chriſt: and knowing him for ſuch a one ſhall
abhorre and deteſt him. And ſhall know alſo, how to anſwer
the reaſons, or to ſpeake better, reaſonleſſe reaſons, which the
Popes Paraſites (for their owne temporall commodities, to be
made Biſhops, or enioy other eccleſiaſticall dignities, &c.
and oftentimes againſt their owne conſcience, contrarie to
that which they thinke, to entertaine the Pope, and maintaine
his primacie) do alleage▪ To anſwere to all their obiections,
and paſſages, which this way and that way they alleage,
ſhould be neuer to make an end. Onely will we anſwer to the
principalles, whereupon the reſt are founded, which being caſt
downe, all the building thereupon builded, of neceſſitie
muſt needes fall to the ground. Theſe in number be two: Thou
art Peter, Matth. 16. and, Feede my ſheepe. Ioh. 21. and in Pro
                  
                     ••
                  mio
Sexti in Gloſſ. it is ſaid: that the Pope by theſe words obtained
the Primacie:In prooemio Sexti in Glo. Matth. 16. 18. 
               Tu es Petrus, thou art Peter: or by theſe,
Paſce oues meas: Feed my ſheepe. Ieſus Chriſt (ſay they) ſayd to
Peter, Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke will I build my
Church, &c. To thee will I giue the keyes of the kingdome of
heauen; whatſoeuer thou bindeſt in earth, ſhall be bound in
heauen:Iohn 10. 4. and whatſouer thou looſeſt in earth ſhall bee looſed
in heauen: The ſheepe (ſaith Chriſt) know the voyce of their
ſhepheard. All this then which Ieſus Chriſt ſaid vnto S. Peter,
we know to be very true, becauſe it was pronounced by our
paſtor,An anſwere to the 2 places wherewith the Pope confirmeth his primacie. maſter, and redeemer Chriſt Ieſus, who is truth it ſelf. But
we ſay, that by no way, neither in part, nor by art hath it any agreement
with the Pope: neither in part nor art it can be applyed
to the Pope who is Antichriſt, nor yet pertaines it vnto him:
when the Pope ſhall haue made the ſame confeſſion that did S.
Peter, Thou art the Chriſt, &c. & ſhal ſo beleeue: when the Pope
ſhall liue as S. Peter liued: when the Pope ſhall teach & preach
the doctrine which S. Peter taught and preached: then ſhall it
agree with him. But the Pope is an Atheiſt, he holdeth for a fable
the hiſtorie of the Goſpell: abominably liueth, teacheth doctrins
of diuels (as befoe we haue proued) wherupō it followeth
that this which Chriſt ſaith to S. Peter, he ſaid not to the Pope,
nor in any wiſe doth it belōg to him. But the better to vnderſtād
it, examine we this place. Chriſt demāded of his diſciples, whom

do men ſay that the ſonne of man is? They anſwered vnto him:
Some ſay, Thou art Iohn Baptiſt, others, Elias, &c. And againe
Chriſt asked them, But whom ſay ye that I am? Peter anſwered:
Thou art the Chriſt, &c. Then Chriſt approuing the confeſſion
of Peter, which proceeded of the Spirit, and not of the
fleſh, ſaid vnto him: Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke (to wit,
vpon this confeſſion which thou haſt made, ſaying that I am the
ſonne of God) will I build my Church. So that not ſo much the
perſon, as the confeſſion of Peter is here to be conſidered. And
ſo ſaith Chriſt theſe words, not to Peter only, but alſo to whomſoeuer
ſhall make the ſame confeſſion, and with the ſame faith
that Peter did. For the rocke which Peter confeſſed, which is
the fundamentall ſtone of the corner, whereupon the Church
is builded, that rocke is Chriſt. Vpon Peter is it not ſounded: but
Peter (as ſaith Saint Auguſtine) is founded vpon the rocke. For
other foundation (ſaith Saint▪
               1. Cor. 
                     •
                  . 11. 
               Paule) then that which is laid, which
is Chriſt Ieſus, can no man lay. H
                  •
               e onely and no other, is the
foundation and head of his Church: the Virgin Mary, Peter,
Iohn, and the other Apoſtles, and faithfull Chriſtians, be liuelie
ſtones, builded vpon this foundation: thy are members of the
Church, whoſe head is Chriſt. The Pope ought to be contented
to be a ſtone of this building: to be a member of this body.
But as he is no member,Ioh. 20. 21. much leſſe is he the head. To thee (ſaith
Chriſt) will I giue the keyes, &c. All whatſoeuer thou bindeſt, &c.
Not only to Peter, but alſo to all and each one of the Apoſtles,
to all and whomſoeuer of the Apoſtles ſucceſſours▪ that ſhall
teach the word of God, did Chriſt make this promiſe. And that
this is the true meaning of this place, appeareth clearely, by that
which the ſame Ieſus Chriſt, Matth. 18. 18. ſaith, Whatſoeuer ye
bind in earth, ſhall be bound in heauen: and whatſoeuer ye looſe i
                     •
                  
earth, ſhall be looſed in heauen. Seeſt thou not, that the ſame
which Chriſt before had ſaid to Peter. the ſame, & by the ſame
words ſaith he afterwards to all the Apoſtles. The ſame ſaith he
by Saint Iohn, when he ſpake to all his Apoſtles, and ſent them
to go and preach the Goſpell: As the Father (ſaith Chriſt) ſent
me, ſo alſo ſend I you. And when he had thus ſpoken, he breathed
vpon them, and ſayd vnto them, Receiue ye the holy Ghoſt
thoſe whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer ye remit, they are remitted vnto them: and

whoſeſoeuers ſinnes ye retaine, they are retained. To all equally
doth Chriſt ſhewe mercy, to all equally graunteth Chriſt the
priueledge, and giueth authoritie. To thinke that Chriſt
reſerued matters for the ſea Apoſtolique of Peter, which
neither Iohn nor Iames, nor Paule, nor any of the other Apoſtles
were able to diſpatch, is meere mockerie, and Impietie
alſo. In authoritie and dignitie, were all the Apoſtles
equall. And long continewed this order in the Church among
the miniſters of the Goſpell, vntill couetouſneſſe and ambition
crept in, and confounded this good order, making one
greater, and another leſſe, becauſe one was more rich then
another, we (ſpeaking of the Primacy) confirme this, with
the ſayings of the ancient Doctours. If Chriſt by theſe words,
Thou art Peter, &c. had appointed Saint Peter vniuerſall Biſhop,
and head of the whole Church (as they ſay) to what purpoſe
did then the Apoſtles ſo often reaſon among themſelues
vpon this queſtiō of the Primacie, who ſhould be chiefe amōg
them. Saint Matthew from the 1 verſe to the 5. of the 18 chapter,
maketh mention hereof: S. Marke cap▪
                9 from the 33. verſe
vnto the 37. S. Luke, from the 46. verſe vnto the 48. of the 9.
chapter doth mention it S. Matth. 20. 20. ſaith. That the mother
of the ſonnes of Zebedeus, and (as ſaith Saint Marke) the ſonnes
themſelues. 10. 15. beſought Chriſt that one might ſit at his
right hand, and the other at his left, for which cauſe (as ſay
both the Euangeliſts) the tenne Apoſtles diſdained at the 2.
brethren. Saint Luke cap 22. 24. telleth: that there was a contention
among the Apoſtles, which of them ſhould be greateſt.
What anſwereth Chriſt Ieſus to the demaund which the
Apoſtles made Matth. 18. 1. who ſhalbe the greateſt? &c. He ſet
in the middeſt of them a little child, and ſaid vnto them. Whoſoeuer
ſhal humble himſelfe as this little child, he ſhalbe the greateſt,
&c. S. Marke 9 35. ſaith, he that willbe the firſt, he ſhalbe
the laſt, & ſeruant of al. S. Luke 9. 48. he that is leaſt among you
ſhalbe great. Chriſt reproueth the ſonnes of Zebedeus, for their
ambitious demand: He ſaid vnto them, ye know what yee aske
&c. the tenne were angry with them for this ſuperioritie which
they pretended, Chriſt ſaid vnto them, that in a Politicall kingdome
there it ſuperioritie: and ſo kings and princes holde authoritie

ouer all: But that in his kingdome, which is ſpirituall;
wherein there neither is, nor ought to bee ſuperioritie,
it is not ſo. But it ſhall not bee ſo (ſaieth Chriſt) among
you, &c.
            Would our aduerſaries well examine this, they would be aſhamed
of their primacy, and principalitie that they ſeeke to
g
                  •
               ue to their Pope: which neither Saint Peter, nor any other
of the Apoſtles euer had. For had Chriſt giuen the
primacie to Saint Peter, when hee heard them contend, which
of them ſhould bee the greateſt, doubtleſſe hee would haue
ſaid vnto them: Wherefore ſtriue you? know yee not that I
haue giuen the Primacy to Peter? Doe yee not knowe that I
haue made Peter the chiefeſt of you all? Quiet then your
ſelues, and for ſuch a one doe yee holde him? The ſame alſo
would Saint Peter haue ſaid, I am hee, whom Chriſt hath
appointed to bee the head of the whole Church, &c. But
neither did Chriſt ſo ſay, but rather for their ambition, and
affectation of the primacie reproued them. Nor yet did Saint
Peter alleage, that Ieſus Chriſt had ſaid vnto him: Thou art
Peter, and vpon this rocke, &c.
            
            The ſecond place fundamental which our aduerſaries doe alleage,
to mainetaine the primacy of the Pope is, that Chriſt
ſaide to Peter,
               Feede my ſheepe. 
               Loueſt thou mee? &c. Peter anſwered, Yea,
Lord, &c. Then ſaid Chriſt vnto him. Feede my ſheepe. Here
doe they inferre,Iohn 21. 16. that ſeeing that Chriſt ſaid this to Saint Peter,
and ſayd it not to any other of the Apoſtles, that by the
ſame reaſon, hee made him Prince of the Apoſtles. The moſt
high wiſedome, and loue of Chriſt, in Peters confirmation
and comfort, they nothing conſider. There times had Peter
denyed Chriſt. And Chriſt three times demaunded if hee loued
him? Twiſe anſwered Peter, Yea Lord: but the third
time he waxed ſorrowfull: and to comfort him, Chriſt ſaide
vnto him, Feede my ſheepe. As if he ſhould haue ſayd: Thou
haſt thriſe denyed mee Peter: but haſt repented, and with
moſt bitter weeping craued pardon for the ſame: Thy ſinnes
I pardon, and reſtore thee to the ſame ſtate thou waſt formerly
in: Feede then my ſheepe. And to cheere him the more,
he ſaid 
                  •
               nto him; that he ſhould be conſtant, & ſhould not denie

him. And gaue him to vnderſtand (as there ſaith the Euangeliſt)
with what death he ſhould glorifie God. The ſame
charge and office of feeding, gaue Ieſus Chriſt to all the Apoſtles,
Mark. chap. 16. verſ. 15. when he commanded them to
goe through the world, and preach the Goſpell to euery
creatu
                  •
               e: and when he ſaid vnto them▪ Receaue yee the holy
Ghoſt.Marke 16. 15. Whoſoeuers ſinnes ye remit, &c. So that in this, carried
not Saint Peter any preheminence ouer the reſt of the Apoſtles.
In dignitie and authoritie all are equall,Iohn 20. 22. and principall
members of the myſticall body of Chriſt, which is his
Church: which body (ſeeing it is no monſter) hath but one
only head, which is Chriſt. And yet ſay I further: ſuppoſe that
Saint Peter had bene Prince of the Apoſtles, and of much
greater authoritie then they all: yet not withſtanding, the Pope
not being Peters ſucceſſour, nor the Vicar of Chriſt (as already
we haue proued (ſhall not be prince of Biſhops, nor vniuerſall
Biſhop ouer all Churches. He ſhould content himſelfe
to be Biſhop of Rome, nor is he yet ſo, but Antichriſt.
Theſe two be the principall & fundamentall places wherewith
the Romiſts endeuour to maintaine their primacy. And
ſeing they proue not theſe thinges, much leſſe will they prooue
the reſt by them alleaged: to which may be anſwered, that
which I haue before ſaid. One thing wil I demaund of them,
and this it is. If it be neceſſary for a man to beleeue the Pope
to bee the ſucceſſour of Saint Peter, Vicar of Chriſt, and vniuerſall
head of all the Church (as Boniface the eight ordeyned)
what ſhall become of the Greeke Church which neuer
ſo beleeued? what ſhal become of all thoſe that liued in the
time of Pope Ione? what ſhall become of all them that liued
in the time of Anaſtaſius 2. Liberius, and Felix 2. theſe three
Popes were Arians, Iohn the 24. an heretique. For the which
and other great abhominations proued againſt him in the
Councell of Conſtance he was depoſed? What ſhall become
of them, which liued in the time of this Pope, and other
heretiques, and of the Popes, that by Armes, or bribes,
or both armes and bribes ioyntly obteyned the Popedome?
Such according to the decrees of the Popes themſelues, be
not Popes. And yet notwithſtanding is this almoſte

alwayes, & of long time before hath bene the common way to
obteine the Popedome. How often hereof, complained Platina,
and the other writers of the liues of the Popes? What
ſhal be come of them that liued in the time of Siſme?
                  
                     •
                  0. Siſmes. 30. Siſmes
(as Onufrius Panuinus, a moſt papiſticall author noteth it) haue
bene in the Church? A Siſme hath bene which 50. yeares endured.
For from Clement 7. vntil our Spaniſh Clement 8. renounced
hauing poped foure yeares,In Cronico pontifi
                     •
                  um. after that Benedict 13. a Spaniard
alſo, dyed in Spaine, ſo many yeares paſſed. What ſhall become
of them, that liued in the time that foure Popes, Victor,
Alexander 3.4 popes at once 
               Caliſtus 3 and Paſcall, in the time of the Emperour
Frederi
                     •
                  ke Barbaroſſa were ioyntly together? What
ſhall become of thoſe, that in the time of 3. Popes Benedict 8.
or 9. Si
                     ••
                  eſter 3. and Gregorie 6. liued. And all they three, at
one inſtant,3 Popes 
                     •
                  t once in Rome. held reſidence in Rome? Benedict had his ſeat in
the Palace of Lateran, Silueſter, in S. Peters, and Gregorie; in
Saint Maries the great. But the Emperour Henry 3. depoſed
them all three. Somewhat before the Councell of Conſtance
was hol
                  •
               ē, Gregorie 12. Benedict 13. & Alexander 5. excommunicated
one another▪ In Rome was Gregorie made Pope. Benedict
in Auinō, & Alexander in the Coūcel of Piſa, which of theſe
3. will they hold for Pope? what ſhall become of them, that in
the time of the Pope Sergius 3.Sergius 2. and Benedict 9. were each of them thriſe Pope. and of Pope Benedict 9. or after
other 8 liued? Each one of theſe 2 was 3 times Pope. Read their
liues. Theſe by force, deuiſes & bribes were made Popes; But
came others more ſtrong, more cunning in deuiſes, and greater
bribes & caſt thē forth: but recouering ſtrength, they eftſonnes
returned and caſt out them, that had caſt them our. This done,
the other againe re
                  •
               u
                  •
               ned, and caſt them out. Theſe the 3. time
(for the 3. 
                  •
               ime was gotten the victorie) returned to be Pope.
            What ſhamefull heades of the Church of Ieſus Chriſt bee
theſe?Great vacatiōs What ſhal become of them that in the time of vacations
which long continewed, and wherein were many diſſentions,
and altera
                  •
               ions liued? After the death of Clement 4. was the
ſea voyd two yeares 9 monethes, and 
                  •
                dayes. After the death
of Nichol
                     •
                  s 4. was the ſea voyd 2 yeares 3 monethes & 2 dayes.
After the death of Clement 5. was the ſea voyd 2 yeares three
monethes, & 17 dayes. Marcelinus as ſaith D. Illeſcas being

dead, the ſeat of S. Peter was voyd 7 yeers & a halfe, & 25 dayes
And Illeſcas addeth that Damaſcus and many other authors affirme
the ſame. But Platina ſatih, it was void 25 dayes. In ſuch
times as theſe, what was the Church? How miſerable was the
ſtate of a Chriſtian, if he could not be ſaued, except he beleeued
the Pope to be his head? What ſhould he do in the time of foure
Popes of 3. of 2. In the time of heretike Popes, Simoniſts, and to
paſſe ouer worſe things, whoremongers: & of ſo long vacatiōs?
But moſt happie is the ſtate of a good Catholique Chriſtian;
Not vpon men, but Chriſt his head, is his faith founded. He beleeueth
that he cānot die, he beleeueth that he once died to deſtroy
the ſin of al thoſe that beleeue in him: but that being now
ſet at the right hand of his father making interceſſion for vs, he
liueth eternally. He himſelfe is the chiefe Biſhop, and of ſuch
a one, and not of the Pope haue we neede. To Chriſt then be
glory and Empire, and to the Pope confuſion and ſhame, & let
al thoſe which deſire that the kingdome of God may come, ſay
ioyntly with me Amen, ſo be it.
            Willing now to conclude this Treatiſe of the Pope, briefely
wil we here ſet down by way of an appendix or addition, ſome
of the blaſphemies which the Pope teacheth, or commandeth
to be taught (for ſeldōe or neuer he either preacheth or readeth)
whereby may be vnderſtood, what is al his doctrine, which he
cōmands vs to beleeue & adore; as if it were Gods word it ſelfe.
And woe to him that will not beleeue it, to the fire he cōdēnes
him for a dogge, an heretike, a Lutherā. God haue mercy vpon
thē & open their eies. This then is his doctrine, that followeth.
            
               The Roman Biſhop is God. Diſt. 96. cap. Satis and enidenter
Baldo in L. vlti. C. ſentent. reſcin. Decio in C. 1. de Conſtitut. Felino
in C. Ego. N. de Iure iurando.
            
               The Pope is not man Lib. 1. ſexti de eloctione tit. 6. cap. fundamentum
in Gloſſatore.
            The Pope neither is God, nor man. In prologo Clementinarum in
Gloſſatore. (Wherein he appeareth to be very Antichriſt, becauſe
Chriſt is God and man)
            It is lawfull for none to will, or, breake the commandements
of the Sea Apoſtolique. diſt. 20▪ 
               ca. Nulli. Item diſt. 12. & 22.
            Whoſoeuer obeieth not the ſtatutes of the Pope, is an heretike
Ibid. in Gloſ.
            
            
               
He committeth Sacriledge which lieth to the Pope: For he holdeth
in earth, the place of the liuing God. De panitent. diſt. 1.
c
                     •
                  . Libenter ignoſco.
            
            The Pope is Biſhop of all the world. lib 5. ſextica. Foelicis in
Gloſſ.
            
            The Pope holdeth the principality of al the world lib. 3. ſexti.
tit. 16. cap. Periculoſo.
            
            
               No man dare ſay to the Pope, Lord, why doeſt thou ſo. In
Extrauag. tom. 22. tit. 5. cap. Ad Apoſtolatus in Gloſſ. 2. Decretal.
tit. 7. cap. 5. Vide Gloſſam.
            The Pope by theſe wordes thou art Peter, or Feede my ſheepe
hath obteyned the primacy. In Proaemio ſexti in Gloſſ.
            
            
               No man may iudge the Pope. Cauſ. 9. queſt. 2. ca. Nemo. Item,
aliorum & diſt. 40. ca. ſi Papa ca. 12 queſt. 2. ca. Quiſquis in Gloſſ.
diſt. 50. ca. Non nos in Gloſſatore.
            To none it is permitted, to iudge of the iudgemēt giuē by the
ſea Apoſtolike, nor reuoke his ſentence ca. 17. queſt. 4. ca. Nemini
            
            
               The Pope diſpenſeth againſt the Apoſtle. Diſt▪ 34. ca. Lector
in Gloſſ▪ diſt. 28 ca. Preſbiter in Gloſſ. cauſ. 15. q. 6. ca. autoritatem
in Gloſſatore.
            The Pope hath a heauenly iudgement. li. 1. Decret. Grego. tit.
7. ca. Quinto,
            
            The Pope can change the nature of things ibidem.
            
            The Pope of nothing, can make ſome thing ibidem.
            
            The Pope his wil ſerueth, for a reaſon in, that he wil do ibidem
            
            The Pope can diſpence with the law of God. ibidem.
            
            Of vnrighteouſnes can the Pope make righteouſnes ibidem
            
            The Pope holdeth the fulneſſe of power ibidem.
            
            How great a difference there is betweene the Sunne & the
Moone: ſo great is it betweene the king, and the high Biſhop.
Lib. Decret. Gregor. tit. 33. Solitae.
            
            Thoſe that are vniuſtly condemned, ought to haue reſtitution
by the Church of Rome,Mat
                     •
                  h. 28. 18. and the oppreſſed, ſuccor. Cauſ.
2.Extrauag. de maiori & obedient ca 2 
                     •
                  an. 2. 21. lib 7. Decretal. d
                     •
                  ſenten. & re indicata. 
               queſt. 6. ca. Ideo.
            
            And becauſe Ieſus Chriſt ſpeaking of himſelf ſaith, al power
is giuen me of my father aſwell in heauen as in earth. The Romiſts
here vpon conclude. 
                  
                     •
                  rgo the Pope abſolutely commaundeth
in heauen and in earth. And for that God (ſaith Daniel) diſplaceth,

and placeth kings, and transferreth kingdomes from one
nation to another. Ergo (ſay they) the Pope hath autho
                  •
               i
                  •
               ie
to diſpoſe kingdomes giuing them to whom he will, and taking
them from whom he liſteth. Herehence came it that
kinges and Emperours began ſtri
                  •
               ingly to kiſſe their feete
beeing preſent, or by their Embaſſadous being abſent Hence
it is, that the Emperour himſelfe 
                  •
               erueth him for a horſe boy▪
holding the ſtirrop to his Sathanſhip, when he mounteth on
horſebacke. And yet brawleth the Pope if he hold not the ſtirrop
featly.Extrauag 
                     〈◊〉
                   Cathol
                     〈◊〉
                  . So ſhameleſſe was Pope Boniface 8. that he made an
Article of faith (without which there could bee no ſaluation.
That the Pope aſwell in the temporalltie, as ſpiritualltie, is
abſolute Lord: preſenting himſelfe in the Iubile; to the viewe
of all men, with a keye in the one hand, and a Sword in the other.
His ſucceſſor Pope Clement the ſixt,Clement in Clement paſtoralie. not contenting himſelfe
to commaund kinges and Emperours, dared in a bull, to
commaund the Angels. In the Popes (Rota) which is his
Chauncerie, was it concluded and determined, that whatſoeuer
the Pope doth, God holdeth for good, and approueth
it.Item in reſcripto. This writing is kept in viena del Dolfinado. That the will of the Pope, is the rule of all lawe and Iuſtice.
That the Pope, may doe abſolutely in this world all whatſoeuer
God doth. Seeing that he is all, and aboue all thinges.
And that if hee chaunge his opinion it ought to be preſumed
that God alſo hath chaunged. That ableit the Pope ſhould ſend
many thouſands of ſoules to hell,Et in Extrauag eadem. none can reproue him, That
the power extendeth to heauen,Deciſiones Rote. earth, and hell it ſelfe, That
from him, may no man appeale to God. That he may diſpence,
and commaund,Baldu, Franci
                     •
                  
                  cus de Ripa. againſt the Epiſtles of S. Paul, as hee that is
greater then Paul. The ſame may he doe againſt the old Teſtament:
as hee that is greater then the authors of the old Teſtament.Phillippus Decius Hoſtien
                     •
                  is Carolus de Ruino.
And yet haue they gone further: they haue diſputed,
whether the Pope might diſpence againſt the Goſpell? Whether
the Pope hath more power then Saint Peter?
               Iohannes de Anauias &c. Diſt. 40. cap. 
                     •
                  . Papa. Whether the
Pope, be ſimple man or as God? Briefly, the deuill hath ſo
farre further proceeded, that a little before the comming of
Luther, and afterwards alſo, it was diſputed in the ſchooles
whether the Pope did participate (as did Ieſus Chriſt) of the 
                  •
               .
natures (to wit) diuine and humane? Better ſhould they

haue demaunded, if the Pope were an Hermophrodit, which
well may be: becauſe a woman hath bene Pope. Read Eraſmus
Annot. 1. caput 1. Epiſtle ad Timotheū. They alſo diſputed
(to vſe their proper Latine) An mille Angels poſſint ſaltare in
ſummitate digiti. To wit, whether a thouſand Angels might
daunce one the end of a fingar? Item an Chriſtus ſub forma ſcarabei
poſſet ſaluare genus humanum?
               Ths Pope after the Romiſts is more mercrfull then Chriſt & why. Whether Chriſt in forme of
a beetle, could ſaue mankind? Item whether the Pope were
more mercifull then Chriſt? O blaſphemy: they conclude,
yea. The reaſon which they giue is this: That it is not read
in all the ſcripture, That Ieſus Chriſt drewe any ſoule out of
Purgatorie: But the Pope of his great pietie and mercy, an
infinite number of Soules doth daily deliuer. And yet go they
further, and in their diſputations conclude, that the Pope
hath power to kindle and quenche the fire of Purgatorie. Flattering
the Pope, conclude they in all theſe queſtions; lying
againſt their owne conſciences; and making no reckoning of
the honour onely due to God: nor of his onely ſonne Chriſt
Ieſus. And Ca. Quoniam de imunit in 6. the Pope ſaith: we not
willing to contemne our Iuſtice, nor that of our ſpouſe the
Church. The Church is well knowne to haue no other ſpouſe
but onely Chriſt. The Pope paſſeth further. Hee ſaith and commaundeth:
that ſo it be ſaid and preached, and that we alſo
ſo beleeue, the vertue and holineſſe of his ſeate to be ſuch and
ſo great, that what wicked man ſoeuer, how impious, periured,
and abhominable hee be, which ſhall ſit therein, euen
then in a moment, for hauing ſitten therein, is altered and changed
to another man, and is made holy. But heare we the ſelfe
ſame words, which the beaſt himſelf ſpeaketh, as in Ca. Non nos
diſt.
               Ca. Non nos Diſt. 41. 41. they be written, and theſe they be. The bleſſed S. Peter
tranſferreth to his ſucceſſors, together with the inheritance of
innocency, an euerlaſting dowery of merits. That which to him
was granted by the light of his workes, pertaineth to thoſe, that
be lightened with like clereneſſe of conuerſation: For who may
doubt him to be holy, which is lifted vp to the height of dignitie?
wherein, if he want goods gotten by his owne merit, thoſe
that are giuen by the predeceſſor of the place, ſuffice, &c. If this
were truth, then no Pope ſhould be euill either in life or Doctrine,

ſith that in being Pope, he is learned and holy: and in a
word to ſpeake all, he is God vpon earth, and ſo all whatſoeuer
he doth, God approueth it in heauen. But the liues of the
Popes by vs recited, and the ſame liues alſo, which the Popes
paraſites haue written, doe ſhew vs the contrary. This is that
ſeate papall, this is the heritage which one Pope inheriteth of
another, that one ſitting therein, were he not ſo euill before, he
is made euill.2. Theſ. 2. 4. And if he were euill, he becommeth moſt euill:
and in the end, each one is made the ſonne of perdition, and
man of ſinne, oppoſing, and lifting vp himſelfe againſt all that
is called God, or that is worſhipped: So that as God he ſitteth in
the Temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God.
            All theſe things, which here we haue gathered together,
concerning the doctrine of the Pope, are blaſphemies, ſuch, as
were the diuell himſelfe clothed with humane fleſh, he could
not ſpeake greater nor more horrible: yet for all this, art thou
blind ô Spaine, and ſeeſt not, nor yet knoweſt thou Antichriſt,
whom (ſuppoſing thou doeſt ſeruice to God, and honour to
Ieſus Chriſt his ſonne) thou adoreſt and honoreſt. God ſhewe
thee his mercie, and open the eyes of thine vnderſtanding,
that thou maiſt reade, heare and vnderſtand the will of God:
which his Maieſtie hath reuealed in his holy Scriprure: without
the reading or meditation whereof, vnpoſſible it is for a
man to attaine to the truth.Iohn. 5. 39. Search (ſaith Ieſus Chriſt) the Scripture:
for they be thoſe that teſtifie of me, & ſo by conſequence
of Antichriſt alſo. When with the Spirit of humilitie thou ſhalt
well haue read, and meditated vpon them: thou ſhalt then vnderſtand
how great hath bene thy blindeſſe and ignorance.
Then turning thy ſelfe hartily to the true God, that created,
redeemed and ſanctified thee, thou ſhalt abhorre the idols of
ſiluer, and the Idols of gold, which thy ſinfull hands (as ſaieth
Eſaie) haue made:Eſay. 31. 7. And thou, blind and ignorant, (ſuppoſing
thou didſt great ſeruice to God) diddeſt honor and adore them.
Then ſhalt thou caſt them from thee, ſtampe them in peeces,
and conſume them; ſo greate ſhall be thy hatred againſt
Idolatrie. Then, then, by how much the more, thou of all
other nations of the world, in theſe laſt times, haſt abaſed and
deiected thy ſelfe, to ſerue and adore this monſter, this man

of ſinne, this ſonne of perdition, this whore, clothed with ſcarlet
& purple, & adorned with ſo great ſtore of gold & precious ſto
                  •
               s
this beaſt, this Antichriſt, this thy Pope, this thy God vpon earth:
by ſo much the more holding thy ſelfe aſhamed & confounded,
for that which thou haſt done (becauſe thou ſo much loueſt, and
more eſteemeſt honor then other nations) thou ſhalt abandon,
abhorre him, and ſhalt practiſe his vtter ruine and deſtruction.
God giue thee that grace, & that quickly, for the ſacrifice ſake
which Ieſus Chriſt his ſonne, our chiefe and only high Biſhop,
our redeemer and Lord, vnto him hath offered Amen.
            For the healpe of memorie haue we heare placed a table,
wherein is plainely declared the Pope to be
Antichriſt: which is the ſumme of of this
firſt Treatiſe.
            An end of the firſt Treatiſe.
         
         
            
            A briefe table wherein moſt clearely & euidently
is declared who Antichriſt is, and by what markes
he may bee knowne
            
               The neceſſitie of this Doctrine is firſt declared.
               AS it behoueth the Chriſtian Church, and euery faithfull
member thereof to know Ieſus Chriſt the Lord; and followe
his Doctrine with all obedience: So is it meete, that euery
faithfull Chriſtian ſhould perceiue and know, what the holy
ſcripture doth teach concerning Antichriſt: to the end that
all the faithfull may truly know him, and knowing him flie
from him, and beware his deceites. And if the Apoſtles
themſelues in the Primitiue Church, forewarned the faithfull
of the daunger: and comming of the great woolfe, as in the
2. Theſ. 2. 3. 4. &c. 1 Ioh. 2. 18. &c. appeareth. How much more
now, in this old age of the world, wherein all iniquitie aboundeth,
& the end of all thinges approcheth, ought we to eſteeme
this Doctrine neceſſarie.
            
            
               2 Concerning the name of Antichriſt, and how the holie
ſcripture ſpeaketh touching the
ſame.
               Antichriſt is a Greeke word, and aſmuch to ſay as contrarie
to Chriſt. For as Antipapa is hee, who not beeing Pope,
attributeth to himſelfe, the whole authoritie and power of the
Pope. So is he Antichriſt that oppoſeth himſelfe to Chriſt;
attributing to himſelfe, that which is proper to Chriſt. The
holie ſcripture of Antichriſt, ſpeaketh two manner of waies:
For as this word Chriſt or anointed is ſometimes generally
taken, Pſalme 105. verſe 15. Touch not mine Annointed,
where, by annointed, all the faithfull that hold Communion
with Chriſt are vnderſtoode. And properly againe, when
Chriſt our Lord is mencioned. So by this word Antichriſt
is ſome time generally vnderſtoode, all ſuch as in Doctrine,
oppoſe themſelues to Chriſt. 1. Iohn 2. 22. and cap. 4. 3. But

then properly it mentioneth Antichriſt, when it noteth an
head of an abominable kingdome: which head lifteth vp it
ſelfe againſt Chriſt, as in 1. Ioh. 2. chap. 18. where the Apoſtle
ſaith, that Antichriſt ſhould come. It is to be noted, that
as many things in the ſcripture foretold of Chriſt, are applyed
to ſome perſons, which were types and figures of Chriſt:
as Dauid, Salomon, Zerubbabel, &c. Which properly, and truly
are meant of Chriſt, and in him accompliſhed: ſo many
things alſo foretold of Antichriſt, Dan. 7. 8. 20. 21. 25.
chap. 8. 23. 24. 25. chap. 11. 36. and 1. Timoth. 4. 1. 2. 3. are
applyed to certaine tyrants and heretikes, as forerunners and
types of Antichriſt but properly to Antichriſt, & in him are fulfilled.
            
            
               3 Whether Antichriſt be come.
               The Papiſts ſay that Antichriſt is not yet come, but ſhal come
(teach they) of the race of the Iewes, of the Tribe of Dan, be
borne in Babylon, brought vp in Chorazain and Bethſaida,
and ſhall reigne in Ieruſalem, &c. with ſundrie ſuch like
inuentions of man, not warranted by authoritie of holie
Scriptures. But wee ſay that Antichriſt is alreadie come, and
that will wee prooue by the teſtimonies of the holy Scriptures.
For the ſame thing nowe is befallen the Papiſtes,
which in time paſt, when Chriſt Ieſus our redeemer did manifeſt
himſelfe in the world, happened to the Iewes. For as
the Iewes (with the Apoſtles) did beleeue and confeſſe, the
Prophetes to haue ſpoken manie things touching the Meſſias:
but not beleeued nor confeſſed that the promiſed Meſſias then
was come, nor that Ieſus borne of the Virgin Mary in Bethelem,
was that true Meſſiah. Euen ſo doe the Papiſtes at this
day, fully confeſſe with vs, that many thinges in holy Scripture
are foretolde concerning Antichriſt, yet beleeue they
not, nor confeſſe that he is come, but ſay he ſhall come, as
the Iewes did of the Meſſias. We ſay then, that Antichriſt is
already come. Let vs ſee now who he is, and by what marks he
may be knowne.
            
            
               4 Who Antichriſt is, and by what markes he may be knowne.
               
                  
This queſtion in former time was hard and obſcure: but now
Antichriſt being reuealed is Verie cleere and eaſie. For as this
is the true Meſſias, in whom, all things foretold by the holie
Ghoſt, concerning the Meſſias, are fulfilled: So is, and ought
this to be truly Antichriſt, in whom, all thinges foretold of
Antichriſt, by the Prophets and Apoſtles, do properly belong,
and are fulfilled. Let vs then conſider what the holie Ghoſt, in
holie ſcripture hath ſpoken of Antichriſt, which we will deuide
into three points.
               
                  1 Of the time of his reuelation.
                  2 Of the place of his ſeate and being.
                  3 Of his eſtate, life and Doctrine:
               
               The time of Antichriſts reuelation is ſignified by Dan. cap. 7.
5. 8. when he ſaieth: A litle horne aroſe vp among the other
hornes in the heade of the fourth Beaſt. The Prophet declareth
that the kingdome of Antichriſt ſhould riſe vp in the Romane
Empire, which was the fourth Monarchie; ſignified by the
fourth Beaſt. The Apoſtle Saint Paule well noteth the time of
the reuelation and comming of Antichriſt; when he writeth. 2.
Theſtal. 2. 3. Let no man deceaue you by any meanes: for that day
ſhall not come, except there come a departing firſt, & that that man
of ſinne bee diſcloſed, euen the ſonne of perdition. Cleerely ſignifieth
the Apoſtle, that after an Apoſtaſie, Antichriſt ſhall
come. True it is, that from the Appoſtles time haue bene ſome
forerunners of Antichriſt, of whom we read Io. 1. 18. 22 &c. And
that then the Myſterie of iniquitie did worke 2. Theſ. 2. 7.
yet could not the kingdome of Antichriſt increaſe whiles the
Roman Empire flouriſhed: But when the Roman Empire
ſhould be weakened, then ſhould Antichriſt be cheife: as
the ſame Apoſtle declareth, when he ſaieth 2. Theſ. 2. 7. 8.
Only he which now withholdeth ſhall let, till he be taken out of the
waie: And then ſhall that wicked man be reuealed.
               
               The place where Antichriſt ſhall holde his ſeate, is noted by
Daniel 
                     •
                  1. 45. when he ſayth, And he ſhall place the Tabernacles
of his Palace betwene the ſeas. Saint Iohn alſo in his Apoc.
ca. 17. when he ſignified Antichriſt by a woman, arrayed with
purple and ſcarlet, guilded with golde, and decked with pearles and
precious ſtones, &c. In the 9. verſe. he plainely mentioneth 7

mountaines, whereon the woman ſitteth: adding afterwards in
the 18. verſe: That great citie which reigneth ouer all the kings of
the earth. And Saint Paule 2. Theſ. 2. 4. ſaith: that Antichriſt ſhal
ſit in the temple of God.
               
               
                  Largely writeth Daniel, chap. 7. 5. 8. concerning the eſtate
life, and doctrine of Antichriſt: where Behold (ſaith he) there
came vp another litle horne, and then addeth, That in this horne
were eyes, like the eyes of a man, and a mouth ſpeaking preſumptuous
things. And in the 20. and 21. verſes. And he appeared greater
then any of his fellowes. And I beheld, and the ſame horne made
war against the ſaints, and ouercame them. And verſe 25. And hee
ſpake wordes againſt the moſt high, and ſhall conſume the Saintes
of the moſt high: and thinke that he may change times and lawes.
And chap. 8. verſ. 23. 24. 25. There ſhall riſe vp a king of fierce
countenance, and vnderſtanding darke ſentences, and his power
ſhall increaſe, but not in his owne ſtrength: and ſhall deſtroy wonderfully,
and proſper, and practiſe, and ſhall deſtroy the mightie
and holy people: and through his policie alſo he ſhall cauſe craft to
proſper in his hand, and he ſhall extoll himſelfe in his heart: and
by peace ſhall deſtroy many: He ſhall ſtand vp againſt the Prince
of Princes: but he ſhall be broken downe without hand. Alſo in
the eleuenth chap. verſ. 36. And the king ſhall doe what he lifteth:
he ſhall exalt himſelfe, and ſhall magnifie himſelfe againſt
all that is God: and ſhall ſpeake maruellous thinges againſt the
God of Gods, and ſhall proſper, till the wrath bee accompliſhed: for
the determination is made. verſ. 37. Neither ſhall hee regard the
God of his Fathers, nor the loue of women: nor care for anie
God: for he ſhall magnifie himſelfe aboue all. verſ. 38. But in
his place ſhall he honour his God Mauzim. A God whom his
fathers knewe not, ſhall he honour, with golde and vvith ſiluer,
and with precious ſtones, and thinges of great price. verſ. 39.
This ſhall hee doe in the ſtrong holds of Mauzim, vvith a ſtrange
God, whom hee ſhall acknowledge: hee ſhall increaſe his glorie,
and ſhall cauſe them to rule ouer many, and ſhall diuide the land for
gaine. The Apoſtle Saint Paule, in the ſecond epiſtle to the
Theſſal. chap. 2. 4. ſaith: that this man of ſinne, and ſonne of
perdition ſhall exalt and lift vp himſelfe against all that is called God,
or that is vvorſhipped: So that he doth ſit as God, in the temple of

God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God. And in the ninth verſe
Who ſhall come by the effectuall working of Sathan, vvith great
power, ſignes, and lying wonders, and in all deceiuableneſſe of vnrighteouſneſſe.
Alſo 1. Timoth. chap. 4. verſ. 2. 3. Which ſpeake
lies through hypocriſie, and haue their conſciences ſeared vvith an
hoteyron: forbidding to marrie, and commaunding to abſtaine from
meates, vvhich God hath created. Alſo in the Apoc. 13. 11.
And I beheld another beaſt, comming vp out of the earth, which
had two hornes like the Lambe, but ſpake like the Dragon. And
cap. 17. 6. And I ſaw the woman drunken with the bloud of ſaints,
and with the bloud of the martyrs of Ieſus.
               Theſe propheſies doe teach vs, that Antichriſt muſt bee a
king, who from meane eſtate, ſhall become exceeding
great and mightie, and proſper. That he ſhall bee alſo a blaſphemer,
an Idolater, a ſacrileger, exceeding proud, ſubtill, an
hypocrite, a contemner of marriage, couetous, a great Tyrant,
a perſecutor of the Saints, a deceiuer, & full of impietie.
               Examine we now theſe teſtimonies of holy ſcripture, which
wil appear to be moſt properly belōging to the Pope of Rome:
So as by theſe propheſies we are warned (as it were) with the
finger of God from heauen, that the Pope is Antichriſt. Therfore
the time of his reuelation conſidered, the Popes reigne began
in the fourth monarchie, and want of the Romane Empire.
For about the yeare 606. Pope Boniface the 3. receiued of Phocas
the Emperour (who was a tyrant, and murthered Mauricius
his Lord, with his wife and children) the title of Vniuerſall Biſhop,
and Head of the Church: which once being graunted,
the Popes whole endeuors were to lift vp themſeues with the
Empire of Rome, and the whole world beſides.
               For the ſeat of Antichriſt, it is cleare, and to all men knowne,
that the Pope ſitteth at Rome, which is a city ſcyted betweene
the two ſeas Thyrren and Adriartike, hath 7 mountains, & reigned
ouer all the kings of the earth, which cannot be ſaid of any
other city in the world. And ſeeing Rome is in Europe, & neither
in India, Aſia, nor Africa: it plainly appeareth, that Antichriſt
ſitteth in the temple of God (to wit) in Chriſtendome, as Saint
Paule 2. Theſ. 2. 4. declareth.
               Meane at the beginning was the eſtate and condition of the

Pope, but it mightily, and with great ſucceſſe increaſed. So
that he holdeth not authoritie and one crowne as a king onely,
but three crownes, declaring thereby, his power to be greater
then that of all kings and Emperours. As he attributeth alſo
to himſelfe: the two ſwords or powers, ſpirituall and temporall,
figured by the two hornes. Apoc. 13. 11.
               A Blaſphemer is the Pope, in ſaying he is Chriſts Vicar: head
of the Church: that he can pardon ſinnes: may not be iudged
of any: cannot erre: in concluſion, that he is God in the earth:
can change nature: holdeth an heauenly power, and the fulnes
of power, and of vnrighteouſneſſe can make righteouſneſſe.
See lib. 1. Decret, Gregor. tit. 7. Can. 5.
               An Idolater he is, when he commandeth Image-worſhip,
inuocation of Saints, maketh of the Sacramēt an Idol, of Mauzim
a God, whom neither the Apoſtles nor their fathers knew,
becauſe they worſhipped and honoured one only God in ſpirit
and truth, Ioh. 4. 23.
               A Sacriledger he ſheweth himſelfe to bee, when he robbeth
the Church of the ſecond commandement of Gods law:
the lay people of the cup in the Lords ſupper: and forbiddeth
Chriſtian people to reade the holy ſcripture, contrary to the
doctrine and expreſſe commandement of Chriſt. Ioh. 5. 39.
               Moſt proud he appeareth, when he is carried on mens ſhoulders,
as they carryed in time paſt the Arke of the Lord, vppon
the ſhoulders of the Leuites: when hee calleth himſelfe moſt
holy Father, and Holineſſe it ſelfe: dares to breake and change
the ordinances of God, and impoſe new lawes vpon mens
conſciences: compareth himſelfe to the Sunne, and the Emperour
to the Moone. lib. 1. Gregor. tit. 33. and both Emperors
and kings do kiſſe his feet.
               Subtill hee is in all his kingdome: but then chiefly when
by meanes of auricular confeſſion, he diueth into the hearts of
all men, not of the common ſort onely: but alſo of the greate
States of the world, vnderſtanding thereby all ſecrets.
               A manifeſt hypocrite hee is, when vnder the title of Seruant
of ſeruantes, hee ruleth as king of kings: and vnder the
name of Paſtor, he ſheweth himſelfe a rauening Wolfe: and
vnder pretence to be S. Peters ſucceſſor, he declareth himſelfe

the follower of Iudas: For as Iudas with a kiſſe & fayned friendſhip
betrayed his Lord, ſo with fayned holineſſe, and outward
ceremonies doth the Pope draw the common people, into the
chaines and ſnares of ignorance and ſuperſtitions. The ſaid title
therefore, which Chriſt gaue vnto Iudas. Ioh. 17. 12. the Apoſtle
giueth to Antichriſt. 2. Theſſ. 2. 4.
               A contemner of mariage, when he eſteemes it a carnall eſtate,
and therefore with ſuch ſeuerity forbiddeth it to his Clergie;
that although fornicators, and adulterers can eaſily purchaſe
abſolution of their ſinnes; no pardon remaineth for the
Clergie that mary according to the ordinance of God: but the
ſame is reputed and puniſhed by the Pope for an vnpardonable
ſinne. Albeit the holy ſcripture teacheth. 1. Cor. 7. 9. That it is
better to marry then to burne. And Hebr. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable
among all men. Alſo 1. Timoth. 3. 2. Euery Biſhop muſt be
the huſband of one wife.
               
               Inſatiable is the couetouſneſſe of the Pope, and extendeth
into all parts. For money, he pardoneth ſinnes: ſelleth eccleſiaſticall
functions: maketh marchandize of his Bulles, indulgences,
Iubilies, Reliques Maſſes, praiers and ſacraments, and
compelleth the miſerable people to buy his marchandize, not
on ſuch dayes onely, as other marchants vſe to traffique: but alſo,
and principally on the feaſt dayes, the Lords dayes and Sabboths,
when other men reſt. And raketh together euery day
in the yeare, and of all ſortes of people, euen of the Iewes, and
Curteſans of Rome.
               A tyrant he is, and perſecutor of Saints, being the cauſe of
the ſheding of ſo much Chriſtiā blood, inciting kings & princes
to perſecute ſuch as contradict him, and abandon his Idolatries
and ſuperſtitions, to ſerue God according to his will and word:
whom the Pope condemneth for heretiques to be burned: and
leaſt they ſhould ſpeake, putteth a gagge in their mouthes. And
to fill vp the meaſure of his crueltie, he ſpareth not Emperours,
nor kings, being the Lords Annointed, when they refuſe to execute
his tyrannies: as hiſtories plainely witneſſe.
               A deceauer he is ſundry waies; becauſe he deceaueth the
common people with falſe doctrine, and vaine promiſes, with
high titles, and fayned holineſſe, with bulles, Pardons, falſe miracles,

and illuſions of the diuell. &c.
               He is full of impietie; becauſe he pleaſeth and delighteth
himſelfe: not only in ſinne, but cauſeth others alſo to ſinne; becauſe
he hath depraued the worſhip of God with idolatrie, the
authoritie of kings with tyrany. The common faith with deceit:
and the life of his Clergie with ſhame and filthineſſe, occaſioned
by conſtrayned ſingle life.
               To conclud, in the kingdome of the Pope is the fountaine
and ſpring af all abhominations and ſlaunder, according to the
old prouerbe. The neerer to Rome, the worſe Chriſtian: So the
neerer to Antichriſt the further from Chriſt.
               By theſe demonſtrations it appeareth plainely, that the Pope
is Antichriſt, whom the Holy ſcripture hath foretold, and by
whom, the Church of Chriſt hath ſo much ſuffered.
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond Treatiſe of the Maſſe and
the holineſſe thereof.
            
               
                  WE haue paſſed by the Lords aſſiſtance,
the Laborinthe, not of Creete, but of
Rome, of the Pope, and his Roman
Court, another much worſe, and for
more intricate & troubleſōe. The Pope
haue we proued to be a falſe Preiſt and
very Antichriſt, to be the man of ſin, &
ſonne of perdition, to be that whereof
whom ſpeaketh S. Iohn in his Reuelation.
This haue we proued by his euil life & wicked Doctrine,
by the ſayings of Doctors and ancient Councels; and by
three notable paſſages of holy ſcripture, Now will we ſhew the
Maſſe,A briefe of the Cōtents of this 2. Treatiſe. which is the ſecond pillar that ſupporteth and vpholdeth
the Roman Church, to be a falſe ſacrifice, an inuention
of the diuell; and a profanation of the holy ſupper, which Ieſus
Chriſt our redeemer inſtituted. And if ſuch bee the Maſſe (as
we will proue it to bee) it followeth, that wee ought to flie
and deteſt it; and ſo doe we flie and abhorre it, as a thing condemned
and abhominable before the face of God. This done,
wee will ſhewe by the Lordes aſſiſtance (without which we
can doe no thing that good is) Ieſus Chriſt, to be the true and
onely prieſt, and chiefe biſhop, And his propper body & blood
which he offered vpon the croſſe to his father, to be the true &
only ſacrifice, the memory wherof we ſhew forth, ſo oftē as we
celebrate his holy ſupper. A table wil we place at the end of this
Treatiſe, wherein we will ſhew the conformity vnion and likeneſſe,
which the holy ſupper inſtituted by Ieſus Chriſt, holdeth
with the holy ſupper in the reformed Churches celebrated. And
thē alſo wil we ſhew the differēce diſconformity & contrariety
that the Maſſe which our aduerſaries celebrate, holdeth with
the holy ſupper of Chriſt, which is the ſame we now celebrate.
               
                  
As the name of Pope is not found in the holy ſcripture, as
little alſo is there found the name of Maſſe.Maſſe. And doubtleſſe,
had it bene ſo neceſſarie for a Chriſtian to beleeue the
authoritie of the Pope and holineſſe of the Maſſe, without
which faith (ſay they) it is vnpoſſible for a man to bee ſaued:
It is, I ſay, to bee beleeued, that Ieſus Chriſt, or his Apoſtles
would haue made ſome mention thereof.There is no thing neceſſary for our ſaluatiō which the ſcripture declareth not. For all whatſoeuer
is neceſſary for our ſaluation doth Chriſt and his Apoſtles
teach vs. Saint Paule ſpeaking to the Epheſians, ſaith. Ye
knowe, that I keepe backe nothing that was profitable, but haue
ſhewed you, and haue taught you openly, and throughout euery
houſe. Witneſſing both to the Iewes, and Grecians, the repentance
and faith in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Actes 20. 20. But this holy Apoſtle,
ſo diligent in teaching that which we ought to beleeue,
maketh no mention of the Pope, nor of the Maſſe. Hereuppon
it followeth, that to beleeue the authoritie of the Pope, or holineſſe
of the Maſſe, is no Article of faith. But true it is, will they
ſaie vnto me, that this word Maſſe, is not found in the ſcripture,
but its equiualent is found, the ſupper of the Lord: And if we
ought to admit the Lords ſupper, thē muſt we admit this name
Miſſa. Whereunto we aunſwere: that moſt great Iniurie
and wrong doe they to the holie ſupper which the Lord
inſtituted, in ſaying it to be the ſame that is their Maſſe,
which they haue imagined, and forged. For how great difference
there is betweene Truth, and Falſhood, Light, and
darkeneſſe, God and Belial: So great is the difference betweene
the holy ſupper, and the profane Maſſe. Had the
queſtion bene concerning the name; whether the holy ſupper
were to be called Miſſa or no. It ſhould not be of great
importance. Agree wee in the ſubſtance of the things, and
call it as ye liſt: Albeit, it bee il done, when the holy ſpirit
calleth a thing by ſuch or ſuch name, that man dare call it by
another name. The Apoſtle calles it the ſupper of the Lord,
and not the Maſſe. Call wee it then, the ſupper of the
Lord,It is not yet knowne where of the Maſſe is deriued. and not the Maſſe. And chiefly, the difference betweene
the ſupper and the Maſſe beeing ſo great as wee
ſhal ſee.
               Concerning the name of Maſſe, yet is it not concluded among

the Romiſts themſelues, whence it is deriued. Some
ſay: that it is deryued of this hebrew word Mas, which ſignifieth
trybute, or taxe: others ſayd, that it is Latine, and that
Miſſa is the ſame that Miſſio is, as Remiſſa (which word ſome
of the ancients, and chiefly Saint Ciprian vſed) is the ſame
that Remiſſion is:what the Maſſe is. and others ſayd other thinges. The Maſſe
as our aduerſaries define it, is a ſacrifice, whereby pardon
is obtained for the ſinnes of the quick, and dead. The Romiſts
doe magnifie their Maſſe, and that (as they ſay) for
diuers reaſons. Eight of the chieffeſt whereof, I will here ſet
downe.8 reaſons wherwith they confirme the Maſſe The firſt for that it is a ſacryfice expiatorie. The ſecond
in regard of him who inſtituted the ſame, which (as they ſay)
was Ieſus Chriſt. The third in regard of them that ſay it, which
were (as they ſay) Saint Peter, Saint Iohn who was chaplaine
(ſay they) of the virgine Mary, Saint Iames and the other Apoſtles.
The fourth, for the antiquitie of the Maſſe; ſeeing all the
Church from the death of Chriſt vntill now, hath celebrated it
with great reuerence. God would neuer permit (ſay they) that
his Church ſhould ſo long time be deceiued. The fift with
many myracles which the Maſſe and their conſecrate hoſt
haue done, they confirme it: which ſhew the holineſſe, and
diuinitie that remayneth in the Maſſe. The ſixt they maintaine
it, ſaying: that in the Maſſe, are many good thinges taken out
of holie ſcripture: as the Epiſtle, the Goſpell, the Hoc eſt corpus
meum, the Pater noſter, &c. The ſeauenth, that this ſacrifice
of the Maſſe (ſay they) was figured in Melchiſedech,Gen. 14. 18. who
being a prieſt of the moſt high God, offered bread and wine
vnto him.Malachy 1. 11. 
                  Malachie (they ſay) ſpake of the Maſſe, when he ſaid.
For from the riſing of ths ſunne, vnto the going downe of the ſame,
my name is great among the Gentiles, and in euery place, Incenſe ſhalbe
offered vnto my name, and a pure offring. 8. For the great profit
which thereby we receaue, doe they eſteeme it. Of all
this, they conclude that the maſſe is holy, good, bleſſed, and
diuine; And that we for ſo ſhameleſly ſpeaking againſt a thing
ſo excellent, which Ieſus Chriſt ordayned, his Apoſtles celebrated,
and all the Church Catholique worſhippeth and honoreth
are heretiques, dogges, &c. In concluſion, their Maſſe
is their Helen, for whom they trouble the whole world.

Theſe be the principall reaſons, wherewith our aduerſaries
doe maintaine their Maſſe. Whereunto (inuocating the name
of the Lord, whoſe cauſe we deale in, and here mainetaine)
in like order as we haue propoſed them, will we anſwere. I beſeech
thee Chriſtian reader, for the zeale thou holdeſt of the
glory of God, & the deſire thou haſt of the ſaluatiō of thine own
ſoule, attentiuely to read, & with ripe Iudgment to waigh the
foreſaid reaſons, and the anſwers which we will giue, and that
moreouer which wee ſhall ſay to this purpoſe: See which of
theſe two Doctrines doe agree, and are more conformable
with the ſquier and rule of holy ſcripture, and that beleeue.
Bee not a beaſt, vnderſtanding and his law hath God giuen
thee. Conſider well if thou be an idolater or no, that nought
therein befall thee, but the ſaluation of thy ſoule.
               Concerning the firſt, where the Maſſe, they ſay, is a ſacrifice
to obtaine remiſion of ſinnes,Our aduerſaries firſt reaſon and our anſwere. &c. I ſay, by their leaue, that
the Maſſe is no ſacrifice. For were it a ſacrifice, it ſhould not
(ſpeaking properly) be a ſacrament.The Maſſe is no ſacrifice. And they affirme the Maſſe
to be both a ſacrifice, and a Sacrament: which cannot be: For
ſo great is the difference betweene a ſacrifice; and a ſacrament,
as there is difference betweene giuing and taking.The difference betwene a ſacrifice and a ſacrament. The
ſacrifice, is offered and preſented vnto God. The ſacrament
is taken and receiued of the hand of the Lord, by the miniſterie
of the miniſter of his word.
               The holie ſupper (ſpeaking properly) is no expiatorie
ſacrifice: for of this doe wee now ſpeake: but a ſacrament
of the precious bodie and blood of Ieſus Chriſt our redeemer.
But improperly ſpeaking, it may bee called a ſacrifice; becauſe,
a memoriall it is of that euerlaſting and onely ſacrifice,
which Ieſus chriſt offered to his father vppon the alter of
the Croſſe: And ſo vnderſtand it the fathers, when they call
it a ſacrifice. Not that the ſupper is a ſacrifice, but a memorial
of the ſacrifice, doe they vnderſtand according to that
which Chriſt ſpeaketh of his ſupper ſaying: Doe this in remembrance
of me. And Saint Paul to the ſame purpoſe ſaith:
Ye ſhall ſhew the Lords death till his comming againe. And if the ſupper
be no ſacrifice, much leſſe ſhall the Maſſe be, which they
celebrate in the place of the ſupper. Beſides this, were the Maſſe

a ſacrifice, It ſhould be either propitiatory, which we alſo call
expiatory, or Euchariſticall, to wit either offered for remiſſion
of ſinnes: or in thankſgiuing. They will ſay vnto me, as in the definition
thereof they ſaid, that it is a ſacrifice expiatory. I ſay
vnto them, it cannot ſo be: for no other expiatory ſacrifice is
there, but only the death and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt. An expiatorie
ſacrifice is that; which is made to appeaſe the wrath
of God,Chriſt alone the expiatory ſacrifice. and to ſatiſfie his iuſtice, and in ſo doing, doth purge
and clenſe ſinnes, that the ſinner beeing clenſed from his
filthineſſe and ſinnes, and reſtored to the purity of righteouneſſe,
may be reduced into the fauour of God. All this wholy
and perfectly did the Lord, by his death vppon the Croſſe,
and hee onely, and no other did ſacrifice ſuch kind of ſacrifice:
For the vertue and efficacy hereof, which Chriſt alone,
one only time offered, is eternall. And ſo ſaid he in offering
this ſacrifice, all is finiſhed all is fullfilled, aſmuch to ſay.
That whatſoeuer was neceſſarie to reconcile vs with the father,
to obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes, righteouſneſſe, and ſaluation,
all this was ended and fulfilled, with that onely
ſacrifice, which Ieſus Chriſt offered: And ſo faulted hee nothing:
that no place might afterwardes remaine for any other
ſacrifice. Hereuppon will we then conclude: that it is an intollerable
diſgrace, and monſtrous blaſphemy againſt
Ieſus Chriſt and againſt his ſacrifice, if any offer any other
ſacrifice, beſides that already offered: or ſhall reitterate
that, which Chriſt before offered, ſuppoſing by ſuch ſacrifice
to obtayne forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, reconciliation with
God, and righteouſneſſe. And what other thing is done in
the Maſſe, but that wee by the merit of a new ſacrifice, may
bee made partakers of the death and paſſion of Chriſt? Who
ſo will well vnderſtand this, which wee ſaie, concerning
the onely expiatory ſacrifice, one onely time offered, and
neuer more iterated. Let him read the Epiſtle which the
Apoſtle wrote to the Hebrewes: and chiefly the ſeuenth
chapter. Of this will wee intreat ſomewhat more to the purpoſe
hereafter.
               The 2.The ſacrifice Euchariſticall. manner of ſacrifice, which wee call Euchariſticall,
comprehendeth all the exerciſes of charitie: which done to

our neighbours, in ſome ſort are they done vnto God; who is
thus honored in his members. Our prayers, praiſes, thankeſgiuing,
and all whatſoeuer we doe for the ſeruice and honor of
God, are alſo comprehended in this kind of ſacrifice, Al which
ſacrifices doe depend vppon that great ſacrifice, by which
we are conſecrated in body and ſoule, and dedicated for holy
Temples to God. This kind of ſacrifice nought ſerueth to appeaſe
the wrath of God, to obtaine forgiueneſſe of ſinne, or
to deſerue, or purchaſe righteouſneſſe: but is only to magnifie
and glorifie God. This Euchariſticall ſacrifice, can no way
pleaſe God; except it proceede from thoſe which (hauing by
the other kind of ſacrifice, which we call Expiatory obtained
forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, bee already reconcyled with him, and
iuſtified. This ſacrifice Euchariſticall is very neceſſarie in the
Church: And woe to that day which a Chriſtian paſſeth, without
offering of this ſacrifice to God.Mal. 1. 11. This is the incenſe, and
oblation,Rom. 12. 1. cleane and pure which Malachie Propheſied, that
the Church of God ſhould offer. Of this ſacrifice ſpeaketh Saint
Paule when hee ſaith:Hebr. 13. 6. that we offer vp our bodies, a liuing
ſacrifice holie and acceptable vnto God, a reaſonable ſeruice
of God. For this cauſe the almes and other good works
of the faithfull, are called ſacrifices; wherewith God is well
pleaſed. The Prophet Hoſeas exhorteth the people to returne
vnto the Lord,Hoſea 14. 3 and ſaie vnto him: Take away all iniquitie, and
receaue vs gratiouſly: So will wee render the Calues of our
lippes. What the Prophet vnderſtood by the calues of lippes,
the Appoſtle declareth,Hebr. 13. 15. when hee ſaith: Let vs therefore
by him, offer the ſacrifice of praiſe alwayes to God, that is the
fruite of the lippes;Phillip. 4. 18. which confeſſe (or prayſe) his name.
Saint Paule calleth the liberalitie wherewith the Phillippians
in his neceſſitie, had relieued him, A ſacrifice of ſweete
ſauour: and all the good workes which the faithfull doe,
are called ſpirituall ſacrifices. His Maieſtie giue vs grace
continually to offer ſuch ſacrifices vnto him, and that when
we offer them, we may without all hypocriſie confeſſe that
wee are vnprofitable ſeruauntes, &c. For if hee commaunded
his Apoſtles ſo to ſay,Luke. 17. 10. and thinke, yea when they had done
what God had commanded them. Why, ſhal he not command

the ſame vnto vs, which be in life and doctrine ſo farre inferiour
to his Apoſtles, that we are vnworthie to loſe the latchets
of their ſhooes? God giue vs grace to be humble in
heart. Of this kinde of ſacrifice will we alſo ſay more hereafter.
               By that which is ſaid, is plainely ſeene, that the Maſſe is
neither an expiatorie, nor Euchariſticall ſacrifice: and ſo by
conſequence, no ſacrifice at all. That it is not expiatorie, we
already haue proued: and that it is not Euchariſticall: by that
which our aduerſaries ſay, that the Maſſe is an expiatorie ſacrifice,
is proued: If it be expiatorie, then is it not Euchariſticall.
The force of this Argument conſiſteth in a rule of Logicke,
which ſaith: The members diuiding muſt not be confounded:
As touching the definition of the Maſſe, this is ſufficient.
Wee haue taken from it the kind, in prouing it no ſacrifice:
we haue taken from it the difference, in prouing that
it is not expiatorie: both the kind and difference taken away,
what ſhall be the definite? Nothing. Or if the Maſſe
bee anie thing, it is a priuation of the holy ſupper of our maſter
and redeemer Ieſus Chriſt: euen as ſinne is the priuation
of grace.
               Let not our aduerſaries thinke that we yeeld thē their Maſſe
to be ſo ancient,The ſecond & third reaſons of our aduerſaries, and our anſwer. as they make it, ſaying: that the Lord 1565
yeares paſt did inſtitute it: for ſo long it is ſince he ſuffered. Neither
do we grant them that S. Peter. nor S. Iohn, nor any of the
Apoſtles euer ſaid that which our aduerſaries ſay to bee the
Maſſe.Chriſt did not inſtitute the Maſſe, neither did the Apoſtles ſay it. Thoſe which they bring are falſe teſtimonies. If any
man beare falſe witneſſe againſt his neighbour, how vile or abiect
ſoeuer he be, he breaketh the 9. commandement, he breaketh
the law of God, and for the ſame is worthy of eternall
death. Howe much more ſhall he breake it, and be worthy of
death, that vpon cold bloud and deliberat purpoſe (of the learned
I ſpeake, and not of the vulgar ſort, which can neither read
nor vnderſtand) bringeth falſe witnes againſt Chriſt, his king,
prophet, and prieſt, ſaying that he did inſtitute the Maſſe, wherin
are ſo many ſuperſtitions and idolatries: ſaying that the Apoſtles,
choſen veſſels of God to denounce the Goſpell, and to
preach the holy catholike faith, haue ſayd ſuch a Maſſe? And

ſo ſay they that S. Peter was the firſt that ſang Maſſe:The Romiſtes raiſe vp falſe witneſſes againſt Chriſt S. Peter▪ & S. Iames, &c. but by
heareſay they ſpeake, without alleaging any Authors. How is it
poſſible that S. Luke, ſo diligent an Hiſtoriographer of the Acts
of the Apoſtles, hath left in the incke-horne this Article which
our aduerſaries hold ſo neceſſarie to ſaluation, as any other of
the twelue Articles of the faith contained in the Creed. And
ſeeing that this falſe teſtimony which they raiſe vp againſt Peter
auaileth little to the confirmation of their Maſſe. Another falſe
teſtimony raiſe they vp alſo of S. Iames: that S. Iames (ſay they)
was the firſt that ſaid the firſt Maſſe in Ieruſalem. Yet are they
more ſhameleſſe, bring to light the ſaid Maſſe ſaid of S. Iames,
which 1500 years ſince at the leaſt was buried: & cry out, a miracle,
a miracle. Now is there no further diſputing to be had: ſith
it is an Apoſtle which hath ſaid Maſſe: now neither can or ought
they to moue any more doubts touching the Maſſe: vpon paine
to be an heretike, & blaſphemer, whoſoeuer ſhal moue it. In the
1560. yeare was this Maſſe of S. Iames (as they call it) printed in
Paris. In this Maſſe ther is a prayer, wherin are ſaid theſe words:
We pray for the gifts offred, ſanctified, precious, ſuperceleſtiall,
ineffable, immaculate, glorious, horrible, fearful & diuine. What
maner of ſpeech is this? when vſed the Apoſtles any ſuch forme
of ſpeaking? Alſo that this falſhood may be clearely perceiued,
there is a prayer in the Maſſe for the Monkes & Nunnes, which
liued in the Monaſteries. They which ſay that this Maſſe is of S.
Iames, ſhould read this and be ſilent. For in the time of the Apoſtles
was there neither Monkes nor Nunnes, nor Monaſteries:
many yeares after were theſe things inuented. Moreouer, if this
be a Maſſe of S. Iames let them augment the Cannon: Let them
place them among the Canonicall bookes of the holy Scripture.
Let them beleeue & do al that which is ſaid in the ſame. In
this Maſſe which they call of S. Iames, all the people did vnder
two kinds communicate: all the office was ſaid in the vulgar
tongue, the people ſang and anſwered to the prayers: in it was
neither the ſacrament of the bread nor wine adored. But in the
Maſſes of our aduerſaries are all things contrarie: wherein the
people do not but once in the yeare communicate, & this once
that they do communicate, they take from them halfe by the
middle: they take frō them the ſacrament of the bloud of Chriſt

which Chriſt cōmanded that all ſhould drink: their Maſſes they
ſay in a ſtrange tongue, which the people vnderſtand not, and
oftentimes he himſelfe that ſaith it, neither knoweth nor vnderſtādeth
that which he ſaith: The people are ſilēt, as though they
ſhuld heare an Enterlude: The people adore the bread & wine
as though it were Chriſt, and not the ſacrament of the body &
bloud of Chriſt. That which Ieſus Chriſt inſtituted, was his holy
ſupper, & he commanded his Apoſtles (who repreſented the vniuerſal
or catholike Church) that they ſhuld afterwards do the
ſame which they had ſeene him do. Do this (ſaith he) in remembrance
of me. And S. Paul (ſpeaking to the Corinthians, among
whō Satan had already beſtirred himſelf, bringing ſome abuſes
into the Church,1. Chr. 11. 23. concerning the ſupper of the Lord) ſaith: For I
receiued of the Lord, that which alſo I deliuered vnto you. That
the Lord, the night, &c. And what agreemēt hath the maſſe with
this which the Apoſtle ſaith? Nothing at all. Let our aduerſaries
then ceaſe to cōfoūd things togither: Let them ceaſe to change
their names: Let thē not call the ſupper of the Lord, the Maſſe,
nor the Maſſe the ſupper of the Lord: Becauſe it is not ſo. This
ſupper of the Lord a very ſmal time cōtinued in it being & perfection.
For euen thē whiles the Apoſtles yet liued, aroſe vp diſſentions,
ſciſmes & hereſies about the ſame: The which S. Paul
willing to reforme, reduced the ſupper to it firſt inſtitution, as
the Lord had inſtituted & celebrated it, & cōmanded that the
faithful ſhuld celebrate the ſame. After theſe times came others
& the buſines went frō il to worſe: Men not cōtented with the
ſimplicity, wherwith the Lord had celebrated his ſupper, ſought
to be famous, ſhewing thēſelues more wiſe, more prudent and
aduiſed, thē Chriſt himſelf. And ſo they began to ad & diminiſh
in the ſupper of the Lord. But notwithſtāding al this for a 1000.
yeares ſpace the ſubſtāce of the ſupper was not touched. Albeit
as touching outward ſhew, they vſed many ceremonies, which
Chriſt Ieſus neuer vſed & attired themſelues with other, then
cōmon ornaments, the which Chriſt nor his Apoſtles neuer did.
The 1000. years paſſed, mē dared to touch the to quick, the ſubſtance
of the holy ſupper. They begā to ſay, that the bread was
not bread and that the wine was not wine: but that they were
cōuerted trāsformed, & tranſſubſtantiated into the body and
bloud of Chriſt. And this gainſaying the holy Scripture and the

Fathers, as well of the Greeke as Latine Church: which
wee will afterwards very ſufficiently proue. The matter
thus going in the Councell of Vercele,Goncilium Vercelenſe. 
                  Leo the ninth being
Pope, Tranſubſtantiation was concluded. This Pope condemned
the doctrine of Berengarius: as ſpeaking of the fourth domage,
we will afterwards declare. Berengarius beleeued what
the holy ſcripture had taught him, and in the Fathers hee had
read: to wit, that the Sacrament of the Lords ſupper in two
things conſiſted: in matter (as they cal it) and in forme: the matter
is that, which is ſeene, touched, & taſted, which is the bread
and wine. The forme is that which is not ſeene, but beleeued,
the body and bloud of Chriſt. You ſee here the great herefie
of Berengarius which the Pope and the Councell (gouerned
by the Pope) condemned. Afterwards ſpeaking againſt tranſubſtantiation
by manifeſt authorities of the Scripture, and by
the ſayings of ancient Doctors will we proue true bread and
true wine viſible and tangible to be in the Sacrament, and the
true body and bloud of Chriſt to be iuuiſible and beleeued by
faith. And albeit the Pope commanded that Tranſubſtantiation
ſhould be beleeued, and the Councell decreed it, yet were
there in thoſe times manie learned and godly men, who (giuing
credit to that which the holy Scripture and ancient Doctors
ſaid) nought eſteemed that which the Pope and his Councell
commanded. And yet as conſtantly paſſed they further: they
wrote againſt ſuch doctrine, as impugning the word of God,
and the Fathers. Afterwards in the yeare of our Lord 1200.
Pope Innocent 3. confirmed this decree: and 
                     Ʋrban 4. in honor
of this ſacrament, at the requeſt of a recluſe (with whom in
times paſt he had bin ouermuch familiar) inuented the ſolemne
feaſt which they call Corpus Chriſts. Read the life which we haue
written of this 
                     Ʋrban 4. And the diuel not contented to haue ſo
euilly intreated the moſt holy Sacrament of the body & bloud
of Chriſt, nor to haue giuen it ſo mortal a wound, paſſed yet further.
He cut off the ſacrament half in halfe: he took away (ſay I)
the ſacramentall wine, which repreſented, ſealed, and ioyntly
gaue (receiuing it by faith) the bloud of Chriſt: And ſo was it decreed
in the Councell of Conſtance, where were three Popes
depoſed: that the Sacrament not ſub vtraque ſpecie, in

both kinds, but in one only ſhould be giuen. True it is, they
yeeld their excuſes, why they departe from the inſtitution of
Chriſt & that which in the Church was vſed, but their excuſes
be very friuolous & to be laughed at: As more hereafter we
ſhall ſee, intreating of the ſixt domage which the maſſe cauſeth.
And a faire thing it is that they condemne thoſe for heretiques,
which in both kinds receiue the Sacrament according to the
Inſtitution of Chriſt himſelfe. If they ſeeke antiquitie. This
manner of communicating ſub vtraque ſpecie, vnder both kinds
continued in the Church for the ſpace almoſt 400. yeares:
Their communion in one kinde is newe and hath not bene but
180 yeares, for ſo long is it ſince was held the Councell of
Conſtance. One thing had I forgotten that it is many yeares
ſithence they began to ſay their Maſſe without cōmunicating
of the People, for the prieſt alone eateth and drincketh it
vp all without giuing any parte thereof to any. How can this
be ſaid to be the ſupper of the Lord, a communion, a common
banquet ſet forth,Priuate Maſſes forbidden. and prepared for all the faithfull. Theſe
maner of Maſſes call they priuie Maſſes and with fauor ſpeaking)
very priuie. True it is that many Canons▪ and decrees
haue bene made againſt theſe priuie Maſſes: but behold how
they are kept. The priuies haue ſo evilly ſmelled that each one
thought good to ſtoppe their noſes and paſſe by them. Priuate
be theſe Maſſes called, not for that they be priuately or ſecretly
ſaid, which publiquely are in the Churches and hearing of
all men that will: But ſo they are called: Becauſe not the people,
but the Prieſt alone doth communicate. And yet haue they
gone further: The Pope giueth licenſe to ſay theſe priuie Maſſes
in the corners of houſes: but then is the charge of them
double. For the Prieſt which ſaith Maſſe muſt haue mony. And
the Pope for the licenſe which he giueth to haue an altar portable,
which is alſo called the Bull. All this is contrarie to the
inſtitution of the Lord. You ſee heere howe the holy ſupper
which Ieſus Chriſt did inſtitute, and his holy Apoſtles did celebrate,
hath bene by little and little disfigured, vntill from the
Supper of the Lord, it is conuerted into the Maſſe of the
Pope. Behold the inſtitution of the holy ſupper, and behold
that which is done and ſaid in the Maſſe: and it is to be ſeene

if the Maſſe be the Supper, or the Supper the Maſſe.
               By an infallible argument and palpable demonſtration doe
we now proue,A reaſon prouing that neither Chriſt nor his Apoſtles ſaid Maſſe. that neither Ieſus Chriſt did inſtitute the Maſſe,
nor his Apoſtles ſayd it: and this it is: that which very many
yeares after the death of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and not of
one, but many, and in diuerſe times was inuented: Ch
                     •
                  iſt did
not inſtitute, nor yet his Apoſtles did it. The Maſſe which our
Aduerſaties ſay, many yeares after the death of Chriſt and
his Apoſtles, not of one, but of many, and in diuerſe times was
inuented. It followeth then, that ſuch a Maſſe was not inſtituted
by Chriſt, neither did his Apoſtles ſay it. The firſt part of
this argument none, except he bee ſenceleſſe and fooliſh, will
denie. But the ſecōd part will our aduerſaries denie, which eaſily
may be proued. For one Pope made the Confiteor: another
the Introit: another the Kyrie-eliſon: another the Gloria in excelſis:
another the Gradual: another the Offertory: another the
Cannon: another the Mementoes: another the Agnus Dei: the
ſame ſay I of all the reſt that is done or ſayd in the Maſſe. None
of theſe things Chriſt, but the Popes, & in ſundry times, ordained.
Our aduerſaries (of thoſe I ſpeake which haue but meanly
read the hiſtories) though they burſt againe, can by no means
denie,Confiteor. that the Maſſe from end to end hath bene made by many
Popes. They well know that Damaſus, which was Biſhop
of Rome in the 368. yeare ordained the Confiteor.
               
               
                  Gelaſius Affricanus, about the 492. yeare, compoſed (as ſaith
Neuclerus) the Hymnes,Hymnes, Collect. Reſponſ. gradu. prefac. verè dignum. Collectes, Reſponſories, Graduals,
and Prefaces, and added the 
                     Ʋerè dignum. & iuſtum eſt.
               
               
                  Symmachus, about the fiue hundreth and twelfth yeare, ordayned,
that euery Lords day, and principall feaſt of the
Martyrs ſhould be ſung Gloria in excelſis Deo.
                  Gloria in excelſis.
               
               
                  Pelagius,
                  Commemoratio defunctorū. about the 556. yeare, added the commemoration
of the dead.
               
                  Gregorie the firſt about the ſixe hundreth yeare made the
Anthems and the Introit.
                  Antif. introit, Kerie-eliſon. Alleluia, &c. He ordained alſo that the Kyrie-eliſon
ſhould nine times be ſung, and the Alleluia: Item▪ that
the Pater noſter ſhould with a high voyce be ſung ouer the
conſecrated Hoſt: and addeh the Cannon, Dieſque no
                        •
                     tros
i
                        •
                      tua pace diſponas.
               
               
                  
                  Sergius which in the ſeuen hundred and firſt yeare died, ordayned
that the Agnus Dei ſhould three times be ſung before
the breaking of the bread.Agnus Dei,
               
               Gregorie the third added to the ſecret of the Maſſe,
                  Quorum Sole
                        ••
                     itas. Quorum
ſolennitas hodie in conſpectu tuae Maieſtatis celebratur, Domimine
Deus noſter in toto orbe terrarum.
               
                  Nicholas 1.Seque
                        •
                     ces. added the Sequences.
               As little can they denie that Siſtus the firſt,Sanctus. added to the
Maſſe Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabaoth.
               
               
                  Innocent,
                  pax. about the 405. yeare added the kiſſing of the
Paxe.
               Leo the firſt added Orate pro me fratres,Orate pro me. Deo gratias. 
                  and the Deo gragratias.
He added alſo the Cannon, Sanctum ſacrificium immamaculatam
hoſtiam,Sanctum Sacrificium. Item hanc igitur oblationem, &c.
               
                  Celeſtine ordained the Offertorie.Hanc igitur.
               
               
                  Alexander the firſt,Offertorie. who died in the yeare 117. began to corrupt
the order and maner which Ieſus Chriſt and his Apoſtles
held in celebrating of the Supper: And ſo the ſaid Pope ordayned
that the bread ſhould be thinne without leauen, and
not common,Vnleauened bread. as before it was. As it appeareth by Diſt. 93. Cap.
Siquis. Item, he ordained that water ſhould be put into the
wine.Water put into wine. 
                  De Conſec. Diſt. 2. Cap. Sacramento. Item, he added, Qui
pridie quam pateretur, &c. This ſheweth verie clearely that Ieſus
Chriſt did not inſtitute the Maſſe:Qui pridie quā pateretur. ſeeing ſo many perſons
ſithence the death of Chriſt haue bene much buſied in making
the ſame.
               Beſides this, the great Teigitur clementiſſime Pater, which is
one of the chiefeſt patches of the Maſſe:Teigitur. wherein mention is
made of the Pope, of the Biſhop, and the king, doth manifeſtly
ſhew, that Ieſus Chriſt made not the Maſſe, becauſe in the time
of Chriſt was neither Pope nor biſhop.
               The communicants,Commn
                        •
                     icāt
                        •
                     
                   wherein made mention of the holy
Virgin, of the Apoſtles, and of many Saints, which very long
time after the Apoſtles liued in the world (as S. Cyprian, Laurence,
Griſogonus, Coſmus, Damianus, and others) very well ſheweth
that Ieſus Chriſt made not the Maſſe. Saint Peter they
haue not placed in this Cannon: for ſhould he ſo haue beene, it
would haue beene ſaid, that he ſought his owne glorie. A

peece of the Maſſe is there alſo, and that of the chiefeſt, which
beginneth,Nobis quoque peccatoribus. 
                  Nobis quoque peccatoribus, wherin mention is made
of ſome of the Apoſtles, hee and ſhee Saints mingled without
order one with another, as Saint Barbara, Perpetua, Agueda,
Lucia, Iues, Cicelia, &c. which long after the death of Chriſt liued
in the world.
               By this then may be ſeene, that Chriſt did not inſtitute the
Maſſe: that which we pretended haue we prooued, that Ieſus
Chriſt did not inſtitute the Maſſe, and that his Apoſtles neuer
ſayd it: but that the Popes in diuers times did make it, one adding
one peece, and another, another; vntill it was brought into
the being and eſtate wherin it now is: which hath no agreement
with the Supper of the Lord. Entring ſometimes into
conſideration of theſe patches, ragges, ſhreds and peeces,
whereof the Maſſe is made, a wonderfull ſimilitude or compariſon
(me ſeemeth) came to minde, and the ſame I ſuppoſe
will alſo appeare to ſuch as well conſider it. To the Maſſe neither
leſſe nor more hath it happened,The Maſſe patched like a beggers cloak. then to a pilgrims ſcrippe,
to an old cloake of a begger that beggeth from doore to doore:
vpon ſuch a cloake the elder it is, the more patches doe they
ſet vpon it: ſo that in time, nothing therein is ſeene but here a
little peece, and there a ſmal peece of the cloth whereof it was
firſt made. And this cloth is ſo vſed, ſo waſted, ſo diſcolloured,
& ſo without being, that it no way appeareth to be that which
it was. In this cloake are not ſeene but patches of cloth, corrupt,
and rotten, and very ill placed, and worſe ſowed together:
ſo that it cauſeth loathing to thoſe which haue bene delicately
brought vp. Such another cloake, and neither more nor leſſe is
the Popiſh Maſſe. The cloth wherof it was made, was the Supper
of the Lord: which men not celebrating according to the
inſtitution of Chriſt, waxed olde, and loſt it collour, it being,
and worth: Thus commeth one and caſteth a peece vnto it:
afterwards commeth another and caſteth vnto it, &c. So that
now it is not the Supper of the Lord, but the Maſſe of the Pope:
now it is not the robe of an honourable man, but a cloake of a
ſhameleſſe begger. By that which is ſaid, haue we anſwered to
the ſecond and third reaſons, wherewith our aduerſaries doe
confirme their Maſſe.
               
                  
The fourth reaſon with which our aduerſaries ſuppoſe to
mainetaine their Maſſe is:The 4. Reaſon of our aduerſaries and our anſwere. That all the Church Catholique,
from the death of Chriſt, vntill this day, with moſt great reuerence
hath celebrated the Maſſe. This their reaſon they
confirme. ſaying: that God who loueth his Church, as his
ſpouſe, would neuer ſuffer it ſo long time to be deceaued, eſpecially
with ſo great ſuperſtition, and idolatrie, as the Maſſe
(wee ſay) is. This fourth reaſon of our aduerſaries, in two
thinges conſiſteth. In antiquitie: And in that God who loueth
his Church, as his ſpouſe, would not ſuffer, &c. concercerning
the firſt, of the Antiquitie of the Maſſe. In anſwering
to the ſecond and third reaſons of our aduerſaries wee
ſhewed, that Ieſus Chriſt neuer inſtituted the maſſe: nor his
Apoſtles euer ſaid it: and that the Church Catholique for
the ſpace of a thouſand yeares neuer celebrated the Maſſe,
which our aduerſaries now celebrate. But the holy ſupper
was celebrated with ſome humaine traditions, and ceremonies
inuented by man: Notwithſtanding all this, the holie
ſupper, as touching it ſubſtaunce was euer in it beeing
conferued, by the ſpace of a thouſand yeares. For fiue hundred
yeares ſpace hitherto, the ſupper hath ceaſſed to bee
a ſupper, and hath euery day more and more bene conuerted
into the Maſſe: ſuch as nowe wee ſee, and chiefly
ſince tranſubſtantiation and the Communion in one kind
were commaunded to be beleeued, as an Article of faith:
Then fell wholy, the holy ſupper, not in name onely, calling
it the maſſe: but alſo in ſubſtaunce as before we haue
ſaid.
               Concerning the ſecond part which they bring for confirmation
of the firſt namely, That God, who loueth his
Church, would not permit that his Church ſo long time
ſhould liue deceaued: To this I anſwere praying them to
read the Hiſtories of the olde and newe Teſtament. Wherein
they ſhall finde (if they well conſider) that the Church
faulted and mainteined errours, and that no meane ones.
The people of Iſrael was the people of God, the Church
of God and the ſpouſe of God, and dearly beloued; but for all

this, the ſame people fell into many errours ſuperſtitions,
hereſies and Idolatries and not once by chaunce but oftentimes,
and of deliberate purpoſe. Read that notable ſong,
which Moſes the man of God made,Deut. 32. written in Deuteronomy:
There I ſay, ſhall yee find that that people, and that
Church of God, fell into idolatrie verſe ninth, Hee ſaith:
For the Lordes portion is his people: Iaakob is the line
(or lot) of his Inheritaunce. And in the tenth verſe, hee
ſaith that God kept this people as the apple of his eye.
And in the eleuenth: God carried this people vppon his back
like the Eagle. &c. But behould what hee ſaith in the
ſame chapter and verſe fifteene of this people ſo deare and
ſo beloued. Behould if they fell to idolatrie: And hee forſooke
(ſaith hee) God that made him and regarded not
the ſtrong God of his ſaluation. They prouoked him with
their ſtraunge Gods, and made him angry with their abhominations:
They ſacrified to diuels, and not to God. But
to Gods whom they knewe not: new Gods, newly come
vpp whome their fathers feared not, &c. And in the two
and thirtith chapter of Exodus, it is ſaid: that the people
of Iſraell pluct of their golden Earnings &c.Exod. 23. 3. & 4. And that Aaron
tooke them and made of them a moulten calfe: And
when the calfe was ſeene, Iſrael ſayd: Theſe be thy Gods
which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. And when
Aron ſawe that. Hee built an altar before it, &c. As wee
haue ſayd in the beginning of the firſt Treatiſe. Here may
yee fee, How all the people of Iſrael, and Aaron their
chiefe Prieſt committed idolatrie. Let vs proceede fur
                     •
                  her.
When the people of Iſrael were entred into the land of promiſe.
How behaued they themſelues? they alſo committed
Idolatrie. Read in the booke of Iudges, and chiefly the
ſecond chapter. and the eleuenth verſe. And the children of
Iſrael (ſaith hee) did wickedly in the ſight of the Lord, and
ſerued Baal. And verſe nineteenth. But when the Iudge
was dead, they turned and corrupted themſelues more then
their fathers following other Gods, ſeruing them and bowing
downe before them.
               They ceaſed not from their owne inuentions: Nor from

their rebellious way. All this booke is full of examples hereof.
The Iudges ended, and this people of God gouerned by
kinges. How was it then? As ill, or worſe then before. Let
them read the Prophets (which they call) great and ſmall.
This people of God, their Prieſtes and Princes condemned
the good Doctrine, and perſecuted the holie Prophets that
preached the ſame. So obſtinate was this people in turning
away from God, That God in indignation commaunded
Eſaie to ſay theſe wordes vnto the people:Eſaie 6. 9. in hearing, heare
and not vnderſtand. In ſeeing, ſee, and not perceaue.
The heart of this people is waxed fatte and their hearing
dull, and their eyes are blinded, leaſt they ſhould ſee with
their eyes and heare with their eares, &c. The prophet
Ieremy proteſteth to all the people of Iuda,Ieremy 25. and to all the
Inhabitantes of Ieruſalem: the diligent care which the
Lord had vſed to conuert them from Idolatrie to himſelfe
and the ſmall profect they receaued thereby. Hee had this
(ſaid hee) preached vnto them by the ſpace of twentie and
three yeares, and they heard him not. Note what the Prophet
ſaith: in the ſecond verſe that hee ſpake this to all the
people of Iuda, and to all the inhabitantes of Ieruſalem.
And note, that onely this Hebrewe people, and no other
in all the world, was then the Church of God: And behould
if the Church erred, Who wounded and impriſoned
Ieremy for his ſermons? Paſhur the chiefe Prieſt of the people
of God. What was the ſtate of the people of Iſrael, when
Elias ſuppoſed that there was none but hee that worſhipped
the true God of Iſrael?1. kings 19. 10. S. Paul alleageth this place, Rom.
11. 13. Let this ſuffice concerning the Church of the old Teſtament.
Come wee nowe to the newe. When the diuine
word, taking fleſh came into the world, How found he his
ſpouſe the Church? All to be ſmeared with dirt, and ſootte.
The Scribes and Phariſies, prieſts and high prieſts with their
traditions had wholely corrupted her. As nowe doe the
Prieſtes and Fryars, Biſhoppes and Popes. So great then
was the corrupption in Doctrine among the people of God,
that there was their principall ſects of the Pharifies ſadduces &

Eſſees. The Phariſes great hypochrits, corrupted the ſcripture
with their traditions. The Sadduces ſhameleſly denied the reſurrection,
and allowed neither Angel nor ſpirit. As by the diſputation
which they held with Chriſt about the woman that
had ſeauen husbands, appeareth. Matth. 22. 22. and in the Acts
23. 8. The Eſſees apart had their opinions. It was a people ſolitarie
like the Charterhouſe Monkes. They had no wiues, drunk
no wine, nor did they eat any fleſh, a people they were very
auſtere, and euery day faſted. Whiles the Church was deuided
into theſe ſects, when all was confuſed, came the ſonne of God
into the world. With ſuch he conuerſed: And of ſuch, for preaching
the truth vnto thē he was crucified. When the light of the
Goſpel was come, which Chriſt and his Apoſtles preached:
who allowed it not, but rather killed and crucified thoſe that
preached the ſame? The ſame people of God, the Church of
God, & chiefly the Scribes & Phariſies, prieſts and high prieſts.
Theſe came togither, & held a Councell wherein they concluded,
that Chriſt ſhould die, and all thoſe that ſhould preach the
ſame Doctrine: They tooke him, & becauſe they wanted authoritie
to put any to death, with falſe witnes they accuſed him before
Pilate, Deputy to the Emperour Tiberius, and thisin the holy
Ieruſalem. And ſo was he condemned for an euil doer, &
for ſuch a one was crucified. O what a Church? O what a Councell,
if the cheife Preiſt may erre, and erred in dede. The Lord
by diuine power eftſoones rayſed vpp, who ſuborned his
keepers to ſay that his diſciples had ſtollen him away? Who aſſembled
a Councell to perſecute the Apoſtles▪
                  The Church, Councel, & chiefe Biſhop may▪ & haue erred in the faith. and commaunded
them that they ſhould not preach? who cauſed S. Iames to
be put to death? Who made S. Peter to be taken, to cauſe him to
die, had not the Angel of the Lord deliuered him? The viſible
Church of God, the ſcribes and Phariſies and high Prieſts. Not
without cauſe faid the Lord, ſpeaking of Ieruſalem: Ieruſalem
Ieruſalem,Matth. 23. 37. which killeſt the prophets and ſtoneſt thoſe that be
ſent vnto thee. Afterwards the very ſame hath hitherto happened:
& leauing former times ſpake we of theſe wherein we liue.
Who hath for the ſpace of 70, or 80. yeares hitherto, ſhed ſo
much bloud of Martyres? they that call themſelues the Church
of Ieſus Chriſt & chiefly the peeuiſh Friars, Biſhops & chiefe

Biſhops, and the ſame ſhal they doe, vntill the end of the word.
And ſo Chriſt ſpeaking of his ſecond comming, when he ſhall
come to the vniuerſall Iudgement, ſaith: Luke 18. 8. The ſon
of man when he commeth, ſhall he find faith vpon the earth?
As if he ſhould ſay: no. And in the XXIIII. chapter of Saint
Matthewe, he maketh a diſcourſe hereof: verſe 12. And becauſe
(ſaith he) iniquitie ſhalbe increaſed, the loue of many ſhalbe
cold. And verſe 24. For there ſhall ariſe falſe Chriſts and
falſe prophets, and ſhall ſhew great ſignes and wonders, ſo
that if it were poſſible, they ſhould deceiue the very elect. And
thinke we not, theſe falſe Chriſts, and falſe Prophets ſhalbee
Turkes and Iewes: Chriſtians they ſhalbe, and for ſuch ſhall
they be holden: Biſhops and chiefe Biſhops ſhalbe the principally
as at this day they be.
               I haue ſufficiently proued (me thinketh) by many examples
and paſſages of the old and new. Teſtament, that the Church
of God may erre, and hath erred indeede: which to our aduerſaries
ſeemeth vnpoſſible. Now will we reſolue a doubt: and
this it is: If the Church bee ſuch, and ſubiect to fall into Errours,
ſuperſtitions, hereſies, and idolatries (as before we haue
proued) How ſhall that be vnderſtood which the ſcripture
ſaith:How the church being the pi
                        •
                     lar of truth may erre. That the Church is the body of Ieſus Chriſt; That the
Church is the ſpouſe of Chriſt: That the Church is the pillar
of truth founded vppon the ſure foundation. That the Churche
is without ſpot or wrincle, and wholy faire: That the gates of
hell ſhall not preuaile againſt her, and other like commendations
and prayſes thereof the word of God witneſſeth? To
this may we anſwere that both the one, and the other may very
well ſtand. For God neuer ſuffered all his Church to fall togither
into Error: But rather hath alwayes reſerued ſome good
and ſome times alſo ſeauen thouſand. As ſaid he ſpeaking of
Elias,
                  1. kings 19. 18. albeit in corners which neuer bowed the knees to Baal.
Such as theſe, the common error, diſpatched: wherewith
all the Church was generally deceaued, Againſt this Error,
ſuch others of theſe ſpake, preached and wrote: and moſt
times it coſt them their liues: and had each one of them had a
thouſand liues: a thouſand liues would each one of them
haue loſt for the ſame cauſe. That Church wherein Catholiquely

and vniuerſally raigned that Errour, or hereſie: ſhee
and her Biſhoppes, did perſecute condemned and kill them.
As by examples wee haue confirmed the ſame. So that when
the ſcripture ſaith: All Iſrael, all Iuda, all the inhabitants of
Ieruſalem turned away from God, committed Idolatrie, &c.
Of ſuch a manner ingenerall muſt wee vnderſtand, which
hath it Exceptions: for in the middeſt of theſe Errours, and
idolatries ſo Catholique, fo vniuerſall had alwayes God ſome
particular men, whom he reſerued cleane and pure from that
common errour. So reſerued God Moſes and Ioſua, and
ſome other particular perſons alſo which worſhipped not the
calfe, when all Iſrael ingenerall, and Aaron the high Prieſt him
ſelfe, worſhipped it. The ſame will wee ſay of the time of the
Iudges, that God neuer forſoke his Church. The ſame wee
ſay alſo of the times of the kings of Iſrael, and of Iuda. When
all committed Idolatrie God rayſed vp an Eſaias, a Micheas,
a Ieremias, an Ezechiel, a Daniel, &c. Who reproued vices
and falſe Doctrine, and declared the truth. But which of theſe
did not the Church, and her high prieſts perſecute and kill. So
alſo reſerued the Lord vnro himſelfe at his firſt comming into
the worlde. A Simeon, an Anna widdowe, a Ioſeph, and
his ſpouſe, the virgin Marie, mother of our ſauiour. An holie
Elizabeth, and her ſonne Saint Iohn Baptiſt: which were
Godly, very well thought of the true religion, and agreed neither
with the Phariſies nor Sadduces nor Eſſees. And ſo the
Lord in ſo vnhappy times, preſerued his Church. And ſo likewiſe
vntill now hath he preſerued the ſame. And now alſo, in
theſe leſt miſerable times, wherein neither faith Luk. 18, 8. nor
loue is found Matth. 24. 12. God reſerueth ſome which oppoſe
themſelues to the tyranny of the Antichriſt of Rome, and to the
common errour and Idolatrie of all the Romane Church ingenerall.
And ſo God hath not permitted that his Church hath
wholly bene deceiued: nor according to his promiſe, I am with
you vnto the end of the world. Wil he euer permit the ſame. Euer
thē, hath God reſerued fome that haue not bene deceiued with
the cōmon errour: & many from time to time be enlightened:
As by experience we haue ſeene it. God of his infinit mercy increaſe
them, that the number of his choſen may be fulfilled, &

ſo ſinne may ceaſe: and only Chriſt, without any competency
of Antichriſt, may reigne. So be it. Amen.
               I haue long dwelled vpon this fourth anſwere: for the matter
ſo required: conſidering that many ſimple people, which
not otherwiſe haue heard, nor are able to vnderſtand how God
who loueth his Church, would permit her ſo long time to be
deceiued, at the leaſt, with ſuch a deceit of idolatrie, are in this
deceiued. And ſo they and the reſt ſhall ſee that, not to be the
truth, which our aduerſaries hold for for an oracle, that the viſible
Church cannot erre. God open their eyes, that ſeeing, they
may ſee, and hearing they may heare: and ſo conuert and be ſaued.
Amen.
               
               Only God is he which cannot erre,Eſay. 53. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 22. but doth euer right. But
only his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus is he which ſinned not, which erred
not,Eſa. 40. 8. neither was there any guile found in his mouth. Onely the
word of God abideth for euer. And as often as the Church (be
ſhe neuer ſo populous & apparant) ſhall depart from this word
of God, and ſhall not hold it for her ſquire, rule, and patterne,
ſhe ſhall erre. And the more ſhe turneth away, the more ſhall
ſhe erre. But alwayes, when ſhe will be gouerned thereby, ſhe
ſhall be eſtabliſhed, and ſhall neuer erre. For the word of God
ſaith Dauid) is a lantern vnto our feet,Pſal. 119. 105. and a light vnto our paths.
The 5.The 5. reaſon, & our anſwer. reaſon wherewith they confirme their Maſſe is the great
miracles which the Maſſe & their conſecrate hoſtes haue done.
Here will I recken ſome (for to ſeeke to recken all, ſhould bee
neuer to end. Damaſcen, among other great & ſtrange matters,
which he citeth in the ſermon of the dead (afterwards will wee
ſpeake of theſe wonders) telleth for a great miracle, a true fable
and old womans tale. One Macarius (ſaith he) deſirous to know
the ſtate of the dead, ſpake with the drie ſcull of one that was
dead, &c. And that the ſame ſcull anſwered him: that the ſoules
of the dead are not ſo greatly tormented whileſt the ſacrifice of
the Maſſe continueth. Herehence our aduerſaries conclude, the
Maſſe to be holy and good.Sermone de lapſis; S. Cyprian an Author more ancient
and autentike, and a martyr of Ieſus Chriſt, reporteth a ſtrange
miracle, which in his preſence happened: Thus then ſaith he: I
my ſelf being preſent: & an eye witnes therof. It chāced that the
parēts of a yong girle flying, & making through great feare no

reckening of their daughter, they left her with the Nurſe that
brought, her vp. The Nurſe hauing the abandoned childe,
caried her to the Magiſtrate gaue vnto this young girle (before
the idoll, whereunto the people flocked) a foppe wet in the
wine, that was left of the ſacrifice of them which periſhed:
This ſop gaue they vnto her, for that by reaſon of her tende
                     •
                  
age ſhe could not yet eate fleſh: the mother after this, recouered
her child: but ſo much could the infant tell or declare the
horrible fact it had committed, as it could not before either
vnderſtand, or auoyd it. It happened that the mother brought
her through ignorance, when we were ſacrificing (as much to
ſay as celebrating the ſupper of the Lord, which in memorie
of the ſacrifice, by the Lord once offered, was celebrated) but
the infant mingled with the Saints, vnable to abide our ſupplication
and prayer, nowe with ſhrikes tormented her ſelfe,
now with feruour of heart, like a waue of the 
                     •
                  ea, ſhe caſt her
ſelfe to and fro as though a hangman had tormented her. And
with the tokens and ſhewes, that the ignorant ſoule of her
age and ſimplicitie might, ſhee confeſſed the conſcience of
the deede. But when (the ſolemnities ended) the Deacon
began to preſent the cuppe to them that were preſent (note
the communion in both kindes) and the others hauing taken
it,The Communion in both kinds in the time of Saint Cyprian. the turne came to her (in the time of Saint Cyprian they alſo
gaue the cup to young children) the girle by very inſtinct
of the diuine Maieſtie, turned away her face, ſhut her mouth,
and forcing together her lippes, refuſed the cuppe. But all
this notwithſtanding, albeit ſhe refuſed the ſacrament of the
cuppe, yet inſiſted the deacon, and caſt it into her mouth. Then
began ſhe to ſigh, and vomite. The Euchariſt could not ſtay in
a body and mouth which were filthy. The drinke ſanctified in
the bloud of the Lord (note that he calleth the wine in the ſupper
drinke ſanctified in the bloud of the Lord) with furie departed
from the polluted intralles:Drinke ſanctified in the bloud of the Lord. ſo great is the power of the
Lord, ſo hreat is his maieſtie. &c. Hitherto Saint Cyprian. Of
this miracle Saint Auguſtine alſo in the 23. Epiſtle maketh
mention, reciting it there ſo certaine authours: and more,
Saint Cyprian ſaith, that hee was an eye-witneſſe, I aſſuredly
beleeue that ſo it happened. But the ſame will I not ſay, of that

recounted by Dam
                        •
                     ſcen: no
                     •
                   of that which now I will declare.
Albeit reported by Pius the ſecond. In the deſcription of Europe,
cap. 21. Pius the ſecond ſpeaking of Eſtiria, a prouince
of Almaine, ſaith theſe words: It is ſaid, and is a thing common
among thē of Eſtiria, that there was a certain Gentleman, who
manie times purpoſed to hang himſelfe: which much diſpleaſing
hm, he went to a certaine learned perſon, to demaund
remedie againſt this temptation. The counſell that hee gaue
him was this, that he ſhould carie his owne prieſt euery day to
ſay Maſſe in a ſolitary rocke, where he dwelled. The Gentleman
obeyed, and ſo continued for a yeere, and neuer after
came into his memorie this wicked thought. Afterwards, the
Prieſt craueth of him licence to goe, and ayde another Prieſt
his neighbour, which dwelled in another mountaintaine neare
adioyning, to celebrate the feaſt of the dedicatiō of the Church.
The Gentleman was contented that the Prieſt ſhuld go, purpoſing
in himſelf to follow ſpeedily, & heare Maſſe. The Caualle
                  
                     •
                  o
buſied now with one thing, then with another, ſtayed long
after. In the end, almoſt at the middle of the day, he departed,
and in the way encountred a certaine villaine, which ſaid vnto
him: The Maſſe in the other mountaine is already ended, and
the people departed: The Gentleman ſorrowing at this newes,
and calling himſelfe vnluckie, for not ſeeing that day the body
of Chriſt: the villaine began to cheare him, and ſaid vnto him:
that he would ſell him the merite, which he had gotten by hearing
of Maſſe, if the other would buy it: and demaunded for
a price of the Gentleman his coat (for know this, that among
the Papiſts one ſelleth his merits to another: as if there were
ſome that had done more thereof then hee ought, wherewith
he might do what he pleaſed.) The ſale made and paſſed, the
knight notwithſtanding went vp into the mountaine, and
made his prayers in the Church. And as he returned, he found
the villaine hanged vpon a tree, and neuer afterwards was
troubled with wicked temptations. Hitherto Pope Pius the ſecond.
If this were truth, who ought not to worſhip the
Maſſe? But either it was a lie: or if it ſo happened, it was
one of Sathans miracles, the more to blind the people with
the idolatrie of the Maſſe. Of ſuch miracles the Lord and his

Apoſtles do aduiſe vs to beware that we bee not deceiued by
them.Two ſorts of miracles. Manie other miracles they recount, but in anſwering
to theſe aforeſaid, we ſhall haue anſwered to all that they can
recken.
               And the better to anſwere this fift obiection, knowe we
that there are two ſortes of miracles, the one true, and the
other falſe. Thoſe that are true, are done by the power of
God, for confirmation of the truth, and the confuſion of
falſhood. Such were the miracles which God wrought by
the hand of Moſes, and of the other Prophetes: Such bee
thoſe which Chriſt and his Apoſtles did. Comming then to
our purpoſe: I ſay that the miracles which God hath done in
the moſt holy ſacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt, to
make vs vnderſtand that he inſtituted this ſacrament, and that
it was not humane inuention, he did them: And this did the
Lord for one of theſe two endes: The firſt is to expell the
wicked, impious, and vnworthy perſons from this ſo high a
Sacrament: for this end ſerued the miracle, which Saint
Cyprian ſaw, and we haue declared: and others alſo which the
ſame author reporteth. For what actuall ſinne had a ſucking
infant, witout anie diſcretion committed, in eating a ſoppe
moyſtened in the wine ſacrificed vnto idols? But did the
Lord, to make vs vnderſtand howe much thoſe men, which
vnworthily, and without any conſideration, receiue the holy
Supper, doe diſpleaſe him: and that to them is it all one,
to ſitte at the table of the Lord, and to receiue the Sacrament
of his bodie, and of his bloud▪ or to ſit at the table
of the Diuell, and receiue the Diuell himſelfe. If God chaſtiſed
by his iuſt Iudgement, a ſucking Babe: as Saint Cyprian
reporteth, for hauing participated of the table of the
Diuell, and of that of the Lord: how thinke wee, will hee
puniſh thoſe, that of ripe age and deliberate purpoſe do participate
of both tables? This young childe could not drinke
the cuppe of the Lord, hauing firſt drunke that of the Diuels:
it could not bee partaker of the table of the Lorde,
and of the table of diuels. For the cuppe of the Lord is the
communion of the bloud of Chriſt: and the bread which
wee breake (in the Supper) is the Communion of the bodie

of Chriſt. And what agreement hath Chriſt with the Diuell?
This is not mine owne inuention, they are the words of
Saint Paul, ſpeaking for this purpoſe to the Corinthians. 1. Cor.
chap. 10. 15. So that we confeſſe, that God hath miraculouſly
many times chaſtened thoſe, which vnworthily receiue
the moſt holy ſacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt.
And the Apoſtle in the eleuenth chapter doth witneſſe the
ſame, when he ſaith: For which cauſe (as much to ſay, as for hauing
vnworthily eaten) many amongſt you are ſicke and
weake, and many are aſleepe, that is to ſay, are dead. The ſecond
end that God pretendeth in the miracles which he doth
in the Supper, is touching good men. In the celebration of
this ſacrament hath God willed ſometimes to do miracles, to
illuſtrate the ſame, and to ſhew forth the excellencie and dignitie
thereof: and the more therewith to confirme the faith of
the godly, that (the Lord hauing blowne away their ſinnes)
doe worthily receiue it. And not onely for confirmation of
the faithfull hath the Lord in the Sacrament wrought miracles:
but alſo hath he done them in the celebration of Baptiſme.
And ſo S. Iohn Baptiſt,
                  Mat. 3. 16. when Chriſt was baptized, ſawe
the heauens open, and the holy Ghoſt viſibly deſcending in
the ſhape of a Doue. And this was, that the Baptiſt, as an eye
witneſſe, might teſtifie of Chriſt, and ſay: Behold the Lambe
of God,Ioh. 1. 29. which taketh away the ſinnes of the worlde. Such
miracles then admit wee, that for confirmation of our faith
are done hy the power of God.
               The ſecond ſorte of miracles▪ are done by the arte of the
Diuell,Falſe miracles. to deciue men, and to cauſe them not to beleeue
the true, but the falſe doctrine: ſuch miracles call wee falſe
for one of theſe two cauſes.
               The firſt is, in regard of the Authour the Diuell, who is a
lyar, and the father of lyes.
               The ſecond becauſe ſuch miracles deceiue them that beleeue
them. By the arte of the Diuell did the Sorcerers of
Pharaoh worke wonders, as Moſes did. Of ſuch miracles
the Lord forewarneth vs: There ſhall ariſe vp (ſaith he) falſe
Chriſtes, and falſe prophetes, and ſhall ſhewe great ſignes
and wonders:Mat. 24. 24. ſo that the verie elect, if it were poſſible,

ſhould be deceiued. Behold, ſaith the Lord, I haue tolde you
before. And Saint Paule ſpeaking of Antichriſt, ſaith: That his
comming ſhall bee by the working of Sathan,
                     
                        •
                     . Theſ. 2. in all power,
ſignes, and lying wonders, &c. Such may we thinke were the
miracles of the Sorcerers of Pharaoh. Such bee the miracles
which Damaſcen reporteth of the dead mans ſcull, and of the
ſoule of Traian,
                  Sermone de defunctis. and of the ſoule of Falconilla, that being condemned,
and in hell, were ſaued. Of theſe miracles of Damaſcen
we will ſpeake afterwards. Such may we thinke was
the miracle of the Maſſe by vs recited of Pius the ſecond. In
concluſion all miracles which bee to confirme a thing that is
contrarie to the word of God, be falſe, and done by the arte
of the diuell. Againſt the word of God is it, that the ſoules by
the iuſt iudgement of God condemned and buried in hell,
ſhould go out thence and be ſaued. Againſt the word of God
is it, to beleeue there is any other Purgatorie then the bloud of
Chriſt. Ireneus, a moſt ancient Doctor, telleth that a certain man
called Marke, a great deceiuer, and heretike, with the Sacrament
of the Euchariſt did ſtrangely deceiue the ſimple. For
he ſo changed the colour of the wine, that nothing but bloud
appeared: and by his inchantments ſo greatly increaſed a
little of the wine, that it filled the cuppe, and alſo ranne ouer.
And another cuppe greater and more capable being
brought: the ſelfe ſame, without adding more liquor, did fill
it vp to the top. Shall we beleeue his hereſie, becauſe he confirmed
it with miracles? Surely no. A commandement haue
we, that if an Angell from heauen ſhall teach vs another Goſpell,
another doctrine, another faith then that which Ieſus
Chriſt and his Apoſtles haue taught vs, wbich they haue left
vs, written in the olde and new teſtament; that although hee
confirme it with many miracles, as did this Marke, and the ſorcerers
of Pharaoh, we ſhould not beleeue him. Of this Marke
maketh Saint Ierome mention, and citeth Ireneus for his author.
This Marke (ſaith he) went into France, and thence paſſed into
Spaine: and with his enchantments deceiued many, the Gentle
women chiefly, whom he allured to carnall loue. Reade
the epiſtle to Theodora, the wife of Lucinus Beticus, or Audaluz.
tom. 1.
               
                  
If we reade the hiſtories of the Gentiles, we ſhall find that
they ſhew many and very ſtrange miracles: in them ſhall wee
find, that there ran riuers of bloud, that bloud flowed from the
thumbe of Iupiter.
               
               
                  Titus Liuius reporteth, that it rained fleſh in Rome. Quintus
Curtius ſaith, that when Alexander beſieged Tyre, the bread
commonly did ſweat bloud. And other infinit miracles to confirme
their idol worſhip, may the Gentils alleage: notwithſtanding
theſe miracles, their idoll worſhip is wicked & deteſtable.
And ſuch be the miracles which our aduerſaries recount to
confirme their Maſſe: their tranſubſtantiation, their idolatrie,
wrought by arte of the diuell to confirme falſe doctrin, deceiue
the ſimple, and if it were poſſible, the verie elect.
               The ſixt reaſon wherewith they confirme their Maſſe,The ſixt reaſon and the anſwer is: to
ſay that in the Maſſe are many good things, taken out of the
holy ſcripture: as are the Epiſtle, the Goſpell, the Hoc eſt corpus
meum, &c. To this obiection we may anſwere: That ſuppoſe,
that in the Maſſe there bee ſome good things taken out of the
holy ſcripture: it followeth not therfore that the Maſſe is good:
for ſo ſhould ſorceries, witchcrafts, and inchantments be very
good. For in them the name of God, the name of the Father,
of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt is very often named. And
no ſorcerie, witcherie, or inchantment is there, wherin theſe
names with many epithites and properties are not named. And
the witches (that theſe names may haue the more efficacy) doe
name them in tongues, which they themſelues vnderſtand not:
in Hebrue, Greeke, and Latine. All goeth backward, wherein
our aduerſaries do imitate the witches. For all the Maſſe almoſt
they ſay in Latine, mingling with it ſome Greeke words, as Kyrie-eleyſon,
Chriſte-eleyſon: He brue do they alſo mingle with it,
as Sabaoth, Hoſanna, Alleluia. But Chriſt when hee celebrated
his ſupper, all whatſoeuer he ſpake, in the vulgar tongue did he
ſpeake it, that all the Apoſtles, ſimple men, might vnderſtand,
and ſpeake the ſame. From hence we conclude, that it ſufficeth
not that the Maſſe, becauſe it hath ſome good thinges in it,
ſhould therefore be holy and good, how much more good then
this there is in the Maſſe▪ is ſo corrupted and endomaged with
ſuperſtition and idolatrie, that it can do no good, but much euil.

or as a litle leuen doth leuen the wholle lumpe of dough, & as
a litle poyſon doth corrupt the beſt meate that is in the worlde
and the moſt excellent wyne yf neuer ſo litle they caſt into yt
killeth him that drinketh it▪ as Examples wee haue in our Spaniſh
Alexander 6. who by the errour of his ſeruitour drunke
the poyſoned wine, which he had prepared to kill ſome Cardinals,
that he had inuited, and thereof dyed) euen ſo alſo, the
ſame things, which of their owne nature be good, placed in the
Maſſe are poyſon,All whatſoeuer is in the Maſſe is poyſoned. which deſtroy. This will we afterwards examine,
and chiefly that which our aduerſaries themſelues, affirme
to be moſt holy; and of the Maſſe, the holineſſe it ſelfe,
which is, Hoc eſt corpus meum. For now (ſay I) they apply it not
to the purpoſe, that Chriſt ſayd. So contrarie, ſay they it, to the
inſtitution of Chriſt, and in a ſtrange tongue, which the people
vnderſtand not, that it infecteth him that heareth it. And if
you beleeue their Hoc eſt corpus me
                        •
                     m, as they vnderſtand it,
into a terrible hereſie ſhall yee fall: As a little beneath, when
we ſhall ſpeake of the fourth domage of the Maſſe we will
declare. That which our aduerſaries conclude, that the Maſſe
is good, becauſe many good things be in it, euidently appeareth
by that we haue ſaid, to be falſe.
               The ſeuenth reaſon wherewith they maintaine their maſſe
is,The 7. reaſon & the anſwer. that the ſacrifice of the Maſſe was figured in the ſacrifice,
which Melchiſedech made, who being Prieſt of the moſt
high God, offered vnto God bread and wine. They ſay alſo
that Malachy chap. 1. verſ. 11. ſpeaketh thereof, as wee haue
before alleaged. Concerning that which they ſay of Melchiſedech,
it ſhall bee needfull that they reade and conſider the hiſtorie,
as Moſes ſetteth it downe. Whereof the Apoſtle maketh
mention, and applyeth it to Chriſt, whoſe figure (ſaith hee)
Melchiſedech was.Gen. 14. 18. 
                  Moſes declareth that Abraham returning
from that notable victorie,Heb. 7. 1. &c. which againſt foure kings, God
had giuen him. Melchiſedech king of Salem, brought forth
bread and wine: he ſaith that Melchiſedech was Prieſt of the
high God. Our Aduerſaries hearing that Melchiſedech was a
prieſt, and that he offered bread and wine: from hence they
conclude, that this bread and wine he offered in ſacrifice vnto
God, and that this was a figure of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe.

Whereunto we anſwere: that Melchiſedech offered not bread
nor wine vnto God: but brought it forth, or to ſpeake better,
cauſed it to be brought forth: for this is the force of the word
which Moſes here vſeth: which very well agreeth with our
Spaniſh maner of ſpeaking: Hee brought forth, or cauſed to
be brought forth bread and wine. If you will aske me why
made he bread and wine to bee brought forth? I will tell you,
to refreſh Abraham and his people, that came wearied from
the ſlaughter, and hungry in the way which he made. For confirmation
of that which I ſay, I will content my ſelfe to alleage
Saint Ambroſe and Saint Ierome. Thus then ſaith Saint Ambroſe
vpon the ſeuenth chapter to the Hebrues. No new thing
ſhould it be, if Melchiſedech went out to meet Abraham the
Conqueror, & brought him bread and wine for the refreſhing
as well of him, as his fellow ſouldiers. The ſame, word for word
ſaith Saint Ierome.
                  Epiſt. ad Euagrium tom. 3. You ſee heere, wherefore ſerued the bread
and wine: which Melchiſedech cauſed to bee brought forth.
What agreement then hath the bread and wine of Melchiſedech,
with the accidents I ſay, Becauſe they denie any ſubſtance
of the bread and wine in the Maſſe.Heb. 7. 
                  Melchiſedech, ſaith
the Apoſtle, was the figure of Chriſt: and ſheweth wherein;
but hee maketh at all no mention of the ſacrifice of
bread, nor of wine: for in this Melchiſedech was not the figure
of Chriſt,Melchiſedech in three things was the figure of Chriſt. ſith neither the one nor the other offered the

                     •
                  acrifice of bread and wine. In three things (if we note well,
that which the Apoſtle ſaith,) ſhall wee finde that Melchiſedech
was the figure of Chriſt: the firſt, in that Melchiſedech
was a king,Heb 7. and not after a ſort, but King of Righteoufneſſe
and Peace: in this was he the figure of Chriſt, who onely is
the true King of righteouſneſſe and peace. The ſecond is,
that Melchiſedech was a Prieſt, not as the Leuiticall prieſts,
which being mortall, one died, and another ſucceded him:
but Melchiſedech was eternall: and therefore his ſacrifice was
eternall: as of him the Apoſtle thus ſpeaking, doth ſay:
Without father, without mother, without kindred, which
neither hath beginning of dayes nor end of life: But is likened
vnto the Sonne of God, and doth continue a prieſt

for euer. You ſee here, how Dauid ſpeaking with his Lord the
Meſſiah, which is Chriſt: ſaith vnto him, Thou art a Prieſt for euer
after the order of Melchiſedech.
                  Pſal. 110. 4. Pſalm. 110. 4. As much to
ſay, as in that Melchiſedech was thy figure and likeneſſe. As
Mechiſedech (in that he was a figure of Chriſt) was an euerlaſting
Prieſt, ſo thou alſo the Meſſiah, art the ſame. That which
the Apoſtle ſaith, that Melchiſedech was without father, without
mother, is to be vnderſtood, inſomuch as he was the figure
of Chriſt: for otherwiſe had he father and mother: and ſo think
ſome that Melchiſedech was Sem. The Prieſts after the order
of Aaron were mortall, and none of them continued for euer:
but he of the order of Melchiſedech is immortall and euerlaſting.
Of the order of Aaron were there many: but of the order
of Melchiſedech was there but onely one, the ſame Meſſiah our
redeemer and Lord: who in that he is the eternall ſon of God,
hath no mother: & in that he is man, borne in this world, when
the fulneſſe of time was come, hath no father: and as hee is eternall,
ſo ſhall his prieſthood be eternall. Euery day ſing they
in their euenſongs,psſalm. 110. 4. 
                  Iurauit Dominus, & non poenitebit eum. Tu et
Sacerdos in aeternum ſecundum ordinem Melchiſedech. But I call
their owne conſciences to witneſſe that dayly ſing it, if they
vnderſtand that which euery day they ſing. Of this order of
Melchiſedech expect no other prieſts then Chriſt. But Antichriſt
is he that ſhall ſo terme himſelfe to be (as he ſaith) the vicar
of Chriſt. Hee, and all his ſhavelings and fatlings will ſay
themſelues to be Prieſtes after the order of Melchiſedech: and
not after the order of Aaron. But ſo are they not after the order
of Melchiſedech, ſith there is no more but one, which is Chriſt:
as little are they after the order of Aaron, ſeeing with the death
of Chriſt ceaſed the Leuiticall prieſthood. What prieſts then be
the Papiſts? After the order of Baal: and ſo they be enemies of
God, and of his Prophets, which preach againſt idolatrie.
               The third thing that the Apoſtle noteth, wherein Melchiſedech
was the figure of Chriſt, is: that Melchiſedech, by reaſon
of his prieſthood, was much more excellent than Abraham:
and ſo, as the greater, bleſſed Abraham. And Abraham himſelf
acknowledging this maioritie and ſuperioritie, gaue vnto him
the tithes of the ſpoyles. Such a one truly is Chriſt, vpon whom

the redemption, righteouſneſſe, & ſanctification, not of Abraham
only, but of all the faithful alſo, doe depend. Here ſee you
the things, wherin (may we beleeue the Apoſtle, a veſſell of election)
Melchizedeck was the figure of Chriſt, No mention at
all maketh he, of the ſacrifice of bread nor of wine; which we
doubt the Apoſtle would haue done, had Melchizedeck in this
bene a figure of Chriſt. The place which they cite of Malachy,
ſaith thus: For from the riſing of the ſun, vntill the going downe
of the ſame, my name (is great among the Gentiles. And in
euery place ſhalbe offered to my name pure incenſe, and
Myrrach (which we tranſlate, preſent or guift) The common
edition, wherunto our aduerſaries giue more credit, then to the
Ebrew text, tranſlateth: Et in omni loco ſacrificatur & offertur nomini
meo oblatio munda. To wit: And in euery place is ſacrificed
and offered to my name, a cleane offering. Here hence they
conclude: that this cleane offering which in euery place, is
ſacrificed, and offered is the ſacrifice of the maſſe. But the
Maſſe, being a profanatiō of the holy ſupper (as before we haue
proued) it cannot be a preſent, nor offering, which is offered to
God; nor acceptable to him: whereof it followeth, that this Incenſe,
and preſent. Of which ſpeaketh Malachy is another thing
farre different from the Maſſe: It is (ſay I) the ſacrifice, not
expiatory, but Euchariſtical, of prayſe and thankſgiuing, which
the faithful euery day, and moment, doe offer to God As before
wee haue ſaid, in the one hundred forty one Pſal. and 2. verſe.
The Prophet vſeth theſe two very names which we tranſlate
Incence and offering. The which place, none vnderſtand of
the Maſſe: becauſe the Prophet ſaith. An euening ſacrifice; But
their Maſſe is ſaid in the morning.
               It is no new thing with God, when his people, his prieſts and
princes, prouoked him with their ſuperſtitions; and Idolatries,
to threaten them, that he would forſake them: that he would
nought eſteeme them: that he would take vnto himſelfe another
people, which ſhould ſerue him much better. Of whom,
he would haue great regard.Rom. 10. 19. S. Paul alleageth to this purpoſe,
a notable paſſages when he ſaith: But I ſay, hath not Iſrael attained
to knowledge? Firſt Moſes ſaith, I will prouoke you to ielouſie
with a people which is not mine:De
                        ••
                     . 32. 21. with a fooliſh people I will

prouoke you to wrath: alſo Eſaias is bold to ſay: I was foūd of thoſe
that ſought me not, I was manifeſted to them, that enquired not for
me &c.
                  Eſaias 65. The ſame doth the Lord, in the place of Malachias:
which we haue in hand,Malach. 1. 10. forſaking the Iewes, he ſaith I take no
pleaſure in you (ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, neither do I regard the offerings
of your handes. You ſee here, how he forſaketh the Iewiſh
people: And then in the following verſe, hee admitteth
the Gentiles, ſaying: For from the riſing of the ſunne vnto
the going downe of the ſame, my name is great among the
Gentiles: And in euery place ſhalbe offered to my name Incenſe,
and a pure offering,Mar. 16. 15. Then ſaith God: That his Church
ſhould now no more be ſtraightned in Iudea: But that it
ſhould extend throughout all the world.The calling of the Gentiles. Which was fulfilled,
when the Lord ſent his Apoſtles throughout all the world,
to preach the Goſpell to euery creature: Then did Malachy
propheſie the calling and conuerſion of the Gentiles: which
hartily conuerted;Iohn 4. 24. ſhould offer Incenſe, and a pure offering vnto
God. That is to ſay: That they ſhall ſerue him, with ſpirituall
worſhippe and ſeruice, and ſhall worſhip him in ſpirit
and truth: and not in this mountaine, nor at Ieruſalem (As ſaid
Chriſt to the woman of Samaria) but throughout al the world
The prophets when they will ſpeake of the calling of the
Gentiles, are wont to ſignifie the ſpirituall worſhip, Whereunto
they exhort them, by the ceremonies of the lawe: And
in ſtead of ſaying, that all the people ſhould turne vnto God,
They ſay: That they ſhall goe vp to Ieruſalem. In ſtead of
ſaying, that all the people of the South and of the Eaſt, ſhall
worſhip God: they ſay, that they ſhall offer for a preſent the
riches of their land. To ſhewe, the great and abundant knowledge,
which he was to giue to his faithfull, in the kingdome of
Chriſt, they ſay: That the Daughters ſhal propheſie, the young
men ſhal ſee viſions, & old men ſhal dreame dreames. So now
Malachy willing to ſay, that the Gentiles ſhall worſhip God
in ſpirit, and in truth, ſaith: that they ſhall offer Incenſe and
an offering, which bee things which God in the lawe commaunded
the Iewes to offer vnto him, and addeth, pure: to denote,
that this Incenſe and offering is not to be carnal but ſpirituall.
What agreement hath this with the Maſſe? Which is a

diueliſh inuentiō, & prophaneth the holy ſupper? Other places
of the ſcripture alleage they for confirmation of their Maſſe:
But with as great faithfulneſſe, and as much to the purpoſe, As
theſe two, of Mechilzedeck and Malachy, which by that is ſaid
may eaſily be anſwered. The 8 reaſon wherewith our aduerſaries
do magnifie their maſſe,The 8 reaſon of our aduerſaries & our anſwere. is for the great good & profit that
therof they receiue: And of al theſe reaſons, & others ſuch like
which they alleadge, they cōclude: vs to be heretiques & dogs
worſe thē Iewes & Turkes: Becauſe, we ſo ſhameleſly ſpeake
againſt the Maſſe; which Ieſus Chriſt inſtituted, his Apoſtles
ſaid, & all the Church Catholike vnto this day hath celebrated
&c. They ſay then, that beſides the oblatiō and ſacrifice which
Ieſus Chriſt hath made vppon the Croſſe, of his body and of
his blood for remiſſion of our ſinnes, to reconcile vs with God
and to obtayne for vs life eternall: hee hath ordayned the
Prieſtes, which be ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles: to conſecrate
in the Maſſe, the bread and wine: to tranſubſtantiate it in the
body and bloud of Chriſt: to ſacrifice and offer vnto God the
father, that body and that blood for the remiſſion of our ſinnes
and to obtaine all that is neceſſarie for vs, both in body & ſoule.
And what greater good then this (ſay they) can be? This ſacrifice
(ſay they alſo) doth much profit the dead, to allay the
paines,The propfits of the Maſſe. which they haue to ſuffer, and doe ſuffer in purgatory
As we cited before of the dead mās ſcul of Macharius reported
by Damaſcen. Who ſo luſteth to knowe the profits of the
Maſſe, Let him read the Spaniſh houers, & he ſhall find very
many. Amongſt others there mentioned, be theſe which follow,
as much worth is the maſſe, as is the paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt.
Alſo that he which heareth it waxeth not old, whilſt he heareth
it. Alſo that hee ſhall not looſe that day, the light of his eyes
Alſo that he ſhal not die an euil death: alſo that he which ſhal
haue ſeen the body of the Lord, if that day he ſhal die ſodenly,
that it is taken for comunicating, & he may not feare to be condemned.
And al this ſay they that S. Iohn Chriſoſtom, S. Auguſtine
S. Ierom ſay; for they knew how to raiſe falſe teſtimonies. Theſe
Articles of faith, haue the inquiſitors of our countrey of Spaine
many yeares ago yeelded to goe among the houers, which cō
                  monly
are praied. And if now they haue cauſed thē to be taken

away, and not ſuffered them to be printed: in this yet doe
they ſhew their ignorance that for ſo many yeares, they haue
ſuffered and commanded, that with their licenſe they ſhould
print them. The cauſe that they now fall in account is: that ſo
groſſe, and abhominable lies, more ſerue at this day to make
wary the people, then to deceaue them; And therefore permit
they ſuch things more, to be printed. We ſay then, that the
Maſſe procureth vs no good at all, but great miſchiefe rather,
As after we ſhall ſee.
               Now that we haue anſwered to the reaſons wherewith our
aduerſaries thinke to mainetaine their Maſſe, for more confutation
thereof, we will now likewiſe ſet downe ſome notable domages
which it cauſeth, and great aduerſaries, which neceſſarily
follow the popiſh Doctrine of the maſſe. And I will not be
much curious in ſeting down here al the domages & abſurdities
which follow of the maſſe: for that ſhould be neuer to end. Only
wil I ſet down ſuch as moſt fitly come to mind for the preſēt.
               I ſay then, that the Maſſe cauſeth many domages. Firſt it prophaneth
the holy ſupper of the Lord,7. domages, the Maſſe cauſeth. ſuppreſſing and deſpiſing
his death & paſſion. 2. In it, they inuocate the dead ſaints. 3. In it
dead ſaints are placed for interceſſors. 4. The prieſts that ſaith
it, holde hee intention to conſecrate or not, and the people
that heare it commit idolatrie. Fiftly, The Maſſe mainetaineth
many other abuſes, beſides the Idolatrie of tranſubſtantiation:
As the worſhipping of Images, and the inuention
of Purgatorie, which is a common cutpurſe. Sixt. In the maſſe
defraud they the people of the halfe of the Sacrament, and
this halfe doe they giue ſeldome and wickedly. Seuenthly.
And put caſe the Maſſe were good; yet is it ſaid in a ſtraunge
Language which the people vnderſtand not, and with ſuch
geſture mouing childiſh toyes, & apiſh fopperies that rather
prouoke laughter, then deuotion. Theſe ſeuen domages wee
proue by the ſame order, as we propounded them. And that the
maſſe derogateth from the paſſion of Chriſt,The 1. domage. is clerely ſene. For
the Maſſe which for this cauſe was ordayned, that a hundred
thouſand ſacrifices ſhould euery one day be offered, what doth
it pretend; but that the paſſiō of Ieſus Chriſt, wherin he offered
himſe
                     ••
                  e, and this once by one only ſacrifice remaineth buried

and caſt in a corner? Who will thinke to be redeemed by the
death of Chriſt, when he ſhall ſee a new redemption in the
Maſſe? Who will beleeue his ſins to be pardoned by the death
& paſſion of Chriſt, when he ſhal ſee a new remiſſion of ſins in
the Maſſe? Inuocation is a high worſhip & ſeruice, which is only
due to God.The 2. domage. Rom 10. 4. For in him only we beleeue, how ſaith S. Paule
ſhall we call vpon him in whom we haue not beleeued? So that inuocation
preſuppoſeth faith, & ſuch a faith as is founded vpon the
word of God, the Nicen creed, they ſing in their Maſſe, which
beginneth Credo in vnum Deum. I beleeue in one only God. If
in one only God we ought to beleeue, one only God ought we
to inuocate: The which inuocation being done in faith, God
promiſeth that he will heare it. Whoſoeuer ſhall call vpon the
name of the Lord (ſaith Ioel) ſhall eſcape &c,Ioel 2. 23. As S. Paule Rom.
10. 13. and Saint Peter Acts 2. 21. doe interpret it, ſhalbee
ſaued. Alſo that only God ought to be inuocated, is by this reaſon
proued. Sacrifice is only due to the true God (this our aduerſaries
will not deny) inuocation is a ſacrifice. As ſaith the
Pſal, 50. 14. Sacrifice vnto me praiſe: or as ſaith the common edition,
The ſacrifice of praiſe: The ſacrifice of praiſe commendeth
the Apoſtle Hebr. 13. 15. and Hoſea 14. 3, that we ſhal
offer to God. Therefore Inuocation, ſith it is a ſacrifice to God
onely, ought it to bee offered. But our aduerſaries forſaking
the fountaine of liuing waters, haue digged them broken ceſternes
which can holde no water.Ieremy 2. 13. They leaue to call vppon
God, and inuocate the Saints. And Saints ſometime alſo,
that it is not knowne who they bee; and ſome of them, it
may bee, that are burning in hell. An example haue we hereof,
in the prayer of S. Roccus, which togither with the Crowne
of our Lady in the 1581 yeare was printed in the houſe of Iohn
Gutierres in Siuell. The praier ſaith thus God which to the
bleſſed Roccus diddeſt promiſe a table which an Angel caried
that hee which ſhall pittiouſly inuocate him, may not bee offended
with the affliction of the peſtilence, &c. This prayer
of Roccus, I put for example, becauſe it came firſt to hand.
Many other examples may bee drawne from their Maſſes.
For what doe they in all their prayers, which they make to
the Saintes: but call vppon them, requeſting them to doe this

or that? There is no commandement either in the olde or newe
Teſtament, wherein God commandeth vs to call vpon any other
then himſelfe. Call vpon me (ſaith God) in the day of trouble,
and I will heare thee, and thou ſhalt honor me. He neuer ſaith, Call
vpon ſuch, or ſuch an Angel, vpon this or that other Saint, vpon
Abraham, Samuel, Dauid, Eſay, &c. Ieſus Chriſt, when his Apoſtles
beſought him to teach them to pray, did not command
them to call vpon his mother, vpon ſuch or ſuch a Saint: but
he commaunded them to call vpon God: and of him ſhould
they demaund whatſoeuer they had need of, as well for the
body as the ſoule. All which is contained in the prayer that he
taught them, Our Father, &c. And as there is no commandement
to call vpon any other, then vpon God: So is there no
example of any the faithfull, either in the old or newe teſtament
that hath called vpon any other then God alone. Secure wee
are of the infinite goodneſſe, loue, and power of God. Aſſured
we are, that whereſoeuer wee ſhall be, albeit in the belly
of the whale, or in the fierie furnace, and ſhall call vpon him,
he heareth vs. But of the Saints will we not ſay ſo much, whoſe
goodneſſe, charitie and power is limitted, and communicated
of that infinite. Only God is infinite, and ſo is in euerie place.
The Saints be finite, and therefore cannot be in euerie place, &
ſo can neither heare nor ſee our miſeries and neceſſities. And
ſeeing we intreat of inuocation, reaſon would wee ſhould ſay
ſomething of prayer,prayer. becauſe inuocation is ſo commonly called
Prayer is a certaine familiar conference & diſcourſe, which
the faithfull ſoule hath with her God: wherein ſhe ſheweth all
her neceſſities: that he is as a Lord, may not only beare thē, but
alſo as a father may prouide for them, and beleeueth that his
Maieſtie will ſo do, and ſo he doth the ſame. Prayer is a lifting
vp of the ſoule vnto God. Prayer is a ladder, by the which, the
ſoule mounteth from this vale of teares, from this gulfe of miſeries,
and pierceth all the heauens, and ſtayeth not vntill it
preſent it ſelfe before God, and propoſe vnto him all her neceſſities,
beleeuing as a good father, that he will prouide for
them. This Ladder of Prayer hath foure ſtages.
               
                  The Ladder of Prayer.
                  1 Neceſſitie conſtraineth vs to pray.
                  
                     
2 The Commandement of God commandeth it.
                  3 The Promiſe maketh vs aſſured to be heard.
                  4 Faith obtaineth that which is prayed for.
               
               Man of his owne nature and condition is ſo euill of himſelfe,
ſo haughty and proud, that did not neceſſitie conſtraine
him, hee would neuer ſubiect himſelfe to God, nor yet call
vppon him. For this cauſe ſayd Dauid, Pſal. 119. verſe 71. It
is good for me that thou haſt humbled (or caſt me downe) and a
little before hee had ſayd, Before I was humbled (or abaſed) I
went aſtray. The good which Dauid drewe of this de
                     •
                  ection,
and euery Chriſtian ought to drawe the ſame, is that hee humbled
himſefe before God, and called vpon him. The Saints
ſeeing themſelues oppreſſed with afflictions and ſorrowes, doe
acknowledge their offences, and call vpon God. So did Dauid,
when he ſaid,pſal. 120. 
                  When I was in trouble I called vpon the Lord,
and he heard me. But when the wicked be afflicted, they blaſpheme
againſt God, and diſpaire. This is a marke by which
the children of God doe differ from thoſe which bee not his.
The ſecond ſtage is, that God commaundeth vs to call vpon
him, Call vpon me in the time of tribul
                        •
                     tion, Pfal. 50. 15. The third
ſtage is, That the Promiſe doth make vs aſſured to bee heard.
And ſo when God commaundeth Dauid to call vpon him, hee
promiſeth that he will deliuer him: and addeth, that when the
afflicted calleth vpon God, hee doth him great ſeruice, And
thou ſhalt honour me ſaith he. Alſo Pſal. 91. verſ. 15. hee ſaith:
He ſhall call vpon me, and then promiſeth, and I vvill heare him:
I vvill be vvith him in trouble, I vvill deliuer him, and glorifie him.
In diuerſe places doth the holy Scripture promiſe,Ioel. 2. 23. that hee
which ſhall call vpon the name of the Lord,Act. 2. 21. ſhall bee ſaued:
but in no place doth it promiſe ayde,Rom. 10. 13. ſuccour or ſaluation to
him that ſhall call vpon any other (be hee neuer ſo holy) then
God. The fourth ſtage is, Faith obtaineth that which is prayed
for. Whatſoeuer ye deſire when yee pray (Chriſt ſayth,
Mark. 11. 24.) beleeue that ye ſhall haue it, and it ſhall bee
done vnto you. This faith had Dauid, Pſal. 4. 4. when hee ſayd,
The Lord will heare me when I call vpon him. The eleuenth chapter
of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues confirmeth this with many
examples. Reade this whole chapter, for therein is liuely ſet

forth the power and efficacie of fayth without the which (ſaith
he) it is impoſſible to pleaſe God. If the heart bee not ſincere,
ſimple,Heb. 12. 17. and pure, albeit one crie vnto God, he will not heare
him: as he heard not Eſau, albeit he prayed with teares: neither
heard he Saul, nor many others of a double heart: and to
make the heart perfect, only faith ſufficeth: Faith then is that
which obtaineth that which we pray for. The commandement
which commandeth vs to pray is of God, and not of the creatures.
The promiſe which maketh vs aſſured to be heard, God,
& not the creatures, maketh. The faith that obtaines that which
is prayed for, is faith in God, and not in the creatures. Hereupon
& with great reaſon, will we conclude, that this ladder of prayer
which hath ſuch ſtages, bringeth vs not to the creatures, but to
the creator, to only God omnipotent. Him only let vs worſhip,
him only let vs call vpon, to him onely let vs pray: for ſo doing,
ſure we are we ſhall not be confounded. He grant vs the grace
that we may truly feele our neceſſitie and miſerie, and feeling
it, may call vpon him, being aſſured, that for his goodneſſe &
promiſe ſake, and for the ſacrifice wherewith his only begotten
ſonne reconciled vs to him, he will heare vs.
               There is no Maſſe which is not full of interceſſions of Saints,The third Domage.
and the Prieſt alſo which ſaith it, preſumeth to be a mediatour
and interceſſour with God, that he may pardon the ſinnes of
thoſe, for whom he ſaith his Maſſe, be they quicke or dead. And
not for men onely intreateth hee, but alſo for Chriſt himſelfe,
praying the Father to receiue and accept him, as hee accepted
the ſcacrifice of Abel, Abraham, and Melchiſedech. Whereof
we will entreat in the fourth domage which the Maſſe worketh.
Yet is there no other mediator but Ieſus Chriſt alone. The reaſon
is this: for he that is to be a Mediator, muſt be in hand with
both parties, between whō he is made a mediator, for if he be in
hatred, or is not welbeloued with one of the parties, he ſhal neuer
preuaile: for ſuſpected ſhal he euer be holden. For this cauſe
was it meere that man hauing offended God, and being to
be reconciled with God, it was needfull (I ſay) that the reconcilour,
Interceſſour, aduocate and mediator, ſhould bee verie
God and very man: for had hee bene onely man, hee ſhould
haue bene a ſinner; conceiued and borne in ſinne, and ſo

ſhould hue nought preuailed with God. And had hee bene
God, and not man, hee could not by dying haue ſatisfied the
iuſtice of God (as dyed our Mediatour and Interceſſour Chriſt,
and dying, ſatisfied and payd all whatſoeuer man ought to the
iuſtice of God) Like as ſinne for being committed againſt the
infinite God, was infinite: ſo was it meete, that the wages of
that ſinne, ſhould be infinite: and ſo the infinite God and man
Chriſt, perfourmed the ſame. No other interceſſour, nor mediator
is there to obtaine of the Father pardon of ſinnes, but
Chriſt alone: for as there is but one God: ſo is there but one
Mediatour betweene God and man,Tim. 2. 5. the man Chriſt Ieſus: as
ſayth Saint Paul. He onely is the Mediatour of the new teſtament:
as in many places of the Epiſtle to the Hebrues,Heb. 8. 6. & 9. 15 & 12. 24. the Apoſtle
doth witneſſe. The ſame which we ſaid of inuocation, ſay
we alſo now: that there is no commandement of God, which
commandeth to put the dead Saints for interceſſours: neither
is there any example in the olde or newe Teſtament, that anie
of the faithfull hath put them for interceſſors. To ſeeke bread
beyond wheate may we not goe: for better bread then that of
wheate cannot be. Wee may not leaue a certaintie for a thing
vncertain. Aſſured we are by the word of God, that Ieſus Chriſt
is our Interceſſour: that the Saints are the ſame wee ſee not by
holy Scripture: and it not appearing vnto vs, yet (doubting
without faith) will we put them for interceſſours. And whatſoeuer
proceedeth not of faith is ſinne,Rom. 14. 23. as ſaith S. Paul to the Romans.
And writing to the Hebrues,Heb. 11. 6. he ſaith: Without faith it is
impoſſible to pleaſe God. Whereupon we conclude then: that
Chriſt onely wee ought to put for our interceſſour: and that
the Maſſe doteth in putting for interceſſour another beſides
Chriſt, to obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes, and not Chriſt onely
in dying was our Mediatour. But now alſo is he the ſame: as
Saint Iohn in his catholike Epiſtle, ſaith: Little children, theſe
thinges haue I written,
                  1. Ioh. 2. 1. 
                  that yee ſinne not: And if anie man ſin,
we haue an aduocate with the Father, Ieſus Chriſt the righteous,
&c.
                  Saint Iohn ſaith not, we haue aduocates but an aduocate. Had there bene more Aduocates then one, Saint Iohn
would doubtleſſe haue ſayd, We haue Aduocates, and would
haue named them. But as hee certainely knew, that there was
but onely one Aduocate, he ſayd, We haue an Aduocate, and

nameth him, Ieſus Chriſt, and addeth, The righteous: By
which tytle all other men he excludeth: all which (none excepted)
of their owne nature are the children of wrath; conceyued
and hardened in ſinne, in the belly of their mothers: as, that
holie Prophet king Dauid witneſſeth.pſal. 51. This doctrine ſo wholſome
and full of conſolation, that Ieſus Chriſt, now is, and
hereafter wil be our mediator and Interceſſor, hath Sathan
obſcured and for many yeares buried it in the church. Who
was he that ſeeing himſelfe in neceſſity and miſery would
remēber Ieſus Chriſt to put him for an interceſſor & aduocate
with his father? Some ran to one he or ſhe Saint, others to other:
according to their zeale & according to their fooliſh deuotion
and ſometimes put they thoſe for Interceſſors, whoſe ſoules
were burning in hell. With the Popes is it no new thing to diſcannonize
theſe whom other Popes haue canonized for Saints:
For example. Pope Boniface 8. that diſcannonized Hermanus
Ferrarienſis, comaunding him after he had 30 yeeres beene
buried, to be vntombed and burned; during all which time he
had bin holden for a Saint & was inuocated of al, contrariwiſe a
Pope hath bin which cannonized him for a Saint, whom others
condemned for an heretike. S. Ierome and Pope Damaſus condemned
for an Arrian Pope Liberius, but Gregory 7. did cannonize
him for a Saint. Their Mule being ſicke, they call vpon S.
Polonia: when they haue fore eyes, S. Lucie: for the throate they
inuocate S. Blaſe: for the peſtilence, S. Roccus. They go yet further,
and ſhameleſſely for their filthy luſts, put they Magdalen
for interceſſour: the barren put for interceſſour, whom thinke
you?The legend of S. Chriſtopher after the pope himſelfe is fabulous. the great gyant Saint Chriſtopher: whoſe legend for being
ſo fabulous, Pope Pius the third commanded, to be taken
out of the Roman Breuiarie, which he cauſed to be corrected:
as in the life of Marcellus the ſecond before wee haue noted.
How many kingdomes, how many prouinces, how manie people,
how many houſes, how many perſons there bee, ſo manie
protecting Gods haue they, whom they put for their interceſſours.
God our maker, and Ieſus Chriſt our redeemer ſleepe.
Hereof complaine the Prophets,Ier. 2. 28. &. 11. and chiefly Ieremie, when he
ſaith: For according to the number of thy cities vvere thy Gods, ô
Iudah. Bleſſed be the Lord, who by his great mercie hath pleaſed

in theſe latter times, to ſhew vs ſo great mercie, as to renew
and raiſe vp againe this doctrine ſo admirable and full
of conſolation: the which in the time of darkeneſſe, of ignorance
and ſuperſtition was dead (as it were) and buried:
Here will I briefly recite a chaunce, that vpon this matter
happened. It is now thirty ſixe yeares paſt, that one conferring
with a graduate, with a maiſter in Iſraell: among other
things, ſayd vnto him: that Ieſus Chriſt was now alſo our Aduocate.
The maiſter wondred at that which was ſaid, it ſeeming
to him to be new doctrine, for that neuer ſuch had he heard or
read. The other ſeeing him wonder, wondred at his wonder,
and for confirmation of that he had ſayd, alleaged vnto him
the place of S. Iohn, We haue an aduocate with the father Ieſus
Chriſt. &c. Saint Paul confirmeth this doctrin, Rom. 8. 34. ſpeaking
of Chriſt, he ſaith: Who is at the right hand of God, & maketh
requeſt (or interceſſion) for vs. And Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore hee is
able alſo euerlaſtingly to ſaue them that come vnto God by him, ſeeing
he euer liueth to make interceſſion for them. Well beleeued this
Maiſter that the Saints were Aduocates: but that Ieſus Chriſt
was the ſame, he neither beleeued, nor knewe. If he being a
Maiſter in Iſrael, was ignorant of this what ſhall wee wonder
if the ignorant people know it not? What ſhall we maruell if
ſilly old women do not knowe it? That which I ſay: that there
is no other interceſſour but Chriſt, I meane it as touching the
obtaining of remiſſion of ſinnes: for otherwiſe one may and
ought to pray to God for another. And ſo S. Paul recommendeth
himſelfe to the prayers of thoſe to whom hee wrote, that
they ſhould pray to God for him. And the ſame Apoſtle beſought
God for them. Should the Prieſt ſay, that in ſaying his
Maſſe, he ſo prayed to God, as the Apoſtle prayed for them to
whom he wrote: ſuch a prayer (were it done in faith) ſhould be
good. But to preſume to be an interceſſour, and to ſell his ſacrifice
for as much vertue and efficacie, as the death and paſſion of
Chriſt it ſelfe. This is intollerable & ouermuch pride. Let them
begin to hūble thēſelues, & to giue glory to God, who only pardoneth
ſins, & this doth he by the only interceſſion of Chriſt, &
by the vertue of that only ſacrifice, which he once, & no more
offred to his father.
               The fourth domage, which we ſay the Maſſe worketh, and

this paſſeth and ought no way to be ſupportted.The prieſt which ſaith the Maſſe, and the people which heare it commit idolatrie. That is, the
Prieſt which ſayeth it, and the People that heare it commit
Idolatry. How great a ſinne is Idolatry and how much more
God abhorreth it then any other, we haue already declared
in our firſt Treatiſe. The Prieſt ordayned for the Maſſe (ſay
our Aduerſaries) hath authoritie and power from Chriſt and
his vicar the Pope,The authority of the popiſh Prieſt. that in ſaying the words of conſecration (as
they call them) Hoc eſt enim corpus meum (ſo that hee ſay them
ſuper debitam materiam, ouer a competent matter, and with intention
to conſecrate) he changeth, conuerteth, transformeth
and tranſubſtantiateth (this laſt word is it that beſt pleaſeth
them) the bread into the body of Chriſt, and the wine into his
bloud. In ſuch ſort, that be the Prieſt what ye will, liue hee a
letcher in mortall ſinne (as the moſt part of them do) be he the
greateſt and moſt infamous villaine of the world, yet for al this,
ſay they, that this authoritie he hath, to bring Chriſt from heauen,
in finiſhing the words, Hoc eſt corpus meum, and to put
him into the place where the bread and wine were: ſo that no
more bread, nor no more wine remaine (for the ſubſtance of
the bread and of the wine is vaniſhed and gone to nought)
but the body and bloud of Chriſt: the which is there trulie,
really, corporally, and carnally (theſe be their proper termes)
as bigge, and as great, as corpulent, and as large, as hee
was vpon the croſſe, when hee dyed for vs ſinners. This is
their doctrine. And becauſe we beleeue not theſe ſtraunge
things which be contrarie to the word of God, and contrarie
to that which the ancient Doctors haue taught (as we will
prooue it) they condemne vs for heretikes, they perſecute vs
moſt cruelly with fire and bloud, worſe then were wee Iewes
or Turkes. But another more ſtrong then they, to their griefe,
hath defended, doth defend, and will defend vs from them.
Who liſteth to know more of the roote of this doctrine, let
him reade their new Councels, wherein the Popes by their
Legats tyrannically haue gouerned. Let him reade their Decrees,
Decretals, Sextos, Clementines, and Extrauagants,
there ſhall hee find it at fall. Let him not reade the Scripture
for in it ſhall hee finde nothing at all to confirme ſuch wonders.Scotus ſuper 4. ſent.
                  Scotus, one of the chiefe and principall pillers of

their Church ſayth; That albeyt the prieſt were not attyred to
celebrate: nor in the ſtate of grace: nor ouer any Altar: but
ſhould ſaye the fiue wordes or the foure, leauing out (Enim)
ouer all the bread that is in the market or in the Pantry: and
ouer all the wyne that is in the Sellar; how much bread ſo euer
ſhould be in the pantrie or in the market, ſo that he had intention
to conſecrate) ſhould be in that very moment conuerted &
tranſubſtantiated into the body of Ieſus Chriſt: and all the wine
of the ſellar by the vertue of the wordes ſpoken and pronounced
by the Prieſt, ſhould be conuerted into the bloud of Chriſt.
Herehence it commeth that no bread, but the body of Chriſt
remayning in the ſacrament in their Sagrarios or pixes do they
keepe it, that when anie ſhall be ſicke, they may with torchlight
carie it in proceſſion, that the diſeaſed may adore and receiue
it, for the ſaluation of his ſoule. Ieſus Chriſt (ſay they)
is in ſort as we haue ſaid, not onely in one Maſſe, but in an hundred
thouſand more alſo, if ſo many could bee ſaid in one moment.
And whole Chriſt is not in all the Hoſt only: but alſo in
euery ſmall parcell, how little ſoeuer it be: ſo that Chriſt is in
the hoſt as the ſoule is in the body: all in all, and all in euery
part thereof.
               This their doctrine of Tranſubſtantiation they confirme,Three reaſons wherewith they confirm Tranſubſtantiation.
firſt with the omnipotencie of God: that ſeeing God of nothing
could create ſomething, the heauen and the earth, and
whatſoeuer is therein contained, how much more can he cauſe
one thing to be conuerted and tranſubſtantiated into another.
2. They ſay: that ſeeing Ieſus Chriſt is the infallible truth, it
is meete that that which he ſaith muſt be in ſort as hee ſpake
it: and ſith he ſaith, Hoc eſt corpus meum, This is my body: they
now inferre, that the bread is no bread, but the body of Chriſt.
3. For confirmation of their opinion, they alſo alleage the ſayings
of Doctors. In anſwering to theſe three reaſons wherewith
they confirme their Tranſubſtantiation, me ſeemeth wee
ſhall haue anſwered to all, whatſoeuer in this matter they can
obiect vnto vs.The anſwere to the firſt reaſon wherwith they confirme tranſubſtantiation.
               
               That which they ſay of the omnipotency of God, God forbid
that we ſhould once denie: we confeſſe it: and it may be,
and alſo (without may be) much better then they. With all our

heart we do alſo confeſſe that which the Creed ſaith, I beleeue
in God the Father almightie (all ſufficient) that which we ſay, is,
that from the power to the deede, is no good maner of argument.
God in that he is omnipotent, may eftſoones drowne
the world, as he did drowne it in the time of Noah: and the
malice of our times is no leſſe, but much more then that of
that time. Notwithſtanding his omnipotencie, and notwithſtanding
our extreme malice, we know that he will not drown
it, becauſe ſo promiſed he to Noah, when he ſayd, My couenant
will I eſtabliſh witb you, that from henceforth all fleſh ſhal not be rooted
out by the waters of the floud, &c. And to ſeale and confirme
this promiſe, God gaue him the Bow in the cloudes, for a
ſigne of this couenant, &c. Reade the hiſtorie. To this ſame
purpoſe is it ſayd in the Pſalm. 140. 9. that God ſet a bound
for the waters, ouer which they ſhal not paſſe, nor turne againe
to couer the earth. And God ſpeaking to Iob concerning the
ſea, chap. 38. 10. ſaith, I eſtabliſhed my commaundement
vpon it, and ſet barres and doores: and ſaid: Hitherto ſhalt
thou come, but no further, and there ſhall it ſtay thy proud
waues. Here you ſee, that albeit God of his abſolute power
can drowne the whole world againe, yet will hee not drowne
it. So then ſay we now, that Chriſt could doe that which they
ſay, annihilate the ſubſtance of the bread, and be tranſubſtantiated
into it. But we ſay, that he will not do it: becauſe he will remaine
ſitting at the right hand of his father in heauen, and according
to his humanitie, according to his fleſh which he tooke
of the Virgin Mary, according to the fleſh wherein he dyed,
wiil he neuer deſcend hither, vntill he come to iudge the quick
and the dead. And ſo to this end ſayd he to his diſciples: The
poore ye ſhall haue alwayes with you, but me ſhall ye not haue alwayes.
For fortie dayes paſſed after his reſurrection hee aſcended into
heauen, & ſitteth at the right hand of the Father, &c. Very well
did his Apoſtle S. Peter vnderſtand this, when in a ſermon
which he preached at Ieruſalem,Act. 3. 21. hee ſayd: Whom (meaning
Chriſt) the heauens muſt containe vntill the time that all things bee
reſtored. And this is an Article of our faith, which in the
Creed we confeſſe. That Ieſus Chriſt is aſcended into heauen,
and ſitteth at the right hand of God the Father, from whence

ſhall come to iudge the quicke and the dead.The hereſie of the Papiſts. Then will he
not come to tranſubſtantiate the bread into his body. So our
aduerſaries be heretikes, denying in deed this article of faith,
which with their mouth they confeſſe in the Creed. Hereuppon
let vs nowe conclude, that Chriſt can, but hee will not,
tranſubſtantiate himſelfe into the bread, but will ſit at the
right hand of the Father, vntill he come to iudge, &c. As the
holy Scripture doth witneſſe it, and in the Creed wee confeſſe
it.
               The ſecond reaſon wherewith they confirme their Tranſubſtantiation,The ſecond confirmation of tranſubſtantiation.
is, That Ieſus Chriſt is infallible truth, and
therefore of neceſſitie that which hee ſayth muſt bee as hee
ſaith it: He ſaith, This is my body: Then it followeth, that that
is his bodie: and if it be the body of Chriſt, it is not Bread.
With Eſayas, chap. 53. verſe 9. and Saint Peter, chap. 2. verſ.
22. confeſſe we, that Ieſus Chriſt neuer ſinned: we alſo confeſſe,
that vntruth nor deceit was euer found in his mouth:
For he is that which of himſelfe he ſaith, Ioh. chap. 14. verſe
6. The way, the trueth, and the life. Wee alſo confeſſe, that
with his owne mouth he hath ſayd: This is my body: and ſo
beleeue we that it is. For ſhould wee denie that which our
King, Prophet, and Prieſt affirmeth, we ſhould not be Chriſtians.
               Thus farre agree we with our aduerſaries. The difference
that is betweene them and vs, is as touching the maner. How
or in what manner, that which Ieſus Chriſt by the meane of
his miniſter, in the holy Supper doth giue vs, is truely and
really the body and bloud of Ieſus Chriſt. For the better vnderſtanding
hereof, it ſhall bee needfull to vſe the diſtinction
which the Lord vſeth in the ſixth chapter of the Goſpell
of Saint Iohn. That there bee two maners of eating the bodie
of Chriſt, the one carnall, the other ſpirituall. Commonly
when the Scripture oppoſeth the fleſh to the Spirit, by the
fleſh it vnderſtandeth the parte of man that is not regenerate,Two maners of eating Chriſt. The one carnall & the other ſpirituall.
nor ſubiect to the lawe of God. So call wee men
without the knowledge of God, carnall, naturall, and ſenſuall
men: But it is not heere ſo to bee taken. By the
fleſh is vnderſtood the ſame fleſh of Chriſt it ſelfe, ioyntly

with his blood, bones and ſinewes, and which Ieſus Chriſt took
when he was borne, and liued in this world, when he dyed, and
roſe againe, &c. The ſecond maner of eating which is called
ſpirituall, is: when the faithfull Chriſtian (his bodie being here
below) is lifted vp ſo high in ſpirit, that with the wings of faith
it flyeth, and with one flight doth pierce all the heauens, and
ſtayeth not, vntill it come before the throne of the maieſtie of
God the father, at whoſe right hand he findeth ſitting his redeemer
and ſatisfier Chriſt. And finding him, with great ioy
doth feede vpon him eateth his glorious bodie, and drinketh
his moſt precious bloud. And if the faithfull Chriſtian doth
freely eate him: much more freely doth the Lord giue himſelfe
to ſuſtaine the ſoules, which he with the death of his body, &
with the ſhedding of his bloud redeemed. He that with his body
and bloud did redeeme them: with his body and with his
bloud wil he maintain them: yet not carnally, but ſpiritually by
faith, as before we haue ſayd. Our aduerſaries beleeue the body
of Chriſt in the firſt manner to be in their Maſſe.Read the recā
                     tation which Nich. 2. commanded Berengarius to make, which we wil place a litle beneath, in anſwering to the Councels. They beleeue
that the mouth taketh, the teeth chawe, the throate ſwalloweth,
and the ſtomacke receiueth the ſame carnall bodie,
which was borne, which dyed, which roſe againe, &c. They wil
vnderſtand the words of Chriſt literally: be it as it will be: but
Chriſt himſelfe, ſpeaking of the neceſſity that wee haue to eate
his fleſh, and drinke his bloud, ſaith: The words which I ſpeake
vnto you are ſpirit and life: to wit, that which I haue ſayd vnto
you touching the eating of my fleſh, and drinking of my bloud,
vnderſtand you not after the letters as they carnally ſound:Ioh. 6. 63.
lift vp the mind, and vnderſtand it ſpiritually. The Capernaits
and many of the diſciples alſo (as ſaith S. Iohn) carnally vnderſtood
the words of Chriſt.Ioh. 6. 60. And alſo they ſayd, that it was a hard
ſaying, and murmured at it. To whom Chriſt, vnfolding their
errour, told them, they ſhould vnderſtand his words ſpiritually.
You ſee here that our aduerſaries are worſe then the Capernaits:
for the Capernaits would not carnally eate the fleſh
of Chriſt, nor drinke his bloud: but they make no bones at it:
without any ſcruple, and without any loathing will they eate
the fleſh of Chriſt carnally: but it will nought auaile them. For
the Spirit it is that quickeneth,
                  Ioh. 6. 63. 
                  and the fleſh (as Chriſt himſelfe

ſaith, ſpeaking to our purpoſe profitteth nothing, &c.
               That the Lord, in his ſupper gaue carnally his body may
wee not vnderſtand. For ſhould wee ſo vnderſtand it, A moſt
great abſurditie world followe: that Ieſus Chriſt, when hee
celebrated his ſupper, had two carnall bodies, One by one;
The Bodie that celebrated the ſupper,An obſnrditie of tranſubſtantiation. that brake the bread
in his handes, bleſſed it, brake it and gaue it to his diſciples,
&c. was the true carnall body of Chriſt, which was borne,
and dyed, &c. If that which this carnall bodie tooke in his
handes and gaue to his diſciples was alſo the carnall body of
Chriſt, it followeth; that Ieſus Chriſt, when he had celebrated
his ſupper, had two carnall bodies: one which ſate and remained
in his place: and the other, which ſitting body, gaue to his
diſciples. The which is a great abſurditie. But did they vnderſtand
this ſecond manner of body (which the Carnall body
of Chriſt gaue to his diſciples, and they tooke it, and did eat
it) not to bee his carnall body, nor carnally taken: They
ſhould fall into ſuch an abſurditie. Alſo leaſt wee ſhould fall
into this abſurditie, and others which wee will afterwards ſet
downe, in his ſupper may we not beleeue Ieſus Chriſt to be in
the firſt manner carnally: but in the ſecond, ſpiritually.
               This ſecond manner of eating, can no way be done without
faith; Becauſe (as wee haue ſaid) it is not carnall, but ſpirituall:
And it is to be noted, that this ſpirituall eating, is done
in two manners. The firſt, by the preaching of the Goſpell:
As Saint Paule ſaith: Faithfull (ſaith hee) is God, By whom
yee are called, to the Communion of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt.
By the preaching of the Goſpell, are wee made fleſh, of the
fleſhly of Chriſt, and bones of bones: By the preaching of
the Goſpell, hee is to vs the bread of life, which came
downe from heauen to feede our ſoules: By the preaching
of the Goſpell are we made one thing with him. Euen as he is
one with the father.The ſpirituall eating in two ſorts.
               
               The ſecond manner of ſpirituall eating, is done by the ſacraments;
and in the holy ſupper chiefly.1. Cor. 1. 9. Theſe two kindes of
ſpirituall eating the body of Chriſt,Epheſ. 5. 30. and of drinkeing his
blood:Iohn 6. 36. by the preaching of the Goſpell, and by the ſacraments,
doe the ancient Doctours confeſſe.Iohn 17. 21. Origin. 
                  Origen. Hom. 16. vppon

Nombers ſaith: wee are ſaid to drinke the blood of Chriſt,
not with the rite of the ſacraments onely: but alſo when
wee receaue his wordes. The ſame vppon Eccleſiaſtes
chap 3.Ierome. ſaith Saint Ierome. The faithfull in the holy ſupper,
receauing with the mouth of the outwarde bodie and carnally
the bread and wine (which be the moſt holy ſacramentes
of the body and blood of Chriſt) receaueth with the mouth
of the ſoule (which is faith) inwarde and ſpiritually the true
body and blood of Chriſt, without that carnall body of Chriſt
diſcendeth here belowe, or ceaſſeth to ſit at the right hand
of his father: As wee will afterwardes more largely declare.
So that wee confeſſe the faithfull, truly and really to receiue
in the holie ſupper, the bodie and blood of Chriſt: As
Chriſt himſelfe witneſſeth: This is my bodie this is my
blood, yet not carnally, but ſpiritually, doe wee vnderſtand
theſe wordes: as Chriſt himſelfe doth declare them. For
hee (as before we haue ſaid) ſpeaking of the eating of his
fleſh, and drinking of his blood, which is done in the ſupper,
ſaith: that this ought to be ſpiritually vnderſtood and
not carnally (As did the Capernaits and ſome of the diſciples
alſo vnderſtand it) My wordes (ſaith hee) are Spirit
and Life. And therefore, that which hee ſaith of the
eating of the bodie, and drinkeing of the blood, ought ſpiritually
to bee vnderſtood. For the Spirit it is that quickeneth,
and the fleſh profitteth nothing. Vnderſtanding
then (As wee haue ſayd) Chriſt to bee thus preſent in the
Sacrament, it ſhall not bee needefull to adnihilate the ſubſtaunce
of the bread, nor of the wine, nor to tranſubſtantiate
it, into the ſubſtaunce of the bodie and blood of Chriſt.
Wee confeſſe then, that in this moſt holie ſacrament, beſides
the hauing of the true bodie and blood of Chriſt, in
ſort as before wee haue ſayd, and the Lord himſelfe declareth:
Wee confeſſe, I ſay, there is alſo true bread and
wine in their proper ſubſtaunce as beeing the bread and
wine (ſay I) haue loſt nothing as touching their ſubſtaunce:
but as touching their qualities, they haue much gayned: For
by the vertues, and efficacie of Chriſtes inſtitution, and of
his wordes, they ceaſſe to bee common bread and wine,

and bee dedicated to ſignifie, figure, repreſent and giue
the true body and blood of Chriſt: and doe ſo ſignifie, figure
repreſent, ſeale and giue the ſame; that whoſoeuer taketh
this bread, and eateth it, taketh this wine and drinketh it
worthily, according to the inſtitution of Chriſt, who ſaith:
Take and eate: Take and drinke yee all of this: taketh and receaueth
truely and really, the bodie and blood of Chriſt. According
to that which the Lord there ſaith: This is my bodie:
This is my blood: Yet not carnally, but ſpiritually by faith.
And if the bread and wine ſhould not abide in their ſubſtaunce
and being, this ſacrament ſhould not bee a ſacrament: for
euery ſacrament (As our aduerſaries themſelues cannot deny
in two thinges conſiſteth:The ſacrament Conſiſteth in 2. thinges the one earthly & the other heauenly. In a viſible and earthly thing,
which they call Materia, and an inuiſible and celeſtiall thing
which they call Forma. That the inuiſible and celeſtiall,
is the bodie and blood of Chriſt, doe wee all agree. As touching
the viſible and earthly, betweene them and vs, is there
very great difference. For wee ſay: That the ſubſtaunce
of the bread and wine, togither with their accidents remayneth:
They ſay, that of the bread and wine, no ſubſtaunce
remaineth. But onely the accidents of the bread and of the
wine, the whiteneſſe, the roundneſſe, the ſmell, the ſauour,
and the coullor. As though the accidents of the bread doe
nouriſh: As though the accidents of the wine doe make cherefull,
and comforte, They bee not accidents of bread, that doe
nouriſh, but the ſubſtaunce of the bread. They bee not the
accidents of the wine, which glad the hart: but the ſubſtaunce
of the wine: The bread and wine conuerting themſelues into
the ſubſtaunce of man which eateth and drinketh the ſame.
To receaue ſpiritually in the ſupper, the true body and blood of
Chriſt, needful it is to receiue carnally & materially true bread,
& true wine: For otherwiſe ſhould therbe no Analogie or agreement,
betweene the figure, which is bread, & the wine, & the
thing figured, which is the body and blood of Chriſt.
               This that we ſay, teach the ancient Doctours, that in two
thinges conſiſteth this ſacrament: in earthly, and heauenly.
So ſaith Ireneus, ſpeaking againſt the Valentinians. Alſo
Gelaſius a Biſhoppe of Rome, who diſputed of the coniunction
of the bread, with the body of Chriſt, both natures of the bread

& of Chriſt remayning in their being: And by this communication
he proueth in Chriſt, the vnion of the humane nature, &
diuine; both the one, and the other remayning in their whole
being and ſubſtaunce. Were there not in the ſacrament true
bread, and true wine, the argument of Gelaſius ſhould bee nothing
worth: But his argument is good, and proueth that (which
he pretendeth: Therfore is there true bread & true wine, in the
ſacrament of the ſupper. As there is alſo true water in the ſacrament
of baptiſme. This ſelfeſame argumēt vſeth Theodorit, As a
little after we will declare.Origin ſnpper. Matth. cap. 15. 
                  Origin ſaith theſe words. So that that
which is materiall in the bread of the Lord, goeth into the belly
& is caſt out into the draught, But which that is by praier, & the
word of the Lord, according to the proportion of faith, profitteth
the ſoule. They will not ſay vnto me, that Origin had ſome
errors & that one of thē is this: for had this bin an error the ancient
Doctors. As S. Ierom & Epiphanius which collected his errors,
would haue noted this for an error, had they taken it, for
an error. But none of them ſay, that Origin thought amiſſe of the
Euchariſt. Therfore that which Origin ſaith is no error, neither
among the anciēt Doctors was it holden for an error. But leaue
we the pudles, & let vs drinke of the cleare water of the fountaine.
Leaue we apart the fathers, and let vs ſee, what the holy
ſcriptur ſaith. Many times doth S. Paul call it bread; yea, after it
be conſecrated after it be dedicated, & made the ſacrament of
the body of the Lord.1 Firſt,1. Cor 10. 16. 23. the bread (ſaith he) which we break
is it not the communion of the body of Chriſt? 2. For one bread
(is that) we many are one body.1. Cor. 10. 17. 3. For we be al partakers of one
bread.4 4. So that whoſoeuer ſhall eat of this bread, &c. 5. Let euery
man therefore proue himſelfe & 50.1. Cor 11. 27. Let him eate of that
bread,5 &c.1. Cor. 11. 28. The Apoſtle in all theſe places calleth the bread
bread:Math. 26. 29. Not becauſe it was ſo: But becauſe it is ſo concerning
the wine the Lord himſelfe,Mar. 14. &c. aftrr he had made the ſacrament of
his blood calleth it.Luke 22. 18. 1. Cor. 10. 16. 1. Cor. 11. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 28. The fruit of the vine. And I ſay vnto you
(ſaith he) That henceforth will I not drinke more of this fruit
of the vine, &c. what thing is the fruit of the vine or of the grape
but wine? S. Paule ſaith. The cupp of Bleſſing, which wee
bleſſe, is it not the communion of the bloud of Chriſt? Alſo. Or
ſhall drinke of this cupp of the Lord vnworthily. Alſo: And

drinketh of that cup. In theſe there places, S. Paul by the cup
doth vnderſtand, that which in the cuppe is conteyned: which
is that, which his maiſter calleth the fruit of the vine, or wine.
Here yee ſee that the Lord his Apoſtle, and the auncient Doctours,
call that bread, & wine which in the ſacrament is viſible
& earthly and by the ſame reaſon admit no tranſubſtantiation:
As there is none in deede. This ſimple and ſound Doctrine, taketh
away many abſurditie, & inconueniences, which followe
tranſubſtantiatiō: it taketh away many ſcruples & afflictions of
conſcience.It is no ſacrament, but when it is taken and eaten. And ſo if the ſacrament (I ſpeak as they ſpeak, for
it is not a ſacrament, but when it is taken, & eaten. Take ſaith
Chriſt, and eate, and afterwards ſaith This is my body: Then in
the ſacrament is not Chriſtes body (except it be taken and
eaten) be mouldy, corrupt, eaten with wormes or mice when
it falleth on the ground or powered out &c. For to all theſe
things the bread and wine and not the body of Chriſt are ſubiect
the bread (ſay we) is mouldy is corrupt &c. The wine is ſpilled.
The which bread and wine, had not rat
                     •
                  , but men eaten and
dronken had bin the ſacrament of the body & blood of Chriſt
Would our aduerſaries vnderſtand this they ſhould not neede
the booke, which they cal De coutelas de la Miſſa which intreateth
what ought in ſuch former like caſes to be done. This,
booke is a continuall affliction, torment, and ſlaughter houſe
of the conſciences which haue zeale:Rom. 10. 2. but as ſaith S. Paul, not according
to knowledge. The reaſon is, becauſe this conſcience
are not founded vpon the firme foundatiō vpon the word
of God, but vpon the ſand, the traditions of men.
               Such as will not vnderſtand the words of the Lord, This is my
body &c. Spiritually but carnally: doe fall into great hereſie &
horrible Idolatrie. The Chriſtian religion (as witneſſeth Athaſius
in his Symbol) beleeueth that in Ieſus Chriſt,Athanaſius. are 2 natures
diuine and humane. It beleeueth, that theſe two natures are ſo
vnited and conioyned in Chriſt, that they are not confounded
nor mingled one with another. The diuine hath his properties,
and the humane his. As the reaſonable ſoule and fleſhly bee
one man, So the diuinitie and humanitie bee one Chriſt. It
is the propertie of the diuinitie onely and of no other thing beſides,
to bee in euery place: for it is vnmeaſurable & infinit

and no other thing there is that is vnmeaſurable and infinite: It
is the propertie of the humanity to be in ſome one place and
not in euery place. So witneſſeth the Angell ſpeaking of the
humanitie of Chriſt,Mark. 16. 6. 
                  He is riſen (ſayth he) he is not here. Beholde
here the place where they put him. And S. Peter, Whom (ſayth
he) the Heauens muſt contayne vntill the time of the reſtauration of
all things:
                  Act. 3. 21. And ſo do wee hold it for an article of faith: that he
aſcended into Heauen and is ſet at the right hand of God the
father, from thence ſhall he come to iudge the quicke and the
dead. Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe ſayth: The poore ſhall you haue alwayes
with you: but me ſhall you not haue alwayes. All theſe places
doe proue Ieſus Chriſt according to his humanity and in as
much as he is man not to bee here below, but in heauen. This
Article of faith do our aduerſaries impugne when they beleeue
the body of Chriſt to be in euery Maſſe. And ſo many as dayly
through all the world are celebrated,The heteſie of the papiſts. and in all their Sagrarios
or pixes, where they keepe it incloſed really, corporally,
carnally, ſo great and ſo big, as it was vpon the croſſe. If this be
not hereſie, what ſhall bee hereſie? Good Tranſubſtantiators
are our aduerſaries, when they haue tranſubſtātiated the bread
and the wine into the body and bloud of Chriſt: ſo that now is
it no bread, now it is no wine: but (as they ſay) the body and
bloud of Chriſt. So now they tranſubſtatiate the humanitie of
Chriſt, his fleſh and his bloud into the diuinitie: ſeeing they attribute
vbiquitie to the bodie and bloud of Chriſt, the which is
only proper to the diuinitie. Ieſus Chriſt is true God and true
man. But his Godhead is not his manhood: and his manhood is
not his Godhead. The one is the Creator, whoſe beginning is
from euerlaſting:The heteſie of the papiſts. the other is a creature, whoſe being had beginning.
Notwithſtanding all this which our aduerſaries (of
the learned I ſpeake) may heare and reade, they continue
obſtinate and hardened, and God hath left them to a reprobate
mind, that they may beleeue the bread to be no bread,
but the bodie of Chriſt: the wine to be no wine but the bloud
of Chriſt. And ſo they worſhip that which a pariſh Clearke maketh
betweene two yrons, and the Prieſt giueth it a forme, making
it his God: In the pixe do they keepe it: to the ſicke they
carie it: Vpon ſome feaſtes of the yeare, and chiefly the day

which they call Corpus Chriſti, with great pompe, triumph, and
maieſtie take they it forth to walke, and wo to that perſon that
will not kneele before it. I would aske them who commanded
them to doe this? If they know that Ieſus Chriſt hath ſo done,
orcommaunded his Apoſtles ſo to doe? Neither example nor
commandement▪ will they giue. Chriſt neither did nor commanded
any ſuch thing, nor his Apoſtles, nor the Catholike
Church did ſo by the ſpace of one thouſand yeares after the
death of Chriſt. A new inuention it is humane & diueliſh, founded
vpon the wicked foundation of tranſubſtatiation.
               Some things there be in the Maſſe, which manifeſtly declare
that there is no tranſubſtantiation: as when they ſay in the Cannon:
Offerimus praeclarae maieſtati tuae de tuis donis ac datis, &c. that
is to ſay, We offer to thy excellent Maieſtie of thy gifts, and of
that which thou haſt giuen,Theſe croſſes with the papiſts haue their myſterie. &c. a pure Ho✚ſt, an holy Ho✚ſt,
an Ho✚ſt without ſpot, holy✚bread of life eternall, and a cup
✚ of euerlaſting ſaluation. One of the two, either by theſe
gifts which they offer to God doe they vnderſtand the bread
and the wine, without any tranſubſtantiation: or els ſo tranſubſtantiated
into the body and bloud of Chriſt that now there
remaynneth neither bread nor wine. It apeareth by the prayer
that there which there they make, that by the gifts they ought
to vnderſtand the bread and wine without any tranſubſtantiation:
which gifts the Prieſt prayeth God to accept, as he accepted
the gifts which Abel, Abraham and Melchiſedech offered: &
ſo ſay they: ſuper quae propitio ac ſereno vultu reſpicere digneris, &c.
that is to ſay. Vpon which (gifts) vouchſafe to behold with thy
merciful & bright countenance, and to accept (thē) as thou pleaſedſt
to accept the gifts of thy iuſt ſeruant Abel, & the ſacrifice
of our Patriarch Abraham, & that holy ſacrifice & ſpotleſſe 
                     •
                  oſt
which that thy high Prieſt Melchiſedech offered to thee. Beſeeching
humbly, we pray thee to command theſe (gifts) to be caried
by the hands of thine holy Angel to the high Alter, before
the preſence of thy diuine Maieſty, &c. And if by gifts the bread
& wine vntranſubſtatiated be vnderſtood, what neceſſitie haue
we of ſuch a ſacrifice to obtaine pardon of our ſins, holding that
moſt perfect & ſufficiēt ſacrifice, which one only time (& ought
not to bee reiterated) our redeemer Chriſt Ieſus offered vpon

the croſſe, wherewith he ſanctifieth vs for euer? But they will
ſay vnto me, that they vnderſtand by giftes, not the bread and
wine vntranſubſtantiated, but tranſubſtantiated into the body
and bloud of Chriſt. If ſo they vnderſtand it, worſe is it then it
was: for then the prayer which the Prieſt maketh is a moſt
blaſphemous blaſphemie againſt Ieſus Chriſt,Blaſphemi of the Prieſt. the only begotten
ſonne of God, true God and man. What pride, what haughtineſſe
and preſumption is it, that a miſerable ſinner, conceiued
and borue in ſinne and corruption, and that doth nothing in all
his life time but adde ſinnes vnto ſinnes, dare to preſent himſelf
before the maieſtie of God the Father, and pray him to receiue
and accept his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt? And how ſaith he that he
ſhould accept him? Euen as he accepted the giftes of Abel,
Abraham, and Melchiſedech? Is Chriſt no other thing then
Abel, Abraham, and Melchiſedech? Is the ſacrifice of Chriſt,
his precious bodie and bloud which he offered, no other thing
then the ſacrifice of Abel, Abraham, and Melcbiſedech, and
then the ſacrifice of all how many ſoeuer iuſt perſons that haue
bene and ſhall be? Let them then be aſhamed ſo to ſpeake of
Ieſus Chriſt, and of his ſacrifice. On the one ſide they confeſſe
Ieſus Chriſt to be equall with the Father (as he is) in eſſence and
power: and on the other ſide, and ſtinking Prieſt put they for
interceſſor and mediator, that the Father ſhould accept and receiue
him with a mercifull and chearefull countenance. O miſerable
ſinner, pray thou vnto God, that he pardon thy ſinnes,
thy ſuperſtitions and idolatries: and pray not, nor intreat thou
for Chriſt, who is the Lambe without ſpot, which taketh away
the ſinnes of the world: he is he that committed no ſinne neither
was anie guile found in his mouth. He needeth not thee
that thou ſhouldeſt pray to the Father for him: but thou haſt
need, that he pray for thee. The father himſelfe ſpeaking of
his ſonne, faith: This is my beloued ſonne, in whom I am well pleaſed:
heare him. Ye ſee here a terrible blaſphemy vttred by the prieſt
in ſaying of the Maſſe. Of that which is ſayd doe wee conclude:
that all thoſe which heare Maſſe, ſeeing they beleeue this tranſubſtantiation
bee Idolaters: and that the prieſt which faith it,
(hold he intention of conſecration or not) is a double Idolater.
For he not only committeth idolatrie: but cauſeth alſo all that

heare his Maſſe to commit Idolatry. Infinite thankes I giue to
my God, that although he permitted, that I with the reſt committed
Idolatrie for a time in hearing the Maſſe, yet hee neuer
ſuffered me to commit idolatrie by ſaying it to others.
               The third reaſon wherewith they confirme their new article
of Tranſubſtantiation,The third confirmation. is the authoritie of Doctors which
they alleage,Ireneus. and determinations of Councels. They cite Ireneus,
who in his fifth booke ſaith: When the cup mingled, and
the bread broken, receiue the word of God: the Euchariſt of
the body and bloud of Chriſt is made.Tertullian 
                  Tertullian, lib. 4. faith:
Chriſt made the bread, which he tooke, his bodie, and diſtributo
his diſciples.Origen. 
                  Origen vpon Matth. chap. 25. ſaith: This bread
which God the Word doth witneſſe to be his bodie, &c. Saint
Cyprian,
                  Ciprian. 
                  Sermone de coena Domini, ſaith: This common bread
changed into fleſh and bloud procureth life. Alſo in the ſame
ſermon he ſaith: This bread which the Lord gaue to his diſciples,
not in forme or appearance,Ambroſe. but chaunged in nature, is
made fleſh of the omnipotent Word. Saint Ambroſe, lib. 4. de
Sacramentis, ſaith: Before the words of the ſacrament it is bread,
when conſecration is applied to it, of bread it is made the fleſh
of Chriſt.Chryſtome. Saint Chryſoſtome, hom. de Euchariſtia, tom. 6. ſayth:
This Sacrament is like waxe applyed to the fire, in which no
ſubſtance remayneth, but becommeth like to the fire: So
(ſaith Chryſoſtome) the bread and wine is conſumed of the ſubſtance
of the bodie of Chriſt. Alſo in the 61. Homily hee
ſaith, That Chriſt not onely gaue himſelfe, that we ſhould ſee
him, but that wee ſhould alſo touch and handle him: and in
whoſe fleſh alſo we ſhould faſten our teeth. Alſo Hom. 38. vppon
Matthew, he ſaith: Manie ſay, that they will and deſire to
ſee the forme and figure of Chriſt, and alſo his rayment and
ſhooes: but he giueth himſelfe to thee, that thou maiſt not only
ſee him,Auguſtine. but alſo touch him. Saint Auguſtine, Prolog. in Pſal.
23. ſaith: Chriſt did beare himſelfe with his handes, when in
the Supper hee inſtituted the Sacrament. And vpon the 98.
Pſalme, declaring thoſe words, Fall downe before his footeſtoole:
he affirmeth that the fleſh of Chriſt ought to be in the Sacrament
adored: which ſhould not fitly be, if the bread remayned.
Hillarie in his eight booke of the Trinitie ſaith:Hillary. Chriſt is

in vs by the truth of nature, and not by conformity of will onely,
and ſaith: that in the meat of the Lord we truly receiue the
word fleſh.Leo. 
                  Leo Biſhop of Rome in the tenth epiſtle which he
wrote to the Clergie and people of Conſtanſtinople, ſaith:
Walke we on, receiuing the vertue of the heauely meat in his
fleſh, which is made our fleſh. Damaſcen whom they cite, libr.
4.Damaſcen. 
                  cap. 14. Orthodoxae fidei, is clearely for them. They alleage
Theophilact,
                  Theophilact. who manifeſtly maketh mention of Tranſubſtantiation.
Other new Authours,Auſelme. as Anſelme, Hugo, and Richardus
de ſancto Victore they alleage,Hugo. which vndoubtedly affirme Tranſubſtantiatiation.
Councels alſo do they cite:Ricardus de ſancto Victore. as that of Epheſus,
which was holden againſt Neſtorius,
                  The Councell of Epheſus. in which was preſident
Cirillus, where theſe wordes are vſed: Wee being made
partakers of the holy bodie and of the precious bloud of Chriſt,
receiue not common fleſh; and not as of a man ſanctified,
but truly ſanctifying, and made proper of the word it ſelfe.
They cite the Councell of Verceill,The Conncell of Veceill. in the time of Leo the ninth,
in which Berengarius was condemned.The Couucell of Lateran. They cite the Councell
of Laterane, in the time of Nicholas the ſecond, which
cauſed Berengarius to recant: of whoſe recantation mention is
made in the decrees de conſecrat.
                  Another councell of Lateran. 
                  diſt. 2. & in the fourth ſentence.
They alleage alſo another Councell of Lateran in the time of
Innocent 3. whereof mention is made in the Decretals de ſumma
Trinitate. cap. Firmiter: & de celebratione Miſſarum. cap. Cum
Martha.
                  The Councell of Conſtance. They alleage alſo the Councell of Conſtance, wherein
was Iohn Wickliffe, that denied Tranſubſtantiation condemned,
and Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage were burned for the
ſame.Trident Councell. They cite the laſt Trident Councell. They alleage the
common conſent (as they ſay) of all the whole Catholique
Church:Tranſubſtantiation cannot be proued either by Seripture or reaſon. Common conſent of the with which conſent Scotus ſo greatly was moued in
foure that ſeeing hee could firmely ſhew Tranſubſtantiation
neither by the holy Scriptures, nor by reaſon, yet he approued
it (he ſayd) for not being contrary to the common conſent
of the Church. Our aduerſaries then ſeeing (as they ſuppoſe)
ſo many Fathers, ſo manie Councels on their ſide, they thinke
all cocke ſure, and crie out, Victorie, Victorie, againſt theſe
heretikes, dogges. Now is there no bread, now is there no
wine in the Sacrament. They be conuerted and tranſubſtantiated

into the bodie and bloud of Chriſt. And whoſoeuer beleeueth
not this, they call him an heretike, excommunicate,
accurſed and condemned. But turne they ouer the leafe, and
behold and well conſider that which followeth. Were our
ſtrife and contention about Tranſubſtantiation to be decided,Fathers againſt Tranſubſtantiation.
concluded and proued by men, we want not other, as manie,
or rather more Fathers, as ancient, learned and godly as thoſe,
whom our aduerſaries (as they thinke) haue armed againſt vs,
to arme in our defence againſt them. And many of thoſe alſo
wil we alleage, which they haue alleaged againſt vs. This done,
to all that will we anſwere which they haue alleaged againſt
vs. The firſt Father which they alleage is Ireneus: The ſame alſo
do we alleage: and for his antiquitie and authoritie, in the
vauntgard will we place him, Thus ſayth Ireneus, ſpeaking
againſt the Valentinian heretikes:Ireneus. The earthly bread, the calling
of the word of God receiued, is now no more common
bread, but is made the Euchariſt. The which conſiſteth in
two thinges (to wit) in earthly and heauenly. As touching
the firſt, Ireneus denyeth not the Euchariſt to be bread, but
that which hee ſaith, is, that it is now not common bread:
And then ſaith hee, This Euchariſt conſiſteth in two things,
the one whereof is earthly, and is the bread; and the other
heauenly, and is the bodie of Chriſt. For how neceſſarie
it is that the bodie of Chriſt bee truly in the Sacrament, ſo
neceſſarie is it alſo, that the bread bee truely in the Sacrament:
For otherwiſe the bread, which is the figure, ſhould
haue no annalogie nor likeneſſe with the thing figured, which
is the body of Chriſt.
               
                  Tertullian in his firſt booke againſt Marcion,
                  Tertullian. ſaith: God
hath not caſt away the bread, his creature: ſith that with it he
hath repreſented his body. Alſo in his fourth booke againſt
the ſame Marcion he ſaith, The bread which hee had taken
and diſtributed to his diſciples, hee made it his body, ſaying:
This is my body, that is to ſay, as himſelfe declareth, the figure
of my body.
               
                  Origen vppon the 26.Origen. chap. of Matthew ſayth, This bread
which God the Word doth witneſſe to bee his body, is the

nouriſhing word of ſoules. Alſo Homil. 7. vppon Leuiticus,
He ſaith: For not onely in the old Teſtament, but alſo in the
Goſpell, is the letter which killeth. For if thou follow the letter,
that which is ſayd, Except ye eate the fleſh, &c. Alſo hom. 9.
vpon the ſame Leuiticus, he ſaith: Cleaue not to the bloud of
the fleſh, but apprehend rather the bloud of the Word: and
heare what he ſaith vnto thee: For this is my bloud which is ſhed
for you. Alſo vpon the fifteenth chapter of Matthew hee ſaith:
The ſanctified bread, as touching the matter goeth into the
belly, and is caſt out below. In the ſame place alſo hee ſaith:
Not the matter of the bread, but the word ſpoken ouer it,
is that which profiteth him which worthily eateth it. In the
eight booke alſo againſt Celſus, hee ſayth: After thankes
giuen for the benefites which wee haue receiued eate wee of
the conſecrate bread.Ciprian. 
                  Cyprian, lib. 1. Epiſt. 6. ad Magnum
ſayth: The Lord calleth the bread made of the gathering togither
of manie graines, his body; and the wine preſſed out
of many cluſters and graines of grapes, calleth hee his bloud.
Alſo, interpreting the Lords prayer, he calleth the bread the
body of the Lord. Alſo, in the ſermon of the Supper of the
Lord, he ſayth: wee whet not the tooth to bite, but with ſincere
and true faith onely doe wee breake the bread, and eate
it. Alſo, in the ſermon de Chriſmate, hee openly ſaith: The ſacramentes
haue their names of thoſe things which they ſignifie.
Saint Auguſtine vſeth theſe ſelfe ſame two maner of ſpeeches
that Saint Cyprian vſeth. Whereby it appeareth, that hee
tooke them from him. The ſecond hee vſeth in the Epiſtle to
Boniface, and firſt, when he ſaith: Why prepareſt thou the
tooth and the belly: Beleeue, and thou haſt eaten, Tract. 25.
vpon Saint Iohn. And turning to Saint Cyprian, in his ſecond
booke and third epiſtle ad Cecilium, he ſaith: In the wine is
ſhewed the bloud of the Lord.Ciprian. Alſo againſt the Aquarians,
he ſayth: That the bloud of the Lord could not appeare to
bee in the cuppe, if the wine ceaſed to be therein. And after
our Tranſubſtantiators, no wine is there in the cup, therefore
it followeth, there is no bloud. For this is the argument of S.
Cyprian. In the ſermon alſo of the ſupper of the Lord, he ſaith:

The ſymbols o be changed into the bodie of Chriſt, but ſo
that they take a certiane likeneſſe of Chriſt himſelfe in whom
the humane nature was ſeene and the diuine remained hidden
by which likenes it appeareth that he wold ſay: that as in Chriſt
remain two natures, diuine and humane: So in the ſame maner
are the two natures preſerued in the Sacrament. That of the
bread which is ſeene and that of the body of Chriſt, which is
not ſeene. In the ſecond booke and third epiſtle he alſo ſayeth:
So that the body of Chriſt cannot be floure onely: Nor water
only, But both doe meete and couple together, and with the
meeting togither and vnion of one bread, become firme, with
which and the ſame ſacrament, our People is ſhewed to be
coupled.Athanaſius. 
                  Athanaſius expounding theſe words: If any man ſhall
ſpeake a word againſt the Sonne of man, it ſhall be forgiuen him, but
he which ſpeaketh againſt the holy ſpirit, &c. ſaith: And how great
is the body that all the world is to eate of? And concludeth,
that this is ſpiritually to be vnderſtood; and hereby that in
this place the Lord ſpeaketh of his aſcention againſt the Capernaits.
               
                  Baſil in his Liturgie,Baſil. calleth the bread of the ſacrament Antitypon
of the body of Chriſt (to wit) an example or patterne
of the like forme. And after the conſecration he calleth it ſo
alſo.Dionyſius, 
                  Dionyſius de Eccleſiaſtica Hierarchia, cap. 3. ſaith: The Biſhop
vncouereth the couered and vndiuided bread, and parting
it in peeces &c.Ambroſe. Saint Ambroſe vpon the firſt epiſtle to
the Corinthians, ſaith: When it is ſaid, that this is done in memorie
of Chriſt, and of his death: we by eating and drinking, do
ſignifie the fleſh and bloud of Chriſt, which haue bene offered.
In the ſame place alſo he ſaith: We receiue the myſticall cup, in
type (or figure) of the bloud of Chriſt. Alſo in the fourth booke
De Sacramentis, and fourth chap. where he ſetteth downe the
change of the ſymbols, he handleth alſo our change into Chriſt:
but for all this, thoſe that receiue the Sacrament are not tranſubſtantiated
into Chriſt. Alſo in the ſame chapter he ſaith: So
that we affirme. How can that which is bread, be the body of
Chriſt by conſecration? And then: If the word of the Lord
haue ſo much power, that the things which were not, begin
to be: how much more powerfull ſhall it be, to cauſe that theſe

things remaine which haue their being, and be changed into
another thing?Ierome. Saint Ierome vpon Saint Matthew ſaith clearely:
that in the bread and the wine is repreſented the body and
bloud of Chriſt. Chryſoſtome vppon the ſecond to the Corinthians
ſayth:Criſoſtome. Not onely that which is ſet before vs vppon the
table, but the poore alſo is the body of Chriſt; to whom wee
are bound to doe good: for he that ſayd this is my body, with
his mouth ſayd alſo, that he it was which receiued the benefite,
and that hee in the poore, was in neceſſitie. Alſo in the eleuenth
Homily vppon Matth. In opere imperfecto he ſaith: In the
holy veſſels is neither the bodie of Chriſt, nor his bloud, but
the myſtery of the bodie and bloud of Chriſt. Alſo vpon the
twelfth chapter of the ſecond epiſtle to the Corinthians, Hom.
27. he ſaih: So that Chriſt in the bread and wine ſayd, Doe
this in remembrance of me. In declaring alſo theſe wordes vppon
the twentie third Pſalme, Thou haſt prepared a table before
me, ſaith; So that the bread and the wine in the Sacrament is
ſhewed vnto vs in the ſimilitude of the bodie and bloud of
Chriſt, &c. Alſo, writing to Ceſarius againſt Apollinarius,
and others, which confounded the diuinitie and humanitie of
Chriſt (this Epiſtle is found in the Librarie of Florence) he
ſaith: For euen ſo the bread before it bee ſanctified wee call
bread: but the diuine grace ſignifying this: the bread by
meanes of the Prieſt is freed from the name of bread, and is
found worthy to be called the bodie of the Lord, albeit the
nature of bread remaine ſtil in it. In verie manie places is Saint
Auguſtine wholly for vs,Auguſtine. and roundly confirmeth our doctrine.
Vppon the foureſcore and ſecond Pſalme hee ſaith:
Thou art not to eate that which thou ſeeſt: nor art thou to
drinke this bloud, which they haue to poure out. That which
I ſay is a myſterie, which will quicken, being ſpiritually vnderſtood.
Alſo in the Treatiſe De Fide, ad Petrum, chap. 19.
hee calleth it the Sacrament of bread and wine. Alſo, againſt
Fauſtus, the twentith booke and twentie firſt chapter he ſayth:
In the old Teſtament, vnder the ſimilitude of the ſacrifices,
(to wit, of the beaſtes ſacrificed) the fleſh and bloud of Chriſt
was promiſed vnto vs: vpon the croſſe was it really giuen, but
in the Sacrament for a memoriall it is celebrated. Let vs

well conſider theſe three times noted by Saint Auguſtine
and the great difference there is. After one ſort gaue Chriſt
himſelfe in the olde Teſtament: after another vpon the croſſe:
and after another in the Sacrament of the Supper. Alſo, De
Ciuitate Dei, the 21. booke, and the twentie fift chapter, he
clearelie affirmeth that the wicked eate not the matter
of the Sacrament, to wit, the bodie of Chriſt. And ſo (ſaith
he) It is not to be thought, that hee which is not in the bodie
of Chriſt, and in whom Chriſt is not, nor he in Chriſt, eateth
the body of Chriſt.The wicked eat not the body of Chriſt. Alſo in the twentith Treatiſe vppon Saint
Iohn hee ſaith the ſame. Againſt Adimantus alſo a Manachie,
chap. 12. he ſaith: The Lord doubted not to ſay, This
is my body, when he gaue notwithſtanding the ſigne of his
body. In this ſheweth Saint Auguſtine, the words of Chriſt,
This is my body: ought not to bee fully vnderſtood according
as they ſound, but by trope or figure; and ſo ſaith hee, that
this manner of ſpeech is like to that alleaged out of the twelfth
chapter of Deuteronomie, verſe 23. The bloud is the life. Alſo,
De doctrina Chriſtiana, lib. 3. cap. 16. Hee ſheweth that
which Chriſt in the ſixt chapter of Iohn vſeth, Except ye eat
the fleſh of the Sonne of man, &c. to bee a figuratiue maner of
ſpeech: the reaſon which hee giueth is, becauſe it ſeemeth
to commaund a great wickedneſſe. For to eate the fleſh of
a man, is a greater crueltie then to kill him; and to drinke
his bloud then to ſhed it. And therefore ſaith Saint Auguſtine,
that it is a figure which commaundeth vs, ſweetely
and profitably to remember that the fleſh of Chriſt was crucified
and wounded for vs. Alſo in the Epiſtle to Boniface
ſayth: The Sacramentes take their names of thoſe thinges
whereof they are Sacraments. Theſe wordes (as wee haue
noted) tooke Saint Auguſtine from Saint Cyprian: and excellently
nameth the Sacrament of the bodie of Chriſt, in a
certaine manner to bee the bodie of Chriſt: and then ſayth:
The Sacrament of the bloud of Chriſt, is the bloud of
Chriſt.
               Vpon the eight Pſalme he alſo ſaith: Chriſt receiued Iudas
vnto his banquet, when hee commended the figure of
his bodie. Let that which wee haue already ſayd of this

glorious Doctor ſuffice.Leo. 1. 
                  Leo the firſt in an Epiſtle to the Clergy
and people of Conſtantinople, affirmeth this diſtribution to be
myſticall, to be ſpirituall meate, and that therein wee receiue a
celeſtiall power to paſſe (or bee conuerted) into the fleſh of
Chriſt:Ciril. who for vs tooke vpon him our fleſh. Ciril. lib. 4. cap. 14.
vpon Saint Iohn, ſaith: So to the faithfull diſciples gaue he peeces
of bread, ſaying: Take, &c. Alſo in an Epiſtle to Caloſyrius,
he ſayth: It was meete, that by meanes of his holy fleſh and
precious bloud, he ſhoud in a certaine maner vnite or couple
himſelfe with our bodies, which by the liuely bleſſing in the
bread and wine, we receiue. Heſychius, lib. 20. vpon Leuit, cap.
8.Heſychius. ſaith: By this he commandeth to eat the fleſh with the bread,
that we might vnderſtand, hee called it a myſterie, which is
bread and fleſh ioyntly togither.Gelaſius. 
                  Gelaſius doth witneſſe againſt
Eutiches, that in the Euchariſt, the ſubſtance and nature of the
bread and wine in no wiſe ceaſeth to hold their being: And that
moreouer which before we haue ſaid, Gregorie the firſt in his
Regiſter ſaith:Gregorie 1. When we receiue as wel the bread without leauen,
as the leauened, wee are made the body of the Lord our
Sauiour.Bertram. 
                  Bertram in the booke which hee made of the bodie
and bloud of the Lord, ſpeaking of the nature of the Symbols,
ſayth: that according to the ſubſtance of creatures, the ſymbols
(which be the bread and wine) bee the ſame after conſecration,
that before they were. But why alleage I one place of
Bertrams booke, ſith the whole booke doth purpoſely handle
this argument, and concludeth the ſame that we now affirme,
with the holy Scripture, and many ſayings of the Fathers, Ambroſe,
Ierome, Auguſtine, Fulgentius &c. confirmeth Bertram
his doctrine: and confirming his doctrine, which is the ſame
with ours, it weakeneth and ouerthroweth that of our aduerſaries:
which ſayth the bread and wine in the ſacrament to bee
the very ſame body and bloud of Chriſt, in fleſh, bones, and
ſinewes, which was borne, dyed, and roſe againe, &c. But the
bodie of Chriſt (ſaith Bertram) is in two maners:Two maners of the body of Chriſt. one in fleſh
and in bones &c. which was borne, and dyed, &c. and the other
ſpirituall; which is that which is giuen in the ſacrament:
and alſo he ſaith, that the ſpirituall body of Chriſt, and his ſpirituall
bloud, vnder the couerture of the corporall bread, and of

the corporal wine remaine. At the requeſt of Charles the Great
wrote Bertram this booke: as he himſelf in the end of his book
ſpeaking of Charles the great, to whom he dedicated the ſame,
ſaith: The occaſion he had, ſo to didicate it, was, for that, As
Bertram ſaith in the beginning of the booke Charles the Great
had demanded of him whether the body and blood of Chriſt,
which in the Church is receiued with the mouth of the faithful,
be in miſtery or really in truth receiued. So that it is now aboue.
760. yeeres paſt ſithens this booke was written. Iohannes Trithemius
giueth this Teſtimony of Bertram. Bertram was (ſaith
Trithemius, much conuerſant in the holy ſcripture, & very learned
in humane ſcience; eloquent he was, and no leſſe excellent
in life,Bernard. then in Doctrine. S. Bernard is the ſermon of the ſupper
of the Lord, by the ſimilitude, which he putteth of a ring,
ſheweth that he is wholy for vs. Now to cloſe vp this band of
the fathers, which againſt tranſubſtantiation, of diuerſe times, &
diuerſe regions, we haue alleaged: we will ſet downe one moſt
learned & godly:Theodoret. This is Theodoret biſhop of Cyr, that wrote
the eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie. He flouriſhed about the yeare of our
Lord 451. For he was preſent in that famous Councell of Chalecdon
in the company of 630. biſhops, which condemned Di
                     
                        •
                     ſcorus.
Theſe biſhops with great curteſie & honorable titles,363 Biſhops in the Councell of Chalcedon.
did honor Theodoret, being preſent in the Councel; calling him
catholique, & true paſtor & Doctor of the Church. The ſame
witneſſeth Leo 1. Biſhop of Rome, in an epiſtle which he wrote
to the foreſaid Theodoret. And it is to be beleeued, that had not
Theodoret rightly thought of ſo high a myſtery, As is the ſacrament
of the body & bloud of Chriſt, that a Councel and one of
the moſt famous that hath bin, wherin were 630. biſhops, wold
not haue called Theodoret catholike, & true paſtor of the church
&c. In the 2. Councel of Epheſus, was this Theodoret vniuſtly depriued
from his biſhopirck: becauſe he would not take parte
with the heretike Eutiches. But in the Councell of Chalcedon
with great honor & praiſe was his biſhopricke reſtored. If that
which Theodoret then thought & taught touching the Doctrine
of the ſacrament were catholike; the ſame alſo ſhall it now be:
for the ſame which then was truth, is now truth. Very truely
ſpake this Theodoret, againſt tranſubſtantiation in a booke

God would ſhould be printed in Rome, for the greater confuſion
of the Romiſts: which cannot deny, that Theodoret is wholly
for vs. But they excuſe him, with ſaying, that this queſtion of
tranſubſtantiation, the Church had not yet determined. Thus
may the Pope (for he is all in all) cauſe that the Doctrine, which
in old time was catholike & true, be now hereticall, & wicked,
and that which then was hereticall and wicked, be now catholike
and good. But if an Angel from heauen (ſaith S. Paul ſhall
preach another Goſpel, other Doctrine, then that which he had
taught, ſuch a one ſhould be curſed. Theodoret in his Dialogues
bringeth in 2 perſons,Dialogue. which diſpute of good things: of thinges
touching Chriſtian religion: The one called Orthodoxo, and the
other Eraniſtes. Then ſaith Orthodoxo, doſt thou know that God
hath called the bread his proper bodie? Eran. I knowe it.
Ortho. knoweſt thou alſo that in an other place, his fleſh, he calleth
wheate Eran. This doe I alſo knowe, &c. And a little
lower, Ortho. In the ſame diſtribution of the miſteries, The
bread he calleth, bodie & the cuppe mingled blood: Eranniſt.
So doth he ſuerly call them. Ortho. But alſo hath power to be
called a bodie, according to it nature, his bodie ſurely, and his
blood. Eranniſt. It is clere. Ortho. But the ſame our ſauiour
chaungeth the names, and giueth vnto his bodie, the name
of ſymboll and contrariwiſe, to the Simboll giueth hee the
name of bodie. After the ſame manner alſo, when he had ſaid
of himſelfe that he was a vine, the ſame blood called he a Symboll,
Eraniſt. This haſt thou well ſpoken, But I would learne alſo
the cauſe why the names are chaunged. Ortho. This is the
marke whereat thoſe ayme which profeſſe religion: For I
would not that they which be partakers of the diuine miſteries,
ſhould ſettle their minds vpon the nature of thoſe things which
are ſeene: but that by the change of the names, they may beleeue
that tranſmutation which is wrought by grace. For hee
which called his natureall body, wheate, and bread, and called
alſo himſelfe a vine:Iohn 15. 1. he himſelf honoreth the viſible ſignes with
the name of his bodie & of his blood. Not changing verely the
ſame nature, but adding grace to the nature. Eraniſt. Surely
the myſticall thinges are myſtically ſpoken, and the thinges
not Notorious to all, are clearely manifeſt. Ortho. Seeing he
ſaith that the robe and the veſture are called of the patriarke

the bodie of the Lord; and that wee are entred into diſcourſe
of diuine miſteries. Tell mee truely whoſe ſignes, and whoſe
figure ſuppoſeſt thou: that moſt holy meate to be. Of the diuininitie
it ſelfe of the Lord Chriſt, or of his body and blood. Eran.
Of thoſe things doubtleſſe, whoſe names they haue receaued.
Ortho. Of the body ſaie thou, and of the bloud. Eran. So I ſay.
Ortho. Verie well haſt thou ſpoken: For the Lord hauing taken
the ſigne, ſaid not this is my diuinitie: but this is my bodie. Alſo
this is my bloud, and in another place, The bread which I will
giue for the life of the world.Iohn 6. 51. 
                  Eran. All this is moſt true: for they
be the wordes of God, &c. And in the 2. Dialogue, Ortho. Tell
me then whoſe Symbols be theſe myſticall ſymbols, which be
offered to God, of the miniſters of holy thinges, Eran. Of the
bodie and of the blood of the Lord. Ortho. Of the true, or not
the true bodie, Eran. Of the true &c. Ortho. For thoſe myſtical
ſymbols: no not after ſanctificatiō, leaue not their proper being
& nature: For they remaine in their former ſubſtaunce, figure &
forme, & are ſeen, & handled. neither more nor leſſe thē before
But the things which are made are vnderſtood belieued & adored
as thiugs being which are beleeued. Cōpare thē the Image,
with the Archtipe (to wit) the thing, whoſe Image it is, & thou
ſhalt ſee the likenes. For the figure of neceſſity muſt agree with
the truth. For that ſame body holdeth no doubt his firſt figure,
forme & circumſcriptiō, & to ſpeake ſimply the ſame ſubſtaūce
alſo of the body, &c. That which Theodoret cheifly pretendeth to
proue in theſe dialogues is that, as there be a things really in the
ſacramēt, the figure & the thing figured, bread &. The bodie of
Chriſt, & theſe 2 things be not confuſed, but each one holdeth
his proper being. So neither more nor leſſe, are there 2 natures
really in Chriſt: diuine & humane, not confounded, nor the one
conuerted into the other. Were there not 2 things really in the
ſacrament. The argumēt of Theodoret, ſhould not proue his intent:
but ſhold be rather for the heretikes, againſt whom he diſputed:
which ſaid that the body of Chriſt, aſcending into the
heauens, is wholly conuerted into the diuine nature; As now,
ſay, our aduerſaries that the bread and wine are conuerted
into the bodie and blood of Chriſt: So that there remaineth
no more bread, nor no more wine. The ſelfe ſame argument
of Theodoret: vſeth Gelaſius, biſhop of Rome againſt Eutiche
                     •
                  
                  
as before we haue alleaged. Here ſeſt thou the victorie which
our aduerſaries haue gotten by aleaging the fathers, to cōfirme
their tranſubſtantiation. If many they haue alleaged for their
tranſubſtantiation, many more haue we alleaged againſt tranſubſtantiation,
as ancient, as learned, & as godly, as thoſe whom
they haue cited: and the ſelfe ſame, alſo haue we alleaged oftentimes,
that they haue alleaged. Our aduerſaries with ful mouth
ſtill crie out, ſaying: Fathers, fathers, as though the fathers were
for them, & not for vs: But by this diſputation, which we haue
in hand ſhalbe ſeene, whether the fathers be before vs, whether
they approue and confirme our Doctrine, and condemne that
of our aduerſaries or no. But for as much (as ſay the Logitians)
to giue an inſtance is not to aſſoyle the argumēt. It ſhalbe good
to anſwere that which our aduerſaries haue alleaged againſt
our Doctrine. This will we doe, with all poſſible breuitie: becauſe
we purpoſe not here to make long diſcourſe of this
mater. To ſhew then, that, that of the fathers which they haue
alleaged, maketh nothing againſt vs. Needful ſhall it be to conſider,
that the holy Scripture it ſelfe doth wontedly giue the
names of Symbols, ſignes, or figures to the thinges which they
betoken, figure and repreſent: and contrarywiſe, the names of
the things ſignified and figured, they giue to the ſignes and figures,
as the fathers doe obſerue it. Thus is Chriſt the paſcall
lambe, & the paſcal lambe is Chriſt, Chriſt is bread, & the bread
is Chriſt, &c. For this cauſe the fathers, imitating the phraſe of
the ſcripture, ſpeaking of the things ſignified, they call them by
the names of thoſe things which they ſignifie: & contrariwiſe,
ſpeaking of the figures, they giue vnto them the names of the
things which they figure.Ciprian. Which thing S. Ciprian, by vs before
alleaged, & S. Auguſtine in an epiſtle which he wrote to Boniface
before by vs alſo alleaged, & Therdoret in the Dialog a little be
fore cited do witneſſe. Moreouer if we diligently conſider, that
which a litle before, or a litle after in other places they haue ſaid
we ſhall ſee, that they haue vnderſtood, & witneſſed, this meat
to be ſpirituall, not carnall for the mouth, teeth, nor the belly.
Wherefore (ſaith S. Auguſtine, as before of him we haue ſayd)
prepareſt thou the tooth, and the belly? Beleeue, and thou haſt
eaten. In which manner of ſpeaking, S. Auguſtine doth imitate

S. Cyprian (As before we haue ſaid) It is alſo to be noted that the
fathers ſpeake one way of the bread, & of the wine before conſecration,
and after conſecration otherwiſe. Before conſecratiō
ſay they, that the bread and wine are common and vulgar, as
the reſt. But of conſecration they deny it to be common bread;
they deny it to be common wine: there is a chaunging ſay they
in them which thing is moſt true. For the bread & wine, by conſecration
ceaſe to be common bread and wine,What Conſecration is. and be dedicated
to a ſacred vſe, and ſo the bread and the wine are made
holie, or ſanctified, ceaſing to bee common and prophane:
Such a chaunge as this, vnderſtood the fathers to be made in the
bread and wine: but not as touching the ſubſtaunce and being.
But as touching the qualities. The which chaunge wee doe
willingly allow, By ſuch a chaunge we confeſſe; that the bread
and wine are made Sacraments, which effectually by the vertue
of the holie ſpirit, doe ſignifie: preſent, ſeale and giue vnto
vs, as touching the ſoule, by the meane of faith. The body &
blood of the Lord. Who ſo will marke this, ſhal vnderſtand that
when the fathers ſay: there is now no more bread, nor wine,
in the Sacrament, this ought not to bee ſimply vnderſtood: As
touching the ſubſtaunce: but in a certaine manner, in reſpect
of him which receaueth the ſacrament, who ought not to ſettle
his eyes vppon the bread, nor vppon the wine, which bee
viſible, earthly, and corruptible things: but ought to lift vp his
hart ſoule, and ſpirit, to receiue that, which by the bread & the
wine is ſignified vnto vs, To wit, Ieſus Chriſt ſet at the right
hand of the father.
               Three cauſes can we ſhew:Three cauſes why the fathers haue giuen the name of things figured to the figures. why the fathers ſo loftily and ſo
hiperbolically haue ſpoken of the ſignes, The firſt is (which
before we haue touched) taking licenſe of the ſcripture which
doth alſo the ſame. The 2. the more to moue the harts of men,
and to lift them vp to contemplate heauenly things & vnſpeakable
mercies, which in this moſt holy ſacrament we receiue:
Seeing that our ſoules are ſpiritually fed and nouriſhed with
the precious bodie and blood of Chriſt. The 3. to ſhew this
repreſentation, which we ſay to be made in the ſacrament, not
to be theatricall, not belonging to commedians: but that the
Lord giueth really that, which for his part, he promiſeth, his bodie

and his blood, for the ſpirituall nouriſhment of our ſoules:
And that we for our part, receiue it by faith. Chriſt being our
foode: were by good reaſon to be conuerted into vs, as are other
meates conuerted into the ſubſtaunce of him that eateth
them: but in Chriſt is it not ſo. For we eating him, doe conuerte
our ſelues into him, and are by a ſecret and vnſpeakable vnion
made one thing with him. Oh admirable miſterie! Oh high
Sacrament! Oh ſweete and diuine banquet wherein; our bodie
receauing carnally with the teeth bread and wine! our ſoule
receaueth ſpiritually by faith, Ieſus Chriſt with all his treaſure
and riches, which dying and riſing againe he gained for vs. For
here is hee wholly giuen vnto vs. that which is ſayd (mee ſeemeth)
ſufficient to anſwere that which our aduerſaries out of
the fathers haue alleaged againſt vs. But ſetting a part this
generall anſweres.Ireneus. Let vs anſwere to each one in particular.
As touching Ireneus which ſaith inuocation receaued the
earthly bread is nowe no more common bread, haue we already
anſwered to bee truth, when on our part we alleaged
him. As touching Tertullian wee ſay what he himſelfe declareth,
ſaying:Tertullian. The Lord not onely made the bread which
hee tooke his bodie, ſaying: This is my bodie, to wit the figure
of my bodie. Concerning that which Origen ſaith: that
the Lord affirmed the bread to bee this bodie, wee deny
it not: but the controuerſie is, how it ſo is, carnally or ſpiritually:
and in the places, which of him, for vs we haue alleaged:
is it declared,Origen. Cyprian. how Origen himſelfe vnderſtood it. As
touching that which Saint Cyprian ſaith, the bread to bee
chaunged into fleſh and blood: The ſame alſo ſay we. But
we meane not a naturall change, that one ſubſtaunce is conuerted
into another. The chaunge which wee vnderſtand,
and which vnderſtandeth Saint Cyprian is ſacramentall and
ſo hee there ſaith, we are vnited (or made one ſelfe ſame thing)
with Chriſt, not ſo much by a naturall chaunge, as by a ſpirituall.
For he hath made himſelfe both bread & fleſh, and bloud.
He himſelfe is meate ſubſtaunce, & life for his Church, which
giuing her participation &c. he calleth his body. Of theſe
words will we conclude, the ſacramentall bread and wine
to be the body and blood of Chriſt, neither more nor leſſe then

the Church is the body of Chriſt, not corporally but ſpiritually
That which he ſaith, that the bread is changed, not in forme, but
in nature, ſeemeth to make much againſt vs. But by that which
Saint Cyprian himſelfe wrote to Cecilius, that in the wine is ſhewed
the bloud of God, it appeareth to be otherwiſe. Alſo ſpeaking
againſt the Aquarians, he ſaith: If the wine leaue his being
in the cuppe, the bloud of the Lord cannot appeare to
be in the cuppe. Alſo all that moreouer, which of him wee
haue on our part alleaged. Beſides this, Saint Cyprian being
a Latine Authour, hee tooke, it may be, the Latine word Natura,
not in ſignification of ſubſtance, but in ſignification of
vertue, force, and proprietie, as the Latine Authours do many
times take it: and in the ſame ſignification in our Spaniſh
tongue is it taken. And ſo ſay wee the nature of this herbe, or
ſtone, &c. is this, &c. The nature of the loade-ſtone is to draw
the yron: As much as to ſay, as the vertue or propertie &c. Taking
it then in this ſignification, it wil very well agree with that
which Saint Cyprian ſaith. That which ſaith Saint Ambroſe of
bread is made the fleſh of Chriſt,Ambroſe. ought to bee ſacramentally
vnderſtood, as before we haue ſayd. And that this was his meaning,
by that which he himſelfe ſaith, in the places of him, for
vs, before alleaged appeareth. What thought Chryſoſtome of
the figure,Chriſoſtome. and the thing figured in this Sacrament, in alleaging
him for vs, we haue already declared. Now it reſteth to
anſwer that, which he ſaith of the waxe, which applyed to the
fire is conſumed: and applying this ſimilitude, he ſaith: So the
bread and the wine are conſumed, of the ſubſtance of Chriſt,
To this obiection we anſwer, that the word (thought) vſed by
Chriſoſtome, declareth vnto vs, that which he ſayd, ought not to
be vnderſtood, but in reſpect of our faith and knowledge,
wherewith communicating the bread and wine, wee receiue
them, not as bread, nor as wine, but lifting vp the ſpirit on high,
we receiue them as the bodie and bloud of Chriſt, or whoſe
efficacie they are a figure. To the other two places of Chryſoſtome,
that Chriſt giueth himſelfe to vs that wee ſhould ſee
him touch him, and handle him, and in whoſe fleſh alſo wee
might faſten our teeth: What Chriſoſtome thought of the ſacramentall
bread and wine, whether it bee true bread and

wine or no, we haue very clearely ſhewed by the ſame words of
Chriſoſtome himſelfe. And it is not to be beleeued that ſo graue
an Authour would contradict himſelf. Let vs, now anſwer how
this ought to be vnderſtood which our aduerſaries alleage of
him againſt vs. I ſay then, that ſimply and properly ſpeaking:
Neither the body nor the blood of Chriſt in the ſacrament are
either ſeene, handled or touched: The bread and the wine are
ſeene, handled and touched. The ſame Chriſoſtome in the ſame
homily ſayth: He maketh vs (to ſay the ſame alſo one Maſſe
with him. And this not onely by faith, but he maketh vs really
his body. The ſame ſaieth he in the 60. and 62. homily to the
people of Antioch ſaying: We I ſay are not onely by faith and
loue but alſo really indeed made and mingled with the body
of Chriſt. And notwithſtanding this vnion, there is none will
ſay that wee are tranſubſtantiated into the body of Chriſt.
So ſay wee alſo that notwithſtanding this ſacramentall vnion
which remaineth betweene the bread and wine and
the body and blood of Chriſt, the bread is not tranſubſtantiated
into the body of Chriſt, nor the wine into his blood.
The ſame Chriſoſtome ſaith: Thinke not that thou takeſt the
body of Chriſt of the handes of a man, but of a Seraphin, &c.
Should wee ſimply 
                     •
                  nderſtand this: the miniſter is not now a
man but tranſubſtantiated into a Seraphin. Alſo hee ſaieth: we
muſt not think the hand of the Prieſt to giue vs the Sacrament
but we muſt vnderſtand the ſtretched out hand of Chriſt to doe
this. By all this varietie of ſpeach what think we ſought Chriſoſtome
to doe, but to drawe the mindes of the Communicants
from the conſideration of the outward ſignes and figures viſible
and ſubiect to periſh, and to make them conſider the heauenly
and diuine things, which by them be figured? This glorious
Father then would, that in communicating, we ſhould ſo celebrate
the memorie of the death and paſſion of Chriſt, as if then
at the ſame inſtant that we communicate, his body were crucified
& his bloud were ſhed for vs. Would God that all Chriſtians,
when they communicate would haue this conſideration
& meditation: other fruit ſhould they then receiue of the cōmunion.
The faithfull beleeuing the Euangelicall doctrine, and
celebrating the holy Supper, are preſent as it were at the condemnation

and death of the Lord: & this is the memorie commanded
them to doe: and ſo ſaith Saint Paul to the Galathians,
That before their eyes was Chriſt condemned,Auguſtin. & among
them crucified. As touching that of Saint Auguſtin which they
obiect vnto vs, that Chriſt bare himſelfe in his hands: We
denie it not: For what inconuenience is it, that Ieſus Chriſt with
his hands hath borne his owne body, if by the body we vnderſtand
the Sacrament of his body. And that this was his meaing,
hee himſelfe a little lower declareth, when hee ſaith:
Quodam modo, in a certaine maner, not ſimply. To the other
which they ſay of Saint Auguſtin: that the fleſh of Chriſt ought
to be adored in the Sacrament. We denie not the fleſh of Chriſt
in ſo much as it is conioyned with the Diuinitie, from the
which it neuer departeth, ought to be worſhipped. For whoſoeuer
otherwiſe ſhall ſimply worſhip the fleſh of Chriſt, not
reſpecting the hypoſtaticall vnion which is betweene the
fleſh and the Diuinitie in Chriſt, ſhall commit idolatrie: for only
God, onely his Diuinitie ought to be worſhipped. Thou ſhalt
worſhip the Lord thy God, and him onely ſhalt thou ſerue. Deut.
chap. 6. verſ. 13. Who ſo liſteth to ſee how much Saint Auguſtine
is for vs, and how much againſt the Tranſubſtantiation
of our aduerſaries: and this not in one place by chance, but
in manie,Hillarie. let him reade that which we haue alreadie alleaged. S.
Hillarie in the place cited againſt vs, groundeth his argument
vpon the truth of the Sacraments, the which doe really and
truly ſeale, giue, and preſent that which they repreſent vnto
vs. We receiue then in the Sacrament of the body and bloud
of Chriſt, the true body and bloud of Chriſt, and make our
ſelues one ſelfe ſame thing with him: and this ſpiritually by
faith, as ſo often we haue ſayd which vnion is not onely made
in the Euchariſt, but alſo in Baptiſme. And ſo the ſame Hillarie
a little before he had ſayd thoſe wordes of the Euchariſt,
had ſayd the ſame of Baptiſme, ſaying: that by it we are conioyned
with Chriſt and amongſt our ſelues. And this not by vnion
of conſent and will only, but alſo of nature: let them
alſo put Tranſubſtantiation in the water of Baptiſme, As
touching that which they ſay of Leo the firſt, wee confeſſe the
ſame which he ſaith: that Chriſt is made our fleſh, and that

we doe paſſe into his fleſh.Damaſeen and how much his authority is to be eſtemed. As touching Damaſcen, there is no
doubt but that he is wholly for them. As appeareth in the place
againſt vs alleaged. This Damaſcen by nation and profeſſion
was a Iew vntill hee came to Conſtantinople and was conuerted:
and being conuerted, became a Monke: He liued in the
time of the Emperour Leo Iſauricus, About the 720. yeare;
when the Moores a fewe yeares before hauing paſſed the
Straights of Gibraltar had by the chaſtiſement of God ſubdued
almoſt all our country of Spaine. Some things he wrote wherein
are found many wonders ſuperſtitions and erours: I will here
ſet downe ſome that the credite may be ſeene that to ſuch an
authour is due. A great defender hee was of Images: They
are not only to be made (ſaith he) but alſo to be honored and
reuerenced: The which is contrary to the ſecond comaundement:
Thou ſhalt not make to they ſelf any grauen Image, Thou
ſhalt not worſhip nor honour them. The reliques of Saints he much
eſteemed and doubted not to call them fountaines of the giftes
of God. He dared to ſay: that wee ought with faith to honor
dead ſaints, the which is blaſphemy. For in one only God ought
we to beleeue: As we confeſſe in the beginning of the Nicene
Creed. Speaking of Purgatory, to confirme it he reporteth
great wonders:Sermone de de functis. hee telleth how Traian the Emperour; who
was a pagan, an Idolaten, & a great perſecuter of the Chriſtians
by the praiers of S. Gregory went out of the paines of hell, &c.
Alſo that the ſoule of a woman called Falconilla a Pagan went
out of hell, whither for her idolatrie ſhe was condemned: and
this by the prayers of one which he calleth Primera, a martyr.
Frier Iohn de Pineda, libr. 18. cap. 24. 
                     •
                   1. telleth another
ſuch like tale: and this it is. Zenoras (whom he calleth a noble
Hiſtorian) ſaith that the Empreſſe beſought the Patriarch, biſhops,
and religious perſons to pray for the ſoule of the Emperour
Theophilus her hushand: and that they obtayned pardon
for his offences: but I (ſaith Pineda) hold it very doubtfull,
ſeeing that he dyed an obſtinate heretike. And then I will leaue
mine opinion founded vpon the rootes of faith. One of which
ſaith: that where the tree falleth, there ſhall it euer remaine:
and another: that in hell there is no redemption: and another,
that grace deuideth betweene the ſonnes of the kingdome.

and of hell, &c. For the ſelfe ſame cauſes ſay we, that which
Damaſcen ſayth of the ſoules of Traian and Falconilla to be lies.
Pero Mexia vpon the life of Traian ſayth: that that which is
ſayd of the ſoule of Traian is a meere fable and ieſt. Doctour
Illeſcas vpon the life of Gregorie the firſt holdeth it for certaine
truth and condemneth Pero Mexia.
               
               Alſo ſaith Damaſcen, that one Macarius conſulting with
a drie ſcull, knew many thinges of the ſtate of the dead (and
what is to be a Nigromancer if this be not?) This Macarius
(ſayth hee) wontedly prayed for the dead: and deſired to
know if ſuch prayers did ought auaile them, and if they receiued
any comfort by them. He ſayth: that God a louer of
ſoules, willing by manie and firme arguments to declare this
to his ſeruaunt, inſpired into the drie skull the word of truth.
For theſe words the skull pronounced:purgatory confirmed with wonders. When thou prayeſt
for the dead, ſome ſmall conſolation wee feele, &c. Alſo hee
reporteth: that one ſawe a a Diſciple of his (which had liued
a life ſomewhat diſſolute, burning in the fire, whoſe body
was in the flame euen to the throate: Afterwardes by the
prayers of the Maiſter. The ſame Maiſter himſelfe ſawe him
in the fire vp to the middle: and afterwardes praying eftſoones
for him, he ſaw him free and ſafe without hurt of the
fire.
               Theſe foure ſo ſtraunge wonders, beſides others which
we paſſe ouer, ſhall you finde in his ſermon of the dead. You
ſee heere the Textes of holie Scripture wherewith hee confirmeth
his Purgatorie.Gen. 9. 4. Alſo to proue the reſurrection, he
citeth the place of Geneſis,Lib. 4. cap 25. the ninth chapter and the fourth
verſe, where God commaunded Noah: The fleſh with the bloud
ſhalt thou not eate.
                  Orthod. fide
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Alſo, another ſtraunge thing in the chapter of Virginitie
he ſaith: that had not Adam ſinned, men for generation
ſhould not carnally haue coupled with their wiues. And becauſe
hee ſaw the Text of Scripture to bee againſt him. God
might (ſayth hee) by other meanes multiply men without
the coniunction of man and woman. Alſo ſeeing that Saint
Baſil calleth the bread and the wine of the Sacrament, examples
of the bodie and bloud of Chriſt (which was

oppoſite to him.) This ſaying of S. Baſil (ſaid he) ought to bee
vnderſtood of the bread and of the wine before ſanctification
(which is not ſo) for the bread and wine before conſecration
(as already wee haue proued by the Fathers) are common
bread and wine, as the reſt: and be no ſymbols, nor figures
of the body and bloud of Chriſt, vntill (and not before) theſe
words: Take and eate, this is my body, bee ſayd. Sith ſuch a one
then is Damaſcen, leaue we him, and let vs followe that which
the hole Scripture doth teach vs, that which the Fathers
(whom againſt Tranſubſtantiation we haue alleaged) doe tell
vs, and that alſo, which experience it ſelfe, of that which we ſee,
touch, and taſt in the ſacrament doth ſhew vs. To Theophilact,
Anſelme, Hugo, Richardo, &c. (whom they cite againſt vs▪) and
liued in the time that the holy Supper of the Lord was now falling:
the Popes then tyrannizing the conſciences of men: who
neuer ſtayed vntill (the holy ſupper deſtroyed) they had made
of ſome reliques, patches and remnants of their Maſſe ſuch as
now it is, full of abuſes, ſuperſtitions and idolatries) do we anſwer
the ſame:Leo. 1. He of theſe late writers which leaſt erred in this
matter of Tranſubſtantiation is Scotus:
                  Tranſubſtantiation can neither be proued by Scripture nor by reaſon. who ſaith (as before we
haue ſaid) that neither by Scripture, nor reaſon it can be proued
but would yet be deceiued, becauſe the Church ſo commaundeth.
How could his Church (which is the Pope and his Cardinals
make new articles of faith, beſides thoſe which Ieſus
Chriſt, our king, our Prophet, and prieſt ordained and taught
us: which be contained in the Creed of the Apoſtles? Let vs
now anſwer to the Councels which our aduerſaries alleage againſt
vs.The Councell of Epheſus. As touching that which they obiect againſt vs of the
Councell of Epheſus, wherein Cirillus gouerned, and Theodoret
(who is ſo appaparantly againſt Tranſubſtantiation) was preſent
therein, they doe vs great wrong. For the ſame do wee
confeſſe that the Councell confeſſeth. We ſay, that receiuing
this Sacrament, we receiue not common fleſh: but fleſh ſanctifying,
which by an inſeparable vnion is conioyned with the
diuine word. But how do we receiue it? Spiritually by faith, not
carnally as ſay our aduerſaries that they receiue, eat and digeſt
it. For vntil it be digeſted, they affirm it to be the fleſh of Chriſt.
They obiect the councel of Vercell in the time of Leo the ninth

where Berengarius was condemned.The Councell of Lat
                        •
                     ran. They obiect the Councel
of Lateran in the tyme of Nicholas 2.The Councell of Lateran. which cauſed Berengarius
to recant. The Lateran Councel alſo in the time of Innocent 3.
Alſo the Councell of Conſtance Anno.
                  The Councell of Conſtance. 1516. The Trident
alſo of our time: in the time whereof ſo many Popes, as Paule
3.The Councell of Trident. 
                  Iulius 3. Marcellus 2. Paulus 4. Pius 4. (and none of theſe
for the cauſes, that ſpeaking of the Popes wee haue ſhewed,
were preſent in it) poped. But examine wee the recantation,
which Pope Nicholas the ſecond that poped about the yeare
1060. commaunded Berengarius to make in the Councell of
Lateran: as it is written in the Decrees de conſecrat. diſt. 2. cap.
Ego Berengarius.
                  Great wonde▪
                   Wherein hee was conſtrained to confeſſe,
that the body of Chriſt is handled (or ſenſnally felt)
with the hands of Prieſts, that it is broken, that it is chewed with
the teeth. I demand of them how can the body of Chriſt, which
now is glorified, and therefore impoſſible, and no way ſubiect
to theſe humane miſeries ſuffer theſe things. Which the Pope
and his Councell do ſay? The Gloſſer of the Decrees himſelfe,
although not verie wiſe, could not but ſee ſo great an abſurditie
as this, and therefore ſayd, that this verie warily and aduiſedly
ought to be vnderſtood: for if thou doeſt not ſo (ſaith he)
thou ſhalt fall into an error farre greater then that of Berengrius.
The Gloſſor then vnderſtood it much better then Pope
Nicholas, or his Councell (whoſe holy ſpirit the Pope was) that
the body of Chriſt in the Sacrament could no wayes bee touched
with the handes, nor broken, nor chawed with the teeth.
For this cauſe the Maiſter of Sentences in the fourth, willing to
amend or conceale this ſo notable a fault, ſaith That this which
was commāded Berengarius to ſay, ought not to be vnderſtood
of the body of Chriſt, but of the Symbols: which ſay they, be
the accidents. And ſo in that manner of ſpeaking admitteth a
trope or figure: according whereunto is attributed to the thing
that which is of the ſymbols. But ſhould we vſe this figure, they
would eat out our eyes.In the end of the Treatiſe ſhal ye ſee how the Councel of Trent was celebrated. Now ſhalt thou vnderſtand the account
which is to be made of ſuch a Councel, and of the other Councels
that followed this: in which the Pope or his Legates haue
gouerned, and nothing aught worthy was in them determined
(albeit the Fathers had broken their heads about it) if the

Pope approued it not. So that the Pope only is hee which maketh
and vnmaketh decrees and articles of faith: and not the
Councel.The manner of celebrating the Popiſh Councels. Whē a Councell is celebrated the which from many
to many yeares is done: as though there were no euill life of the
Prelates to be amended; nor abuſes, ſuperſtitions, hereſies nor
idolatries in the Church to bee corrected) the Legates of the
Pope, which commonly are three (for ſuch is his cauſe, that hee
truſteth not one with it) haue great regard to write to the Pope
this or that is determined in the Councel, how liketh it your Holineſſe.
Then doth the Pope either approue it, or blotting it out,
diſalow it. If he blot it out, there is then no more treaty of that
matter, how true ſoeuer it be, & how profitable ſoeuer for the
Church. That which he approueth he writeth to his Legats. This
letter which the Pope ſendeth, is the holy ſpirit which now gouerneth
the Councels. This holy Spirit deſcendeth not from
heauē, but commeth incloſed in a budget or wallet. Thus is the
Councell not free, but a ſeruant: and of whom? of the Pope.
Who (as before by many moſt ſufficient reaſons we haue proued
to be Antichriſt. So neceſſarie an article to ſaluation is
Tranſubſtantiation among our aduerſaries, that they hold him
not a Chriſtian, but an heretike anathematized, accurſed, and
excommunicated that doth not beleeue it. Wherein, to the
Councell of Florence, held in the time of Eugenius the fourth in
the yeare of our Lord 1439. do they great iniurie. In this Councell
were preſent the Emperour of Grecia, the Patriarke of
Conſtantinople, and many Eaſterne Biſhops. The Greekes and
Latines agreed in this Councell, in the difference which they
held touching the holy Spirit: and in ſome other things they alſo
agreed: but as touching Tranſubſtantiation, albeit the Pope
did labour them to allow of it: yet could they neuer effect it
with them. And great heed tooke the Greekes, that in the letter
of vnitie no mention were made of Tranſubſtantiation: the
which was done to the good liking of the Greeks, as in the Bull
of Eugenius, which beginneth Exultent coeli, & laetetur terra, appeareth:
wherin he giueth for good to all Chriſtendome, that
the Greeke and Latine Church had once againe accorded.
And I ſurely know, had their Tranſubſtantiation bene an article
of faith, without which there is no ſaluation, the Romane

Church did wickedly to admit the Greeks for brothers, ſeeing
they openly denyed Tranſubſtantiatiō.There was neuer mutual cō
                     ſent of the Church touching Tranſubſtantiation. That which our aduerſaries
ſay of the mutual cōſent of the Church touching the article
of Tranſubſtātiation, here appeareth to be falſe. For neither
the Greek nor Eaſtern church euer beleeued it, nor now at this
day beleeueth it: nor yet did the Latine Church for a thouſand
yeares ſpace beleeue it. Of all this which we haue ſpoken touching
Tranſubſtantiation we conclude that which we ſay to be
truth, that he which heareth the Maſſe is a great Idolater, and
he which ſayth it is a greater.
               The fift Domage which the Maſſe cauſeth,The 5. domage of the Maſſe. purgatory. is: that beſides
the ſayd foure domages, it maintaineth many abuſes, as is Purgatorie.
Concerning Purgatorie ſay we: there is no other purgatorie
but the bloud of Chriſt, which purgeth our ſinnes. By
which purgation wee are reconciled with the euerlaſting Father.
The other purgatorie ſay we which our aduerſaries haue
forged, without the word of God, is the head of a wolfe, as Doctor
Conſtantine did call it, who for the cauſe of religion, of infirmitie,
age, and hard impriſonment, among thoſe cruell Canibals,
and eaters of mans fleſh, the defilers of the faith, in the caſtle
of Traiana died. Purgatorie is a common cutpurſe, that
without ſhame or correction ſtealeth, robbeth, and catcheth all
what it can, to fill the paunches of theſe idle bellies, prieſts and
friers, & all the eccleſiaſticall order. For whence haue they ſo
enriched themſelues? whence is it that they haue builded ſo
many ſumptuous Monaſteries, which ſeeme rather Caſtles
and pallaces of moſt rich kings and Princes, then houſes of
begging Friers and poore Monkes, who in times paſt gained
their liuing with the labour of their hands? Whence haue they
founded ſo many Chappels, ſo manie Trentals, ſo many Maſſes
prayed and ſung, which they called de requiem, but of the
fooliſh perſwaſion of Purgatorie? As the Maſſe entertayneth
Purgatorie, ſo alſo doth Purgatorie entertaine the Maſſe. The
Maſſe and Purgatorie are euen as two Mules, the one rubbing
the other.
               The falſe prophets made an old & ſimple woman beleeue,
that the ſoule of her father, mother, husband, daughter or other
perſon whō ſhe deerely loued was ſuffering moſt grieuous torments

and paines in Purgatory: and demanded ſome reliefe by
the Maſſe or Maſſes which ſhould be ſaid for it. Then the poore
old woman, taking it from their mouth, ioyned peece to peece,
68 Blancas which is a ryall,Maſſes ſold for money, according to the prouerbe, No peny no Pater noſter went to a Prieſt, and giuing him the
tyall (for Maſſes are ſold for money) beſought him to ſay a
Maſſe with great deuotion for the ſoule of her father, or ſome
other perſon whom ſhe loued. And were the old woman ſo
much more ſuperſtitions; then went ſhe to a monaſterie, holding
it for certaine, that the Fryers liued a more religious and
holy life then the Prieſtes, and being come to the monaſterie,
beſought the Sextan or potter to cauſe a Maſſe with all ſpeede
to be ſayd. The Sextan or porter ſayd, it ſhould preſently bee
done. Then went out a Father to ſay the Maſſe, and tooke money
of her: to whom better had it beene to haue giuen, then
taken it from her: for God knoweth the pouertie that remayned
in the houſe of this old woman, and the riches and ſuperfluity
that was in the monaſterie. And a faire thing it was, that
they ſayd it not for her: for oftentimes it happeneth, that more
Maſſes are receiued for in one day, then all the Prieſtes of the
monaſtery can ſay in a moneth. And this is the cauſe why they
cannot ſay all the Maſſes they receiue for. But thou wilt ſay
vnto mee: Why do theſe reuerend men take of them more
money for Maſſes then they well can ſay? Me ſeemeth they rob
in doing this which thou ſayeſt. Hereunto I anſwer, that they
reckon not of this, nor make they any conſcience thus to rob
and deceiue. And that which is worſe, this their theft and robberie
do they ſanctifie, ſaying: that is very well done, and that neceſſity
ſo requireth,Thus doing, they do contrary to that which the Apoſtle ſaith: Euill is not to be done that good may come of it Rom. 3. 
                        •
                     . that the deuotion of the people be not deſpiſed.
Ad the Pope for the cauſe aforeſayd a proueth and maketh
good this theft: and commandeth them to ſay two Maſſes
at euery moneths end, one for the quicke, another for the dead:
which two Maſſes (ſaith he) are as auayleable as all thoſe (how
many ſoeuer) they haue omitted to ſay. Did the Magiſtrates
their dutie, they would ſeeke, and in the cheſts of their Monaſteries
ſhould find ſuch Bulles, ſuch mockeries, and ſuch licenſes
to ſteale. Purgatorie haue they made a new article of faith:
ſo that he which beleeueth it not, is therefore an heretike. If it
be hereſie not to beleeue that, which neither in the doctrine

of the old or new Teſtament is confirmed:The. 3. Credes containe the ſome of that whicha Chriſtā is to beleeue The. 6. Domage. Nor is in any of the
three Creedes, of the Apoſtles, the Nicen nor of Athanaſius being
a Summarie token out of the ſcripture, which a Chriſtian
ought to beleeue, conteyned.
               The 6. domage is: that ſuppoſe the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, or
ſacrament of the altar (As they call it) had bene ſuch, As they
paint it out: Yet ſhould it not be wel adminiſtred, ſith the Chriſtian
people are defrauded, and depriued of the one halfe of the
ſacrament. becauſe they giue them not the ſacramentall wine,
which is the ſacrament of the bloud of Chriſt, ſhed for vs vpon
the Croſſe, & when the other halfe is receiued, they giue it ſeldome
once in the yeare, & wickedly, with ſo many ſuperſtitions
and Idolatries (As we haue already proued). In bread and
wine did Ieſus Chriſt inſtitute this ſacrament, for the high
ſignification and alluſion which the bread and wine holde with
his bodie and with his bloud: and commaunded his Apoſtles, in
the ſelfe ſame maner, As they had ſeene him celebrate the ſupper,
in memoriall of his death to celebrate it. When he gaue thē
the bread, he ſaid. Take eate, this is my bodie. And when he gaue
the wine, he ſaid. Drinke ye all of this. This is my blood. In giuing
the wine, he addeth, & that not without great miſtery, this word
all, for with this word All, doth the Lord preuent, & arme vs againſt
the heretikes, which were afterwardes to ariſe, ſaying:
Drinke not all of the wine. Our aduerſaries cannot deny the
Lord to haue ſaid. Drinke yee all of this. They cannot deny, that
all thoſe which haue receaued the bread, haue not drunke of
the wine.Mar. 14. 23. And ſo ſaith S. Marke. And they all dranke thereof.
As litle alſo can they deny that they themſelues cōmand, contrary
to the cōmandement of God, that all do not drinke thereof.
What ſhall we hereupon conclude? That they be heretikes,
Albeit,The hereſie of the Papiſts. they deny it becauſe they falſify and clip the moſt holy
ſacrament which Chriſt did inſtitute. If the lawes commaund,
that he which falſifieth or clippeth the coyne, bearing the figure
of the king, or the Lord of the land; ſhal die: What puniſhment
ſhal he deſerue, that falſifieth & clippeth the ſacrament, which
hath not only the figure of Chriſt, but his proper body & bloud
As in bread & wine, Ieſus Chriſt did celebrate his ſupper: Euen
ſo did his Apoſtles celebrate it afterwards. Read the 11. chapter

of the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthes, where S. Paule intreateth
of the celebration of the holie ſupper; But the ſpace of one
thouſand yeares was the ſelfe ſame order touching the ſubſtāce
of the ſupper, obſerued in the Church: vntil falſe prophets aroſe
that brake this good order, which Chriſt did inſtitute and his Apoſtles:
& the Church did long time after obſerue, Theſe would
ſhew thēſe lues to be more wiſe thē Chriſt, & ſo cōmāded they
that no Chriſtian, were he not a prieſt, ſhuld receiue, whē they
cōmunicated the cōſecrated wine. And their reaſons they yeeld
(but very friuolous & ridiculous) why they ſo commaund.
               The firſt is, becauſe there is no difference betwene the prieſt,
and the people. Great pride & arrogancy is this, euer haue they
pretended to keepe Chriſtian people in ſubiection: So are
they called the Clergie, for being, as they ſay. The Lot of the
Lord. As though the people, for whom Chriſt died, were the
lot of the diuell,
               The ſecond cauſe is, the danger of ſhedding the bloud, by
the beardes: if the people ſhould drink it, If this bee the cauſe
why giue they it not to womē, ſeeing they haue no beards? why
giue they it not to many, which either by nature, or ſhauing, or
cutting haue no beards? Why command they not, that all Chriſtians
ſhould be beard ſhauen?. Why permit they the Pope and
many Cardinals & Biſhops in Italie to nouriſh their beards? and
ſo no danger ſhould be.
               The third ſay they: that receiuing the forme of the bread,
they receiue the body of Chriſt, and by conſequence (as they
call it) receaue they the bloud. And thus (ſay they) that vnder
one forme they receaue both thinges: the bodie and bloud of
Chriſt. Oh learned men! Oh great wits! The Lord commandeth
that all ſhuld drink. They countermād ſaying. That all ſhal not
drinke: that to receaue one kind is ſufficient. And a faire thing
is this, that they cōdemne thoſe for heretikes which receiue the
ſupper in both kinds: As Chriſt did celebrate, & as the Apoſtles,
& all the Church, for more then a thouſand, & ſo many yeares
celebrated the ſame. They ſee not that in condemning vs, they
condemne Chriſt, his Apoſtles, & all the Church for ſo many
yeares. Let thē ſhew me one Church, that comunicated in one
kind, for the ſpace of 1000. yeres after the death of Chriſt. Teh
                     •
                  s

reaſons & all whatſoeuer they can imagine, and in their fantaſie
forge, wil not ſuffice to diminiſh nor defeat the order which
Chriſt ordayned in his Church. In bread aud wine did Chriſt
inſtitute this ſacrament, & ſo diſtributed it, to his Apoſtles, and
commanded them ſo to doe the ſame, S. Paul as a good diſciple
obedient to his maiſter,1 Cor. 10. 20. did ſo celebrate the holy ſupper: diſtributing
the bread, which is the ſacrament of the body and the
wine which is the ſacrament of the bloud. Ye (ſaith he) cannot
drinke the cup of the Lord, & the cup of diuels, &c. And a little
before, by the cup, he had made mention of the cōmunion of
the bloud, & of the participation of his bodie by the bread. Alſo
as often as ye ſhal eate this bread, & drinke this cup, &c. So that,
whoſoeuer ſhall eate this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
vnworthyly, &c. Let euery one therefore proue himſelfe, & ſo
eate of that bread and drinke of that cup. Alſo, for he that eateth
and drinketh vnworthyly, &c. Of all thoſe that did communicate
ſpake, S. Paul, and not of the prieſts alone. This ſelfe
ſame order of communicating in both kindes, was for many
yeares obſerued in the Church. As in the eccleſiaſtical hiſtories
& writings of the fathers, ſome of whom I wil here alleage, appeareth
Our fleſh ſaith Tertullian is fed with the fleſh & bloud
of Ieſus Chriſt:Tertullian lib. de reſurrect. that the ſoule may be nouriſhed of God. Oftentimes
doth S. Cyprian make mention of this cōmunion in both
kinds,Cyprian, Serm De lapſis. in bread & wine. Read his ſermon intituled Delapſis. In
which, not once, but 5 or 6 times, he maketh mention thereof.
Alſo he ſaith: that thoſe which did cōmunicate, receiued the ſacrament
with the hand: & giueth a reaſon why we ought to cō
                  municate
in both kinds, the which is of other touch, then thoſe
which our aduerſaries giue, why we ſhould not in both kindes
cōmunicate. How ſhal we exhort (ſaith S. Cyprian) the people, to
ſhed their bloud for the confeſion of Chriſt, if when they enter
the combate, we deny them the bloud of Chriſt? Or how ſhall
we make thē capable to drink the cup of martirdome. If we admit
thē not firſt to drink, the cup of the Lord? Alſo that which
we ſaid of the ſame S. Cyprian cōcerning the young Infant (whē
we ſpake of the miracles) that in both kinds receiued the ſacrament,
Chriſoſtome ſaith.Chriſoſtom vppon. 2. Cor. 
                        •
                     . We are not, as in the olde lawe:
where the prieſt toke his portion, and the people had the reſt,

but one ſelfe ſame body is here giuen to all, and one ſelfe ſame
cup: and all whatſoeuer is in the Euchariſt, is common both to
prieſt and people. Chriſoſtome in this ſacrament, putteth not the
difference that our aduerſaries doe, betweene the prieſt & the
people: That the prieſt in both kindes communicate, and the
people only in one. But we will ſhew for greater confuſion,
of our aduerſaries, all thoſe foure Doctors (As they call them)
of the Church to bee for vs. As great credit giue they to
the Doctrine which theſe foure Doctours with one common
conſent doe teach:Ambroſe. As they giue, to the Goſpell it ſelfe. Saint
Ambroſe (As Theodoret lib. 5. cap. 17. reporteth ſpeaking with
the Emperour Theodoſius 1. a naturall Spaniarde of Italica,
which we now call olde Siuill, one league diſtant from Siuill
They ſaid vnto him.The ſacrament taken with handes and in both kynds. How dareſt thou, I pray thee ſtretch out
thy handes, ſtayned with vniuſt ſlaughter and bloud, to receaue
with the ſame, the holy bodie of the Lord? Or thou, that
moued with the fury of wrath, ſo much bloud ſo wickedly haſt
ſpilled, how wilt thou apply to thy mouth his venerable bloud?
depart then, &c. Sozomenus. lib. 7. cap. 24. maketh alſo mention
of this Hiſtorie. The ſame S. Ambroſe in the funerall oration,
which he made at the death of Theodoſius, maketh mention
of Theodoſius his repentaunce. Were there many Ambroſes
There would bee many Theodoſies. The cauſe will I here
briefly tell, why Saint Ambroſe depriued him of the holy ſupper.
They of Theſſalonica murdred a Tribune in a popular
tumult: the Emperour Theodoſius, hearing it was ſo highly
offended that hee cauſed ſeuen thouſand men to bee ſlayne.
Pero Mexia, writing the life of this Theodoſius, applyeth this
to his Maſſe, which is ſo much againſt it. Hee ſaith: that Theodoſius,
the day following would go to the Temple to pray,
and heare Maſſe, as he was (ſaith he) accuſtomed, &c. And note
the affected malice of Pero Mexia: That he alleaged not the author
of this his ſaying. That Theodoſius went to heare Maſſe:
which he would haue done, had any ſaid it, Maliciouſly he concealeth
the name of Theodoret, becauſe it made againſt his
Maſſe, which he ſo much adored. Two things may we note in
this ſaying of S. Ambroſe: Firſt, that he which did communicate
toke the ſacrament with his handes, and not with his mouth,

a childe, when they giue it pappe. This ſacrament is not for Infants,
which cannot eate ſtrong meates, but it is for people, that
haue diſcretion, & can eat a peece of bread, and drinke a boule
of wine, And ſo ſaith Chriſt vnto them, Take eate, Take drinke.
He ſaith not: Open thy mouth, receaue therewith the bread.
The ſecond thinge which we are to note in this ſaying of Saint
Ambroſe is: that the ſacrament to the faithful was giuen in both
kinds, in bread & wine. For to eate without drinking, what doth
it profit the body? Both the one & the other, haue we noted, in
the place of S. Cyprian before aleaged. Alſo lib. 4. De ſacramentis,
cap. 5 theſe words ſaith the ſame S. Ambroſe In the diſtribution
of the bodie & bloud of Chriſt, the prieſt ſaid Take the body
of the Lord:
                  Ieorme. 
                  Take the bloud of Chriſt. Whereunto the commucant
anſwered Amen. The ſecond Doctour is Saint Ierome:
Where ſpeaking vppon the ſecond chapter of Malachy ſaith:
The prieſt which conſecrateth the bread of the ſupper, and
diſtributeth the blood of the Lord to the people. Saint Auguſtine
is full of notable ſayings, confirming our Doctrine of
the communion in both kindes. Of which I will alleage one
or two,Auguſtine. to auoyd tediouſneſſe. How (ſaith Saint Auguſtine lib.
5. Hypognoſt. Tom. 7.) doſt thou promiſe the life of the kingdome
of heauen to Babes, not regenerate of water and the
holie Ghoſt, nor nouriſhed with the fleſh, nor watered with
the blood of Chriſt, &c. Alſo in the firſt Epiſtle, to Ianuarius.
Some (ſaith he) doe euery day communicate the body and the
bloud of Chriſt: others, &c. This is moſt certaine, that in the
time of S. Cyprian. and of S. Auguſtine. and long time alſo after
the Euchariſt was giuen in both kindes, and that to Infants
As Eraſmus noteth it. The fourth Doctor which is S. Gregory.
now remayneth: whom we may iuſtly intitle the laſt biſhop of
Rome: and his ſucceſſor Boniface 3. may we call the firſt Pope:
becauſe he would be wholy Pope, calling himſelfe by the ayd
of that murderer Phocas,
                  Gregorie. vniuerſall Biſhop. Saint Gregorie then
ſaith: you haue learned what the bloud of the Lambe is: and
this not by hearing, but by drinking his bloud (to wit, as often
we haue ſaid, the ſacramēt of his bloud) is ſhed into the mouths
of the faithful. Here you ſee, al the foure Doctors of the Church
confirme our Doctrine. Why then doe our aduerſaries deny

it, And what ſay I of foure doctors? reade they all the ancient
Doctors as wel Greeks as Latins, all are found to be for vs. And
many years alſo after Saint Gregorie, when all things as it were
went to ruine this cuſtom continued: & not as a cuſtome, but as
a law inuiolable was it holdē: for the reuerence of the diuine inſtitution
was yet on foot & in it being: & to ſeparate thoſe things
which God hath ioyned they doubted not to be ſacrilege. So
ſaid Gelaſius Biſh of Rome as de Conſecratione:
                  Gelaſius. diſt. 2. cap. Comperimus
it is alleaged) we haue vnderſtood, ſaith he, that ſome hauing
only taken the body of the Lord, doe abſent themſelues
from the cuppe: who for as much as they ſinne of ſuperſtition,
muſt bee compelled to receiue entirely the whole Sacrament
or to abſtaine from the whole. For the diuiſion of this miſterie
cannot be without great ſacrilege. Our aduerſaries then
in diuiding this myſterie, by the ſaying of Gelaſius, be ſuperſtitious
& Church-robbers.The papiſts be Superſtitious & Sacrilegious. In the 3. Councell of Toledo, 2. Cannon
And in the concluſion of the ſayd Councell, the ſymbol of
our faith is commaunded to be ſaid before the communion of
the body and bloud of Chriſt, according to the cuſtome of the
Eaſt: the reaſon which the Councell giueth is, that the people
ſhould confeſſe that which they beleeue, and ſo hauing
hearts, purified by faith, are ſaid to receiue the body and bloud
of Chriſt. In this Councell was preſent the Catholike king Ricaredo:
as by the prayers which hee made in the Councell appeareth.
               The 7.The 7. Domage. Domage that the Maſſe cauſeth is, that ſuppoſe the
Maſſe were good, & celebrated as it ought to be celebrated, yet
in a ſtrange tongue is it ſayd, that the people vnderſtand it not,
& ſometimes alſo be himſelf that faith it vnderſtandeth not that
which he ſaith: which is againſt the commandement of S. Paul,
who commandeth that all be done with comelineſſe & order.1 Gor. 14. 40.
And what comelines or order is there, where the people heare
a language which they vnderſtand not, and ſo know not whether
the Prieſt doth bleſſe or curſe them? The ſame Apoſtle
ſaith, that the vſe of tongues not vnderſtood (albeit to the praiſe
of God) is vnprofitable in the Church. And therefore, without
interpretation of that which is ſaid, ought not to be vſed. Read
1.1 Cor. 14. Cor. 14. 8. where he ſaith If the trumpet ſhall giue an vncertaine

ſound, who ſhall prepare himſelfe to the battell? So likewiſe you by
the tongue, except ye vtter words that haue ſignification, how ſhall it
be vnder flood that which is ſpoken? For ye ſhall ſpeake in the aire, &c.
And therefore in the 19. verſe he ſayth: I would rather ſpeake
fine words in the Church with vnderſtanding (that is to ſay, that
may be vnderſtood, thereby alſo to inſtruct others) then tenne
thouſand wordes in a tongue (to wit) that the people vnderſtand not.
The ſame Apoſtle in the 27. verſe commandeth, that if anie
ſhall ſpeake in a ſtraunge tongue, there be alſo an Interpreter.
And if there ſhall be no Interpreter, hee commandeth that hee
ſpeake not in the Church. And that if he ſpeake, hee ſpeake to
himſelfe and to God, and not to the people: for the people receiue
no edification by a tongue that is not vnderſtood. And
therefore in the 26. verſe he commandeth that all be done to edification.
For this cauſe, when God ſpake with the Patriarks,
with the Prophets, and with his people of Iſrael, or they with
him, they ſpeake vnto him in their mother tongue that all did
vnderſtād. The ſame did Ieſus Chriſt, ſpeaking with the Scribes
and Phariſies, he ſpake vnto them in the vulgar tongue, the
ſame that was then vſed in Iudea. The Apoſtles when the Lord
ſent them through the world to preach, had firſt receiued the
gifts of tongues to preach the Goſpell, and celebrate the ſacraments
to euerie nation in their proper language. Why then do
not our aduerſaries in this imitate the Apoſtles, they taught and
celebrated their Sacraments in the vulgar tongue, that al might
vnderſtand: that the people might be edified, & God might be
glorified. The myſteries of Chriſtian religion, be not as the miſteries
of the Gentiles (which were thoſe that they called Myſterios
Eleuſimos, & thoſe of the good goddeſſe) & wo vnto him
that reuealed the ſame. Herehence it commeth that the Prieſt
pronounceth the words of conſecration, not onely in a ſtrange
tongue, but alſo in a verie low voice that none can heare thē, &
ſo (ſay they) Pope Vigilius cōmanded, as reporteth D. Illeſcas vpon
the life of Vigilius. The Lord wil that his Chriſtian people vnderſtād
the myſteries,Leuit: 11. 3. & vnderſtood, do meditate vpon them as
God in old time loued not the beaſt that chewed not the cud,Deut. 14. 4. &
ſuffred not his people to eate thereof, ſo now loueth he not that
chriſtiā that chaweth not the cud, & meditates on the ſaw of the

Lord his miſteries and his ſacraments.Pſal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Dauid ſpeaking of the
exerciſe of a godly man ſaieth: That he meditateth night and
daye vpon the lawe of the Lord.
               The Lord ſpeaking with Ioſua who was no Prieſt but a
moſte warlike Captaine that wan ſo many battailes ſaith theſe
wordes vnto him:Ioſua. 18. The booke of this law ſhall neuer depart
from thy mouth but day and night ſhalt thou meditate therein,
that thou maieſt keepe and doe, &c. To each nation in their
vulgar tongue, let them then ſay their Maſſe that they may
vnderſtand and knowe whether that which is therein ſaied
be good or euill: and not ſaie it to all nations in Latine: whereof
the people receiueth no edificacion but deſtruction: nought
learning, but ſuperſtition and Idolatry; As before we haue
proued. Some notable domages, which the Maſſe cauſeth,
haue we ſhewed.Abſurdities which the Maſſe cauſeth. Now will we ſhow ſome abſurdities & great
inconueniences which thereof followe: Againſt the worde of
God are ſome of them & againſt the doctrine of the fathers &
others be againſt experience it ſelfe: againſt naturall reaſon,
and common ſence. And but three or foure will I ſet downe to
auoyd tediouſneſſe. We ſayd (being ſo taught by the word of
God) that in the ſacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt,The faithful only receaue the body and bloud of Chriſt. the
faithfull onely receiue ſpiritually and by faith, the true body &
bloud of Chriſt. Our aduerſaries not herewith contented, ſay:
that not only the good, godly, and faithfull, but alſo the euill,
wicked and vnfaithfull,The firſt abſurditie. the Turkes, Iewes, and Pagans do receiue
the true bodie and bloud of Chriſt: & yet paſſe they further:
they ſay, that beaſts, mice, and other vermine do eat it, that
the moiſture doth moiſten it, & the mouldineſſe doth make it
mouldy, &c. Their blacke Tranſubſtantiation hath made them
fall into ſo great an abſurditie & ſtrange wonder:Tranſubſtantiation is the cauſe that the papiſts beleeue the mouſe, &c. to eate the body of Chriſt. they beleeue
that there is no bread nor wine, but the body & bloud of Chriſt
it the Sacrament: They vnderſtād that not the faithful only, but
alſo the infidel, Turke, Pagan, and Iew, the Mouſe, &c. eateth
that which was in the Sacrament. Hereupon conclude they that
they eate and drinke the body & bloud of Chriſt. He that will
deny them Tranſubſtantiation, will alſo deny this their concluſion
to be good. But this ſet apart, the wicked, &c. will we ſhew
by the month of Chriſt himſelfe, not to eat nor drinke the body

and bloud of Chriſt. S. Iohn ſheweth that the Lord ſaith: Except
ye eate the fleſh of the son of man, and drinke his bloud, ye haue no life
in you.
                  10. 6. 53. Hereupon is concluded, that except wee eate his fleſh,
and drinke his bloud we ſhall not be ſaued. We eat and drinke
his fleſh & his bloud when we not only reciue this Sacrament,
but alſo at all times, and as often as we beleeue in him. Beleeue
ſaith S. Auguſtine, and thou haſt eaten. And therefore the ſame
Lord recounteth the fruites which this eating of his body and
drinking of his bloud do neceſſarily bring forth. He that eateth
(ſaith he) my fleſh, and drinketh my bloud, hath eternall life, and I wil
raiſe him vp, &c. Alſo, He that eateth my fleſh & drinketh my bloud
dwelleth in me, and I in him. And, he that eateth me, ſhall liue alſo by
me. Preſuppoſe this, as moſt true and apparant it is, that wicked
men, Iewes, mice, &c. haue not eternall life, nor ſhall bee raiſed
vp in the companie of the faithfull. It is ſeene they that dwel
not in Chriſt, nor Chriſt in them, it is alſo apparant that they
ſhall not liue by Chriſt. Hereupon we conclude, that they eat
not the fleſh of Chriſt, nor drinke his bloud. For had they eaten
it, and had they drunke it, heauen and earth ſhould rather faile,
then the word of Chriſt ſhould faile, the wicked Iewes, Turks,
mice, &c. ſhould haue life eternall, and ſhould dwell in Chriſt,
and Chriſt in them, &c. and to ſay this is a moſt great abſurdity.
Therefore it followeth, that ſuch eate not the fleſh, nor drink
his bloud. Saint Auguſtine conſidering this he ſayd: The other
Diſciples did eat Panem Dominum, the Lord which was bread,
but Iudas did eat Panem Domini,
                  Tractat. 59. in Iohannem. the bread of the Lord: as if he
had ſayd: Iudas wanting faith, and receiuing the Sacrament vnworthily,
did not eat the body, nor drinke the bloud of Chriſt,
which the other Apoſtles did, becauſe they had faith, and did
eate it worthily: but Iudas did only eat & drinke the ſacrament
of the body and bloud of Chriſt. Alſo in the 21. booke de Cinitate
Dei cap. 25. he ſayth: It is not to bee thought that he eateth
the body of Chriſt, which is not in the body of Chriſt,
nor in whom Chriſt is not, nor hee in Chriſt. Origen vppon
thoſe wordes,Origen ſuper Math. 15. 11, 
                  That which entreth in at the mouth defileth not the
man, &c. manifeſtly ſayth, that the wicked doe not eate the
body of Chriſt: and giueth the reaſon: becauſe the bodie of
Chriſt (ſayth he) is quickening, and he which eateth it, dwelleth

in Chriſt.Saint Ierome vppon Eſay Chap. 66. Saint Ierome vppon the 66. chap. of Eſayas
ſaith: Not being holie in bodie nor ſpirit, they eate not the
fleſh of Ieſus, nor drinke they his bloud. Manie other places
bee there in the Fathers, that proue our doctrine, the wicked,
&c. not to eate nor drinke the bodie & bloud of Chriſt.
But thoſe which wee haue alleaged, are now ſufficient.
               Another abſurditie there is,The 2 abſurdity and this it is, that the banquet
being to be common and generall to all: by which it is called
Communion: one onely at his pleaſure eateth it and ſwalloweth
all, without giuing part to others. Who taught them
thus to doe? Not Chriſt, nor his Apoſtles, nor the primitiue
Church. In old time, all thoſe that were preſent when the
Supper of the Lord was celebrated did communicate, and
that in both kindes. And except they did communicate they
depriued them of the Supper, which our Aduerſaries cannot
denie. So confeſſeth George Caſſander in the Preface of
the booke intituled Ordo Romanus de officio Miſſae: for confirmation
hereof hee alleadgeth the tenth Cannon of the Apoſtles:
where it is commaunded, that all the faithfull which
were found preſent at the holy ſolemnities of the Church,
and continued not till the Maſſe were ended, nor receiued the
holie Communion, ſhould bee caſt from the Communion.
He citeth the Councell of Antioch, the ſecond chapter, wherein
it is ordayned, that all they which enter into the Church
of God, and receiue not the holy Communion, ſhould bee
caſt out of the Church. Hee alleaged alſo the Cannon of
Calixtus (or as ſay others) Anacletus, which commandeth:
that the conſecration ended, all ſhould communicate. Hee
alleageth alſo Iohn Coclaeus, in the booke which hee intituled
De Sacrificio Miſſae, contra Muſculum. In old time ſaith Cochleus.
Aſwell the Prieſtes, as the Laitie, ſo manie as were
found preſent at the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, the offering being
ended, did ioyntly with the Prieſt communicate, &c.
And the ſame Cannon which they ſay in their Maſſe, maketh
this to bee clearely vnderſtood: becauſe it maketh mention
of the people, ſtanding about, offering and communicating.
For which cauſe ſome expounders of the Cannons
ſay: that the Cannon ought not to be ſayd in the Maſſe, but

onely when the people communicate. Many more Councels
and Fathers might be alleaged to confirme that which Caſſander
ſayth: but the thing being ſo manifeſt, many witneſſes ſhal
be needleſſe. The Grecians vntill this day obſerue the ancient
cuſtome: there is no priuate Maſſe among them. Vpon
the Lords dayes and feſtiuall dayes,The papiſtes which heare the Maſſe & Communicate not are ex communicate by their owne Cannons. the Supper of the Lord
is onely celebrated, and the people in both kindes communicate.
Our aduerſaries may ſee what hath beene the cauſe of
leauing this ancient and laudable cuſtome, and that as many
alſo as heare the Maſſe, and communicate not, incurre thereby
Excommunication. The Communion in our time, is but
once a yeare celebrated, and this with damage and great idolatrie:
and all the dayes in the yeare, is no other thing done,
but ſaying of Maſſes in euery corner of the Churches, and in
thoſe alſo of particular houſes, without any Communion: except
it be that ſome for deuotion will communicate: and oftentimes
it happeneth, that none is found preſent at theſe Maſſes,
but the Nouice onely that anſwereth, Et cum Spiritu tuo, and
with thy ſpirit:The Nouices commonly are little villaines. when the Prieſt hath ſaid vnto him, Dominus vobiſcum,
The Lord bee with you. And note that the Nouice is
wont to be commonly a little villaine, according to the prouerbe:
Hize à mi hijo Monazillo, y torno ſeme diabillo, Make my
ſonne a Nouice, and turne him a little diuell. What agreement
then hath this their priuate Maſſe with the holy Supper of the
Lord which is a common banquet, propoſed to the whole
Church. Reade the tenth and eleuenth chapters of the firſt epiſtle
to the Corinthians, which before we haue alleaged. What
wickednes do they then that conuert the Maſſe into the ſupper
of the Lord: which they neuer celebrate, except the whole
Church, or the greateſt part of it do communicate, acording to
the inſtitution of Chriſt, & according to that which his Apoſtles
did, and the Church many yeares after.
               The 3.The 3. Abſurditie. abſurdity is that which before we haue ſaid, that were
there Trāſubſtantiation, Chriſt ſhuld haue 2 carnal bodies, one
which ſate, & the other which this ſitting body did eate, & giue
to his Diſciples. The fourth Abſurditie is, that they put the
body of Ieſus Chriſt in diuerſe places at one inſtant,The 4. Abſurditie. in all the
Maſſes which are ſayd through the world: Againſt the order
of nature doe they in this, according whereunto, nothing created

that is finite, can be at one ſelfe ſame time in diuerſe places.
The body of Ieſus Chriſt conſidered it ſelfe, is finite, and in
time created: therefore can it not bee in diuerſe places at one
inſtaut. In this do they alſo againſt the article of our faith, which
in the Creed we confeſſe, that Ieſus Chriſt ſitteth at the right
hand of God the Father. From whence ſhall he come (ſaith the
article of our faith) to iudge the quicke and the dead. Alſo they
do againſt common experience: for ſeeing bread and wine
with the eyes, taſting them with the mouth, and ſmelling them
with the noſe, yet for all this, ſay they, that no bread nor wine
remaineth. I demaund now, when they burne this their Sacrament
for the cauſes that they themſelues in the booke de Cautelis
do command it to be burned: I demaund of them, what is
that which is burned and conuerted into aſhes? Not the bodie
of Chriſt, which now being glorified, is impaſſible, nor the accidents
of the bread, nor of the wine: for the ſubſtance of the
aſhes, engendred of that which was burned, could not bee engendered
but of another ſubſtance: according to that which
commonly is ſaid: The generation of one thing is the corruption
of another: It followeth then Albeit it grieue them & that
they deny it) that the bread is burned. I demaund of them alſo
when the Prieſt deuideth the Hoſt into three partes: what
is that which he deuideth? Some ſay they bee accidents without
ſubiect. To others this anſwere not ſeeming to be good,
becauſe not the accidents, but the ſubſtance, which hath quantitie
is parted: Therefore ſay they, that nothing is parted. This
people thinke vs to be blocks and fooles. They will make vs
(as they ſay) del cielo cebolla, to beleeue things impoſſible. Free
ſhould they be from all theſe abſurdities, would they with Ieſus
Chriſt, with his Apoſtle Saint Paul, and with the Catholike
Church confeſſe true bread and true wine to be in this ſacrament:
of which bread and of which wine being corrupted,
are engendred thoſe things before ſpoken. So that the wormes
and aſhes are engendred and made, not of the body of Chriſt,
which is glorious, and ſet at the right hand of the Father:
not of the accidentes, which haue not other being: but
doe remaine in ſome ſubiect, (and by a miracle ſay they,
the accidentes in the Sacrament, bee without ſubiect) but

are made of the bread and of the wine which is corrupted or
burned. Now for confirmation of that which we haue ſayd:
we will ſet downe an Appendix or addition,The eſtimation wherein the pope holdeth his God the Sacrament. which with wonderfull
examples will liuely declare the eſtimation wherein the
Popes and their people, which the call eccleſiaſticall, hold
their Sacrament, which they ſell vnto vs for God. And wee as
ſenceleſſe, and ouer-ſuerſtitious, for money doe buy it. Open
thine eyes ô Spaine, and be no more by the Pope deceiued.
Pope Gregory the ſeuenth, which before was called Hildebrand,
was (as in his life we haue ſayd) a terrible and mortall enemie
of the good Emperour Henry the fourth: & ſo deſperately procured
by all wayes and meanes poſſible, now by force, now
by dececit, now by inchantments to pull him out of the world.
And for that purpoſe ſuborned with promiſe of reward, a certaine
man, &c. as in the life of the ſaid Gregorie wee haue declared.
Cardinall Benon goeth further, he ſaith: that the Pope
with high voyce from the pulpit vpon the feaſt of the reſurrection
at Eaſter, had prophecied the death of the Emperour
Henrie, ſaying: Hold me not for Pope, but caſt me from the
Altar, if that which I ſay vnto you bee not fulfilled betweene
this and Pentecoſt: and ſo to proue a true prophet, in this which
he had ſpoken, he ſuborned certaine Traytors that ſecretly
ſhold kill the Emperor: As in dede they had killed him had not
God preſerued him. The ſayd Cardinall ſayeth further: that this
Hildebrand, or Gregory 7. euer wontedly carried with him a
booke of Nigromancie, that was to him very familiar. He caſt
(ſaith hee) the conſecrated Hoſt into the fire and burned
it.The pope caſt the Hoſte into the fire & the cauſe. Becauſe, demaunding of it a reuelation againſt the Emperour,
it anſwered him not: albeit the Cardinals which then
were preſent therein gainſayd him. Iohn Biſhop of Porta, Secertarie
of the ſaid Gregorie the ſeuenth, alleageth Cardinall
Benon for confirmation of that which is ſayd. A ſtrange caſe it
is, to caſt the Sacrament into the fire, for that coniuring it, it
gaue him not anſwer againſt the Emperour. Our aduerſaries
cannot denie this Pope to haue erred in the faith,The pope erreth in faith. and alſo to
haue bene an Athieſt, without God or religion: ſeeing that he
burned his Creator. If he beleeued it to be his Creator why did
he burne it? And if he beleeued it not (as moſt of the Popes

doe not beleeue it why did he with fire and bloud, perſecute
thoſe that did not beleeue it? Miſerable is the God which is
ſubiect to burning. The true God is immortall, hee liueth for
euer.
               Moreouer, many Popes and eccleſiaſticall men doe wee
reade in hiſtories, to haue poyſoned thoſe whom they would
kill, giuing them poyſon in the Sacrament it ſelf. Two or three
examples will I here ſet downe: who ſo liſt to know more, let
him reade the liues of the Popes,Victor 3. poiſoned in the Chalice. and of the Emperours. Of poiſon
died Victor the third in the 1088. yeare, which his Subdeacon
had caſt into the chalice. Don Alonſo de Cartagena Biſhop
of Burges, in his hiſtorie called Anacephaleoſis maketh mention
hereof. William (as reporteth Mathew Paris) was reſtored
to his Archbiſhoppricke of Yorke in England, and in the
ſame yeare died of poyſon,Thh Archbiſhop of Yorke poiſoned in the Chalice. which in ſaying of Maſſe, they
caſt into the chalice: as vpon Anaſtaſius the fourth in the 1146.
yeare we haue ſayd. In the 1314. yeare a Dominican Frier
gaue poyſon in the ſacrament to the Emperor Henry, 7. countie
of Lucemburg: as we haue declared vppon Clement the 5. The
hiſtory is worrthy to be read. It noteth the great impietie and
treaſon of the Frier, and the great patience of the Emperour,
after he perceiued himſelfe to be poyſoned:The Emperor poiſoned in the Sacrament. praying the Frier
to flie, leaſt his Almaines ſhould kill him, ſaying: Vade Domine,
depart Lord, &c. Pero Mexia maketh mention of this in
the life which he wrote of Henrie the ſeuenth. But as a man ouer
paſſionate for his Antichriſt, and for his breaden God, wold
not beleeue it: whoſe words are theſe: Henrie the ſeuenth died
the day of the Aſſumption of our Lady, hauing that day
receiued the body of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, wherein were giuen
him (write ſome) certaine hearbes, by a Monke of Saint
Dominickes order, 
                     〈◊〉
                   that of them the ſame day he died. Which
is a thing ſo wicked, that of no Chriſtian it ought to bee beleeued:
how much more of a religious man? Thus farre Pero
Mexia. But the puniſhment executed vppon the Dominicke
Friers, and their Monaſteries in Tuſcan and Lombardie, ſheweth,
that which is ſayd, to bee true. Raphael Volateranus, lib.
Geograph. 5. ſpeaking of Sixtus the fourth, ſaith theſe wordes:
The chiefe Biſhop vnderſtanding it, and ayding the Conſpirators,

they came to Florence, and all met together in the Church
of S. Raparada, at the time of the Maſſe and of the ſacrifice. Saluiatus
with his followers which were ſecretly armed, in the
meane time departed the Temple: and faining other buſineſſe,
went to the pallace to conferre with Alferez, but with intent
that the ſlaughter begun in the Temple, he might there be ready
ioyntly with the Magiſtrate to aſſault the pallace. So that
hauing giuen a ſigne at the eleuation of the Hoſt (note the reuerence
and reſpect that the Pope and his haue of their God)
At the lifting vp (ſaith he) of the Hoſt,Impietie. 
                  Bandino paſſed from part
to part, to Iulian de Medices, brother of Lorenço. Antonio, who
required to be the firſt, ruſhed by treaſon vpon Lorenço, and a
little below the throate did wound him. As he at the crie turned
backe his face, he eſcaped the blow: the other willing to ſecond
his blow, he haſtily retired to the Clearke of the Church,
which was neare vnto him.The legat by the Popes commandement gaue the eleuation of the hoſt for a ſigne of the murder. Then the Legate of the Pope (who
had giuen the ſigne of murder at the eleuation of the Hoſt)
was taken by the citizens, and carried from the Church: and
being put in priſon, was handled as his dignity required: In
the meane time Saluiatus biſhop of Piſa, who by his induſtrie
prolonged the conference with Alferez to ſee the end of the
buſineſſe, was then taken, and at a windowe of the pallace the
ſame day hanged. The Pope at this newes excommunicateth
Lorenço de Medices (who, ſay we eſcaped by flight) for laying
his hands vpon the Prieſts of God, and vpon the Legate, and
proclaimeth open warre againſt the Florentines. By this hiſtorie
and others ſuch like, ſhalt thou ſee, ô Spaine, the account &
eſtimation that the Pope, his Legate, and their prieſtly order do
make of their conſecrated Hoſt, which they ſell vnto thee for
God, and thou beleeueſt it. See we alſo the account that the diuell
himſelfe maketh of it. Speaking of Sylueſter 2. (who much
profited in Nigromancy, whiles he liued with the Moore at Seuill)
we ſaid, that he much deſired to know how long he ſhould
be Pope, which thing he demāded of the diuel. The diuel made
him anſwer,A mockerie of of the Diuell in the Maſſe: that he ſhould not die vntil he ſhould ſay Maſſe in
Ieruſalem. But the diuel meant a Church which is in Rome, called
the holy Croſſe in Ieruſalem. And ſo with the Maſſe of Ieruſalē
the diuel mocked the Pope, as in his life we haue declared.

About the yeare of the Lord 1540.Another mockery of the Diuell with the Sacrament. not much more nor leſſe,
the inquiſitors of Cordeua condemned (but not to be burned)
one Magdelena de la Cruz,
                  Magdelen de la Cruz. Abbeſſe of the Monaſterie of the
Franciſcan Nunnes, for enormious offences, dealings and couenants
which ſhe had made with the diuell. As the Inquiſitors
themſelues in their ſentence doe ſay: She with the ayd of
the diuell, to whom ſhee had giuen her ſelfe, making with
him this pact and couenant when ſhe was nine yeares old, became
ſo notable an hypocrite, that ſhee was holden in moſt
great worſhip and admiration: and ſo by meanes of her Paramour
the diuell wrought great miracles: but of thoſe which we
haue ſayd, the diuell, Antichriſt, and falſe Prophets to do. Mat.
25. 24. 2. Theſ. 2. 9. Here will I recite ſome, for to reckon all,
would require another as great a time, as had the Inquiſitors
when they drew her into the Act, in the great Church of Cordoua:
which Act was in the ſpring time, and laſted from ſixe of
the clocke in the morning, till foure in the euening. In all this
time was no other thing read but the abominations and falſe
miracles of this curſed woman.The falſe miracles of magdalen de la Cruz. Of her it was ſayd, that the mariners
in a ſtorme did pray vnto her, and ſhe being inuocated,
appeared vnto them, and ſo the ſtorme ceaſed. Of her alſo it is
ſayd, that ſhe burned in liuely flames, like the Seraphin (this
very well agreeth with her, ſhe being of the order of Seraphicall
Saint Francis) and ſo inflamed, was lift on high in a trance,
wrapped vp in ſpirit, and heard wonders which mortall man
could not vtter. In this laſt was ſhe made another Saint Paul:
who was wrapped vp into the third heauen, where he hard, &c.
Of her alſo is it ſayd, that when ſhe did communicate, ſhe lifted
vp an elle to meaſure the height of the ground, and ſo being lifted
vp into the aire, ſhe receiued the Sacrament: which viſibly
went out of the hands of the Prieſt that ſayd the Maſſe, and viſibly
went through the aire, and entred into the mouth of Magdalen
de la Cruz.
                  2. Cor. 12. 2. And all this by the arte of the diuell. In the
ſame maner did the Nunne of Lisbon, whom they called holy,
receiue the Sacrament: whoſe life we will declare in the
end of this Treatiſe. What ſhall we ſay of this Sacrament? If
it were God how was he carried through the ayre to confirme
the hypocriſie of Magdalen de la Cruz, and that of Maria

de la Annutiada, and the opinion that was holden of them, and
this by the arte of the diuell? The prieſt which ſaid the Maſſe
counted his fourmes, according to the nomber of the Nunnes,
that were to communicate: being counted did conſecrate
them. And conſecrated, found ſo many others, as before he
had counted: and none hee wanted, but that onely which he
ſaw go into the ayre, and entred into the mouth of Magdalene
and of Marie. Alſo it is ſaid of Magdalen de la Cruz, that when
ſhe was in the garden, and the ſacrament by chaunce, paſſed by
the ſtreete, the wall of the garden opened, and that then, ſhee
did worſhippe it. Of her it is alſo ſayd: that ſhee fayned not
to haue eaten in ſo many dayes togither, but that ſhee was
nouriſhed onely with the ſacrament which he receaued. So
great was the opinion of her holineſſe, that great Ladies of
Spaine ſeeing themſelues at point of childe birth, ſent to Magdalen
de la Cruz, their mantle and ſwadling clothes, wherein
the creature ſhould be wrapped, that he ſhould bleſſe them:
ſuppoſing the creatures ſhould thus be holy & bleſſed. The Empreſſe
her ſelfe ready to be deliuered frō 
                  Valladolid (a very long
way) ſent mantles to Cordoua. By reaſon of the holines of Magdalen
de la Cruz' many Ladies and Nobles of Cordoua, and of
the land about Cordoua, put themſelues Nunnes of the order
of Saint Frauncis. And many Gentlemen became Franciſcan
Fryers. Of this abhominable woman it is ſayd. That ſhe
gaue to her beloued Hee and ſhee friendes, ſome droppes
of her menſtruous blood, making them beleeue it was the
blood of Chriſt. The Dominicks euer haters of the Franciſcanes
rayſed vp in Toledo, another ſhee poſſeſſed, which
ſayd: that ſhee had, the Innocencie of Adam, &c. But ſo
ſhameleſſe, and manifeſt were her whooredomes, that ſhee
was by and by diſcouered. A few yeares ſince, aroſe there vp
in Lisbon another Franciſcan woman, which (ſay they) had
the fiue wounds of Chriſt. As had S. Frauncis and many things
elſe, they ſay of her. But I teſtifie, that in time ſhe (as the reſt)
ſhall bewray her hypocriſie. In the meane time, beleeue not
euery ſpirit. But as Saint Iohn doth warne vs, proue the ſpirits
whether they bee of God:
                     
                        •
                     . Iohn. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . for many falſe Prophets (As he himſelfe
doth aduiſe vs) are gone out into the world, &c. Saint

                  Paule 1. Theſſa. chap. 5. verſe. 21. ſaith: proue all things, hold
that which is good. As did the people of Berea. Concerning
this holie Nunne, her hypocriticall life, her falſe myracles and
illuſions of the diuell, wherewith ſhee deceiued very many, &
how ſhee was diſcouered and condemned: Read the ſwarme
of falſe myracles, &c. Which thou ſhalt finde at the end of
this Treatiſe. The which I haue added in this ſecond impreſſion.
Returning then to Magdalen de la Cruze for ſuch haynous
offences and falſe miracles' contempts and ſlaunders, of
Chriſtian Religion, was ſhe condemned, yet not to be burned,
but certaine penaunces, and cloſe impriſonment. Should a
faithfull and catholique Chriſtian ſay, As ſaith Saint Paule
that a man is iuſtified by faith,Rom 3. 28. and not by workes, becauſe
the moſt iuſt and perfect workes which wee doe, are (ſaith
Eſaias as ſtayned clothes) Should he ſay,Eſaus. 64. 6. that God and no other
ought to bee worſhipped and ſerued.Math. 4. 10. As Chriſt anſwered
the diuell when he tempted him. Should he ſay that Anitchriſt
is ſet in the Temple of God: Who cauſeth himſelfe to bee
worſhipped as God.2. Theſ. 2 As ſaith Saint Paule, and that Antichriſts
reſidence is in the Citie which hath ſeuen mountaines, or
heades (which is Rome (as Saint Iohn ſaith. Should hee ſay
That there is but one onely ſacrifice to obtayne remiſſion of
ſinnes;Apo (:17. which is the death and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, As faith
the Epiſtle to the Ebrewes chapter 7. Such a one would
they burne. But Magdalen de la Cruz a terrible Hypocrite
which fayned that ſhee did not eate, in ſo many dayes: and
beeing demaunded how ſhe was ſuſtayned, ſaid: with the only
ſacrament which ſhe receiued: who wrought myracles by
the arte of the diuell and cauſed her ſelfe to be inuocated & adored:
and that beſides, which we haue ſaid: ſuch a one ſhall not
die.4 Fryars hanged in Siuill. Ariſe Lord, Iudge thine owne cauſe. About the 1536.
yeare, ſomewhat more or leſſe, were foure Auguſtine Fryars
hanged in Siuill. Theſe men had ſecretly by night murdred
their prouinciall; and the day following to auoyd all note of ſuſpition,
all foure of them ſaid Maſſe. But (as they themſelues
afterwardes confeſſed) they had no intention to conſecrate:
and ſo did they not conſecrate. Yet in the reſt, they vſed all the
Ceremonies and acts accuſtomably done by them,
                     
                        •
                     o: Riuins lib. 1. De Religione. that ſay the

Maſſe. For confirmation of that which I haue ſaid: that the popiſh
prieſts haue oft times no intention to conſecrate, and that
not hauing intention to conſecrate, they cauſe all thoſe that
heare their maſſe, to commit idolatrie: I will here rehearſe one
notable hiſtory, which a graue author reporteth: & in our dayes
happened. There was in this land (ſaith this author) a certaine
prieſt, &c. Whē this man for his filthy life & incredible rudenes
and ignorance of holy things was depoſed and another more
ſufficient which could well and profitably feede the ſheepe of
the Lord put in his place: He that was depoſed about certaine
buſines which he had came to my houſe. After ſome diſcourſe, I
demanded of him, that ſeeing he had bene aboue 30 yeares a
leacher, & that he had by his concubine ſome ſonnes now of big
ſtature, I demanded of him I ſay, if purpoſely & truly, & withall
his hart, had at any time repēted him of his whoredome. He anſwered
me that he had ſometimes repented: As at the time whē
he celebrated the birth of our Lord, & at the feaſt of the reſurrection
at Eaſter. At that time (ſaid he) he alwaies ſeparated his
bed, & for ſome nights ſlept not with his concubine. I cōmanded
of him if finally at any time, he had truly repēted him of this
his abhominable life? I demād of him, if with praiers teares ſighes
and grones, & that with delebrat purpoſe to liue thence forth
chaſtly, & to chaūge his life into a better, he had craued pardon
at Gods hand for his offence? And if hauing reputed, he put
from him, his concubine, with intent neuer more to receiue her
He neuer had (ſayd he) any ſuch purpoſe. I ſayd vnto him:
How then ſaydeſt thou euerie day Maſſe? How maideſt thou
no ſcruple to eate the bread of the Lord, and to drinke of his
holie cuppe, thy conſcience accuſing thee, of ſo enormious
a ſinne? Dideſt thou not feare that the earth would open,
and ſwallowe thee vp quick? I ſtill inſiſting and conſtrayning
him; at laſt, he confeſſed, that not pronouncing the ſacramentall
wordes wherewith is conſecrated the ſacrament, that hee
ſhould not vnworthilie receiue the bodie and bloud of the
Lord he had not conſecrated. What ſayeſt thou? Sayd I
I tell you that which paſſed, (anſwered hee) and the ſame
is truth. Alas, Alas, ſayd I, dareſt thou committe ſo
horrible, and neuer once heard of wickedneſſe? Is it poſſible

that thou gaueſt ſo great an occaſion, of ſo horrible Idolatry?
The people at your eleuation kneeled on their knees, caſt thē
                  ſelues
to the earth, lifted vp the handes, towards the altar,
ſtroke their breaſts, and worſhipped the vnconſecrate bread
and cuppe. What thing is this? I tremble to ſpeake it. But God
(ſayd I) if thou repent not, will doubtleſſe ſometimes giue
thee, the puniſhment, that for ſuch abhomination and boldneſſe
thou deſerueſt. But what neede many words? When
I with wordes had earneſtly reprooued him, my gallant
(who not with wordes, but with priſon and irons deſerued
to bee puniſhed) began to excuſe his fault, ſaying: that it was
not ſo great, and that he was not alone, but many more, did
the ſame: which thought it not ſo abhominable an offence, as
I made it, &c. This far the ſaid author.
               All they that heard the maſſe of thoſe men, & adored the ſacrament
which they lifted vp: by their owne Cannons and decrees,
cōmitted idolatry. For this is their Maxim that he conſecrateth
not, which hath no intention to conſecrate and as little
doth he conſecrate that pronounceth not the words of conſecration:He conſecrateth not that hath no intention to conſecrate.
miſerable is the religion of thoſe that depend vpon the
intention of another. And who knoweth the intent of man, but
God alone, which ſearcheth the harts? In the meane time ſhall
man doubt, whether that be God, which he worſhippeth, or no.
Therefore a certaine Inquiſitor & moſt great enemy to the cō
                  uerts,
fearing when he heard maſſe, whither the prieſt had intē
                  tion
to conſecrate or no,An Inquiſitor to auoide Idolatrie ſaide I adore the Lord if thou be there ſaid. O Lord if thou be there I adore
thee. By this ſubteltie thought this Inquiſitor to eſcape committing
of Idolatrie. In the time of the Councel of Conſtance,
there were 3 Popes, all three did the Councel, for their wickednes,
& abhominations depoſe: and elected Martin 5. Theſe 3
Popes, not being true Popes, could not ordaine prieſts nor giue
them authority to conſecrate. So that after their owne cannons
All they that heard their Maſſes, committed Idolatry. As little
did all they, that were ordayned in the time of Conſtantine 1. and
of Pope Ione, conſecrate. For Conſtantine being a laye man,
and without receiuing any orders was by force, which Deſiderius
his brother, king of Lombardie, vſed to the Romaines,
made Pope: who not being a prieſt, could not ordaine, nor giue

authoritie to ordaine prieſts, which not being prieſts, conſecrated
not. Concerning Pope Ione, there is none doubted, but that
neither ſhee, nor they by her ordayned, nor they which by
her authoritie were ordayned did conſecrate. And ſo as many
as in the time of this man Pope, and in the time of this
woman Pope adored the ſacrament, by their owne Cannons
committed Idolatrie. For although they had intention
to conſecrate, yet had they not the Caracter, which they call
(Indelibele)
               
               Of the prieſtly order, and he which is not ordained prieſt, doth
not conſecrate:Alame
                        ••
                     able Hiſtory of burning the Sacrament. and not conſecrating, all that heare his Maſſes
commit Idolatry. And to make their ſacrament the more to be
loathed, I will recite here an hiſtorie, which in the 1526. yeare
in a Monaſtery of Dominican Fryars of the towne of Auſerra
in Fraunce and vppon the ſolemne feaſt day of Corpus Chriſti
happened. There was a Friar in the ſayd couēt, who by reaſon
of his age, and chiefly for being eaten with the Bubos, had not
ſayd Maſſe now of many dayes before: This increaſing in him
deuotion, he tooke courage to ſay Maſſe, vppon ſo ſolemne a
day. So that, hee ſayd Maſſe, and finiſhed it. His Maſſe ended,
and hee going through the cloiſter of the Monaſterie, his
ſtomack turned, and beeing not able to digeſt & retaine God:
which hee had in bodie and bloud receiued, did vomit him vp
before the chapter gate, Which thing once knowne a great
rumour was preſently rayſed througout all the Couent. Some
ſayd this thing, others that thing ſhould bee done. But in
fine hauing ſome time diſputed vppon this matter, they
concluded that the Tabernacle or tombe which they vſe to
put on the graues, when they celebrate the Office of the dead,
ſhould be placed ouer that holy vomit. And ſo was it done,
And this, that none ſhould tread vppon, nor any dogges
ſhould eate that holie ſacramentall vomit. And the more to
honour it, foure light tapers they placed vpon the foure quarters
of the tombe. This done, the Nouices were commaunded
to ſing all that day, the verſe of the hymnes which is ſung
vppon that day of Corpus Chriſti: and beginneth: Tantum
ergo Sacramentum veneremur cerni, &c. That is to ſay
worſhippe wee th
                     •
                  n with bowed knees, this ſo great a ſacrament.

Better ſhould they haue ſayd. This vomit of a pocky
father, They ſang alſo, the Anthem, of the ſame day, O Sacrum
conuiuium: O holy banquet. But how holie ſoeuer they
ſayd it was, there was none (albeit ſome thereto exhorted the
reſt) that would taſt it, nor put it into his bodie. For after the
booke of de cautelis, as they call them, the beſt remedy is this
that in ſuch caſe can bee taken, ſith among them all there was
none of them, that dared to eate it: needefull it was, another
ſhift ſhould bee vſed. And thus it was: In the beſt wiſe they
could gathered they vp that holie vomit, and very curiouſly
daubed the ground where it had fallen. The Subprior then for
that he Prior was from home) arraied himſelfe in holy ornaments
and with light tapers carried the vomite to the Church
in proceſſion. Some ſang that which before we haue ſaid: others
(and theſe were the moſt holy frantiques and greateſt hypocrites)
ſighed and groned for the moeſtful ſpectacle that they
ſaw: which much marred the feaſt: the vomit thus carried to the
Church a new deliberation was needful what therewith ſhould
to be done: The opinion of the moſt ancient and moſt learned
was, that this vomit ſhould be caſt into the fire and burned to
aſhes:The papiſts burne the Sacrament which they beleeued to be God. & ſuch aſhes ſhould be kept in el Sagrario, the Sanctuary:
all which was done, as in their booke de Cautelis, &c. in ſuch caſe
it is commanded. So that the papiſts conclude themſelues their
God to be burned: their god I cal it, for this is their doctrin: that
all the time that any forme or ſhew of bread or of wine ſhall be
ſeen, al the time that it ſhal not be digeſted (as was not that whē
the Pocky father vomited it vp with the reſt,) the bread is not
bread but the bodie of Chriſt; and the wine is not wine, but
the bloud of Chriſt.
               We haue recited the ſorrowfull ſpectacle that happened to
the Friars Dominickes,A Chough burned and the cauſe. with their Sacrament vomited and
burned: Now will we declare another, which one which
was preſent and an eye-witneſſe tolde me, that happened to
the Franciſcan Friers, but not ſo lothſome as the other. In
the Couent De Alta vila, which was in the prouince of the
principalitie of the kingdome of Naples, was an ancient
Friar, called Frier Antonio de Contron, who for his recreation
had nouriſhed vp a Chough, and had taught her to fly

vp vppon his ſhoulders, and to eate bread in his hand, and other
ſuch like thinges. When the Friar one Sabboth of the
Aduent in the thouſand fiue hundred threeſcore ſeuenteene
yeare was ſaying the high Maſſe in the ſayd Couent, and lift
vp the Hoſte, that they (as they are woont) ſhould worſhip
the ſame: The Chough which then hopped to and fro,
ſawe the Hoſte, and ſuppoſed that her maiſter ſhewed her
ſomething to giue her. The Frier in the meane time pulled
downe his Hoſte: and the Chough remained there, watching
if her maiſter ſhould mocke her with anie thing againe.
Whiles the Chough thus awayted: behold, when the Friar
the ſecond time ſhewed the Hoſte ouer his ſhoulders, the
Chough ſeeing it, immediately leaped vppon the ſhoulder
of her maiſter, and caught hold of the Sacrament, and by
flight pearched vppon a beame in the roofe of the Church.
When the Friars, and the reſt that heard the Maſſe, ſawe
this, they beganne to call vnto her, but ſhee would neither
anſwere, nor come downe, for ſhee was buſied with
her breakefaſt which (as ſhee thought her maiſter had giuen
her. When good wordes nought auayled, they beganne to
throwe ſtones and cudgels at her, vntill they brought her to
the ground. And now had ſhee eaten all the Hoſte, a fewe
crommes excepted, which had fallen downe from her (and
note, that according to the opinion of our aduerſaries, euerie
ſmall cromme is God,) they tooke the poore Chough,
and taken, did ſentence her to bee burned, till ſhee were conuerted
into aſhes: which was perfourmed, and her aſhes were
kept in the Sanctuarie, as were the other of the vomite of the
pockie Father.
               Into ſo manie ſtrange thinges cauſeth Tranſubſtantiation
our aduerſaries to fall. They beleeue that the bread is no bread,
but the body of Chriſt. Hence it commeth that they beleeue
the mouſe, the worme, the chicken, the Chough, &c. to eate
the body of Chriſt. But to manifeſt the deceit vnto them (if they
leaue to be deceiued) let them well note, what here we will
ſay: and this it is: Two kinds of creatures may eate the Sacrament:
The one, which haue the vſe of reaſon: and the other
that haue not: thoſe which haue it not are beaſtes: Theſe

creatures without vſe of reaſon eate only bread and drinke
wine: the ſacrament of Chriſts body eate they not: neither doe
they drinke the ſacrament of his bloud:Vnreaſonable creatures eat not Chriſt nor his Sacrament but only the bread. much leſſe doe they
eate the body of Chriſt or drinke his bloud, and ſo to eate the
bread or not to eat, they neither reioice nor be ſad. Men which
haue the vſe of reaſon; are two folde: Some doe worthily receaue
the ſacrament; and others vnworthily. They that vnworthily
receaue the ſacrament, are thoſe, which doe not examine
their conſciences, Nor proue themſelues, before they
receaue the ſacrament: & to them it is all one, to ſit at the table
of the Lord,Iohn. 14. 21. and to ſit at the table of the deuill: to receaue the
moſt bleſſed ſacrament which Ieſus Chriſt in his holy ſuppe
                     •
                  
preſenteth vnto them:The wicked receaiue the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt but not the body & bloud of Chriſt. Tract. 54 in Iohannem. or to receaue the Idoll, which the Pope
in his Maſſe putteth in his mouth. Such as theſe receaue not only
the bread and wine (if it be giuen them) But receaue alſo
the ſacrament of the bodie and bloud of Chriſt: And this for
their condemnation and not for their ſaluation. And ſo Sathan
entreth in and poſſeſſeth them: As after the taking of the
ſoppe hee entred into and poſſeſſeth Iudas. Such as theſe, doe
no way receaue Chriſt, for the cauſe which wee haue ſhewed
When wee proued the wicked, not to receaue Chriſt: not to
receaue the Lords bread, but the bread of the Lord. As ſaith
Saint Auguſtine, ſpeaking of Iudas. They that worthily receaue
the ſacrament, bee they which examine their conſciences,
how they ſtand towards their God, and towards their
neighbour. The which S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. calleth prouing of himſelfe.
And finding themſelues faulty & imperfect doe humble
themſelues before God, repent, & withall their hart craue pardon
& mercy. This done, not truſting in their owne worthines
but in the worthines of Chriſt, they are bold to receiue the ſacrament,
not to their condemnation, but their ſaluation. For
Chriſt, doth poſſeſſe them & incorporateth them into himſelfe,
and he incorporateth himſelfe into them. Theſe be they alone,
which receiue not only the bread & wine: but alſo the ſacramēt
of the body & bloud of Chriſt; by the bread, & by the wine ſignified:
& receauing the ſacramēt of the bodie & bloud of Chriſt
they receiue truly & really, the glorious body & bloud of chriſt
yet not carnally, but ſpiritually by faith. As before we haue ſaid.

would our aduerſaries admit this ſo true and cleare doctrine
that bringeth with it no abſurdities, but rather taketh away manie,
which the word of God doth teach vs, and the ancient
Doctors doe witneſſe, they would not beleeue that the mouſe,
the chicken, the poore Chough, &c. doe eate the bodie of
Chriſt, but a peece of bread, and that but of ſmall ſubſtance,
and ſo would they not burne, nor being burned, preſerue their
aſhes.
               I cannot omit here to tell that which on the ſame day of Corpus
Chriſti, did an Inquiſitor in Bercelona. The tale is this: It
is 34. or 35. yeares, little more or leſſe ſince, that being to go in
ſolemne proceſſion, which with ſo great pompe and triumph is
vpon this day of Corpus Chriſti accuſtomed to be done through
out all Spaine: and the Prieſt hauing now ſung the high Maſſe,
which wontedly is the laſt vpon that day (for all the Prieſts will
that day go in proceſſion) it then hapned, that the conſecrated
Hoſt, which was to be put in the boxe, was ſo great that it could
not be placed in the ſame. This ſeen, the preparation ſtaied: and
there was none in that famous companie, that could tel in ſuch a
caſe what ought to be done. But in the end, the wiſeſt of the cō
                  pany
were of opinion, that another Maſſe ſhould be ſayd, and
an Hoſt conſecrated of the like bignes with the boxe: but grieuous
it was vnto them to waite ſo long: & it might be alſo, that
no Prieſt was found, which had not already ſaid his Maſſe, and
broken his faſt, the better to be able to go in proceſſion: which
as that day is very ſolemne, and is farre in going and comming.
In this famous companie was there an Inquiſitor much ſpoken
of, called Molon. This man impatient to ſuffer ſo much delay, &
waite ſo long a time,They wil not ſay that the Inquiſitor clipped the body of Chriſt, ſeeing it is now glorified: it followeth thē that he clipped the bread or wheaten ſubſtance. preſuming vpon his Inquiſitory authority,
demanded a paire of ſheeres, wherewith he clipped the conſecrate
Hoſt: ſo that he made it fit for the boxe, and ſo the proceſſion
went forward. It is to bee thought that ſome did abhorre
the raſhneſſe of the Inquiſitor, and ſighed to ſee their
God and Creator (as they call the ſacrament) ſo handled by the
wicked hands of the Inquiſitor. Others would ſay otherwiſe.
This is moſt certain, that had any other but the Inquiſitor committed
ſuch an offence, and chiefly had he bene of any race of
a new Chriſtian, he ſhould not (I ſuppoſe) haue eſcaped with

life: one by one, al that he had he ſhould haue loſt. The chaſtiſement
wherewith Signor Molon was puniſhed for ſo enormious
a fault, was; that they depriued him of his inquiſitors Office
in Barcelona but becauſe ſo notable an Inquiſitor ſhould not
be idle, they prouided for him the office of the inquiſitor at Seuill:
where hee better might vſe his handes in the time of the
great perſecution, which a few yeares before was raiſed: as in
the life of Pius the 4. and the 1557. yeare we haue declared:
This was the great puniſhment which they gaue to better
him withall.
               We will then conclude this Treatiſe with a notable hiſtory
reported by Don Rodrigo Archbiſhop of Toledo, who ended
his hiſtory (as himſelfe at the end thereof witneſſeth) in the
yeare of the Lord 1243. and in the 26. yeare of king Don Fernando,
and in the time of the great vacation of Gregorie 9. So
that it is now three hundred fifty fiue yeares ſince he wrote it.
The ſaid Archbiſhop, in his ſixt booke and twentie fiue
chapter, That the Office which they call Toledano by Iſidorus
and Leander ordayned, was throughout all Spaine celebrated,
vntill king Don Alonſo the ſixt, which wanne Toledo, at the
inſtance of his wife Queene Conſtance, Frenchwoman, ſent to
Rome to Pope Gregory 7. requeſting him that the Toledan Office
being taken away, the Roman Office throughout all
Spaine might be vſed, &c. And in the 26. chap. he ſaith, that
Pope Gregory 7. at the petition of king Don Alonſo, ſent one
Ricardus, Abbot of Saint Victor, to ſet in good order the
Churches of Spaine. This Legate ſent by the Pope (as the
ſame Archbiſhop reporteth) did wickedly gouerne: ſo that he
was depriued from his office. Before he was depriued he much
diſturbed the ſtate Eccleſiaſticall and common wealth of
Spaine, For the Legate and the King cauſed them to take the
French Office, and to leaue the Toledan, wherein they and
their Anceſtors had beene brought vp by the ſpace almoſt of
fiue hundred yeares: which was from Saint Gregorie the firſt,
in whoſe time liued Saint Leander and his brother Saint Iſidor,
Archbiſhops of Seuil, vntill this Gregorie the ſeuenth, in whoſe
time reigned Don Alonſo the ſixt and ſo vppon a certaine day
for his pleaſure, was this matter very truly debated in the preſence

of the king, the Primate, the Legate, and the people.
The Eccleſiaſticall ſtate, Nobilitie (which the Archbiſhop
calleth Militia) and people did purpoſely much withſtand it,
endeuouring what they could, that their ſeruice ſhould not
be changed. But the king perſwaded by his wife, a Frenchwoman
inſiſted with threates vnleſſe it were chaunged.
               The concluſion was thus: Two knights were named to fight,
the one for the king, which ſhould defend the French Office:
the other for the Nobilitie and Communaltie of Spaine, which
ſhould maintaine the office of Toledo. Hee that tooke part
with the king was vanquiſhed: & the people ſeeing the knight
of the Toledan Office was victor, reioyced. But ſo greatly was
the king pricked forward by the Queene, that hee would not
chaunge his purpoſe 'ſaying: That the ſingle fight or (combat
of two) was not law. The knight which ſought for the Toledan
Office, was of the linage of the Matienças, whoſe race as
yet liueth. And when for this cauſe aroſe great tumult (for the
Nobilitie and people did greatly mutine) it was determined,
that the booke of the Toledan Office, and the booke of the
French Office ſhould bee caſt into a great fire: all being firſt
commanded to aſſemble and pray together. Then after they
had deuoutly ioyned together and prayed, both the one booke
and the other were caſt into the fire. And the booke of the Toledan
Office aroſe vp ſafe and ſound without dammage aboue
all the flames of the great fire.The Romane office was caſt into the fire, & burned but not the Goti
                        •
                     ſh. All which, ſaw thoſe that were
preſent, & gaue thanks vnto God. But the king being of an high
ſtomacke, and bold executor of his will, neither feared by the
miracle, nor moued by requeſt, perſeuered rather in his
purpoſe, threatening the loſſe of goods and life to thoſe
that ſhould reſiſt him: and ſo commaunded that the
French Office (which was now the ſame with the Roman)
ſhould bee celebrated through all his kingdome. And then
all weeping and ſwearing,From whence commeth this ſaying. As the King wil, ſo go the Lawes. the old Spaniſh Prouerbe began
to be ſaid:

                     Alla van leyes, do quieren Reyes.
                     As the king will, ſo go the lawes.
                  
And from that time was the French Office kept in Spaine, as
well in the Pſalter, as in the reſt, which neuer before that

time had bin receiued nor vſed in Spaine: yet in ſome monaſteries
it was afterwards vſed for a time: And the tranſlation of the
Pſalter in manie Cathedrall Churches and Monaſteries at this
day is alſo vſed. Thus farre the Archbiſhop. In this hiſtorie reported
by the Archbiſhop, is there much to be noted. Firſt,
that now 500 yeares paſt (for ſo long time is it ſince Gregorie
the ſeuenth died, in whoſe time reigned Don Alonſo the
ſixt) the diuine Office celebrated in all our countrie of Spaine
was not the Roman, but the Gothiſh, which they called the
Toledane office. This office was changed through the deſire
of a French woman, who ſo greatly pricked forward the king
her husband, that he chaunged the ancient Office, maugre the
ſtate Eccleſiaſticall, Nobilitie, and all the Communaltie of
Spaine. The Pope alſo that commanded the Office ſhould be
chaunged, was one of the moſt abominable that did eate bread
in his time. Many wrote his life: A great inchanter he was: by
force of Armes without any election he made himſelfe Pope:
A tyrant he was, an heretike: he burned the Sacrament of the
Altar, his God. And the moreouer, which in his abominable
life we haue declared. For which enormious ſinnes, in
his abſence (for he would not appeare) hee was condemned
and depriued, in the Councell of Brixa. And Clement the
third was made Pope in his place. The Legate of the Pope,
which dealt in this buſineſſe, of the chaunge of the Office,
was aſo another ſuch like as his maiſter that ſent him, and
ſo abode in the ſame with his maiſter and Lord. For his wickedneſſe
(as the Archbiſhop reporteth) was he depriued. In
theſe two, Pope and Legate, is the old Spaniſh Prouerbe verified:
Qual Abad, tal Monazillo: Such Abbot, ſuch Nouice.
               Hereby ſhall our Spaniards perceiue, that the diuine Office
and Tranſlation of the Pſalter, which our forefathers vſed in
Spaine, vntill the yeare 1080, or little leſſe, was not the Roman
office: much leſſe was it the Maſſe, which now in Spaine
is ſo greatly eſteemed. For the Roman Office, which before
fiue hundred yeares was celebrated, was defiled with
the ſuperſtition and idolatry, which we now ſee in the Maſſe, as
be Tranſubſtantiation, the taking from the faithful the one half

of the Sacrament, Interceſſion and Inuocation of Saintes Purgatorie,
&c. Long time after, about the 1215. yeare, Innocent
3. being Pope was Transubſtantiation admitted and made
an article of the faith. Albeit true it is, that this Gregory 7.
was the firſt that drawing it out of hell began to exalt it. And
notwithſtanding that the Romane Office then vſed was nothing
ſo euill nor ought agreed in Idolatry with that which is
now yet is it to be thought there was great difference between
the Toledane and the Romane office, ſeeing that all Spaine ſo
purpoſely and truly oppoſed it ſelf to the king, the Queene, the
Pope, and his legate, and receiued not the Romane Office but
with great diſlike and forced by threats of life & goods. That alſo
is to be noted which the Archbiſhop ſpeaketh concerning
the combat of the 2 Knights and of the friar, which (the Gothiſh
Office remaining ſafe) then burned the Roman Office.
If they will haue miracles, this of the fire is ſtrange. D. Illeſcas
lib. 5. vpon the life of King Don Alonſo the 6. ſaith almoſt the
ſame that Don Rodrigo the Archbiſhop doth: for from him hee
tooke it, but that of affected malice he changed ſome things:
whoſe words I will here ſet downe: When hee that defended
the part of the Gothiſh Office (ſayth he) was 
                     Ʋictor: the king
ſtroue by all meanes to take it away, and hauing caſt into the
fire two Maſſe bookes (the Archbiſhop ſaith, it was determined
that the booke of the Toledan Office, and the booke of
the French Office ſhould bee caſt into a great fire. He ſaith not
Maſſe bookes) the Roman leaped out of the fire. and the Gothiſh
was not burned in it. The Archbiſhop ſaith, the booke of
the French Office was conſumed of the fire, and the booke of
the Toledan Office aroſe vp without receiuing any domage.
Here ſeeſt thou the maner of our aduerſaries dealings. To aduaunce
his Catholique faith hath God no need of ſuch lies. And
note that Doctour Illeſcas alleageth not the Archbiſhop, from
whence hee tooke this report, leſt his ſhameleſſe falſifying
ſhould haue beene ſeene. The Authour, and the place, which
is the ſixt booke, the 25. and 26. chapters haue I alleaged. I beſeech
the Reader to reade it, that it may bee ſeene whether I,
or Doctor Illeſcas doth ly. I ſpeaking with the Guardian of S.
Francis of Mexico, touching this falſification of Doctor Illeſca
                        •
                     .
                  
It was ſo (anſwered he me) as Doctor Illeſcas ſaid, and that our
booke were falſified. But I brought him an old booke with the
armes royall, printed at Granada, and ſhewed him the place, &
the poore Warden was aſhamed.
               And it is to be noted (as noteth D, Illeſcas) that by the command
of Don Sancho 1. king of Arragon, the Gothiſh or Moſorabiſh
Office was leaſt to be ſayd in Arragon, and the Roman
Office, which now is vſed brought in. In S. Iohn de Pena the 21.
day of March,The firſt Latine Maſſe ſaid in Spaine. in the 1071. yeare, was ſayd the firſt Latine
Maſſe after the manner of the Romaines: The ſame Doctor
Illeſcas alſo ſaith: The 25. day of may in the. 1083. yeare King
Don Alonſo 6. wan Toledo, the great Church whereof called
Meſquita was conſecrated the 25. of October in the 1086.
yeare. Thus was the Gothiſh office chaunged in Arragon fifteene
yeares at leaſt before it was in Caſtile. Note ye Spaniards
(which thinke and beleeue the Latine Maſſe, now ſayd in
Spaine, to be moſt ancient from the time of the Apoſtles) the
firſt Latine Maſſe, after the Roman maner was ſaid in S. Iohn de
Pena in the time of king Don Sancho 1. And in this yeare 1599.
is no more but 528 yeares ſince. If ye beleeue not me, beleeue
D. Illeſcas and others, that ſay the ſame which I do. A new thing
is the Maſſe: which plucketh from the Church, the inſtitution
of Ieſus Chriſt, I meane his holy Supper: God giue you grace
to returne and reſtore it to it former place.
               Of this change others alſo make mention. George Caſſander
in the preface of his booke intituled Ordo Romanus de officio
Miſſae, ſaith theſe words: But the Spaniards (As they be moſt
reſolute in the inſtitution which they haue once receiued) held
conſtantly for manie yeares the rites of their countrey. Their
rite was called the Rite of the Moſarabes: and ſo was it called,
becauſe the Chriſtians mingled with the Alarabes, which occupied
the beſt part of Spaine, vſed the ſame, from the time of
Saint Llefonſo Archbiſhop of Toledo, and Saint Iſidor Archbiſhop
of Seuill. In the end and time of Gregorie the ſeuenth (forcibly
conſtrained by Don Alonſo the ſixt which wan Toledo,With greife and teares was the Romaine Rite admitted in Sqnine.
at the inſtigation of Queene Conſtance, a French woman, after
many great contentions (and not without teares, leauing
their countrie rite, they receiued the French or Roman rite:

Which rite notwithſtanding could not ſo be rooted out, but that
it ſtill remained, and yet doth remaine in ſome Churches and
Chappels of Toledo. Verie largely is this diſcourſe in the generall
hiſtorie of Spaine, made in the name of Don Alonſo
the tenth. It is alſo found in the hiſtorie of Don Rodrigo, a moſt
graue Hiſtoriographer of Toledo. Hitherto Caſſander.
               
               
                  Iohannes Ʋaſſeus heereof maketh mention, ſpeaking in
his Chronicle of the deſtruction of Spaine, which happened
in the time of King Don Rodrigo. The Chriſtians (ſaith this
Authour) which remained in Spaine, had libertie of their Chriſtian
religion, vntill the time of Don Alonſo the ſeuenth, in
whoſe time came out of Affrike the Almohades, which ſuffered
no Chriſtian to liue in the Chriſtian religion. Theſe Chriſtians
which liued among the Moores, were called Moſarabes,
to wit, mingled with the Alarabes, and their diuine
Office compoſed by Saint Leander and Saint Iſidor, was called
the Moſarabiſh Office. He ſaith alſo: This Office at this day is
called Moſarabe, and is vſed in ſixe pariſhes in Toledo, and in
the Cathedrall Church, in the Chappell of Cardinall Franciſco
Ximenez. On certaine dayes of the yeare in Salamanca is
it alſo vſed in the Chappell of Doctor Talauera. Others ſay
they are called Muçarabes with ç, not with ſ, of Muça the
Mooriſh Captaine which wan Spaine, and gaue libertie to
the Chriſtians to liue in the Chriſtian religion. After this deſcribeth
Vaſſeus what maaner of Office is this Moſorabe, and
how it is celebrated: But I much feare me, that the Office Moſorabe,
now in the foreſayd places celebrated, either by adding
or diminiſhing, is much different from that, which Saint
Leander and Saint Iſidor made a thouſand yeares paſt. Of this
I feare me, becauſe the Popes haue bene verie diligent in taking
away that which hath bene contrarie to their doctrine,
and in adding that which made for them. And ſo ſuſpect I
many of the ceremonies and garments, that now (as ſaith Vaſſeus)
are vſed in the Office Moſorabe. In this opinion doe I
ſtrengthen my ſelfe, ſeeing that among other names of Saints
in the Office Moſorabe named, are named Ambroſe, Auguſtine,
Fulgentius, Leander, Iſidor. And it is not to bee thought

that Saint Leander and Saint Iſidore, which compoſed this Gothiſh
Office, would put their owne names among the names of
the Saints: and ſo thinke I, that they haue much added and taken
away to and from the Office Moſorabe, to make it hold affinity
with the Maſſe which now they ſay: and ſo to declare it
almoſt all to be one. But be it as it will be, either that they haue
added vnto it, or taken from it or not, I hold for a more ſure
thing the ſimplicitie and maner which Ieſus Chriſt, his Apoſtles
and Martyrs vſed in celebration of the holy ſupper, in the
primitiue Church. Imbrace we then the firſt inſtitution which
the Euangeliſts and Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11. recite: and ſo ſhall
we not erre.
               By that we haue ſaid in this Appēdix, thou ſhalt ſee moſt deerly
beloued Spaine (God for his mercy open thineeies,) the account
which the Pope & his cleargy make of the Sacrament, albeit,
they affirme it to be God, & not bread nor wine▪ It they vſe
to reuenge their wrongs, hatreds and malice: and ſo in Florence
was the eleuation the ſigne to begin the murder. With it they
poiſon, as a little before we haue ſaid: They vſe it for an Harbenger
ſending it one or modaies iornies before, atended with
the baſeſt ſort of people: as in the beginning of this booke
we haue declared: For coniuration they vſe it: as did Gregory
the ſeuenth, and becauſe the ſacrament did not anſwer him,
he caſt it into the fire, and burned it. The Dominicans of Auſerra
did alſo burne it: and the Franciſcans de Alta villa burned
the Chough, and in burning the Chough, they burned the
Sacrament which ſhe had eaten, &c. And the booke which they
call de Cautelis, commanded in ſuch caſes, that they ſhould ſo
do. And when the Sacrament for want of renewing in time,
is become mouldy, it commandeth it to be burned, and the aſhes
to be kept. Molon the Inquiſitor clipped it alſo. The book of
the Roman Office alſo was burned, the Gothiſh remaining miraculouſly
ſafe and ſound, as reporteth Don Rodrigo Archbiſhop
of Toledo, before alleaged. Alſo ſeeing the diuell vſeth it to deceiue,
as he deceiued the Pope, when he told him hee ſhould
not die vntill he had ſaid Maſſe in Ieruſalem, before by vs mentioned
vpon the life of Sylueſter the ſecond: and to cauſe idolatrie,
as we haue ſeene in Magdalen de la Cruz, and in the foure

Fryars, which were hanged in Siuill: which had no intention to
conſecrate, and ſo did not conſecrate; and in the clearke which
ſayd not the words of conſecration: and in them that Conſtantine
2 & Pope Ione ordayned: who had intention to conſecrate
but not being prieſts, as before we haue ſaid, did not conſecrate
What ſhall we hereupon conclude? Two things, the firſt, that
the Popes and their eccleſiaſticall rable, which doe ſuch things
be Atheiſtes, without any God; or religion. The 2. That their
Maſſall ſacrament, albeit they ſay (though many of themſelues
beleeue it not) the ſame to be Gods is no God, but an Idoll ſet
in the place of God, and as God worſhipped. And if this be ſo;
why then do they perſecute them with fire & bloud which (ſo
taught by the holy ſcripture) do well know the Maſſe, & it miſfall
ſacrament, to be a prophanation of the holie ſupper of the
Lord; to be a terrible abhomination and Idolatrie? The Maſſe
hath no agreemēt with the holy ſupper which the Lord inſtituted,
& which his diſciples did celebrate: Compare the one with
the other (the which we wil do at the end of this Treatiſe) aſwel
touching the ſubſtaunce of that which is giuen; as alſo the ceremonies
with which it is giuen. And it is euidently to be ſeene,
that there is no more agreement betweene the holy ſupper, &
the diueliſh Maſſe: then there is betweene light and darkneſſe:
betweene good & euill, betweene truth & falſhood betweene
Chriſt and Beliall.
               
               I haue paſſed by the Lordes aſſiſtaunce (whom with my
whole hart I beſeech to direct my ſteppes) two terrible labyrinthes
of filthineſſe, and Idolatrie: which are the Pope aud his
Maſſe.Of the true prieſthood and Sacrifice. Now by the ſame aſſiſtaunce wee will enter into the
moſt pleaſant garden, into the moſt ſweete and moſt holie orchard
and garden full of all conſolation and comfort. Which
is the Treatiſe of the true prieſt, and of the true Sacrifice,
which this our high prieſt offered: with which, wee being ſinners,
and ſonnes of wrath, he reconciled vs to God. Oh good
newes! Heare them then, O Spaine, and beleeue them. In
this Treatiſe I wilbe ſhort, for many things which were here to
be ſayd, haue we formerly ſayd in the confutation of the falſe
prieſtes, which is the Pope: and of the falſe ſacrifice which is
the Maſſe. And there haue we ſayd it, for confutation of falſhood:

For how can falſhood be confuted, but with the truth?
walke we then hence forth, as Children of truth and light.
               He that liſteth to knowe, who is this high prieſt, and what is
this his onely and eternall ſacrifice: Let him read the Epiſtle
which the Apoſtle wrote to the Hebrewes, & there clerely ſhal
hee find both the one & the other. And no booke there is in all
the holie ſcripture, which more to the purpoſe, and more axcellently
handleth this argument, then this Epiſtle. An Epiſtle
truely, worthie for each faithfull Chriſtian to reade, and reade
againe, and to retaine in memorie: Seeing there in is handled
a matter ſo neceſſary, without the vnderſtanding & knowledge
whereof, it is impoſſible for mā to be ſaued. For what thing
is more neceſſary, thē to know, who my redeemer is: & how he
hath redeemed me; & ſo to beleeue in him, & beleeuing in him,
to be thankful vnto him, by liuing in holines and righteouſneſſe
all the daies of my life? His maieſty pardon our imperfections, &
ſupply that much which is wanting. But before we enter into this
matter.That which we beleeue touching the perſon and office of Chriſt. Let vs declare that, which we beleue of Chriſt: we confeſſe
that Ieſus Chriſt is truely God, and truely man, & that in as
much as he is God, he is equall with the father & with the holy
Ghoſt, & in nothing inferior. We confeſſe that in as much as he
is man, he is leſſe then the father, and leſſe then the holy Ghoſt,
and in nothing equal. We confeſſe theſe two, ſo far different natures
diuine, & humaine, not to haue bin vnited nor conioyned
for euer,Gal. 4. 4. but in time: as ſaith S. Paule when (ſaith he) the fulnes
of time was come, God ſent his ſon made of a woman, & made
vnder the lawe,Io. 114. &c. The ſame ſaith S. Iohn. And the word was
made fleſh, and dwelled among vs. So that from thenceforth is hee
called, and is true God and true man: and ſo according to this
coniunction, Chriſt is leſſe then the father. For the father hath
made him, and giuen him vnto vs. For our king, Prophets and
prieſt.The office of Chriſt is to be our King, prophet and preſt. Which three offices, the name of Chriſt ſignifieth,
which is a Greeke word, and is the ſame that is Meſſias in Hebrewe
and Vngido in our Spaniſh tongue. So alſo is it called,
becauſe theſe three kindes of men,1. Sam. 10. 1. were in olde time annointed.
And ſo doe wee read that Samuel annointed Saul for king.1. Sam. 16. 13.
                  Dauid alſo hee annointed.2. Sam. 1. 34: 
                  Sadoc annointed Solomon, &c. Concerning
the Prophets wee read that Elias annointed Eliſeus.
                  1. Kings. 14. 16.
                  
Concerning the Prieſts annoynting, it is ſeene in Exod.. 30. 50.
Theſe 3. Offices doth the holie ſcripture attribute to Chriſt. It
calleth him king Pſal. 2. 6. I haue appointed to my ſelfe a king ouer
Sion. Alſo Luke 1. 33. And he ſhall raigne ouer the houſe of
Iacob for euer, & his kingdōe ſhall haue no end. Alſo Iohn 1. 49.
12. 15. Mat. 22. Al the places alſo which ſay Chriſt to be the head
of the Church, cōfirme Chriſt to be king, a Prophet he is called
Eſaie, 61. 1. Luk. 4. 19. Alſo Deut. 18. 15. It is promiſed that God
wil raiſe vp a Prophet:Actes. 3. 
                        •
                     3. which place S. Peter, in that excellēt ſermō
which S. Luke mentioneth, vnderſtandeth of Chriſt who is the
Prophet of Prophets. In the ſame maner vnderſtādeth it S. Stephen.
A prieſt is hee called Pſal. 110. 4. Thou art a Prieſt for euer,
after the order of Melchizedech.
                  Act: 7. 38. Which place in the Epiſtle to
the Hebrewes, is oftentimes alleaged: where it calleth him the
only & euerlaſting prieſt. But the difference between the kings
Prophets & prieſts of the olde Teſtament, & Chriſt, is this: they
were the figure of Chriſt, and annointed they were with materiall
& viſible oyle: But Chriſt is the thing figured, & is annointed
not with viſible oyle, but with the grace of the holy ſpirit. As he
himſelfe Luk. 4. 18. doth witnes, in declaring the propheſie of Eſaie.
The ſpirit of the Lord, &c Of this kind of ointmēt, thus ſpeaketh
the Pſal. 45. 7. Thou haſt loued righteouſnes, and hated Iniquitie.
Wherfore God euen thy God,Eſay. 61. 1. hath annointed thee with
the oyle of goodnes, aboue thy fellowes, which place the Apoſtle
vnderſtandeth of Chriſt.Hebr. 1. 9. And Chriſt being annointed with
the ſpirituall oyntment, we vnderſtand his kingdome not to be
of this world, his doctrine to be heauenly & his prieſthood to be
euerlaſting & diuine.
               Chriſt as king appointed of the father,The office of the king. gouerneth his Church
& giueth her lawes: which no prince, nor the mightieſt monarch
of the world,philip: 2. 9. 10. may diſdaine or aboliſh. For it is noted that all (how
mighty ſoeuer) do acknowledge him for king of kings & Lord
of Lords. For God (as ſaith S Paul (exalted Chriſt, & gaue him a
name aboue all names: that at the name of Ieſus, euery knee do
bowe in heauen in earth,The office of the prophet. and vnder the earth.
               Chriſt as a prophet doth teach vs the will of his father doth
ſhewe vs what we ought to fly: & what we ouht to follow. Whō
the father gaue vnto vs, for our Doctour, maiſterand teacher,

whē he ſaid: This is my beloued ſonne in whom I take delight, heare
him. He wil we ſhould heare another Doctrine, albeit an Angel
from heauen doe preach it,Math: 17. 5. If an Angel from heauen (ſaith Saint
Paul) ſhal preach vnto you another goſpel thē that which I haue
preached vnto you (the which he had learned of the Lord Ieſus)
Let him be accurſed.Gal: 1. 8.
               
               The office of the prieſt,The office of the prieſt, is to appeare before the diuine Maieſtie:
to appeaſe his wrath, and to obtaine grace for vs. The
which he performeth: Offering a ſacrifice pleaſing, and acceptable
vnto him. This did Ieſus Chriſt, offering vp himſelfe vpon
the Croſſe. Which ſacrifice one only time offered, and neuer
more reiteratetd (For reiteration ſhould ſhewe imperfection
to haue beene in it) was ſo ſweete, and ſo good a ſauour
vnto God, that he was pleaſed: and being pleaſed, was reconciled
with men. So that he pardoned all our ſinnes and ſanctified
vs for euer. Of theſe three offices treateth alſo the epiſtle
to the Hebrewes. In the 1 chapter, it ſheweth the excellencie
and maieſtie of Chriſt aboue the Angels, and conſequently ouer
all Creatures. In which it deuoteth his kingdōe. In the third
chapter, the Apoſtle calleth him the teacher of the will of God.
Which thing did the Prophets. chapter 13. 20. he calleth him
Great Paſtor. By Paſtor, he vnderſtandeth a teacher. And ſo in
the 7. verſe he ſaid. Remember your Paſtors which ſpeake vnto
you the word of God, &c. That Chriſt is a prieſt, and his ſacrifice,
his proper body, his fleſh, and his bloud which he himſelfe
offered to the father for vs, all this Epiſtle is full thereof.
Of which I will here make a ſhort Summarie concerning that
which toucheth his Prieſthood and ſacrifice. This then is that,
which we now promiſed to ſhewe. So neceſſary for a Chriſtian,
is this Doctrine of the Prieſthood and ſacrifice of Chriſt. That
without it,Acts. 4. 12. it is impoſſible to be ſaued. For (as ſaith Saint Peter)
there is no ſaluation in any other: and no other name there is
giuen to men vnder heauen:A Summary of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. wherein we may be ſaued: Come
we then to the Summary: in the firſt chapter of the Epiſtle, the
Apoſtle ſheweth the excellencie of Chriſt aboue the Angels
The which he confirmeth with paſſages of the ſcripture. In the
3. verſe, He maketh mention of the ſacrifice of Chriſt: hauing
made (ſaith he) the purgation of our ſinnes in himſelfe chap. 2.

The Apoſtle hauing proued in the firſt chapter, the dignity of
Chriſt, concludeth in the beginning of the 2. chapter the obedience
due to his doctrin, & the great puniſhmēt: prepared for
vs, if we deſpiſe the ſame: which menaces he afterwards vſeth, &
chiefly in the 6 and 10 chap In the third chapter, he compareth
Chriſt with Moſes: proueth Chriſt to be his ſuperior: wherefore
he exhorteth the Hebrewes to obey him; And that they ſhould
not be obſtinate againſt Chriſt: As their fathers in the time of
Moſes, were obſtinate againſt God. In the 1. verſ. he ſaith. Conſider
the Apoſtle & Biſhop of our profeſſion Ieſus Chriſt. In the
4. chap. He exhorteth thē to cōtinue in the receiued grace of the
Goſpel, & openeth the gate to the Treatiſe of the prieſthood of
Chriſt: & ſo ſaith he verſe 14. Therefore hauing one (ſo) great a
high prieſt, which pearced the heauens Ieſus, &c. And in the 15.
verſe, we haue not an high prieſt, which cēnot haue cōpaſſion of
our infirmities: In the 5. chap. The Apoſtle ſheweth, what the office
of the high prieſt is: ſpeaketh of the dignitie of Chriſt & of
his offering, & of the vertue & efficacy thereof. The dignity. The
eternall ſon of God: The offering his fleſh and his bloud himſelfe.
The efficacie of his ſacrifice,Heb. 7. 2
                        •
                     . to be heard of the father, &
made the cauſe of euerlaſting ſaluation, to thoſe that obey him
(as he ſaith verſe. 9.) In the 6. verſe, ſaith he Chriſt is a prieſt
for euer, after the order of Melchizedech. Which maner of ſpeaking,
the Apoſtle taketh of Dauid. Pſal. 110. 4. & oft times vſeth
it in this Epiſtle chap. 5. verſ. 6 & 10. chap. 6. 20. cap. 7. verſe. 17.
& 21. And in the 15 verſe he ſath: that he is likened to Melchizedech.
What the order of Melchizedech is, we haue before ſaid
ſpeaking of Tranſubtantiation. In the 6. chap. he calleth Chriſt
our forerunner & high prieſt, &c. In the 7 chap. the Apoſtle taking
occaſion of the laſt words of the chapter going before:
Thou art a prieſt for euer, after the order of Melchizedech, beginneth
very fitly to intreate, who Melchizedech was, and wherein
he was like to Chriſt, without father (ſaith verſ. 3.) without mother,
&c. This done, the Apoſtle ſheweth the prieſthood of
Chriſt, which is after the order of Melchizedech, to be much
more excellent, then the leuitical prieſthood. The cauſes which
he ſheweth, are that the prieſthood of Chriſt being come, it adnulled
& aboliſhed the leuiticall prieſthood: that alſo of Chriſt

was inſtituted with another: The Lord ſweare (ſaith he) & will
not repent, &c. Pſal. 110. But the Leuitical prieſthood was inſtituted
without an oath, the prieſthood alſo of Chriſt is eternal, &
euer holdeth his being & vertue: the Leuiticallnot. Alſo Chriſt,
who exerciſeth this euerlaſting prieſthood, is much more excellēt
thē 
                  Aaron:
                  Chriſt is our continuell Interceſſor. which exerciſeth the Leuitical prieſthood: Of ſo great
vertue is the ſacrifice of Chriſt. That hauing one only time offered,
he left no place for any other expiatory ſacrifice. For he eternally
ſaueth thoſe that come vnto God by him: euer liuing to
make interceſſion for them.Heb 17. 25. They need not then any other ſacrifice,
but the only death & paſſion of Chriſt. And as little haue
they need of any other Interceſſor, or mediator but only Chriſt.
Who ſo will not be contented with this only ſacrifice, nor with
this only interceſſor,Ier. 2. 13. let him ſeeke for others better. To ſuch a
one, it wil happē, that leauing the foūtain of liuing water, he ſhal
dig ceſterns, which will hold no water. Alſo, of ſo vnmeaſurable
vertue is this ſacrifice which Chriſt one only time offered that it
neither ought, nor can be reiterated. For reiteratiō is a moſt ſure
argument of imperfectiō: And this is the cauſe why the Leuitical
facrifices were ſo, & ſo often reiterated, becauſe the bloud of
calues, and of Goates, could not perfectly ſanctifie either thoſe
that offered them, or thoſe for whom they were offered. He that
will attentiuely read, & meditate vpon this 7. chap. ſhall not
deſire any other ſacrifice but that only which Ieſus Chriſt one
onely time offered. Which was himſelfe: As verſe 27 is declared.
The memory whereof the Lord commandeth vs to renewe
ſo often as we celebrate his holie ſupper.
               And this word (once) which the Apoſtle. chap. 9. verſe. 12.
25.This worde once is much to be noted. 26. 28. and chap. 10. 10. 12. 14. vſeth, is very much to be noted.
For vpon the word (once) groundeth the Apoſtle his argument,
to proue the prieſthood of Chriſt to be much more excellent;
then the Leuitical prieſthood. For the Leuitical prieſts, reiterated
their ſacrifice which they offered: Firſt for their owne
ſinnes, and then for the ſinnes of the people: But Chriſt offered
not ſacrifices but one only ſacifice (to wit) himſelf: and not for
himſelfe (for he had no ſinne:Eſay 53. 9. 1 peter. 2. 12▪
                   neither was there any guile found
in his mouth) but for others. And this ſacrifice did he not oftentimes
offer, nor commanded it ſhould be oftentimes offered:
one only time did he offer it. In the 8. chap. the Apoſtle repeates

that which he had ſaid in the chap going before concerning the
heauenly & euerlaſting prieſthood of Chriſt. In the 9. chap. he
three or foure times repeateth the word once. In the 10. chap.
verſ. 10. he repeateth the word once. In the 5. and 12. One ſacrifice,
and verſ. 14. One only offering.
               
               Hitherto treateth the Apoſtle of the Prieſthood & ſacrifice of
Chriſt:After the order of Melchiſedeck, and as in the word, after the order of Melchiſedech, there
remaineth great myſtery: for by it the Apoſtle proueth the
Prieſthood of Chriſt to be eternal, repeating the ſame as (wee
haue ſeen) for a word of ſo great importāce. So alſo in the word
Once, which the Apoſtle ſo often repeateth is there great myſterie:
for therby two things are proued. The firſt is, that there is no
other ſacrifice to obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes, but onely that
which Ieſus Chriſt offered. The ſecond is, that this ſacrifice is, &
euer ſhall be of ſo great vertue and efficacie,Once. as it was the day,
houre and moment when Chriſt offered it: for which cauſe it
neither ought, nor may be reiterated, without doing moſt great
iniurie to Chriſt: as though his ſacrifice which he once offered,
were not fufficient to obtain pardon for all ſins: & that therefore
another new ſacrifice were needful, or at the leaſt to reiterat the
old. All, as many as were, or ſhalbe ſaued, not onely ſince the
death of Chriſt, but before his death alſo, frō the firſt iuſt Abel,
vnto the laſt, were, are, & ſhalbe ſaued by the vertue of this only
ſacrifice once offered. Otherwiſe muſt he often haue ſuffered
ſince the foundation of the world. But now in the end of the
world hath he appeared once to put away ſin by the ſacrifice of
himſelfe:Hebr. 9. 26. Theſe be the words of the Apoſtle: againſt which nothing
impugneth that which S. Iohn ſaith in his Reuelatiō:Apo
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                      3. 
                  That
the Lambe (Chriſt) was ſlaine frō the beginning of the world: for Ieſus
Chriſt but onely once died: & this was, whē 
                  Tiberius Caeſar
was Emperor: which is now 1566. yeares ſince. How thē ſaith S.
Iohn, that he died frō the beginning of the world? To this ſay we, that
S. Iohn meant that the ſacrifice which Chriſt offred, did not only
profit thoſe that in the time of Chriſt, or ſithence liued: but
all thoſe alſo, which were long time before frō the beginning
of the world. For all before the death of Chriſt, which beleeued
that the ſeed of the woman (which is Chriſt) ſhould breake the
head of the ſerpent (which is the diuel) were neither more nor
leſſe ſaued, then theſe which ſithence the death of Chriſt,

beleeue that he is come and that by dying he hath ouercome
the deuill.All one faith haue Wee aud the faithfull of the olde Teſtament. In the ſame God whom we beleeue, beleued they:
the ſame faith which wee hold held they: and by the ſame ſacrifice
of Ieſus Chriſt one only time & no more offred they &
we are ſaued: The ſame Sacraments as touching the ſubſtance
that we haue, had they. So wittneſſeth Saint Paul when he ſaieth:
Moreouer, Brethren I would not that yee ſhould be ignorant,
That all our fathers were vnder the cloud and all paſſed through the
Sea:
                  1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4. 
                  and were all baptiſed vnto Moſes in the cloud and in the ſea,
and did all eate the ſame ſpirituall meate and did all drinke the ſame
ſpirituall drinke: for they dranke of the ſpirituall Rocke that followed
them which Rock was Chriſt. This is the difference between
them and vs, that they beleeued Chriſt the Meſſias, ſhuld come
and we beleeue that he is already come, and hath fulfilled all
whatſoeuer was written of him. We then here conclude; that
with one only ſacrifice, which Ieſus Chriſt offred, and this one
only time, and no more he ſanctified for euer all thoſe that from
the beginning of the world haue bene, are, and ſhall be ſanctified.
The Lord God, which whē we were the children of wrath
and his enemies, hath ſhewed vs ſuch mercie, giue vs grace
firmely and conſtantly to perſeuer in this faith, & perſeuering,
may liue in holineſſe and righteouſneſſe all the dayes of our life.
               The holy Scripture (as we haue ſeen) mentioneth two kinds
of Prieſts which offer ſacrifice for ſinnes:Two kinds of preiſts. the one after the order
of Aaron, the other after the order of Melchiſedech. Many there
were after the order of Aaron, becauſe being mortall, they died,
and being dead one ſucceded another. After the order of Melchiſedech
no other Prieſt there is but only Chriſt: who being an
euerlaſting Prieſt, and his ſacrifice being of euerlaſting vertue,
admitteth no companion: for he only is ſufficient. This prieſthood
ſhall ſhall endure for euer, and it is proper to the new Teſtament,
wherein there is not, nor can be more then one onely
Prieſt, which neither hath, nor can haue companion nor ſucceſſor
in his office. For he is an euerlaſting prieſt: and therefore his
offering one only time offered, is of euerlaſting vertue. Hereupon
we then conclude, that if the Maſſe-prieſts (which ſay
they offer Chriſt in Sacrifice for the ſins of men) be Prieſts inſtituted
by God, either they ſo be after the order of Aaron, or after

the order of Melchiſedech (for of theſe two only orders the ſcripture
maketh mention.) But Prieſts they be not after the order
of Aaron, which already ceaſed with the death of Chriſt. As little
are they of the order of Melchiſedech: for after this order
there is but one only Prieſt,The Maſſe prieſts be not after the order of Aron, nor after the order of Melchiſedec but of Baal. which is Chriſt. Hereuppon it followeth,
that if they be Prieſts, not by God, but by the diuell be
they inſtituted: and ſo be they the Prieſts of Baal. May it pleaſe
our God and Lord to conuert them: Or if they bee veſſels of
wrath, to breake them with his rod of yron, that they doe not
more miſchiefe to the Catholique Church, the Spouſe of Ieſus
Chriſt, and with his precious bloud redeemed. I truſt in mine
omnipotent God that one day he will haue mercie vppon our
country of Spaine: and ſend the true Elias, which with the power
of Gods word ſhal kill theſe falſe prophets & filthy prieſts.
               Beſides the expiatory ſacrifice,The Sacrifice Euchariſticall. wherof we haue ſpoken, anothere
there is called Euchariſticall, of thankſgiuing: This ſacrifice
offereth and ought to offer euery faithfull and Catholique
Chriſtian: and for ſuch a one, he that offereth it not, neither is,
nor ought to be holden. What maner of ſacrifice this is, in the
beginning of this Treatiſe of the Maſſe we haue before declared.
And if euery Chriſtian offer vnto God this kind of ſacrifice;
it followeth hereupon that euery Chriſtian,Exod 19. 6. ſeeing he offreth ſacrifice,
is a prieſt. And for this cauſe God commanded Moſes
to ſay theſe words to all the people of Iſrael,peter. 2. 6. 
                  Ye ſhall be vnto me a
kingdom of Prieſts, and a holy nation. And S. Peter ſpeaking to all
the faithfull, ſaith: Ye are a choſen generation, a royall prieſthood, an
holy nation,, a peculiar people, that ye ſhould ſhew forth the vertues
of him that hath called you out of darkneſſe into his maruellous light,
&c. S. Iohn in his Reuelation, ſpeaking of the Lambe, ſaith:
Thou haſt made vs vnto our God kings & prieſts. Of this which we
haue ſaid we conclude, Chriſt only to be the Preiſt, who offring
vp himſelfe & this onely once, obtained for vs remiſſion of ſins:
& that all faithful chriſtians are prieſts & that not once, but manie
times, euery day, euery houre, & euery moment (ſo ought it
to be done) do offer ſacrifices of praiſes vnto God. And why
ought we to praiſe God, & to giue him thanks? For al the benefits
which we receiue ech momēt of him touching both body &
ſoule. But for this benefit chiefly that paſſeth all others which is

the ineſtimable benefit that we receiue by the death & paſſion
of Chriſt. By the ſin of the firſt Adam we were all made ſinners
and ſeruants of ſinne, ſonnes of wrath, enemies of God and to
two ſorts of death, temporall and eternall of body & ſoule condemned.
Strangers we were from the common wealth of Iſrael
which is the houſe of God: And ſo all the goodnes which was
in vs, was either wholly loſt and baniſhed from vs, or els corrupted
and endamaged through ſinne: So that we cannot think
well, much leſſe can we doe well. The cauſe of all this is ſin:
which (as ſaith Saint Paul) entred into the world by Adam,
                  Rom. 5. 12. &
by ſin, death: And ſo death went ouer all men: for as much as
all men haue ſinned. But contrary wiſe, by the righteouſnes of
the ſecond Adam Chriſt, by his obedience, by his death & paſſion
(for of no leſſe power to ſaue was his obedience, then the
diſobedience of the firſt Adam to condemne all) are we made
iuſt, free from ſin, ſonnes & friends of God, heires of life eternal,
citizens of the heauenly Ieruſalem, deſirous to do wel, and enemies
vnto euil: and whatſouer wickednes is in vs, it is conuerted
into goodnes: For by Chriſt grace entred into the world, and
by grace, life,: and ſo went grace vnto all men in him, in whom
all men were ſaued. O my God, how vnſpeakeable is thy mercie
and goodneſſe, that thou ſo much louedſt the ſinfull world,
that thou gaueſt thine only begotten ſon, that euery one that beleeueth
in him ſhould not periſh,
                  Ioh. 3. 16. 
                  but haue euerlaſting life, &c. And if God
ſo loued the world, that he ſpared not his onely begotten ſon,
but gaue him vp for vs how thē ſhal he not giue vs al things with
him? Who ſhall lay anie thing to the charge of Gods elect? And
that moreouer which S. Paul to this purpoſe ſaith, Rom. 8. 32.
But God ſetteth out his loue or charitie towards vs: ſeeing, that
whiles wee were yet ſinners,Rom. 5. 8. Chriſt died for vs. Much more
then being now iuſtified by his bloud, ſhall wee be ſaued from
wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled
vnto God by the death of his ſonne: much more now
being reconciled vnto God, ſhall wee be ſaued by his life, &c.
Who ſo liſteth to know and meditate vppon that which Chriſt
did, and ſuffered to obtaine for him remiſſion of ſinnes, and reconcile
him with God: let him reade the hiſtorie which the
Euangeliſts ſet downe concerning the life and death of Chriſt:

he ſhall finde, that from the houre wherein he was borne v
                     •
                  ntil
he died, no other thing he was but a verie example of croſſes
afflictions, miſeries and calamities. And what greater miſerie
then to be born in a manger amongſt beaſts? And that when he
was borne, it behoued him to fly to a ſtrange land, for feare of
Herod, who ſought to ſlay him? This miſerie can none vnderſtand
but he that with aduerſitie, hath bene a ſtranger. And to
what land did he fly? To a land of a barbarous language, and
ſtrange religion.The vnion of Religon is greater then that of the nation. It is great comfort for a ſtranger to find people
of his owne nation: but much more is it to find people of
his owne religion. Very long ſhould I be, thus to proſecute the
life of Chriſt: to the Euangeliſts I referre me. And if miſerable
was his life to the eyes of men: much more miſerable and vnhappy
was his death. Sith as a tranſgreſſion of the diuine and humane
law, he was publikely ſentenced to die vpon the croſſe:
which kind of death was not giuen but to abominable perſons,
which had committed enormious offences and ſinnes. And ſo
pronounced the holy ſcripture ſuch ſentence,Deut: 21 23. when it ſaid, Curſed
is he vvhich hangeth on the tree.
                  Gal. 3. 13. And ſo Saint Paul ſpeaking of
Chriſts humiliation,Philip. 2. 8. ſaith: He became obedient vnto the death, euen
the death of the croſſe. And all this which he out wardly ſuffered,
was nothing in compariſon of that which his moſt holy
ſoule inwardly felt: this was, the inſupportable burthen of
ſinnes, not his, but of all men, which God layd vpon him: for
which, hee onely was to ſatisfie. This ſo great a weight felt
Chriſt, when praying in the garden he ſayd, Father if thou wilt,
let this cuppe paſſe from me,
                  Luke. 22. 42. 
                  yet not mine, but thy willbe done. And
ſo great was his ſorrow, that an Angell from heauen appeared
vnto him, and comforted him: and notwithſtanding being in
an agonie,Math. 27. 46. hee prayed more earneſtly: and his ſweate was (as
witneſſeth the ſame Euangeliſt) like droppes of bloud trickling
downe to the ground:Chriſt in ſaying my God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me, felt truly the paine which the damned ſuffer in hell. & ſo as abhorred and forſaken of the Father,
for the multitude of ſins (not his, but ours) which were poured
vpon him, a little before he gaue vp the ghoſt, cried he out
with a loud voice, ſaying: My God my God, why haſt thou forſaken
me? Chriſt, thou ſeeſt here caſt into the depth of hell, ſtriuing
with death, with ſin, & with the diuel, which fel to the erth with
him: but their reioycing not lōg endured: for Chriſt aided by his

diuine power returned vpon his enemies: and did in ſuch ſort
ſuppreſſe them that he vāquiſht thē for euer. This is that which
S. Peter ſaith:Act: 2. 24. 
                  Whom God hath raiſed vp, an
                        •
                      looſed the ſorrowes of
death, becauſe it was impoſſible that he ſhould be holden of it. And ſo
Chriſt hauing vāquiſhed his enemies,Eſay. 53. 4. ſatified the Father for our
ſins, & reconciled vs with him, went out victorious frō this cruel
& bloudy battell. Read for this purpoſe Eſai. 53. wherein Eſayas
ſeemeth not to bee a prophet which foretelleth that which
ſhould happen to Chriſt, but an Euangeliſt, which recounteth
that which already had befallen him. In the 4. verſe he ſaith:
Surely he hath borne our infirmities and carried our ſorrowes:
yet we did iudge him as plagued and ſmitten of God and humbled.
verſ. 5. But he was wounded for our tranſgreſſions, hee
was broken for our iniquities, the chaſtiſment of our peace was
layd vpon him, and with his ſtripes are we healed, verſe. 6. All
we like ſheepe haue gone aſtray: we haue turned euery one to
his owne way, and the Lord hath layd vpon him the iniquitie
of vs all &c. And ver. 11. By his knowledge ſhall my righteous
ſeruant iuſtifie manie: for he ſhall beare their iniquities. An admirable
chapter is this againſt the obſtinate Iewes, which expect
their Meſſiah to be verie mighty in this world,The 53. chapter of Eſaias, painteth o
                        •
                     t Chriſt far otherwiſe then the Iewes doe expect. a great warriour,
which ſhall kill and cleaue aſunder. But here the Prophet
depaintcth out a man, the moſt humbled of any that hath
been, whipped and wounded of God and men, without any
forme or beautie: ſo had he bene handled of God and men. Admirable
alſo is this chapter to proue the Diuinitie of the Son of
God, of the Meſſiah, of our Chriſt. For who can by faith in
him (which the prophet calleth with his knowledge) iuſtifie
men? Who can giue righteouſneſſe, and take away the ſinnes
of men but God alone? This doth Chriſt: therefore is he God.
The ſame Chriſt, Matth. 9. 6. ſaith, that he hath power to pardon
ſinnes: and ſo ſaid he to the ſicke of the palſie, Sonne, be of good
comfort, thy ſinnes be forgiuen thee. For which cauſe ſaid the
Scribes that he blaſphemed. And ſo ſaid he to the ſinful woman
Luk, 7. 4. S. Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. The Scripture in many other
places maketh mention of this humiliation and deiection
of Chriſt, and then of his glorious triumph againſt his enemies.
But this which we haue ſayd ſufficeth.
               
                  
This benefit of the death and paſſion of Chriſt propoſed ingenerall
to all men, doeth Saint Paule by faith applye to him
ſelfe,Gal. 2. 20. ſaying: I am crucified with Chriſt: and liue, not I now
but Chriſt liueth in me: and in that I now liue in the fleſh I liue
by faith in the ſonne of God, who hath loued me, and giuen
himſelfe for mee:For me Chriſt died. Who ſo will enioy this benefite propoſed in
generall to all, let him learne of Saint Paule to apply it by faith
in particular to himſelf. For whoſoeuer ſhall not ſo doo: Let
him holde it for ſpoken,Rom. 4. 25. he ſhall not enioy it. They only be ſafe
which beleue Chriſt to be giuen for their proper ſinnes and riſen
againe for their iuſtification.Rom: 8. 38. Hee which of himſelfe ſhall
not particularly beleeue this, ſhall be condemned: the death of
Chriſt ſhall nothing auayle him. But he which ſhall beleeue it,
ſhall be ſaued: and being ſaued, is aſſured that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
preſent, nor things to come, nor ſtrength, nor height, nor depth
nor any other creature ſhall bee able to ſeparate him from the
loue of God which is in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. His Maieſtie increaſe
this faith, his gift it is. A Chriſtian then armed with ſuch
weapons of faith, ſhall patiently, and I ſay more ioyfully ſuffer
for Chriſt, tribulation, ſorrow, perſecution, famine, nakedneſſe,
danger, ſword, fire, and diſhonour: for to all theſe things the very
day that wee truely beleeue in Chriſt, are wee ſubiect. For
the diſciple is not more to bee exempted from them then his
maiſter was.philip. 4. 13. Hee increaſe faith in vs, and make vs conſtant in
aduerſities: for without him can we do nothing; and with him
can we do all things. This verie well perceiued Saint Paule,
when he ſayd, I am able to do all things, through the helpe of
Chriſt which ſtrengtheneth me.1. Cor. 9. 20 1 peter. 1. 18. God then with his exceeding
loue ſo louing vs, that he ſpared not his proper and only begotten
Sonne, but gaue him vp for vs; and being bought, not with
gold nor ſiluer, but with an ineſtimable treaſure, with the moſt
precious bloud of Chriſt, the Lambe without ſpot, let vs not
abaſe nor ſubiect our ſelues to ſinne and wickedneſſe: but ſeeing
we are the friends, ſonnes and heires of God, and brothers
and coheires with Ieſus Chriſt: let vs highly eſteeme our ſelues
and apply our ſelues to vertue: that God bee not angrie, but
ioyfull to haue ſuch ſonnes; nor Chriſt aſhamed but rather honored

to call vs brethren friendes and companions. In the
ſacred Scriptures are there very many places, wherein the holy
Spirit doth exhort vs to liue godly and holily: but of all haue I
choſē one, which maketh much to the purpoſe, becauſe in it are
mentioned, both kindes of ſacrifices (to wit) the propitiatory
which only Chriſt one only time offered: and the Euchariſtcall
which euery moment we offer, or to (ſpeake better) ought to
offer: the Spirit of God by the mouth of S. Paul, doth thus exhort
vs:Ephe. 5. 1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as deare children, &
walke in loue, euen as Chriſt hath loued vs, and hath giuen himſelfe
for vs, to be an offring and ſacrifice of a ſweet ſmelling ſauor
to God: But fornication and all vncleanneſſe, let it not once
be named among you, as it be commeth Saints: neither filthines
neither fooliſh talking, nor ieſtings, which are things not comely:
but rather giuing of thanks, &c. For all the che chapter is an
exhortation to well liuing. Let not man thinke, for being called
a Chriſtian, for being baptiſed, for ſaying that he beleeueth
in God, for being trayned vp in the Church, where he frequenteth
ſermons, and celebrateth with the reſt, the holy ſupper: Let
him not thinke for all this (ſay I) that hee ſhall be ſaued: if hee
keepe not together with this the commaundements of God.
If thou wilt (ſaith Chriſt) enter into life, keepe the commandements:
thou ſhalt not kil, thou ſhalt not cōmit adultery, &c. That hypocrits
may doe, and doe the ſame: but not this. For without a true and
liuely faith, which hypocrites and wicked Chriſtians, haue not,
this cannot be done. The outward ſhew, the dead faith, imaginary
and idle, is not the faith which iuſtifieth: but the liuely,
true, and diligent faith which bringeth forth in time
fruits of charitie. For as true fire, cannot be without heate, and
the greater that the fire is, the greater heat it giueth: So true
faith cannot be without good works: and the more the faith is,
ſo much the more it worketh. And contrariwiſe: as the painted
fire warmeth not, as little alſo the dead faith worketh: for being
dead, how ſhall it worke. Such a perfection doth the holy Spirit
require in vs, that we do not onely good, and commit no euill,
but willeth alſo that we be not familiar nor conuerſant with
the wicked. Whereas ſuch calling themſelues brothers, bee
hypocrites, vniuſt and impious. So commaundeth the Apoſtle,

1. Cor. chap. 5. 1. If any man (ſaith hee) calling himſelfe
a brother, ſhall be a fornicator, a couetous perſon, an idolater,
an euill ſpeaker, a drunkard, a theefe, with ſuch a one eate not.
The cauſe why we ought not to bee familiar with ſuch, in the
ſecond epiſtle to the Theſſal. chap. 3. 14. he ſheweth. And conuerſe
not with him (ſaith he) that hee may bee aſhamed. And
Rom. 16. 17. he commandeth vs to depart from them which
make diſſentions. And 2. Ioh. verſ. 10. it is commanded we
ſhould not ſalute them. To receiue then and enioy the benefit
of Chriſts ſacrifice, ſuch ought (as we haue mentioned) to be
the life of a Chriſtian. Hee that ſhall not be ſo perfect, (for
who ſhall hee bee? ſeeing there is no man but finneth, and
ſith the iuſt man falleth ſeuen times, I would ſay many times a
day: if he fall ſeuen times a day, what will hee doe all his life
long? fall and riſe againe.) He that ſhall not then be ſo perfect,
let him deſire ſo to be: let him ſigh and bewayle his imperfection
before the Lord: let him beſeech him of grace to become
perfect. Let him beleeue the Lord to be ſo good, that
he will accept this good deſire, proceeding from ſo contrite
and humble heart: and ſo will he ſupply the faults of our imperfections,
and not impute them vnto vs. And thus ſhall we
enioy the benefite of the ſacrifice which Chriſt our high and
onely Prieſt once offered to his Father.
               We haue proued Chriſt onely to be our Prieſt, and onelie his
body & bloud which he once offered vpon the croſſe to be the
only and vnreiterable ſacrifice expiatorie, whereby our ſinnes
are pardoned, and we for euer ſanctified. Let vs now (as we promiſed)
treat of the inſtitution of the holy ſupper, and ſo wil we
conclude this Treatiſe.
               The Lord knowing our careleſneſſe,The inſtitution of the Supper. negligence & forgetfulnes
of the things which concern our ſaluation, that we ſhuld
not forget the benefit of his death & paſſion, did inſtitute the
moſt holy ſacrament of his precious body, which he gaue vpon
the croſſe, & of his precious bloud, which he ſhed in his paſſion:
which ſacramēt he wold ſhuld be vnto vs a memoriall of al that
which he ſuffred for vs, & of the benefit we receiue by his death
& paſſion, As often as ye ſhal do this (to wit, as ye ſhall celebrate
the holy Supper) ye ſhal do it (ſaith Chriſt) in remembrance of me.
               
               
                  
                  One only time was Chriſt offered, and by this (only offering)
he obtained for vs a generall pardon of all our ſinnes. But hee
would we ſhould alwayes remember this benefit: And to help
our memorie did he inſtitute this ſacrament, and willeth wee
not once but many times in our life receiue it. The inſtitution
of this Sacrament, the Euangeliſts Matthew, Marke, and Luke
do declare: but moſt largely Saint Paul in 1. Cor. chap. 11. and
in the tenth chap. he beginneth alſo to intreate thereof. He are
wee then Saint Peul declare how Chriſt celebrated his holy
ſupper, wherein hee inſtituted the Sacrament of his body,
and of his bloud.
                  1. Cor 11. 23 I receiued of the Lord (ſaith Saint Paul)
that which I alſo deliuered vnto you, to wit, that the Lord Ieſus the
ſame night that he was betrayed, tooke bread: and when he had giuen
thanks he brake it, and ſaid: Take, eate: This is my body which
is broken for you. Do this in remembrance of mee. Likewiſe alſo
after ſupper, he tooke the cup, ſaying: This is the new teſtament in
my bloud: Do this as often as you ſhall drinke it in remembrance of
me. For as often as you ſhall eate this bread, and drinke of this cup, ye
ſhall ſhew forth the Lords death vntill his comming. Whoſoeuer
therefore ſhall eate this bread, and drinke of this cup vnworthily,
ſhall be guiltie of the body and bloud of the Lord. Let then a man
proue himſelfe, and ſo eate of that bread, and drinke of that cup. For
who ſo eateth and drinketh the ſame vnworthily, eateth and drinketh
his owne damnation, not conſidering the Lords body.
               We haue heard how the Lord did celebrate his holy ſupper
and inſtituted therein the moſt holy ſacrament of his body and
bloud. The ſame order that Ieſus Chriſt vſed in celebrating of
it, held his Apoſtles, as often as they celebrated the ſame. This
ſelfe ſame order (as we haue before ſhewed) was for a thouſand
yeares ſpace obſerued in the Church. Albeit true it is, that before
the thouſand yeares were accompliſhed, Sathan (enuying
the great benefite and comfort which we receiue with this ſacrament)
began to alter it, adding thereto many thinges touching
rites and ceremonies. But the thouſand yeares paſſed, the
whole ſacrament with furie hee caſt to the earth: and in place
thereof aduaunced an idoll made of dough made betweene
two irons, which they adore and ſacrifice vnto, neither
more nor leſſe, then if it were God himſelfe that created heauen

and earth. But in all this time of ſo great ignoraunce, and
Idolatrie. The Lord (as we haue ſaid) did neuer vtterly forſake
his Church: For euer he raiſed vp ſome true prophet, ſome holy
man, or men, that with zeale of the Lordes houſe, and nor
accompting of the daunger whereunto they thruſt their liues
reproued the world. Becauſe through the Church of God, was
ſold this ſo horrible idolatry. But particularly in theſe our times
hath the Lord ſhewed mercy, rayſing vp very many learned &
godly men. Which being ſimple poore men, haue with great
zeale, oppoſed them ſelues to the tyranny of Antichriſt, and to
all the power of the world. which was inchanted & bewitched
with the falſe Doctrine of Antichriſt. And ſo hath God bleſſed
the labour of theſe men (As he bleſſed in times paſt, the labour
of the Apoſtles, meane & ſimple people) that they haue
caſt to the earth the Miſſa, or Maſſe, the breaden God, which
our aduerſaries haue rayſed vp and haue eftſoones reſtored the
holy ſupper which the Lord Ieſus, the night before he ſhould
ſuffer, celebrated with his diſciples. They that haue eyes to ſee, Let
them ſee, and they that haue eares to heare, Let them heare. That
ſeeing, and hearing, All the world may iudge, if that be true,
which we ſay. I will here ſet downe, the order holden in our
Churches, which God, by the meanes of theſe holy men, hath
in our time reformed, when the holy ſupper is celebrated. Hearken
then O Spaine, what in thine owne Language I ſpeake: that
ſmall and great, learned, and vnlearned may vnderſtand me.
               
                  The forme which is holden in the reformed Churches, of celebration of the holie ſupper of the Lord.
                  
                     It is to be noted. That the Lords day before the ſupper is celebratae.
The miniſter doth warne the people that each one diſpoſe, and prepare
himſelfe to receiue it worthily and with ſuch reuerence as is
meete, The ſecond thing which is done is, that youthes, which haue
now attayned to yeares of diſcretion, doe not preſent themſelues to
receiue it before they he well inſtructed and taught in the Chriſtian
Doctrine, and have made profeſſion of their faith in the Church.
Thirdly if therebe any ſtraungers, or newe commers, which be as yet
                     
rude and ignorant in religion, that they come & preſent themſelues
to be taught particularly in that which is meete for them
to know: & the day on which they celebrate the ſame, the miniſter
at the end of the ſermon, toucheth ſomewhat concerning
the miſteries: Or if neede require, his whole ſermon treateth of
the Doctrine of the ſupper: to declare to the people, what the
Lord, by this miſtery, will ſay, & giue to vnderſtand, And how
we ought to receiue it. After that the miniſter hath publiquely
prayed, he ſaith, the generall confeſſion, & after the confeſſion
of faith made, to witnes in the name of the people, that they all
wil liue & die in the doctrin & Chriſtian religion. The table being
prepared, & the bread & wine vpō it, he thus aloud ſpeaketh.
               
            
            
               The inſtitution of the holy ſupper of the Lord
               Let vs heare how Ieſus Chriſt did inſtitute vnto vs his holy
ſupper, according to that which S. Paule in the 11. chapter of the
firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians declareth.
               I receiued of the Lord, &c. As we haue before recited.
               
                  The forme of excomunication and excluding from the
holy ſupper of the Lord theſe which be not
worthy to receiue it.
                  We haue heard (brethren) how the Lord celebrated the ſupper
with his diſciples, and in that which he did, he ſheweth vnto
vs: that ſtraungers, to wit thoſe which be not of the fellowſhip
of his faithfull, ought not to be admitted vnto it: Following
therefore this rule: in the name, & by the authoritie of our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt, I excommunicate all Idolaters, blaſphemers, contempners
of God, heretiques, & all Schiſmatiques which make
ſects a part, to break the vnity of the Church, all periured perſons:
all that be diſobedient to their fathers and mothers, and to their
ſuperious, all ſeditious perſons, factious traytors, contentious
perſons, adulterours, fornicators, thieues, dauncers, manſlayers,
euill ſpeakers, deceiuers, couetous perſons, he & ſhe witches,
vſurers, rayſers of falſe witnes, robbers, drunkards, gluttons & all
thoſe that liue ſcandalouſly: denouncing vnto them, that they
abſtaine from this holy table: that they foule not, nor defile the
holie meat, which our Lord Ieſus Chriſt giueth to his houſhold
and faithfull only.
               
               
                  
                  An exhortation, wherein is declared what
is the vſe, and fruit of
the ſupper.
                  Therefore, after S. Paules admonition, let euery man proue
and examine his conſcience, to knowe if hee haue true repentaunce
of his ſinnes, and if hee abhorre them, grieuing to haue
cōmitted them, againſt the diuine goodnes & deſireth thenceforth
to liue holily according to the wil of God. And aboue all if
he haue his truſt in the diuine mercie, & ſeeke wholy his ſaluation
in Ieſus Chriſt. And if all Enmitie and rancour layd aſide,
hee haue a good purpoſe to liue with his neighbours in concord
and brotherly loue.
                  If we haue this teſtimony in our hart before God, we nothing
doubt, but that he accepteth and acknowledgeth vs for his
ſonnes: And that the Lord Ieſus Chriſt directeth his word to
vs, to admit vs vnto his Table, and communicate this ſacrament
vnto vs, which hee commnnicated to his diſciples. And
albeit wee feele in our ſelues great weakeneſſe and miſery:
As not yet to haue perfection of faith. But to bee inclined to
vnbeliefe and diſtruſt, and as not to bee ſo fully addicted to
ſerue God, and with ſuch a zeale, as wee ought: But to fight
continually with the Iuſtes of the fleſh. Notwithſtanding this
hath the Lord ſhewed vs this mercy, to haue imprinted in our
harts his Goſpel, to reſiſt all incredulity: and hath giuen vs a deſire
and affection to renounce our owne inclinations and corrupt
deſires, to follow his righteouſneſſe, and obey his holie
commandements: Sure we are, that the vices and imperfections
remaine in vs cannot let, but that he receiue vs & make vs worthy
to be partakers of his good things in this ſpirituall banquet.
For wee come not to him, to proteſt, that in our ſelues wee
are perfect or iuſt: But contrarywiſe in ſeeking with great
deſire our life in Chriſt: wee confeſſe, that we abide in death.
This ſacramēt vnderſtand we to be a medecine for thoſe which
are needy in ſpirtuall infirmities, & that all the dignitie, which
Chriſt our redeemer requireth at our hands, is to know vs to
haue ſorrow and hartie griefe for our offences: and to ſettle all
our delight ioy & contentment only in him.
                  Firſt doe we beleeue theſe promiſes which Ieſus Chriſt (who

is the infallible and eternall truth) pronounced with his mouth.
To wit: that he will truly make vs partakers of his body, & bloud
To the end, we may wholy poſſeſſe him, that he may liue in vs
& we in him. And although we ſee not the thing giuen, but only
bread & wine: yet are we ſure, he wil ſpiritually fulfil in our harts
all that which he out wardly ſheweth by theſe viſible ſignes. He
is (I would ſay) the heauenly bread to feede vs, & nouriſh vs vnto
life eternal. Let vs not then be vngrateful to the infinit goodnes
of Ieſus Chriſt our ſauiour, who ſetteth before vs vpon this
holy table, all his riches to diſtribute the ſame vnto vs. For in giuing
himſelf vnto vs, he doth witnes, that all his good things, are
wholy ours. Let vs therfore receiue this ſacramēt as a moſt certaine
pledge: wherby the vertue of his death & paſſiō is imputed
vnto vs, for righteouſnes: As if we our ſelues in our own perſons
had ſuffered. Let vs not be ſo peruerſe of vnderſtanding, & nature
to refuſe, to reioyce, & enioy this diuine banquet, wherunto
Ieſus Chriſt, by his word, doth ſo gently inuite vs. But with great
eſteeme of the dignitie of this moſt precious guift, wherewith
he graceth vs to preſent we our ſelues vnto him with a burning
zeale and faithful hart, that he make vs capable to receiue him.
                  For this end, lift we vp our minds & harts vnto him: there where
Ieſus Chriſt is, in the glorie of his father: from whēce we expect
him for our redemptiō. And let vs not be occupied, nor dwel vppō
theſe earthly & corruptible elements: which we ſee with the
eyes, & touch with the hands, to ſeeke him in thē: as though hee
were incloſed in the bread & wine. For thē ſhall our ſoules (being
ſo lifted vp aboue all earthly things) be diſpoſed to be fed &
quickened with his ſubſtaūce, to come vnto heauē, & enter into
the kingdōe of God, where he remayneth. Content we then our
ſelues to hold the bread, & wine, for ſignes & teſtimonies, ſeking
ſpiritually the truth, where the word of God doth promiſe.
                  
                     This done, the miniſters diſtribute vnto the people the bread, and the
cup hauing firſt admoniſhed all, that they come with all reuerence
& by order to receiue it. In the meane time, they ſung ſome pſalmes
in the congregatiō, or read with a loud voyce ſome thing of the holy
ſcripture, agreiug to that which by the ſacramēt is ſignified, & whē
all haue cōmunicated, they kneele on their knees & giue thanks.
                  
                  A thankeſgiuing after the communion
                  
                     
We giue thee euerlaſting thanks & praiſe, eternall and heauenly
father; for the clemencie which thou haſt vſed towards vs
in communicating vnto vs, ſo great a benefit: being as we are,
miſerable ſinners, and in hauing made vs partakers of the communion
of thy ſon Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Whom thou deliueredſt
ouer to death for vs, and now giueſt him vnto vs, for foode,
and nouriſhment of euerlaſting life: Haue mercie alſo vppon
vs, and neuer ſuffer vs to forget theſe thinges ſo worthie of
thee: But hauing them imprinted in our harts, we may alwayes
growe & be ſtrengthened in faith, effectuall to all good works.
And that this doing, we may order, & proceede all our life time
holily, to the aduauncement of thy glory, and edification of our
neighbours, through Ieſus Chriſt thy ſon, who in the vnity of the
holy ſpirit liueth & raigneth with thee the true God euerlaſting.
               
               
                  This done, the miniſter with this bleſſing diſpatcheth the people,
wherewith the Lord commaundeth, that they
ſhould bleſſe the people. Numb. 9: 24.
                  The Lord bleſſe you, and ſaue you, the Lord make his face
ſhine vpon you, & be merciful vnto you. The Lord turne his fauourable
c
                        •
                     ūtenance towards you & giue you his peace. Amen.
               
               
                  In the vulgar tongue is all this ſayd that all ſmall, and great,
learned, and vnlearned may vnderſtand.
                  Whoſoeuer without paſſion, & with a deſire to be aſſured of
the way of his ſaluation, ſhall read this which we haue ſayd, hee
ſhall eaſily vnderſtand the ſupper which now we celebrate in
the reformed Churches, to be the ſame, which Ieſus Chriſt our
king, prophet and prieſt inſtituted, & which his Apoſtles & the
catholike church, for many hundred yeares did celebrate: And
contrary wiſe, ſhal he vnderſtand the Maſſe (which our aduerſaries
at this day celebrete) to haue no agreement with the holy
ſupper of the Lord, but in al, & by al, to be oppoſit vnto it. And ſo
cōtrary, that where the one is, the other in no wiſe can be: where
the maſſe is, there is not the ſnpper of the Lord, & where the ſupper
of the Lord is there is not the maſſe, For how can light and
darknes be ioyned, the table of the Lord, & the table of diuels,

God and Belial? And that the Chriſtian people of my nation (for
whoſe cauſe, deſiring to do them ſeruice, I haue taken this paine
(if that may be called paine, which the perſon with great content
and deſire to ſerue, and doe ſome good taketh) may eaſily
vnderſtand this. I will here in a table ſet downe, the agreement,
conformity, and vnity, which is betweene the holy ſupper by
vs in our reformed Churches celebrated & the holy ſupper of
the Lord: then will I ſet downe the difference, diſagreement, &
contrariety which is between the holy ſupper, by our Chriſt inſtituted,
and the prophane maſſe, which Antichriſt hath inuented,
and ſold for mony to miſerable people, called Chriſtians.
Hee whom God hath giuen vnderſtanding to vnderſtand,
Let him vnderſtand the will of the Lord and doe the ſame.
               
            
            
               
                  The holie ſupper of the
Lord.
                  Ieſus Chriſt alone ordained his holy ſupper, and commanded
his Church to celebrate the ſame, As he himſelfe, had
celebrated it.
                  
                     The ſupper of the reformed Churches.
                     The ſupper is celebrated neither more nor leſſe, then Ieſus
Chriſt, did celebrate it, and after the ſame manner by him
cōmanded to his Church: as the Euangeliſts Mat. 26. 26. Mar.
14. 22. Luke 22. 19. & S. Paule 1. Cor. 11. 24, do declare. Therefore
is our ſupper the ſupper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Maſſe hath bene made by many Popes: For one Pope
made the confite or, another the introit, another the Kyri-elecſon:
another the Gloria in excelſis: another the Gradual, another
the Offertorie: another the Cannon: another the Memento another
the Teigitur another the Cōmunicātes, another ordayned,
that the bread in the Maſſe ſhould be vnleuened, another that
water ſhould be put into wine. Another cōmanded, that the
bread ſhuld be worſhipped, ſaying: it was not bread, but God,
which made heauē & earth, &c. Another made the Agnus Dei.
The ſame may alſo be ſayd, of whatſoeuer is done in the maſſe.
Chriſt made none of all theſe things, nor cōmanded his faithfull
to doe them. Diuers Popes, and at ſundry times did inuent

them. Whereuppon it followeth, that neuer Chriſt, no
not at all did inſtitute the Maſſe, nor his Apoſtles ſayd
it. Therefore the Maſſe is not the Supper of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy ſupper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt entending to celebrate his Supper, changed not his
garments.
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     So alſo the Miniſters, when they celebrate the Supper,
change not their garments. Therefore is our Supper
the ſupper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh Prieſt (going to ſay his Maſſe) doth nought
els but cloth and vncloth: and euery garment that hee
putteth on, how little ſoeuer, carrieth great myſteries:
which they without the word of God, to keepe the poore
people ſtill bewitched, haue forged. Moreouer, the
Prieſt ſaying Maſſe muſt haue his head & beard ſhaued,
& vpon his head a circle of haire, which they cal a crown:
wherein they follow not Chriſt, nor his Apoſtles, who
neuer did weare head nor beard ſhauen: but they imitate
the Prieſts of the Gentiles: whom Baruch, chap. 6.
and 30. reporteth to haue had their heades and beardes
ſhauen. Therefore the Maſſe is not the Supper of the
Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt vſed common bread, ſerued at the table, when hee
ſupped with his Apoſtles.
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     We alſo do vſe common bread, therefore is our Supper the
Supper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh prieſt muſt expreſly vſe other maner of bread,
baked betweene two yrons, which properly is no bread,
but wafers. Therefore the Maſſe is not the Supper of the
Lord.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The holy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt made his Supper vppon a table.
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     We do alſo celebrate the Supper vpon a table, and not vpon
an altar. An altar is for ſacrifice, and ſacrifices ceaſed
with the death of Chriſt. Therefore neede we no altar.
A table is to ſuppe on. Saint Paul cals it the Lords
ſupper, 1. Cor. chap. 11. 20. whereuppon it followeth,
that it being a Supper, vpon a table (and not an altar) it
is to be celebrated: therefore is our ſupper, the Supper of
the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh Prieſt muſt haue an altar, which he calleth conſecrated.
An altar (I ſay) in a hole in the middeſt whereof
(which they call the Sepulchre) is put a peece of ſome
reliques: and if the altar be not conſecrate, then muſt he
haue a marble ſtone, which they call a conſecrate altar in
the border whereof are little peeces of cloth, which they
cal Corporales. All which Durandus in his booke intituled
Rationale diuinorum, hath diligently trauelled to declare:
therefore the Maſſe is not the Suppet of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy ſupper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt, in celebrating his ſupper, preached and taught his Apoſtels.
                  
                     The ſupper of the refoumed Church.
                     The ſupper is neuer celebrated, but the miniſter doth preach
and teach thoſe that communicate: therefore is our Supper
the Supper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh prieſt mumbleth between his teeth certain praiers:
he turneth to and from the altar one while his backe,
another while his face to the people: now goeth he from
one part of the altar vnto another: now he ſingeth with an
high voyce, now with a low voyce: now liftes hee vp his
armes, now he caſteth them downe: he lifts vp the traine
of his cope, holding a candle or wax burning. Briefly, he

ſeemeth to be nothing els but a man wholly madde, not
knowing what countenance to vſe. Let them ſhew when
Chriſt or his Apoſtles did this, or commāded the Church
to doe the ſame. Therfore the Maſſe is not ſupper of the
Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy Super of the Lord.
                  Chriſt in celebrating of his Supper, ſpake in the vulgar
tongue that all might vnderſtand.
                  
                     The Supper of the Reformed Churches.
                     All whatſoeuer is ſayd when we celebrate the Supper, is ſpoken
in the vulgar tongue, that all may vnderſtand: therefore
is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     In the Maſſe a ſtrāge tongue is vſed, which moſt of the Maſſing
prieſts vnderſtand not: which is wholly contrary to
S. Paules doctrine, 1. Cor. 14. where hee ſheweth, that no
tongue in the Church is to be vſed, but that which may
be vnderſtood. Therefore the Maſſe is not the Supper of
the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt in the Supper firſt brake the bread, and then gaue it to
his Apoſtles.
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     In celebrating of the Supper, the Miniſter firſt breaketh the
bread, & then giueth it to the communicants, therefore is
our ſupper, the ſupper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh Prieſt in his Maſſe, obſerueth not this order: for
he firſt ſpeaketh certaine words ouer the bread, and then
at his pleaſure breaketh it (or as they ſay) the accidents of
bread (by they) is tranſubſtātiated into the body of Chriſt.
But Ieſus Chriſt firſt brake the bread, and then ſpake the
words, therefore the Maſſe is not the Supper of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt after he had broken the bread, ſaid, Hoc eſt corpus meum,
                     
This is my body
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     The ſame ſaith and doth the Miniſter without ought adding
or diminiſhing: therfore is our Supper the Supper of the
Lord.
                  
                  
                     The Prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh Prieſt ſpeaketh the words without breaking of
the bread: and not content with Chriſts wordes, addeth
thereto this word enim, ſaying, Hoc eſt enim corpus meum,
therefore the Maſſe is not the Supper of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt ſitting at the Table with his Apoſtles, ſayd: Take
and eate.
                  
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     The ſame ſaith the miniſter, and neuer celebrateth the
Supper but the Church doth the like: and all ioyntly
with him doe communicate, and not one ſwallow vp all:
therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh Prieſt (all being on their knees) onely ſheweth
them the bread and wine to be worſhipped, and giueth
nought to the people, but like a glutton, keepeth all for
himſelfe, and eateth it alone: which is not onely contrary
to Chriſtes inſtitution, but the cuſtome alſo of ancient
Fathers: as by the Cannons of Anacletus and Calixtus
plainely appeareth. Where vnder the paine of excommunication,
it is ordayned, that after the conſecration,
all ſhould communicate. The ſame is ordayned in the
Cannons ſayd to be the Apoſtles. And in the Councell
of Tholouſe. Whereuppon it plainely followeth that the
Maſſe (as now it is ſaid) was neuer by Ieſus Chriſt inſtituted,
nor by his holy Apoſtles celebrated: which
being ſo, all thoſe that now heare it, all thoſe (I ſay) are
by the ſame Cannons excommunicate. Seeing that
hearing the Maſſe, they communicate not: but the
Prieſt onely taketh it for himſelfe, and eateth it alone,

contrarie to rhat which Chriſt and the ancient Fathers
ordayned. Therefore the Maſſe is not the Supper of
the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt gaue not the bread onely, but alſo the wine, ſaying:
Drinke ye all of this, Matth. chap. 26. 27. And as ſaith
Saint Marke chap. 14. verſe 23. And they dranke all
thereof.
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     The Miniſter giueth not the bread only, but alſo the wine,
ſaying: Drinke yee all of this. And all drinke thereof, as
Chriſt hath commaunded, therefore is our ſupper the
ſupper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh Prieſt onely giueth the conſecrated bread, and
not the wine to the people: which is wholly contrarie,
not to the inſtitution of Chriſt onely, but the cuſtome
alſo of the the ancient Doctors ſince the Apoſtles, who
communicated in both kinds of bread and wine: and
condemned all ſuch as communicated in one kind only:
as in the Conſecra. Diſt. 2. Cap. Comperimus appeareth:
where it is ſayd, that ſuch as receiue not the ſacrament
in both kinds, refuſe the one part or the other
be ſacrilegious infidels: Therefore the Maſſe is not the
Supper of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The holy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt gaue the bread by it ſelfe, and the wine by it ſelfe.
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Church.
                     The Miniſter giueth the bread by it ſelfe, and the wine by it
ſelfe: beleeuing the bread to be the Sacrament of the body
of Chriſt, and the wine to be the ſacramēt of his bloud:
therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The Popiſh Prieſt doth firſt conſecrate, as he thinketh, the
bread and wine. and then a good while after breaking it
in 3 parts: one part whereof he letteth fall into the wine,

and ſo mingleth thē together: all which he himſelfe deuoureth.
Sauing that once a yeare, whē the people communicate,
then he giueth them the conſecrate bread, but
of the conſecrate wine, he neuer giueth to the communicants.
Who thinketh this to agree with the Lords ſupper?
Therefore the Maſſe is not the ſupper of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  The hoy Supper of the Lord.
                  Chriſt ordained his holy ſupper in memoriall of his death &
paſſion, and that he had once offered vp his body and
bloud vpon the croſſe for vs.
                  
                     The Supper of the reformed Churches.
                     The Supper which we celebrate is in memorial of the death
and paſſion of Chriſt: and that he hath once offered his
bodie and bloud for vs vpon the croſſe: therefore is our
ſupper the ſupper of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     The prophane Maſſe of the Pope.
                     The popiſh Prieſt ſaith his Maſſe in memoriall of the Saints,
both he and ſhe. And thoſe oftentimes do they hold for
Saints, whoſe ſoules are burning in heil. Hee ſayth his
Maſſe alſo to find things which be loſt, and that for money.
The Prieſt vſeth the Maſſe for a plaiſter or drugge
againſt all infirmities. And, which is more: hee ſacrificeth
(ſaith he) Ieſus Chriſt in his Maſſe, and preſenteth
him to God his father, for the ſinnes of the quicke
and the dead. Which Chriſt, did once vpon the croſſe
and none but he onely, could euer doe the ſame. Becauſe
(as Saith the Apoſtle Heb. 7. chap. verſ. 26.) it behoued
that the Prieſt which purged ſinnes, ſhould be holy,
innocent, pure, ſeparate from ſinners, and made higher
then the heauens, which needed not euery day to offer
ſacrifice, firſt for his owne ſinnes, and then for the ſinnes
of the people. This Chriſt once perfourmed, offering
vp himſelfe for the ſinnes of all men. Examine the liues
of the popiſh prieſts, and how farre off they are from
that puritie, which it behoueth the Prieſt to haue, that
offered the expiatorie ſacrifice, will appeare. Therefore
the Maſſe is not the Supper of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
Many other things there be, wherein the holy Supper & the
Maſſe do differ & are contrary: as in ſo many mouings, ieſtures,
childiſh fopperies, maskings & apiſh toyes done in the Maſſe,
which Chhriſt neuer did, nor once thought of. The Lord in celebrating
his ſupper neuer commanded men to make Saints
their interceſſors, nor to call vpon them, nor to kiſſe nor worſhip
images, nor to pray for the ſoules of the dead in purgatory;
nor not taking nor eating the ſacrament, beleeuing it to bee
God, to worſhip it, nor to keepe it in the boxe, nor carry it in
proceſſion, to walke in the ſtreets couered with boughes, the
walles hanged with fine Tapiſterie of ſilke, gold, and cloth of
gold, with caſtles and much iollitie, &c. Who commanded thē
to do theſe things? Not Chriſt nor his Apoſtles, who in all ſimplicitie
did celebrate the holy ſupper. The wiſdome of the fleſh
being enemy to God, hath brought them into the Church to
make vs forget the memorie of the benefite of Chriſts death
and paſſion.
                  Moreouer, we wil cite certaine hiſtories, by which the Chriſtian
Reader ſhall clearely ſee what account the Pope and his
Cleargie make of their Sacrament of the Altar, which they affirme
to be God.
                  
                     Gregory 7. for that he demanded a reuelation of the Hoſt againſt
the Emperour, and had no anſwer caſt it into the fire, &
burned it.
                  
                     Victor 3. died of poyſon, which his ſubdeacon in ſaying of
Maſſe, put into the chalice.
                  A Dominicke Friar, gaue poyſon in the Sacrament, to the
Emperour Henry 7.
                  
                     Sixtus 4. commanded that at the time of the eleuation, the-murder
ſhould begin: and ſo it was performed at Florence.
                  A certaine Inquiſitor at Barcelona, called Molon, clipped the
Hoſt with a paire of ſheers.
                  Foure Auguſtine Friars which were hanged at Seuill, ſaid
Maſſe without any intention of conſecration. The ſame haue
many other Prieſts done alſo: and ſo by their owne Cannons
haue cauſed all that heard their Maſſe to commit idolatrie.
                  That being (as it is) true which we haue ſaid and proued of
the Maſſe: with very iuſt title, and good and ſound conſcience

do we deteſt it as a prophanatiō of the holy ſupper of the Lord:
There is then no cauſe why any ſhuld condemne vs, for ſedicious
heretikes or ſchiſmatikes, if abhorring the Maſſe, & flying
the ſame, we follow and imbrace the holy ſupper which Ieſus
Chriſt iuſtituted, his Apoſtles and our forefathers for the ſpace
of a thouſand yeares celebrated. Would God for that onely ſacrifice
ſake, which his ſonne our high and onely Prieſt offered
vnto him) that all our Spaniards would know (as other nations
do already know) what the Pope is, what things are his Buls,
which be nought els but mockeries, which he maketh of vs:
what is his authoritie which is nought els but vanitie, wherewith
he hath many yeares deceiued vs, that they would know
that when the Pope curſeth vs, then God doth bleſſe vs: would
God they would know the holineſſe of the maſſe to be diueliſhneſſe,
ſeeing it is a prophanation of the holy Supper of the
Lord. Very hard will it be for them (I know well) to do this, becauſe
they haue bene borne, brought vp, & growne old in the
contrary. But if the holy ſpirit giue them grace to reade, compare,
conferre, & cōfront that which we haue ſayd in theſe two
Treatiſes, with the holy Scripture, which is the word of God,
very eaſie it ſhall be vnto them: wherby euery faithfull and catholike
Chriſtian in particular, and the whole Church in generall
ought to be ruled & gouerned. Our Spaniards in this ſhould
imitate thoſe of Berea:Chapt. 17. 11. who (as ſaith S. Luke in his hiſtory of the
Acts of the Apoſtles) ſearched the Scriptures to know if that
which Paul preached were the word of God or no. If that wee
haue ſaid be the word of God, no time, no cuſtome, how ancient
ſoeuer, ought to preuaile againſt it. And if for our ſins, lies,
falſhood and error haue for a little or long time oppreſſed and
darkened the truth, the errour ought to giue place, as maugre
the ſame it ſhall giue: and ſo truth, iure Poſtliminij (as ſay the
lawes) ſhall reenter his poſſeſſion. And albeit an olde cuſtome
is very hardly left, yet none ought to preferre ſuch cuſtome to
reaſon and truth, do euer exclude and expell cuſtome. Therefore,
when with reaſon and truth, for reaſon and truth we conſtraine
and conuince our aduerſaries. In vaine do they oppoſe
ancient cuſtome vnto vs, ſaying: in this were our forefathers
brought vp: in this did they die: In this were wee borne and

brought vp, & in this then will we die. As if cuſtome were greater
then the truth. This is euen like the ſaying of another: A
Moore was my father, a Moore alſo will I be, hauing no other
reaſon to giue but cuſtome. Cuſtome without truth is an olde
errour: and errour the elder, the more dangerous it is. Therefore
leauing (as ſaith Saint Cyprian in his epiſtle ad Pompeium,
                     Cuſtome with out truth is as old error, and therfore more dangerous. 3. Eſdt. 3. 38.)
errour, let vs follow the truth. knowing (as ſaith Eſdras) Truth
ouercommeth: as it is written: Truth doth & ſhall euer preuaile,
and liue and raigne eternally. And then ſaith the ſame S. Cyprian:
Bleſſed be the God of truth, The which truth Chriſt ſhewing
in his Goſpell vnto vs, ſaith: I am the Truth: wherefore,
if we be in Chriſt, and haue Chriſt in vs, if we abide in the truth
and the truth abide in vs. Let vs hold that which is the truth.
And a little lower: If the truth in any thing ſhall ſtagger or
ſeeme doubtfull, meete it is, that we runne backe to the originall,
which the Lord ordained, and to the Euangelicall and
Apoſtolicall inſtruction: and thence ariſeth the reaſon of
that which wee doe: from whence the order and originall
was raiſed. And as he himſelfe in another place ſaith: What
men haue formerly done ought wee not to looke: but to that
which Chriſt, who is the firſt of all, hath done. The holy Scripture
is the moſt certaine and infallible rule and ſquire, whereby
all our actions ought to be ruled and ſquired: as witneſſe
theſe places which we will alleage, and manie others, Dauid
Pſal. 119. verſ. 105. ſayth: Thy word is a lanterne to my
feete, and a light vnto my pathes: Eſay. chap. 8. and 20. we are
commanded to repaire to the Law and to the teſtimonies:
and ſayth: that they which do not ſo, it is becauſe there is no
light in them: It is becauſe they be in darkeneſſe: it is becauſe
they are blind, and as blind men, goe groping. Saint
Peter ſpeaking of the word or doctrine of the Prophets, ſaith:
Whereunto, yee ſhall doe well to giue eare, as to a candle,
burning in an obſcure place. &c.
                  The holy Scripitures doe teach vs, that Ieſus Chriſt is our
high and onelie Prieſt. It teacheth vs that hee once offered
vp himſelfe, with which ſacrifice, being of infinite vertue, he
ſanctifieth vs for euer.

And teacheth vs that there is no other ſacrifice, nor was, nor
ſhalbe, but this alone, by which remiſſion of ſinnes is obtained,
it teacheth vs, that whoſoeuer ſhall offer another ſacrifice be
ſides this, or reiterate this, doth moſt great iniurie to Chriſt:
As though his ſacrifice (which was Chriſt himſelfe) were inſufficient.
It teacheth vs, that Ieſus Chriſt ordained his holy
ſupper, which he commandeth vs to celebrat, in remembrance
of that ſacrifice, which he one only time offered to the father:
all this in generall, and euery thing in particuler by the grace of
God, (to him be the glory) haue we ſufficiently proued. This is
the trueth: for it is the word of God. This then we beleeue, his
Maieſtie graunt vs grace, not onely with the heart to beleeue
this, which he in his holy Goſpell he hath reuealed vnto
vs: but alſo ſtrength and conſtancie with the mouth to confeſſe
it: and to ſuffer alſo, for this faith and confeſſion, whenſoeuer he
pleaſeth with perſecution to proue vs. Concerning that which
men haue of their owne heades haue inuented (That the Pope
is our chiefe Biſhop) the ſucceſſour of Saint Peter, the vicar
of Chriſt God vppon earth, and that as ſuch a one he pardoneth
ſinnes,That which the papiſts beleeue of their pope & their Maſſe. draweth out of hell and purgatorie what ſoules he will
and what ſoules hee will hee placeth in heauen. And that the
Maſſe ſuch as now they ſay, is a ſacrifice, as ſatisfactorie, as was
the death and paſſion of Chriſt. None of theſe things doth the
holy ſcripture teach vs: it is humane inuention, and diueliſh
lies, wherwith Sathan hath long time deceiued vs. The Apoſtle
Saint Paul willing to correct the vices brought into the holy
ſupper of the Lord in the Church of Corinth found no better
remedy but to reduce it,The beſt remedy for reforming is to reduce things to Chriſts firſt inſtitution. to the originall and firſt inſtitution.
And ſo 1. Cor. 11 he ſaith: I receiued of the Lord that which I
haue giuen you, &c. ſo now do we alſo the ſame. We reſtore the
ſupper of the Lord, and celebrate it according to it firſt inſtitution:
as the Euangeliſts and Saint Paul doe declare vnto vs.
And if ſo we do, thē haue they no cauſe to hold vs for heretikes
but for good faithfull and catholike Chriſtians: and for ſuch do
we hold our ſelues, and ſuch we are, albeit is the many imperfections:
the Lord pardon them vnto vs. We confeſſe: we hold &
beleeue that God through the merit of Chriſt, is our father, and
the holy catholike or vniuerſall, Apoſtololike, and true Church

whē it is ruled by the word of God, in the ſacred ſcripture of the
olde and new Teſtament reuealed. For otherwiſe is ſhe no mother
(but a Stepmother) our mother. And wo to that man, which
ſhall not be ſon of this father, and this mother. We confeſſe hold
and beleeue, all that which this our mother confeſſeth, holdeth
& belieueth:All whatſouer we ought to beleeue and doe. the holy ſcripture teacheth vs All which is conteyned in the bookes of the old &
new Teſtament. For nothing there is which we ought either to
do or belieue, which is not writtē in theſe ſacred bookes. Therefore
will we conclude this Treatiſe, ſaying: That whoſoeuer,, albeit,
an Angell from heauen, ſhall preach or beliue another
Goſpell,Gal. 1. 8. another Doctrine beſides that, which Ieſus Chriſt and
his Apoſtles haue taught vs all which is written in the bookes
which we call the holy ſcripture: Let ſuch a one be accurſed,
and execrable, Let him be (as ſaith Saint Paule) Anathema.
                  Thou haſt hard (Chriſtian Reader) the Enormious charges,
wherewith we charge the Pope, as touching life & Doctrine:
But chiefly, touching the ſuperſtition and Idolatrie of the Maſſe
which the ſayd Pope of himſelfe without the word of God, hath
inuented and brought into the Church. Thou haſt alſo heard,
the Enormious charges where with the Pope chargeth vs. Hee
accuſeth vs for proud, contentious and arrogant, that we will
know more then all the whole Church. He accuſeth vs for diſobedient
to Magiſtrates, diſturbers of common-wealthes, prouinces
and kingdomes. he accuſeth vs for ſchiſmatiques, and heretiques.
For the which, as an accuſer, witnes and Iudge he concludeth,
that we are not worthy to liue in the world. But it is not
ſufficient to accuſe. Of neceſſity muſt he proue that which hee
ſaith:We demand a generall Councell, lawfully called & free, which may heare both parts. and ſo conuince the accuſed. Come we then to the proofe,
let a generall Councell be aſſembled, which may heare both
parts: Let it graunt to euery part freedome of ſpeech: The Councell
hauing heard both ſides, let it iudge according to the thing
alleaged and proued, without reſpect of any perſon, poore or
rich, wiſe or ignorant, eccleſiaſticall or ſecular. Let it only haue
regard of iuſtice, equity and truth: Let the part conuinced by
the Teſtimony of holy ſcripture, and of the fathers alſo, and ancient
Councels (As be the firſt foure generall) be ſubiect to the
cenſure which the Councell ſhall ordayne. Let the Pope and
his defendors appeare perſonally in the Councell: not as iudges

(becauſe they accuſe vs, and we accuſe them) but as accuſers,
and accuſed. Let vs alſo appeare, ſeeing we accuſe them, and
they accuſe vs. Let this Councell be called. As were the foure
firſt generall Nicen 1. the Conſtantinople, the Epheſian, and
the Chalcedonian.
                  This is the onely remedie to take away the diſſentions and
differences which are at this day in the Church, as touching life
and Doctrine. This remedy in times paſt, vſed the Church in
like caſes. In the meane time beſeech we our God to moue the
hartes of the Emperour, Chriſtian kinges and Princes that
they may take in hand ſuch an Enterpriſe for the glorie of God,
& quietneſſe of his Church. By the meanes of which Enterpriſe
vice and falſe Doctrine, ſuperſtitition, here ſie and Idolatrie
may be condemned. And vertue and wholeſome Doctrine
conteyned in holie ſcripture, confirmed. But our aduerſaries
will ſay vnto mee, that all this, in the laſt Councell of Trent
was concluded, and that therefore another Councell is not
needefull: Whereunto I anſwere that, which ſo often in this
booke,The counſell of Trent was not free. I haue ſayd: And chiefly vppon the life of Pope Marcellus
the ſecond, That this Councell was not free: Sith to
none (whereof was had the leaſt ſuſpition in the world, not
to bee in all, and by all, ſlaue of the Pope, and ſworne to the
Pope) was it permited to ſpeake therein. The reſt which haue
there ſayd to this purpoſe,The councell of Trent was not generall In the councell of Trent were found 4: Cardinlls. 4 Archbiſhoppes 33. Biſhoppes 47. Deuines all which allmoſt weare Spaniards and Italions. and that which is ſayd in the foure
hundred fifty and eight, and foure hundred fifty and nine pages
is to be noted, beſides this (ſay we) that this Councel was not
generall. For how ſhall the Councel of Trent be called an Ecumenicall
vniuerſall, or generall Councell: Sith in it was not
found the hundreth part of Biſhoppes of Chriſtendome. And
that this is truth it is euidently ſeene: For in it were found, but
fiue Cardinals. Three of which were legats of the Pope: foure
Archbiſhops, two of which were Archbiſhops in title (or as we
call them in Spaine, de anillo) of the ring, namely Olaus magnus
intitled Archbiſhoppe, not of Hiſpall, but of 
                        Ʋpſall, people
of Gocia; that neuer acknowledged the Pope, nor the Roman
Church: The other named Robert Venant, called Archbiſhop
of Armagh in Ireland vnder the Crowne of England. A land,
that as litle acknowledgeth the Pope: Theſe two poore Archbiſhops

                     Paul the third maintayned, giuing to Olaus 15 crownes
a month, and another like thing gaue he to Robert. 33 Biſhops
were found there▪ all of them Spaniards or Italians. except only
3. Then were alſo found betweene prieſts & Friars, 47. diuines
Of whom all, al moſt were Spaniards or Italians. Thou ſeeſt
here the great nomber of biſhops with which the Trident Coū
                     cell
began:The Italians would not continue ther councell in Trent and ſo they went to Bologua, hut the Spaniardes 
                           •
                        emanined 
                           〈◊〉
                         Trent. which by times conteyned 18 yeares. In which time
were holden 25 Seſſions. In many of which nothing was done
for want of appearence in the Councel. And ſo in the 8 Seſſion
was nothing done, but that the Italians tranſported the Councell
to Bologna, aland of the popes in Italy. Where was held
the ninth Seſſion: Where in as little then did they: For the Spaniards
and the reſt (except the Italians) ſtayed at Trent, willing
to end the Councell,In many ſceſſions of the councell of Trent was nothing done for want of apperance. where it was begun. The 10. Seſſion was
held in Bologna, wherein was nothing done. For thoſe of Trent
there abode, expecting them of Bologna: and thoſe of Bologna,
expected them of Trent. And ſo in this 10 Seſſion was
there no other thing done, but a prolongation to the 15. of September.
Which day being come, they did nothing alſo: & ſo the
one and the other, for a long time brake vp the Councell. In this
time died Paule 3. and Iulius 3. ſucceeded him: who (at the importunity
of the Emperour, being much diſpleaſed at the tranſlation,
and diſcontinuance of the Councel) commanded, that
the Seſſion following, ſhould the firſt day of May 1557. be holded
at Trent, wherein nothing elſe was concluded, but that
the twelfth Seſſion ſhould be holden, the firſt day of September
which day being come. As little was ought done: For the prelates
were not yet come. In the thirteenth Seſſion were found
fourtie Biſhops and fourty two diuines. In the 15. Seſſion was
there nothing done. In the 16. Seſſion no other thing was concluded,
but the ſuſpenſion of the Councell for two yeares. And
ſo Iulius 3. Marcellus 2. & Paul 4. & Pius 4. was elected in whoſe
time, the reſt of the Seſſions were holden: The number of
Biſhoppes then increaſed, the Councell was ended and
confirmed by the Pope. For knowe this, that all is nought
woorth, whatſoeuer the Councell decreeth if it bee not confirmed
by the Pope: Knowe alſo, that ſo ſubiect was this Councell
to the Pope: that it made a decree. Wherein it was

ordayned, that all whatſoeuer was in the Councell ordayned
was intended, (So that it nothing derogated from the Authoritie
and commodity of the Pope: and the Councell was not only
ſubiect to the Pope: but to whatſoeuer other Biſhops alſo.
And ſo in the 18 decree, it was ordayned, that the Biſhops, and
the reſt, to whom it ſhould appertayne, might diſpenſe with
whatſoeuer decree, or decrees of this Councell, ſo that he knew
the cauſe & commoditie ſo required. This decree was it which
gaue moſt content to the Eccleſiaſticall perſons. For by vertue
of this decree, each thing remayneth polluted as before, and ſo
nothing reformed. So that the eccleſiaſticall Lordes take courage
& reioyce, becauſe if there be any thing in this Councell
that ſeemeth ouer harſh, hard, or bitter, irkſome, they reioyce
I ſay: For that by vertue of this decree, ſhall they eaſily for money
haue diſpenſation of the Biſhop, or of the Pope: Which diſpenſation
will make them, ſo tender and ſo as a peece of ſoft
bread, and ſo ſweete as the honie. Moreouer, this Councell was
not admitted of the kings of England, and Denmarke, nor of the
Proteſtant princes: nor of the common wealthes of Germany.
All theſe be one good part of Chriſtendome, inhabiting in Europe.
But they will ſay vnto me:Our aduerſaries will not abide this 'for they know the ſcripture, the fathers & the Councels to be againſt them: that theſe which I haue named
be heretiques. Whereunto I anſwere: that if they hold them
for heretiques, for the ſame cauſe, are they to be ſuffered to
ſpeake freely, that which they thinke in the Councell. Their
ſayings being heard, they ought to diſpute with them, and conuince
them by the bookes, of holy ſcripture. And by that which
the Doctors and auncient Councels gouerned by Gods word,
belieued and maintayned. And now that they ſay the foreſayd
proteſtants, to be heretiques: What will they tell me of kings
of Fraunce (whom the Pope himſelfe calleth moſt Chriſtian, for
the great ſeruice they haue done to the ſeat Apoſtolique (which
tooke not this of Trent for a generall Councel, nor lawfully called?
And ſo Frauncis 1. ſent not, of all his kingdome, one prelate
or diuine to the Councel No more did his ſonne Henry that ſucceeded
him in his kingdome, he tooke it not, for a generall
Councell. As by the proteſtation, which this king in the 1551.
yeare, by his Embaſſadours made in the Councell was proued:
The report is this: Iames de Annot Abbot de Belloſana, Embaſſadours

of the king came ſodainely vnto Trent, & preſented to
the Councell a letter from his king. The ſuperſcription whereof
ſayd: To the aſſembly of Trent. Aſmuch to ſay, As to the
meeting at Trent: This ſuperſcription being read, the Spaniſh
Biſhops ſpake, ſaying: that ſuch a letter was in contempt of the
Councell, and that it ought not to be read nor yet opened. But
notwithſtanding the reſt of the Councel, after they had well debated
the buiſines concluded, that the letter ought be opened
and read, preſuppoſing that moſt Chriſtian king, had not vſed,
ſuch a ſuperſcription, either for contempt of the Councel, nor
to derogate from it authority: and ſo was it read. The ſome of
this letter was:The French king holdeth not for general nor lawfull the Councel of Trent. that he proteſted, as before he had proteſted in
Rome, that he could not ſend to Trent by reaſon of the warres,
the Biſhops of his kingdome. He ſaid alſo: that he held not this
Councel for general, or lawful, but for a particular meeting calnot
for the publique good of Chriſtendome (the which ought
led togither for the profit & cōmoditie of ſome particular perſō,
& to be the principal cauſe of the calling togither of a Councel)
That he thought neither himſelfe, nor his ſubiects bound to obſerue
the decrees, that there in ſhould be made: But that concerning
the ſame he will vſe (if need ſhould be) the remedies,
which his progenitors had in the like caſes vſed, &c. And the
king of Fraunce not contented to haue made this proteſtation
in Rome, and in the Councell, but paſſed yet further, and ſent
an Embaſſadour called Marlot, and of his Councell, to the aſſembly
which the Cantons of the Swizers held at Bade, to perſuade
them not to take this of Trent, for a Councel, nor to make
any reckoning thereof: Whereunto he perſuaded alſo the ſame
Cantons, which were papiſts. The Griſons alſo, which had ſent
Thomas Planta their Biſhop to the Councell (nor approuing
the Councell) cauſed him to returne home. They will not ſay
Frauncis, and Henry his ſonne, kings of Fraunce to be Lutherans
but moſt Chriſten (as our aduerſaries the papiſts themſelues cal
them) which hold not for a Councell, the Councell of Trent,
but an aſſembly of particular perſons, for their particular profit.
The ſame account then that ſo many Nations, kings mightie
princes, and great States of Europe, not of the proteſtants
onely: but alſo of the papiſts (without paſſing to the Chriſtians
of Affrique and Aſia, none of whom doe I know, or haue read

to be found in this Councell) made of this Councell, make wee
alſo: & ſo demand we a Councel general, lawfull, & free, where
each one may freely ſpeake his opinion. Let the Councell, and
not the Biſhops onely (who only with a deliberate voice haue
tyrannically lift vp themſelues) examine & iudge what euerie
one ſhall ſay, according to the word of God. Were there ſuch a
Councell, God we truſt would giue vs ſpeech and wiſdome to
maintaine & defend our cauſe, which is his: becauſe it is the vndeceiueable
truth, which his maieſty in his holy Scripture, hath
reuealed. Concerning the lies & falſe doctrine of the authority
of the Pope, & the holines of the Maſſe, which our aduerſaries
maintaine perſecuting with fire & bloud, all thoſe that beleeue
it not, nor worſhip it, & therefore trouble they the world (as at
this day, we ſee it troubled) We aſſuredly know, that it ſhall periſh.
According to that, which the Lord ſaith: Euery plant which
my heauenly father hath not planted, ſhal be plucked vp by the roote.
And we haue the axe, which is the word of God, put to the root
of the two trees, the Pope & the maſſe to cut them downe.
                  I beſeech the Lord our God (Chriſtian reader, which hath
giuen thee a deſire and will to be informed & to know the
cauſes why we ſubiect not our ſelues to the Pope, nor wil heare
his Maſſe, but rather deteſt and abhor the one & the other) that
he would pleaſe to lighten thine vnderſtanding, that thou maiſt
comprehend what in theſe two Treatiſes haue bin ſaid & confirmed,
not with the ſayings of men, but of God himſelfe, of his
holy Scripture, & giue thee ſuch a mind and ſtrength, that thou
maiſt wholly depart out from this wicked Babylon (which is
Rome) & deliuer thee from all the enormities, abominations,
horrible ſuperſtitions, and deteſtable idolatries which Rome
hath inuented, among which the principal is the Maſſe. Theſe
idolatries without doubt be the chiefe cauſe original, and fountaine
of all miſeries, calamities, and warres where with they that
are called Chriſtians, be at this day afflicted. For if God in the
primitiue Church plagued with infirmities & death the Corinthians
for the abuſes which they had brought into the holy ſupper,
the Apoſtle S. Paul yet liuing, which he reporteth in his
firſt epiſtle that he ſent them: what ſhal we ſay, this ſelfe ſame
Lord wil now do, when the malice impiety, ſuperſtition, & idolatry
haue ſo greatly increaſed, that the holy ſupper of the Lord

(which he inſtituted, and commanded vs in remembrance of
him to clebrate) haue they wholy conuerted into the prophane
Maſſe of the Pope?God chaſtened and yet doeth chaſten many that vnworthily receaue the Sacrament, with death and other punniſhments. Truly the abuſes of the Corinthes as touching
the Supper, had no agreement by far with the erronious &
intollerable abuſes, which thoſe that are called Chriſtians commit
at this day in their Maſſe. And notwithſtāding all this, Saint
Paul ſpeaking to the Corinthians ſaith vnto thē: For which cauſe
many ef you are infirmed and weake, & many ſleepe (he wold haue
ſayd, are dead.) We are not then to maruel if God ſtrong & iealous
of his honour, do chaſten at this day ſuch an idolatry as is
that which in the Maſſe is committed,1. Cor. 11. with ſuch great warres,
famine & peſtilence: and which is worſe and leſſe perceiued, a
reprobate ſenſe. And no other mean there is (Chriſtian reader)
to obtaine pardon for theſe ſuperſtitions, & paſſed idolatries, &
to get and keepe the grace of God, of whom thou oughteſt not
only to expect all proſperity & goodneſſe, but to endeuour by
all poſſible meanes to ſerue him & honour him: applying thy
ſelfe with all thine heart to all that; which pleaſeth him: which
is that which his Maieſtie hath ordained and inſtituted in his
holy word: flying contrariwiſe all whatſoeuer may diſpleaſe &
offend him: and eſpecially all kinds of idolatrie, which he more
deteſteth & abhorreth then all other ſinnes & abhominations:
and as ſuch doth puniſh it (as in the beginning of the firſt Treatiſe
we haue declared. Such is the Maſſe: fly then from it, & follow
the holy inſtitution which Ieſus Chriſt our king, prophet,
and onely high Prieſt ordained. This is the holy Supper, as the
Euangeliſts and S. Paul do ſhew. Do this thē which Ieſus Chriſt
ordained & commanded vs to doe in remembrance of him (as
by the mercy of God with all ſimplicity, & without all ſuperſtition
or idolatrie, is celebrated in our reformed Church) and
thou ſhalt walke aright. All they that do otherwiſe, erre. God
giue thee grace to walk aright, that thou be not with this world
coondemned. And this do he for the vertue & merit of the ſacrifice,
with our high and only Prieſt Chriſt, one onely time offered
vnto him. To whom who liueth and reigneth with the
Father and the holy Spirit be euerlaſting glorie and perpetuall
power. Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A SWARME OF FALSE MIRAcles
and Illuſions of the diuell, wherewith
Maria de la viſitacion, Prioreſſe de la Anuntiada
of Lisbon, deceiued very manie: and how ſhe was
diſcouered and condemned.
Anno. 1588.
            
               FOr confirmation of that, which in
theſe two Treatiſes ſo often I haue ſaid
that the Papiſts confirme their religion
with falſe miracles inuēted by their
eccleſiaſticall perſons, or wrought by
the Art of the diuell. I will here ſet
downe a moſt true hiſtorie deliuered
in two popiſh bookes, which by the
prouidēce of God came to my hands.
Out of which, with all faithfulneſſe as he that muſt appeare before
the iudgement ſeat of Chriſt, & giue an account, not only
of that hee hath done, and ſaid, but of that alſo which he hath
thought) I haue taken that, which I will deliuer. Hee that will
not beleeue me, let him reade the two bookes, from whence
I haue taken that which I ſay. I name the Authours of theſe
bookes, the Printers, the yeare, and place where they were imprinted,
as a litle after you ſhall ſee. Our Aduerſaries I wot
well would haue buried all theſe thinges: for they open
a dore to men to ſeeke to vnderſtand and the truth: And that they
may vnderſtand it, I haue put it in writing. The Lord which
knoweth my deſire, bleſſe my trauaile. Our Aduerſaries hauing
no ſound proofe to confirme their new articles of faith
which they haue made (as in very truth there is none) haue
confirmed them with dreames, with fained apparitions, and
viſions of Phantaſmes of ſpirits and of ſoules come (as they ſay)
from another world. Now I hauing met with a new, great and
thicke ſwarme of ſuch things which I found in a Portugal hiue,
me ſeemed I ſhould do well by a new, familiar and domeſticall
example (which be they that moſt moue, and that none can denie,
ſeeing it happened in our countrey of Spaine, in the yeare
1588) truly to manifeſt the ſame: that all the world, and chiefly

my countrimen the Spaniards, for whom I haue taken this
paine, may haſten to know them, and knowing them may abhorre
them, & ſo may turne to the holy catholike faith, & true
religion of Ieſus Chriſt, which is written in holy Scripture. This
hiue is Maria de la Viſitacion, Prioreſſe of the Monaſtery de la
Anunciada in Lisbon, who was held ſo certainly for holy: whoſe
hypocriſie & falſe miracles were diſcouered, & publikely condemned:
as we ſhall after ſee. I hearing much talke of the great
holineſſe, admirable life, and maruellous miracles of this womā
whom for excellency they called The holy Nunne) aduiſed my
countrimen the Spaniards in a booke which I publiſhed in the
beginning of the yeare 1588. not lightly to beleeue that which
was reported of this Nunne. My words are theſe: Pag. 419. Another
Franciſcan (I ſhould haue ſayd Dominican) a few yeares ſince
roſe vp in Lisbon, who they ſayd had the fiue wounds of Chriſt as had
S. Francis: & many other things they ſay of her. But I appeale to him
for witnes: ſhe ſhall diſcouer her hipocriſie, as the reſt haue done. In the
meane time beleeue not lightly euery ſpirit, but as S. Iohn (1. Ioh. 4.
1.) warneth vs, Try the ſpirits whether they be of God. For many
falſe Prophets (as himſelfe aduiſeth vs) are gone out into the world,
&c. God will that I ſhould write this, and that it ſhould be imprinted
at the charge of two Chriſtian Flemmiſh merchants,
who for the great zeale they haue that the Spaniſh natiō ſhuld
be partaker of the benefit of the reformed profeſſiō of the goſpell,
whereby God hath ſhewed mercie to other nations, will
ſpare neither coſt nor trauaile. The Lord enrich them with his
ſpirituall gifts, & increaſe their faith. For two cauſes then was
this imprinted: the one, to admoniſh thoſe which were of God,
that they ſhuld not ſuffer themſelues to be deceiued with falſe
miracles: the other, to make all thoſe inexcuſable, that notwithſtāding
the light of the Goſpell, which God of his great goodnes
hath in theſe our laſt times reuealed) beleeue lies cōfirmed
by dreames and falſe miracles, and not the Goſpell written in
the holy ſcripture. He that is of God (faith the Lord, Ioh. 8. 47.)
heareth Gods word. Theſe of the ſecond ſort therfore which will
not heare them are not of God. His Maieſtie, if he haue choſen
thē to life eternall, if he haue made them veſſels of honor, vpon
whom he will ſhew his mercy, conuert them. And if they bee

veſſels of wrath, prepared to deſtruction, confound them. Many
haue ſpoken & written of this holy Nun. But he which hath
entreated of her moſt to the purpoſe. Of all thoſe, which I
haue heard of, or read, is one Stephen de Luſignan, a Dominican
Friar, who collecting all he could get, to extoll her, compiled a
book in French, & dedicated the ſame to the Queen of France,
imprinted at Paris by Iohn Beſſaut 1586. In the beginning of
the booke ſhe is pictured like a Dominican Nun, with a blacke
mantle, and a white coule, a coat, & white looſe habit vpon the
mantle, on her head ſhe hath a crowne of thornes: the crucifixe
on high ſet ouer her, and falling towards her, with rayes from
the wounds which reach to the feet and hands of the Nun: that
out of the ſide commeth to a hart which ſhe holdeth betweene
the fingers of her right hand: a Dragon ſhe hath vnder her feet
a Dominican friar before her kneeling, & a ſecular man & woman,
& at her left ſide a paire of beads hanging. The Title of the
booke is this which followeth.
            The great miracles and the moſt holy wounds, which this preſent yeare 1586.
haue happened to the right renerend mother, now Prioreſſe of the Monaſtery
de la Annuntiada in the city of Lisbon in the kingdom of Portugal, of the
order of preaching Friars, approued by the reuerend father, Fryar Lewes de
Granada, and by other perſons worthy of credit: as ſhall be ſeene at the end
of the Diſcourſe. In Paris by Iohn Beſſaut. 1586.
            The Epiſtle dedicatory ſayth thus.
            To the moſt Chriſtian Queene Luiſa de Lorena, Queene of France, mirrour of
all vertue, godlineſſe and ſweetneſſe: Health.
            Madam, hauing ſeene your Maieſtie moſt deuoted to the
moſt holy ſacrament of the altar, & to the Angelicall Doctor S.
Thomas of Aquine, in whoſe Chappel you haue inſtituted euery
moneth a ſolemne proceſſion, with carrying the moſt holy ſacrament,
and a Maſſe ſung by all the religious of our Colledge
& hauing conſidered, that becauſe of your great deuotion, &
of the greatnes of your rare vertues & perfections, euery man
of any worth borne, enforceth himſelfe to offer you moſt
pleaſing things. I (albeit the leaſt of thē) am alſo willing to rāge
my ſelfe into the number of theſe. Therefore hauing found certaine
writings printed in diuerſe cities, I haue collected & put
them all together. In which I haue found the greateſt miracles,
and effects, that euer Almighty God in our times wrought in
the perſon of a moſt noble, moſt vertuous, & moſt religious virgin,

mother Mary de la Viſitacion, Prioreſſe de la Anunciada of
Lisbon in the kingdom of Portugall, moſt deuoted to the holy
Sacrament, and the ſayd Saint Thomas of Aquine: by whoſe merits
and interceſſions ſhe hath deſerued to haue viſibly for her
husband Ieſus Chriſt crucified, and his fiue moſt holie wounds:
by means whereof, the diuine Maieſty doth continually diuers
miracles: the which in this booke I humbly offer to your Maieſtie,
to the end that you ſo much the more feruently may follow
& continue theſe your deuotions, which you haue begun, and
that it would pleaſe your maieſtie to accept of this moſt holy
virgin, a ſpeciall ſeruant of our Lord that by her merits & interceſſion
your Maieſty may obtaine that you deſire, as well concerning
this whole kingdom, as all Chriſtendōe beſides. And if
I for my part, Madam, beſeech God to grant that which your
M. deſireth, with a moſt happy & long life. From the couent of
S. Dominick at Paris the 20. of Auguſt 1586. Your moſt humble
& obediēt ſeruant F. Stephen de Luſignan of the order of S. Dom.
            
            This Luſignan for confirmation of that which he ſaith, ſetteth
downe 3 letters: the 1. is frō the Prouincial, F. Antonio de la Cerda,
ſent to F. Ferdinando de Caſtro, Proctor in Rome for the ſayd
prouince of Portugal, that he ſhould ſhew it vnto the pope. The
date is frō Lisbon 14. of March 1584. This letter trāſlated into
Italian, was with licenſe of the holy inquiſitiō printed in Rome
& Plazencia, & afterwards tranſlated into French. All this ſaith
Luſignan. Come we now to the letter which was to be ſhewed
to the Pope. Pag. 8. it ſaith. Mother Mary de la Viſitacion at 11,
yeares of age entred into the Monaſterie de la Anunciada, & at
16. years made profeſſion. In which time, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt
appeared to this Religious, to recompence her merits, & tooke
her to his wiſe, ſaying to her the words of the Prophet Ieremie,
I haue loued thee with an euerlaſting loue: therfore with mercy haue
I drawne thee. And from that time forward he ſtill appeared to
her, granting her very many particular graces, & fauours ſpeaking
& conuerſing familiarly with her: as one friend doth with
another, in ſuch ſort as God talked & diſcourſed with Moſes: &
oftentimes appeared he to her, accompanied with he and ſhee
Saints, as with Mary Magdalen (for much deuoted was this Religious
to Magdalen and wontedly called her her faire) and
accōpanied with our father S Dominicke, & with S. Tho. of Aquin
               
Saint Katherin of Sene and other times appeared he alone and
very familiar, helping her to ſay the Cannonicall houres: and
at the End of euery Pſalme would ſhe ſay: Gloria Patriet tibi
& Spiritui Sancto; Or, as ſaith friar Lewys de Granada, & Tibifilio
(To wit) Glory be to the Father, and to thee his Sonne, and
to the holy ghoſt, &c.
            
            In the 9. Page he ſaith: To communicate and receiue her
Creator was her ordinary cuſtome: during which time the other
Nunnes ſaw her in a trance for a long ſpace rapt vp in Spirit,
vntill her Gouernour commaunded her to go to the Communion
with the other Religious. And then returning to her
ſelfe, ſhee went moſt obediently forthwith to accompliſh this
holy myſterie, &c.
            In the 10. pag. (ſpeaking of her great charitie) he recounteth a
miracle, & this it is. In the Monaſtery there was a Nun that was
very weake, & withall had this fanſie, that ſhe would in no wiſe
eate any meat, ſuppoſing that all ſorts of meats were poiſoned:
and in this franticke humour ſhe kept her teeth ſhut, by reaſon
whereof her lips and iawes were couered with filth & matter.
This religious Marie, hauing compaſſion of the poore frantick
Nunne, and moued with a feruent charitie to her, went to ſee
her: and praying her to eat a peece of bread, which ſhe offered
her, aſſured her it had no poiſon in it. The diſeaſed anſwered: If
you will eate of the ſame bread, and bite in the ſide that I with
my teeth and iawes (which were cankered) will bite, then will
I beleeue that the bread hath no poiſon, & that it is good bread▪
               Marie full of charitie, enforced her ſelfe, and with a ſtrong hart,
leaſt ſhe ſhould vomite, promiſed to do ſo. Then tooke ſhe the
bread and bit therof in the ſame place that the frantike Nunne
had bitten. And this ſhe did with incredible cheerefulneſſe:
hardly had ſhe thus done, when our Lord Ieſus Chriſt (by reaſon
of his charitie) appeared to the ſayd Mary & ſayd vnto her:
For this thy ſo charitable an act, I will giue health to this diſeaſed.
And ſo was the ſicke healed of her infirmitie.
            The 11. pag. ſaith: That (as often, as being in the Monaſtery,
ſhe heard the litle bel, which accompanied the moſt holy ſacramēt
of our Lord, whē they carried it to the diſeaſed through the
citie) ſhe kneeled downe on the ground with teares, & was rapt
vp in a trance, as witneſſe the religious of the ſaid Monaſterie▪
               
deſirous is ſhe of this moſt holy ſacrament, &c. ſo hunger after
it that Ieſus Chriſt appeareth very often viſibly vnto her, & he
himſelfe giueth himſelfe to this religious. The wedneſday in
the holy week, ſhe went into the low quire, where the Nunnes
through a window do wontedly receiue the holy communion,
at the hāds of the prieſt, who is on the other ſide without: where
ſeeing that all the Nunnes had communnicated, and that there
was neuer a conſecrat hoſt left for her: ſhe betooke her ſelfe to
praier, intreating with teares the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt
that ſhe might haue means to comunicate, &c. And a little after:
Then the holy place (where ſo rich a treaſure as is the body of
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt was kept) opened of his owne accord, &
one of the conſecrate formes went forth without any viſible
helpe, and offred it ſelfe to the mouth of this Religious woman
which with moſt great deuotion and humility ſhe receiued.
Another time on Innocents day another like miracle happened
vnto her, who euer increaſing in perfecttion & vertue is
now come to ſo high an eſtate. That about foure or fiue yeres
ſince, Ieſus Chriſt crucified appeared vnto her all ſhining,
from whoſe right ſide iſſued a beame of fire which ſtroke vpon
the left ſide of this Religious, who ſtood right againſt the Crucifixe
made and left in her fleſh a red marke as bigge as the
ſtroke of Launce, and this wound on certaine daies, namely at
euery Friday openeth: from whence iſſue certaine droppes
of bloud: and ſhe feeleth (ſhe ſaith) great griefe of the ſaide
wound. The di
                  •
               ine Maieſtie hath ſhewed theſe wonders
ſince ſhe was made Prioreſſe; which was in the yeare 1583. in
the beginning of Iulie, &c.
            Pag. 12. When ſhe is in her Cell at prayer the religious ſee
her enuironed with brightneſſe, and lifted vp into the aire with
a great light, which iſſues from her breaſt and face, which ſignifie
the great and feruent charitie and loue of God that is in her.
Laſtly vpon the day of Saint Thomas of Aquine the 7. of March
1584. ſhe (being before aduiſed thereto by our Lord Ieſus,
and by the ſayd Saint Thomas) communicated this viſion to
her Prouinciall: And being by him exhorted therunto for nine
dayes together euery day firſt confeſt her ſelf, ſhe receiued the
moſt holy communion. In theſe dayes God ſhewed many fauours,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
with much brightneſſe by night. As ſhe was praying in
the Quire on the ſaid feaſt of Saint Thomas, after Mattens, betweene
the houres of foure & fiue in the morning, Ieſus Chriſt
crucified, gloriouſly ſhining, appeared vnto her, as before he
had appeared, with his fiue moſt holy wounds. From his feete,
hands and ſide iſſued out beames of fire, which wounded the
hands, feete and ſide of this Religious. The wounds and marks
of bloudy colour moſt faire remaine in her, aſwell within the
palmes of the hands & the feet, as without: the one in a round
figure like to a naile, anſwering the other: & the ſame ſide was
marked in the ſame place, wherein ſhe had before bene wounded:
but with a ſigne or marke far more apparant. She confeſſeth
that ſhe feels extreme griefe of the ſaid wounds, &c. At the
end of the letter the Prouinciall hath theſe words: Some of my
Religious bring I with me, to giue good teſtimonie of that
which I haue ſaid: & he nameth theſe: Friar Antonio de la Cerda,
Prouincial of Portugal (who wrote this letter) F. Gaſper Leiton,
Regēt of the Colledge of Lisbon, & preacher to the king: Friar
Lewys de Granada, Friar Pedro de Somer, Cōfeſſor of the moſt illuſtrious
D. Henrie Cardinall, that afterwards was K. of Portugal
            The ſecond Letter is from Friar Lewys de Granada, ſent to
the Patriarke of Valencia, The date is from Lisbon the 18. of
March 1584. the principall pointes are theſe. In the 16. page of
the book it ſaith: that S. Thomas appeared vnto her 10 dayes before
his feaſt, & told her, ſhe ſhould prepare her ſelfe: for vpon
his feaſt day the Lord would come to viſit her, & ſhew vnto her
grace and particular fauour, namely, that of the impreſſion of
the fiue wounds: as was ſaid in the firſt letter, &c. Alſo he ſaith:
fiue or ſixe dayes the paine endured: during which time, when
ſhe ſtepped to walke, the ſoales of her feet (ſhee thought trod
vpon nayles &c. And pag. 18. it ſaith: On Tenable Wedneſday,
ſhe was in the Quire with great deſire to communicate in a
window by which the Religious did cōmunicate, right againſt
whereunto was an altar, where the little casket of the moſt holy
Sacrament ſtood: for the great altar was occupied with the
Sepulchre, or monument that was made vpon it. In the meane
while he ſaw the litle casket open and a conſecrate hoſt to iſſue
thereout, which moſt deuoutly ſhe receiued, &c. And Pag. 19.
She told me that for 7. yeares euery Thurſday at the Auc Marie
               
houre ſhe hath felt in her head all the paines of the crowne
of thornes: inſomuch that the bloud iſſueth forth: and ſhe hath
in her head ſome ſmall prickes and holes of the ſayd thornes: &
the paines endure vntill Fryday at the ſame houre. She had at a
certaine time a great deſire (as very often ſhe hath) to communicate:
at which time ſhee ſaw in ſpirit S. Iohn Euangeliſt celebrate.
The Maſſe being ended, a conſecrate hoſt came from
the Altar. She then returning to her ſelfe (for ſhe was rapt or rauiſhed
in ſpirit) ſhee found that ſhee had the ſaid hoſt in her
mouth, &c. All this which I haue written (ſaith Friar Lewes de
Granada) ſhe her ſelfe told me: and I ſhould write much more,
if I would recken all the maruellous thinges which our Lord
worketh in this bleſſed ſoule, &c.
            The third Letter is from the ſame Prouinciall, Friar Antonio
de la Cerda, ſent to Friar Ferdiando de Caſtro, Proctor in Rome,
for the prouince of Portugall. The date is at Lisbon, the 30. of
March 1585. Thus it ſayth: Since your departure from this city,
it hath pleaſed our Lord from day to day more manifeſtly to
declare how highly he eſteemeth la Anunciada. For infinit be
the miracles▪ as well corporall as ſpirituall, which by her means
he hath wrought in theſe parts: which hath bene the cauſe that
very many Gentlemen haue bene moued to become Fryars, to
whom with my hands I haue giuen the habite. The fame of
which miracles hath ſo far ſtreched, that it is come to the Mores
dwelling in Alualady, which is a caſtle three leagues from Liſbon:
Three wherof, becauſe the houre for them to turne Chriſtians
it ſhould ſeeme drew neare, maruellouſly deſired to ſee
the Prioreſſe: for beleeue they could not ſo great miracles, as
were reported of her. And from thenceforth the holy Spirit inwardly
moued & prouoked them, more and more kindling in
their hearts the deſire to ſee the ſaid ſeruant of God. And ſo
much dayly increaſed this deſire in thē, that one day very early
not acquainting one another with th their purpoſes, they departed
all 3 frō Alualady for this city of Lisbon, & came to ſeek
me in this couent, ſaying, that they knew not what it was, which
ſo inwardly had moued & burned them with ſo feruēt a deſire
to ſee the Prioreſſe. And whiles one of the told me theſe things
behold, there commeth the other & afterwards the third. And
whē they met all three together, they vnderſtood that they all

demanded one ſelfe ſame thing: they ſeeing themſelues inflamed
with one ſelfe ſame deſire, were greatly aſtoniſhed: &
perceiuing that this proceeded of one ſelfe mouing of the
holy Spirit, and not of curioſitie, as ſome would preſume, I carried
them to the monaſtery de la Anunciada, and went into the
parlor, and thence ſent word to the Prioreſſe, that I would
ſpeake with her, without letting her vnderſtand why ſhee was
called. She preſently came: and the 3 Moores were faſt by me
when we ſpake together. She lift vp her vayle to talke with me▪
and ſcarcely had the three Moores ſeene her when they fell
groueling to the earth. And in ſuch maner, that needfull it was,
ſome which were preſent ſhould helpe them vp. When they
aroſe beholding her eftſoons, they kneeled on their knees with
out a word ſpeaking. But that they lamented without ceaſſing
hauing their eyes for a long time fixed vpon the Prioreſſe. And
when I asked them why they ſpake not to the Prioreſſe? They
anſwered, that they ſaw in her ſo great and admirable things
that they knew not what to ſpeake. Hauing thus ſayd, they beſought
the Prioreſſe, that he which was by her might giue them
baptiſme. She anſwered, if they would be baptiſed, that I was
there preſent who would cauſe them to be baptiſed. Adding
moreouer, that this to her Spouſe ſhould bee greatly pleaſing.
This done, I returned, leading with me the Moores (albeit to
their great ſorrow for they would not haue parted frō the Prioreſſe)
home to my Couent. Of all this I aduertiſed the Archbiſhop,
who ſent forthwith for the Moores, and I (accompanied
with ſome Fathers) brought them. Brought (as they were) they
confeſſed to the Archbiſhop in our preſence, that they had ſeen
neere vnto the Prioreſſe, Ieſus Chriſt in humane ſhape, put vppon
the croſſe. Which miracle was ſo admirable, that the ſame
thereof ſtretched through all the kingdom: & great multitudes
of people are come to this citie to ſee thē baptiſed. The Archbiſhop
ſent for the Prioreſſe, to giue them their names. The
which at my commaund ſhe gaue vnto them. Manuel ſhe called
the firſt, Iohn the ſecond and the third Thomas: who were in
this houſe baptiſed and with vs continue.
            The ſecond miracle which the Prouinciall telleth is this: A
Lady of qualitie there was which had a cancker in one of her

Lippes. This lady talking with Dona Vincencia told her, that
the day following they were to cut the canker: The Lady Vincencia
moued with compaſſion, gaue vnto her a ſmall peece of
fine linnen cloth: which the Prioreſſe was wont to drawe ouer
her ſyde, ſaying: that ſhe ſhould put it vppon her canker: for
ſhe truſted in God that when they ſhould cut it, ſhe ſhould feele
no griefe at all, &c. The Ladie ſo did. And with great deuotion
promiſed, that if ſhe found ſo much good hereby, that in cutting
of her canker, ſhe ſhould feele no paine, ſhe would publiſh
to her power, that God, through the merits of the Prioreſſe
his ſeruant, had graunted her this ſo ſingular & admirable mercie.
This ſimplicitie diſpleaſed not God, But he graunted the rather
what ſhe had demanded: for riſing vp early the day following,
ſhee found her ſelfe whole, and without any ſigne where
the canker, nor any euill had bene, &c. And a little lower. Of
all this were inſtruments made by arte of a notary publique, at
command of the Cardinals moſt illuſtrious worſhip.
            The 3. Miracle which the prouincall, telleth is, Anna Rodrigues
del Crucifixo, of the third order of Frauncis, brought with
her two ſmall peeces of a wodden Croſſe, which the prioreſſe
had giuen her. And going to viſit one that was diſeaſed demanded
a little water to drinke. Anna tooke a porcelan, and piſt water
into it. And after in the preſence of them all, tooke a peece
of the Croſſe, which the Prioreſſe had giuen her, and making a
ſigne of the Croſſe, caſt it into the Porcelan. The peece went to
the bottome. And eftſoones (like a candle on a candleſticke) aroſe
vp right on end. Of this water gaue ſhe the paciēt to drink:
Who then began to find himſelfe better, and demaunded, what
was that, they had giuen him, which had done him much good.
After they had cold him, what had paſſed, he prayed them to
giue him more water then before, to drinke. Then caſt they
more water into the Porcelane, where in alſo was the peece of
the Croſſe. Anna Rodrigues, ſuppoſing that the diſeaſed in drinking,
had ſwallowed the ſame peece, caſt in the other, the which
went alſo to the bottome And commning to the other which
ſtood in end in the porcelane, cleaued vnto, and was ioyned togither
with it. So that of thoſe two, was made a farre little Croſſe
which moued all that ſawe it, to very great deuotion. Scarcely

the ſecond time, had the ſickman taſted of the water, but he became
whole and ſound, & the third day alſo aroſe from his bed,
and went to walke through the citie. Of this alſo was information
made by the cōmandement of the moſt illuſtrious Legat. I
could (ſaith the prouincial) recount alſo many other like things.
Friar Stephen de Luſignan ſetteth this downe for concluſion.
            
               The tenne particular and principall inſtructions which
wee draw from theſe maruellous effects in theſe
letters miſſiue declared.
               1. The true he and ſhe religious, are much pleaſing to God
               2. Holy obedience, is meritorious and charity, humanity, and
ſimplicity of life.
               3. Virginity is a very pleaſing ſpouſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
               4. It is needfull to reuerence and honor the holy Images.
               5. The he and ſhe Saints of Paradiſe, are interceſſors and aduocates
for vs.
               6. It is needefull to acknowledge the truth of the moſt holy ſacrament
of the Altar.
               7. He pleaſeth God which oft times receiueth ſo great
                     •
                   ſacrament.
               8. The gifts and graces of Ieſus Chriſt cannot be obtained, without
ſorrow, praiers and deuotions.
               9. The paſſion and death of Ieſus Chriſt, by meanes of our owne
works, are profittable for vs.
               10. Miracles haue euer continued in the Catholique, Apoſtolique,
and Romiſh Church. At the end of this booke of the
holy Nunne, was this.
            
            Our holy father Siſtus 5. through the deuotion and requeſt,
of the moſt Catholique king of Spaine, hath ordayned to bee
made, the proceſſe of the miracles of Friar Lewes de Beltrum, in
Aragon, one of the order of the Friars of S. Dominick to put him
in the number, and Catalogue of the Saints: and bleſſed (which
ſhal be another ſuch, as this, of this holy Nunne) All that I haue
ſayd is drawne out of the french booke, which Friar Stephen
wrote, in praiſe of this holy Nunne. So famous was the ſame of
this Nunnes holineſſe: That Cardinall Albertus of Auſtria ſent
information to Pope Siſtus 5. To whom the Pope wrote this
letter following tranſlated into Latine with great ioy haue we

read, that thou haſt procured to be written, the vertues of the
Prioreſſe of the monaſterie de la Anunciada, of the moſt holie
virgin, And of the great benefits, which God hath ſhewed her,
we pray the diuine goodnes to make her from day to day more
worthy of his grace, & enrich her with his heauenly gift, for the
glory of his name and ioy of his faithful. Giuen in S. Maries at
Rome, with the little Ring of the fiſher. The 10. of September
1584. and of our Biſhopdome, &c. Subſcribed Antonio Prucha
Badulini.
               Lib. 22. cap. 29. ¶3. Friar Iohn de Pineca, in his booke intituled Monarchia
eccleſiaſtica printed at Salamāca by Iohn Fernādez making mentiō
of the Saints, that had the wounds of Chriſt: nameth this Mary.
And ſo ſaith he, dyed the glorious Saint Katherine of Sena in
the 1380. yeare, whoſe maruelous life wrote S. Antonius and
Raimond of Capua: And albeit they both ſay, that the wounds of
our redeemer were printed vpon her, S. Antonius affirmeth that
at the requeſt of the Saintes, they were not ſhewed on her bodie:
yet ſuffered ſhee incredible paines. And Iohn Brugmano
writeth: that the holie virgin Saint Lyduuina receiued the
woundes of the redeemer: But that the virgin beſought God.
That to avoyd the applauſe of the world they ſhould bee couered:
And then the skinne grew and couered the woundes
Lorenço Surio, ſaith: that the holie virgin Gerturd of Eſten, vppon
good Fryday in the 1340. yeare receiued the woundes,
and for many dayes ranne bloud from them ſeuen times a
day. At this time it is publiquely ſayd, and there are pictures
of her, that there is a religious in Portugal of the order of Saint
Dominick, Which hath the woundes of our redeemer Hitherto
Friar Iohn de Pineda. The ſame author part 3. lib. 22. cap. 23.
¶3. affirmeth for an approued thing; that their Saint Frauncis
had the woundes of Ieſus Chriſt: as a little lower yee ſhall
perceiue. Concerning thoſe which had the fiue woundes I will
recount to this purpoſe, an admirable hiſtory whereof make
mention many of our aduerſaries who as wel in Dutch as in Latine,
both in verſe and proſe haue written that the Dominick
Friars haue alwaies holden a certaine emulation, enuie & hatred
toward the Franciſcans, for both being beggers, they could not
well agree togither. It happened tin Berne one of the 3 Cantons
of the Swizers in the a thouſand 5 hundred & ninth yeare

that the Franciſcans were much more eſteemed and fauoured
then the Dominicks which the Dominicks: perceauing, much
ſtomacked: and ſo they conſulted to find remedy for ſuch a miſchiefe.
Foure of the chiefe of their order, came to vnderſtand the
cauſes, why the Franciſcans were before them preferred. Theſe
two, beſides others which I will declare, they found to bee the
principall cauſes: firſt, that Saint Frauncis had the woundes of
Chriſt. The other, the brawling Queſtion which was betweene
them, and the Franciſcans, whether the virgin Mary was conceiued
in ſinne or no. The Domincans did affirme it: the Franciſcans
denyed it. For this cauſe, the common people moued with
fooliſh deuotion, and with a zeale without knowledge, much
loued the Franciſcans, & made no reckoning of the Dominicks.
The Dominicks then vnderſtanding the cauſe of their ſo great
euill, the remedy which they put, was this. A ſimple Friar they
tooke, which they had in their couent, a young frantique, or holy
hypocrite, & ſo deceiued him with many perſwaſions & gaue
him certaine inchaunted drinks, that the ſmall vnderſtanding
which he had, they tooke quite from him. They marke, as they
could, the fiue wounds vpon him. They made him to beleeue
(and he fooliſh alſo beleeued it) that hee had then truly as S.
Frauncis had them. And here ſtayed they not: They made
him beleeue, that the moſt holy virgin Saint Barbara, and Saint
Catalina de Sena, appeared, and reuealed great things vnto him,
they made him beleeue, that S. Mary gaue him the red conſecrated
hoſt, aud that ſhe preſented him with the bloud of Chriſt
and that ſhe commaunded him to go the Cabildo or Senate,
and ſay, that which ſhe had commaunded, giuen him in. And
among other things, this was one: that the holy virgin was conceiued
in ſin, & that for this cauſe, they ought in no wiſe to permit
the Franciſcans, to dwell in their City, for that (beſides that
they are certayne loſt perſons, and without reformation) they
taught a groſſe error, which ought in no wiſe to be ſuffered.
That the holy virgin was conceiued without ſin. He told them
alſo, that they ſhould highly houour an Image of the holy virgin
(which their Fryars had made by a certaine Arte) that
diſtilled teares by the eyes as though it had wept. All this at
firſt was beleeued, that red bloud was adored. As the verie

bloud of Chriſt, and was ſent to great Lordes, as an incomparable
Treaſure. Great concourſe there was to the weeping
Image. So well knew the Dominickes to draw water to their
mill, that they onely were holden for holie, and ſo caried they
all the Almes and deuotions of the people. And the poore
Franciſcans were caſt aſide, and no man made reckoning of
them. The Franciſcans then ſeeing themſelues ſo deſpiſed,
and perceiuing (like people as well exerciſed in falſe miracles)
as were the Dominickes, and the reſt of the popiſh Clergie)
the craft and deceit of the Dominickes: vſed great diligence
to diſcouer the villany. So much did they, that at laſt
it was diſcouered. The foure principal Authors of this Tragedy
in the one thouſand fiue hundred & ninth yeare, were burned,
and the reſt were pardoned. Thoſe deceauers that ſo ſhameleſly,
make a mockery of religion (beſides theſe aforeſaid) confeſſed
in their torments great abhominations. (As the papiſts
themſelues that wrote this Hiſtorie doe witneſſe wherein the
Pope ſending His Legate for this purpoſe, put all, to ſcilence:
For he feared to looſe his eccleſiaſticall perſons, which
ſo great ſeruice with their falſe miracles haue done and doe vnto
him. For well vnderſtandeth the Pope, their ſuperſtitions
and Idolatries (whereof their religion is full) to haue bene inuented
or at the leaſt confirmed with like deceipts of fayned
apparitions, reuelations and falſe miracles. Into this reprobate
ſence, God leaueth them to fall, for not reading of the holie
Scripture: which is the onely rule of the well liuing and ſeruing
of God. As his maieſtie will be ſerued. But returne we now to
our holy Nunne, who with ful gale vntill now, moſt happily
ſayled, and ſet (as ſay the Gentiles) on the toppe of Fortunes
wheele, ſo much as was poſſible of ſmall and great. Aſwell
in Portugal, as elſe where, was eſteemed and reuerenced. O
how often of her was it ſayd. Bleſſed is the wombe that bare
thee, and the pappes that gaue thee ſucke. Shee nothing wanted
in this world to be wholy bleſſed, but that then ſhee ſhould
die. O how great a Saint ſhall hell poſſeſſe. O how great a
Saint hath the Roman Church loſt. Now that we haue hard the
Pro, Let vs heare the Contra. From this ſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt,
ſo holie, ſo charitable, and ſo miraculous, would the true Ieſus

Chriſt) not her husband which was the diuell) that the Maske of
hypocriſie, wherewith ſhe was couered, ſhould be taken away,
& her abhominations, wickednes, ſuperſtitions, & Idolatries diſcouered.
And ſo at the end of the admirable yeare 1588. was ſhe
condemned: as a certaine booke, which at the beginning of the
yeare following, being the 1589. was printed at Seuil, doth witnes:
from whence word for word haue I drawne that I will ſay
againſt other. The title thereof is this.
            A Relation of the holineſſe and woundes of Mother Mary de
la Ʋiſitation, which was Prioreſſe de la Annuntiada of Liſbon,
and that which was declared, in the Sentence which was giuen.
            All the booke will I not ſet downe, but the principall points
thereof will I take for my purpoſe. Thus then it beginneth. Hauing
committed the verification of the woundes and holineſſe
of Marie Prioreſſe de la Annunciada of the order of Saint Dominick,
to the moſt reuerend and illuſtrious Archbiſhoppes
of Lisbon and Braga, the Biſhop de la Guardia, the Prouincial
of Saint Dominiks order, the Inquiſitors of this Citie of Lisbon
and Doctor Paulo Alfonſo of his maieſties Councell. The
ſayd Lordes went to the Monaſtery, vppon the ſaid verification
and examination, by the teſtimony of many Nunnes of the
ſayd Monaſtery which conſentingly, declared, that the holineſſe
of the Prioreſſe was fayned, and the woundes painted. The information
ended, the ſayd Prioreſſe was brought before them
whom they commaunded to ſweare vppon the Maſſe booke
and Chriſt crucified, that ſhee ſhould ſay the truth, of that
ſhould be demaunded of her. And if ſhee ſo ſayd: that God
ſhould helpe her: And if not, that the diuell ſhould carry her away.
Frſt how ſayd ſhe that ſhe had oft times ſeene the mother
of God? And how had ſhe the woundes: By the oath ſhe had
made, ſhe anſwered: That at nine or tenne yeares of age, ſhee
entred into the Monaſtery. And after ſhe had made profeſſion,
being ſeuenteene yeares olde, one day, as ſhe was praying, to
her was it reuealed, that God would cheriſh her: And that anonother
like day, when ſhee was at prayer, came the Angels
and put a Crowne of thornes vppon her head: which wounded
her. And many dayes after being in prayer, Chriſt crucrufied

apeared vnto her and of the beams that iſſued from his
woundes, were thoſe which ſhe had, imprinted: And Chriſt
(whom ſhe called husband) oftentimes appeared to her) and
talked with her, and holpe her to ſay ouer the praiers, and that
ſhe confeſſed to this confeſſor that ſhe ſaid: Gloria Patri, & tibi
& Spiritui ſancto. The Confeſſor told her ſhe ſhould no more
ſay ſo: but Gloria Patri, & Filio, & Spiritui ſancto: as ſaith the
holy mother the Church. And in a conference which ſhee
had with her husband, ſhe told him that which her Confeſſor
had ſayd vnto her. And the husband anſwered: ſhe ſhould doe
what her Confeſſor had commanded her. The foreſayd Fathers
ſeeing ſhe ſought each way to make her ſelfe holy, and yet all
was fayned, as the other Nunnes declared vnto them; they perſwaded
her to ſay the truth of that which had paſſed, ſeeing all
was fictions, and ſo to them it appeared, by information which
they had taken: and that ſhee ſhould craue mercie: and ſo
would they haue compaſſion vpon her. But (ſhe perſiſting that
no other truth there was, but that which ſhee had ſayd, as her
husband well knew) they left her. Another day in the Viſitation
which they had with her, they tooke hard ſope and hot
water, and well waſhed her hands and wounds. And when
they began to do it, ſhe fained to haue great paine. And after
a while that they had waſhed them, the ſayd wounds were
taken from her. And when ſhe ſaw they were taken away,
ſhe fell to the earth, and began to weepe, ſigh, and craue mercie,
and caſt her ſelfe at the feete of the ſayd Lords: who
willing her to confeſſe the truth: ſhee was wearied and dead
(ſaid ſhe) and that they ſhould leaue her till another day, and
ſhe would confeſſe the truth: and ſo they left her in guard of
the Nunnes, charging them on paine of excommunication,
they ſhould for no cauſe leaue her alone. Another day the
foreſaid Lordes returned to the Monaſterie, and cauſed the
ſaid Prioreſſe to be brought before them. And demaunding
of her how that buſineſſe paſſed: ſhe ſaid: that the truth was,
becauſe men ſhould eſteeme her holie, ſhee had painted the
woundes on her handes, and that ordinarily ſhee ſo did:
And that, that of the ſide ſhee had onely done thriſe with
a knife which ſhee had in her combe boxe. Once when

ſhe publiſhed, that the ſayd wounds were made: Another time
at a viſitation, made by the Prouinciall of their order the laſt, this
which now is done: being like vnto the ſcratch of a pen. And
that the Crowne of thornes vppon her head ſhe made, pricking
herſelfe with a knife, and making the bloud to iſſue forth:
and that this ſhe had done ſixe or ſeuen times, Being demaunded
how ſhee imprinted in the clothes, the fiue droppes of
bloud which were (ſayd ſhee) of the wound in the ſyde: She
anſwered, that ſhe carefully tooke certaine holland clothes,
and painted them with bloud, and when they gaue her ſome,
to touch the wound which ſhe fayned in her ſyde: ſhee cutte
them before thoſe which gaue them in ſuch ſort, that they
were like vnto thoſe which ſhee had, and put them vppon her
breaſt, and drawe fourth, and gaue them thoſe, which ſhee
had painted. Being demaunded, when the Moore captaine,
of them, reſident in this Citie of Lisbon, and had bene viceroye
of Biquinos came to ſee her how printed ſhee the wounds
in the little cloth, which ſhe gaue him: She anſwered. Becauſe
ſhe ſaw that the Moore did mark her, ſhee drewe a little, the
curtaine of the lettife window, faining, that for ſhame hee
ſhould not ſee her putting the cloth vppon her breaſt, ſhee
tooke out of her combe boxe a knife, and ſo pticked her finger
that it bled, and painted therewith the ſame cloth, and afterwardes
put it vppon the breaſt and beganne to ſtraine the
ſame before them all: and drewe it out imprinted with bloud
and all beleeued, it was the bloud of her ſide, being demaunded
how ſhee had put thoſe droppes of bloud vppon the rotchet
of 
                  •
               he Popes Collector: Shee anſwered: That the Collector
perſwading her, to put ſome bloud of her woundes vppon
the ſaid rotchet at ſuch time as ſhee chaunced to haue a bliſter
on her hand ſhee tooke it away in ſuch ſort, that the bloud iſſued
and therewith rubbed ſhe her hand in the rotchet, and it
remayned died with bloud. Being demaunded how ſhee lift
vp her ſelfe: And how the Nunnes ſawe her many times, to
ſhine in her Cell: Shee anſwered: that ſhee kindled in a chaſing
diſh a fire with ſmall light, and put before it a lookeing
glaſſe, and that the light ſtroke vppon the glaſſe, and the reflection
of the glaſſe glimpſed in her face: And that ſhee ſhould

ſeeme to haue beene lifted vp, ſhe put her feete vpon Chapins
or womens ſhoes: other times vpon timber, which ſhe had purpoſely
prouided: whereupon ſhe ſo ſate, that ſhee ſeemed to
be lifted vp into the aire: demaunded, that being in mortall
ſinne, how ſhe dared euery day to communicate: She anſwered:
She euer truſted that our Lord would draw her in time
to repentance: and hereof ſhee craued mercie of the foreſayd
Lordes. This notwithſtanding, they proceeded to take
further information: wherein the Nunnes declared, that ſhe
being one day in the Chapter, was lifted vp, and a place made
by her ſide, as though ſome man ſhould ſit there: Demaunding
of her for what purpoſe ſhe did that ſhe ſayd: See ye not
that our father Saint Dominicke came thither, and there ſitteth:
And many other things, which to auoyd tediouſneſſe,
I omit.
            The foreſaid proceſſe ſeene by the foreſaid Lords, and the
offences which thereof redounded againſt the Prioreſſe: the
ſixt of the inſtant moneth of December in the 1588 yeare,
they pronounced ſentence againſt her, in the Monaſtery of
the mother of God, of the order of Saint Francis, in this citie:
from whence they commaunded to carrie her, and in her preſence
was publiſhed and read the ſentence which we will now
declare. And afterwards, the 8. of the ſayd moneth in the pulpit
of the great Church of this citie, at the time of the great
Maſſe with an high and audible voyce was publiſhed. Wherby
they declared that through only zeale, that men ſhould deeme
her holy, all that to be and haue bene fained. And for that ſhee
had not dealt with, nor inuocated the diuell, they adiudged her
to perpetuall impriſonment. And that in fiue yeares ſhe might
not be confeſſed, nor communicate, except in caſe of neceſſitie:
and three feaſts in the yeare, and in the Iubilee: and that
ſhe ſhould neither beare vaile nor habit, nor haue any actiue or
paſſiue voyce in the Chapter, nor bee elected to any office:
And that for fiue yeares ſhe ſhould eate vpon the ground, and
that the fragments remaining might not to any (no not to the
poore) be giuen, but burned: and that when they were to go
forth of the dyning place, ſhe ſhould lie proſtrate on the earth,
that all the Nunnes might paſſe ouer her: and that on wedneſdayes

and frydayes they ſhould giue her diſcipline whiles
the pſalme of Miſerere mei laſt. And that ſhee ſhould bee
carried forth of the citie to a Monaſterie of the ſame order,
25, leagues vpwards the riuer Tei
                     •
                  , where ſhee ſhould bee included
in a cell, and not go out of the cell, but at the Maſſetime
and Cannonicall houres: and that ſhe might talke with
no Nunne (one excepted) which the Prioreſſe of that Monaſterie
ſhould appoint her; and that ſhe ſhould be inſtructed in
the faith. And that her picture vpon the wall of the Annunciada
ſhould be blotted out, that no after ſigne remaine there euer to
haue bene: and that the ſmall clothes with the fiue wounds, &
other her things ſhold be carried to the Inquiſitors, where they
ſhould be: and otherwiſe to the Prouiſor, or curate of the pariſh,
who was to appoint what ſhould be done with them.
            Now to aduiſe all thoſe that truely deſire to ſerue Chriſt,
of whoſe name they are called Chriſtians, and will liue according
to his holy Goſpell and law, and not according to
that which men haue inuented to liue in pleaſure. Some notes
and conſiderations will I here make of that which hath bene
ſayd vpon the life and ſentence of this holy Nunne. Firſt, as
touching the ten inſtructions drawne by Luſignan, out of the
Letters miſſiue, It were good to ſhew how falſe they be all in
general, and euery one in particular. For not vpon the word of
God, but vpon dreames, falſe miracles, illuſions of the diuell, &
imaginations of a curſed hypocrite (which fained her ſelfe to
be no leſſe then Chriſt) haue they any foundation. But ſeeing
our aduerſaries by publike ſentence haue condemned all that
contained in the Letters, concerning the holineſſe and miracles
of this Nunne, to be falſe, fained, and hypocritically done.
I will not paine my ſelfe to proue their falſhood. Onely I will
tell them: that when they will proue their new articles of faith,
they ſeeke better proofes. For dreames and falſe miracles are
now nothing worth. The time through the mercie of God, is
not now as wontedly it was, when the Clergie eaſilie deceiued
the people, and made them to beleeue all whatſoeuer
they liſted. Bleſſed bee the Lord for the light which in our
times he hath giuē vs. His Maieſtie giue vs grace to draw neere
vnto it: For the ſeruant that knoweth his maiſters will, & doth

it not, ſhall be more puniſhed then he that knoweth it not. Beſides
this, there is nothing in theſe his ten inſtructions, which
hath not already in the two precedent Treatiſes, of the Pope,
and of the Maſſe, bene ſufficiently confuted. To them I referre
my ſelfe. Our redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, when hee beganne to
preach his Goſpell, confirmed the ſame with true miracles:
and departing from this world (as Saint Marke in the laſt chapter
of his Goſpell declareth) for the ſame effect to confirme the
Euangelicall doctrine, he left to his Church the gift of working
miracles. This gift in the Church (I would ſay in ſome of
the faithfull, for all had it not, as witneſſeth Saint Paul, 1. Cor.
12. where reckoning vp the giftes of the holy Spirit, and how
he diſtrributeth them amongſt other, hee ſaith And to another
are giuen the gifts of holineſſe by the ſame Spirit. To another working
of miracles, &c.) for ſome time continued, vntill the doctrine
was confirmed, and then afterwards ceaſſed. Albeit
God, vſing his omnipotency, leaueth not ſometimes to do miracles.
But this is extraordinary, and not common as then it
was. The Antichriſtians willing to be ſold for Chriſtians, pretend,
and doe confirme their new and falſe doctrine with
new and falſe miracles, of which their bookes bee full. For
this is the chiefe proofe wherewith they confirme their doctrine.
            Concerning that of the fiue wounds, there is no word in
all the new Teſtament, nor in any of the ancient Doctours,
which for the ſpace of one thouſand and two hundred yeares
liued in the Church of God, that any of the Apoſtles, no not
Saint Iohn the dearely beloued Diſciple, nor yet the holy mother
of our redeemer her ſelfe hath had them; nor euer was
it ſaid, an
                  •
               e hee or ſhee Saint in all this time to haue had
them: for ſo much as I remember, to haue read the firſt, that
they ſay, had them, was Saint Francis, and this a few yeares
before his death: who died in the 1226. yeare. The booke
of Conformities, fol 
                  •
               . demaundeth. In which of the ſaints
haue the miraculous wounds of Chriſt bene imprinted? The
ſame anſwereth: In none, but in the bleſſed our Father
Saint Frauncis: As witneſſeth the Romane Church: and
commandeth the faithfull to beleeue it. Afterwardes ſay

ſame: that in the 1340. yeare Saint Gertrude had them. And
holy Ludiuina (ſay they but know not in what yeare) alſo had
them. Alſo they ſay, that S. Katherine of Sena, who died in the
1380. yeare. And in our dayes, in the 1588. yeare, was a publike
voice and fame▪ that the holy Nunne of Lisbon had them,
For ſo great a truth hold they that of Saint Francis: that if anie
beleeue it not, or doubt it, for an heretike is he 
                  •
               olden, and
as an heretike ought he to be puniſhed. So that it is now one of
their new articles of faith. And ſo Pope Gregorie did commaund
it to be beleeued. The ſame commanded Pope Alexander
the fourth, and ſaith, that with his owne eyes he ſaw thē,
as in his Bull he doth witneſſe. Another ſuch like Bull gaue out
Pope Nicholas 3 and Pope Bendict 12. who graunted (beſides
this) to the Franciſcan Friars, that they ſhould celebrate the
feaſt of the wounds of Saint Francis. All this ſaith the booke intituled,
Of the Conformities of Saint Francis, with Ieſus Chriſt,
A booke full of blaſphemies ſeeing it maketh him equall with
Ieſus Chriſt, & proueth S. Francis with many reaſonles reaſons,
to haue bin much more excellent then S. Iohn Baptiſt.
               Blaſphemie, which ſaith S. Francis to be much more excellent then S. Iohn Baptiſt. Amongſt
which he ſetteth theſe downe, that he conuerted many more
than Iohn, that he preached repentance 18 yeares, & inſtituted
the order of Penance: & S. Iohn but 2 yeares, and ſome what
more preached. Iohn receiued of the Lord the word of repentā
               
                  •
               e:
Francis receiued it of the Lord & of the Pope. And which
is more (terrible blaſphemie to adde ought to the infinit power
of the Lord) S. Iohn was a friend of the Bridegrome. The like
to the Lord Ieſus Chriſt was the bleſſed S. Francis. In holineſſe
to the world was Iohn moſt ſingular. In conformitie of his
wou
                  •
               ds with Chriſt was Francis then all men more excellent.
S. Iohn is aduanced into the order of the Seraphins. In the ſame
Seraphical order & ſeat of Lucifer is placed the bleſſed S. Francis,
&c. If this be not to make a mockery of Chriſtian Religion,
of the maieſtie of the Son of God, and of the holineſſe of Saint
Iohn Baptiſt, what ſhall bee? Friar Iohn de Pineda, a Friar Franciſcan.
part. 3. lib. 22. cap. 23. ¶3. ſpeaking of his holy Saint
Francis, ſaith thus: A few yeares before his death, faſting
and praying vppon the Eue of Saint Michael the Archangell,
he receiued in his virginall bodie the wounds of Ieſus

Chriſt, by the impreſſion of the ſame Ieſus Chriſt. as ſay Vbertino
and the Maiſter Piſano, S▪ 
               Francis himſelfe to haue reuealed
the ſame, hauing ſuffered moſt terrible paines when they were
imprinted, &c. He confirmeth his ſaying, with the ſayings of
Vbertino and the Maiſter Piſano, who is the Author of that blaſphemous
booke of Conformities. They ſay the ſame. Of no
great credit be theſe two Authors: as eaſily as they ſpeake it,
with the ſame facility will we condemne it.
            It is ſayd of Saint Francis, that he couered the wounds of S.
Katherine of Sene, ſaith Antonius, that ſhe beſought God they
ſhould not be ſhewed vpon her body: Of S. Lyduuina ſaith Iohn
Brugmano, that to auoyd the applauſe of the world, ſhee beſought
the ſame at God his hands. Of S. Gertrude ſaith Surius,
that for manie dayes ran bloud from them 7. times euery day.
But of our holy Nunne of Lisbon ſay the Prouinciall, and Friar
Lewes de Granada, and it was the publike voyce and fame, that
ſhe had them and ſhewed them, & that they yeelded alwayes
freſh bloud, wherewith ſhee painted the ſmall clothes which
they gaue her. The Prouinciall ſaith, that the wound of the ſide
on certaine dayes, namely the fridayes, opened; & that certaine
drops of bloud iſſued from the ſame. &c. Surely this was much
more ſhameleſſe than all the others. Saint Francis and the reſt
ſayd to haue the wounds, liued in the times of great ignorance,
aſwell of good letters, as of true and pure Chriſtian religion,
when the Roman Antichriſt was abſolute Lord of all, & ſwayed
both ſwords, ſpirituall and temporall. Then was there none
that durſt whiſper againſt him, nor that was ſo bold to ſay vnto
him, thou doſt wickedly: but it ſhould coſt him his life, or litle
leſſe. An eaſie thing was it then, with ſuch like fictions of
wounds and other miracles to deceiue the ſimple poore common
people. But now that the Lord hath giuen ſo great light
of his Goſpell, a verie hard thing ſhall it bee to be long time
manitained with like opinion of holineſſe: by and by flyeth away
hypocriſie: by and by God raiſeth vp ſome to ſpeake and
write againſt it. Vnhappy therefore was this Nunne, as touching
the word, that in our time and not in their dayes, ſhe liued.
Had thoſe, ſayd to haue the wounds, bene well examined,
and with hot water and hard ſope waſhed, their hypocriſie no

no doubt had bene diſcouered, as well as that of our Marie de
la Viſitacion: Wherein as touching the ſoule, were they more
vnhappy then ſhe: ſeeing they died in their hypocriſie, wherewith
they deceiued many, and vntill this day do deceiue with
it. But our Mary liuing of her hypocriſie conuinced, in time (it
may be) will ſhe employ her great wit to better purpoſe, and
craue mercie at the hands of God, whom ſo wickedly ſhe hath
offended. And ſo his Maieſtie giue her grace truly to conuert
to the true Chriſtian religion: which not with dreams, nor falſe
miracles, but with the word of God it ſelfe is confirmed. His
Maieſtie ſhewe her this grace and mercie. Had this miſerable
creature (as did the others) died before her hypocriſie had bin
diſcouered, cannonized had ſhe bene, as they were, and for 
                  •
               o
holy had bene holden, that hardly in all heauen ſhould her
Dominickes haue found place to haue ſet her Had ſhe bene a
Franciſcan, as ſhe was a Dominicke, her Franciſcans would
haue placed her next to Saint Francis in the moſt higheſt
place of the Quire of the Seraphins, ioyning to the ſeat of Lucifer,
where they themſelues ſayd, that their Saint Frauncis is
placed.
            Much do I maruell at the Lords which examined the proceſſe
of this diueliſh creature, this truly poſſeſſed of the diuell,
another Magd
                     •
                  len de la Cruz. Another ſuch as ſhe, whom they
called in England, The holy Mayd of Kent: who in the time of
Henry the eight, king of England did wonderfull and moſt falſe
miracles. Againſt whom was made proceſſe, and all proued
to be falſe and fained, as was that of our Nunne. For which
ſhe was ſen
                  •
               enced to death, and ſo was executed. That which
paſſeth in the Pontificall kingdom, is a thing againſt all 
                  •
               uſtice,
that one for ſpeaking, as in his conſcience hee thinketh, and
according to that, which the word of God in the holy ſcriptures
hath reuealed: that he knoweth no other Purgatorie, but
the only bloud of Chriſt, that he knoweth no other righteouſneſſe,
but that which is receiued by faith: and that none is to
be called vpon▪ but God alone, by the onely meane of Ieſus
Chriſt, &c. That he ſhall die without redemption: and with
greateſt diſgrace before the world: and that Magdalen and
Marie, and other ſuch like, being curſed blaſphemers, periured

in publike audience, poſſeſſed of the diuell, mockers of
Chriſtian religion of God, and of Ieſus Chriſt his ſonne, ſhall
liue, True it is, that they were condemned, yet not to bee
burned, but to certaine F
                  •
               ia
                  •
                like pe
                  •
               an
                  •
               es and reſtraints. Ariſe
Lord, iudge thine owne cauſe. Behold, thoſe die, that confeſſe
thee, and they that blaſpheme thee do liue. Very much
I ſay do I maruell a
                  •
                theſe Lords, which condemned this curſed
M
                     •
                  rie, that they ſhould vſe theſe words in their ſentence
which they giue againſt her: All that which this Nunne hath
done, is, and hath bene fained of 
                  〈◊〉
                onely that they ſhould
hold her for holie, and that ſhe had not dealt with, nor in
                  •
               ocated
the diuell. Surely they ſpeake in this (let their Lordſhips
pardo
                  •
                
               
                  •
               e) againſt their owne conſciences, which told them
her miracles to haue bene done by the a
                  ••
               e of the diuell, with
whom doubtleſſe, was ſhe verie familiar, and he was her huſband,
conductor, and guide. For how could ſhe do the miracles
ſhe did without the helpe of the diuell, and her inuocation
vpon him? That which ſhe ſaith, that Ieſus Chriſt appeared
vnto her, now accompanied with hee and ſhe ſaints, and
now alone: that very familiar he was with her: that he ho
                  •
               p her
to pray ouer the houres, that he was her husband, and imprinted
the wounds vpon her. Let all this be fained of her, as all
is fained, that men ſhould take her for holy: and more fooliſh
they that beleeued her, and did not remember Magdalen de la
Cruz. But what will they ſay vnto me of the diſeaſed and franticke
Nunne which was healed, as the Prouinciall in his letter
witneſſeth? That the Prouinciall lyed will they ſay, and that
the Nun was not healed? I think not ſo. Healed ſhe was by the
meane which the Prouinciall reporteth, by miracle wrought
by the diuell▪ What will they ſay vnto me of the Lady of qualitie
that had the 
                  •
               anker, and was healed, as the ſame Prouinciall
doth witneſſe: and ſaith that all this was taken by faith,
and teſtimonie before a Notarie publike by commandement
of the Cardinall? What will they ſay vnto mee of the diſeaſed
perſo
                  •
               , who for
                  •
               aken of the Phyſitions, with drinking
of the water wherein was the little 
                  〈◊〉
                of the wodden
croſſe, which the Prioreſſe had giuen to Anna Rodriguez, was

healed? What will they ſay vnto me of this little 
                  〈◊〉
               , which
ſet it ſelfe vpright, and of the other alſo, that being caſt into the
water, claue vnto, and was ioyned with the firſt: ſo that of them
twaine one faire little croſſe was made, which moued to great
deuotion all thoſe that ſaw it? (and this was that, which the diuell
with this falſe miracle of the croſſe pretended, to cauſe thē
to commit Idolatrie) of this alſo was information taken by
commandement of the Legat. Of many other ſuch like things
that the Prouinciall faith, he could declare, what will they ſay
vnto me? How could theſe things and the reſt bee done without
the art of the diuell, without his help, and inuocation vpon
him? I demaund of thē, what was that, which the three Moores
ſaw in the Prioreſſe, which were things ſo great & maruellous,
that the Moores were not able to ſpeake. To the Archbiſhop
of Lisbon in the preſence of the Prouinciall and many others,
they confeſſed, that they ſaw neere to the Prioreſſe, Ieſus
Chriſt in humane ſhape, put vpon the croſſe: throughout all
Portugall was this miracle publiſhed. Will they ſay vnto mee
that it was the true Ieſus Chriſt, or that it was the illuſion of the
diuell: that it was Ieſus Chriſt will they not ſay: For in their
Sentence they ſay: All whatſoeuer this Nunne hath done to
haue bene fained. It followeth then, that it was the diuell in
humane ſhape, that appeared vnto her. Saint Paul doth aduiſe
vs, 2. Cor. chap. 14. that Satan is wont (the better to deceiue) to
transforme himſelfe into an Angell of light. But here in the
buſineſſe of theſe three Moores, much more bold was Satha
                  •
               ,
transforming himſelfe into Chriſt crucified, and taking his
forme vpon him. O the great patience of God. And the Prouinciall
addeth. So famous, and ſo admirable was this miracle,
that the fame thereof hath ſtretched throughout all the
kingdome, &c. Then was it a true miracle. But of thoſe, which
Sathan worketh, to deceiue men, and not a fiction of the Prioreſſe.
Why make their Lordſhips no mention in their ſentence
how the Prioreſſe had made Sathan to appeare in the figure of
Chriſt crucified? And how that litle ſo deuout a croſſe was
made? and how the ſicke perſons were healed? The principall
paſſed they ouer, leaſt they ſhould 
                  〈…〉
                ſuperſtitions
and Idolatries. That which they demanded of her is. How ſayd

ſhe, that ſhe had oftentimes ſeene the mother of God? wherof
in the Letters were made little mention? O great ſubtiltie:
herewith they haue ſtopped the mouth of the people. All theſe
things was the iuſt iudgment and puniſhment of God, wherewith
he puniſheth thoſe, that beeleue not the word of God, reuealed
in the holy Scripture: but beleeue lies confirmed with
falſe miracles & illuſions of the diuel. The principall reſteth for
me yet to demaund. What was, I demaund of them, that conſecrate
forme, as ſaith the Prouinciall, or hoſte conſecrated?
as ſaith Friar Lewes de Granada, which the wedneſday in the
holy weeke iſſued out of the little casket, wherein the moſt
holy ſacrament lay: which casket, of it ſelfe opened, and out of
it iſſued the ſaid hoſt without any viſible miniſtery, & was preſented
to the mouth of the Religious, and ſhe receiued it with
moſt great deuotion &c. The Prouinciall addeth: that another
time vpon Innocents day another ſuch like miracle happened.
Friar Lewes de Granada ſaith: That the Maſſe being ended,
which Saint Iohn Euangeliſt did celebrate, a conſecrated hoſt
came from the Altar, and was put into the mouth of this moſt
holy Nunne. Of Mag
                     •
                  alen de la Cruz was it ſaid: that when ſhee
communicated, ſhe lifted vp a rod to meaſure the hight of the
ground, as in the Treatiſe of the Maſſe we haue noted. The
hoſt which Mag
                     •
                  alen the Franciſcan hipocrite, and that which
Mary the Dominican hypocrite receiued (albeit the ordained
Maſſe-Friars and with intention to conſecrate, did conſecrate
them, murmuring ouer them their words of conſecration
Hoc eſt enim Corpus meum: were not the body of Ieſus
Chriſt, whoſe glorious body ſits at the right hand of the Father,
and is not to deſcend thence, vntill hee come to iudge the
quicke and the dead: As witneſſeth S. Peter. Act. 3. 21. Whom
(meaning Chriſt) the heauens muſt containe vntill the day of
reſtauration of all things: And ſo doe we holde it for an article
of faith, and confeſſe the ſame in the Creed: Were there no other
proofe to proue their conſecrated hoſtes, their ſacrament
of the aultar, not to be the body of Chriſt: this in good reaſon,
ſhould ſuffice, that the diuell vſeth his conſecrated hoſtes: he
carrieth them into the aire and putteth them into the mouth of
his he and ſhe deuoted, that men may holde them for holy. As

theſe two domeſtical exāples of the Franciſcan Magdalen de la
Cruz, and of the Dominican Mary de la viſitation, doe confirme
the ſame. But for as much as many other proofes they are taken
out of the holy ſcripture & out of the anciēt doctors, which we
haue noted in the Treatiſe of the Maſſe, there maiſt thou read
the ſame. This opening of the caſket, this iſſuing out of the conſecrated
hoſt, and viſible comming through the aire, without
any viſible myſtery, and putting it in to the mouth of Magdalen,
of Mary, and other ſuch like was by the arte of the deuill, he
came betweene and was inuocated. Open then thy eies, O
Spaine, and vnderſtand: Suffer not thy ſelfe to be deceiued in
the firſt article of chriſtian religion. Remember it is the firſt cō
               mandement
which our great God (whoſe name is Iehona) cō
               mādeth
vs to keep. Thou ſhalt haue no other Gods before me.
How can that be God, how can that be a creator, which the diuell
vſeth to cauſe the people to commit idolatry, to entertaine
the fained holineſſe & hypocriſy of Magdalen & Mary, and of
other ſuch both hee and ſhee? Holy and bleſſed is our God: he
abhorreth wickednes, hipocriſy, ſuperſtition & idolatry, Therfore
conclude, that he which entertaineth theſe abhominations
is not the true, but a falſe God, made by the inuention of men,
and Sathan their father, which gouerneth them. And this is the
iuſt iudgment and puniſhment of God, that they which neither
read, nor heare, nor yet giue credit to the word of God, regiſtred
by the holy prophets and Apoſtles, without which, there is
no ſaluation, may beleeue lies: wherwith Antichriſt, and his father
the diuil deceiued them, to carry them with him into hell.
Theſe things which we haue ſpoken of, done by theſe Ladies,
I confeſſe, are miracles, and they cauſed that which our aduerſaries
hold for the ſacrament, and for the body of Chriſt, truely
to come. But of theſe they are, which the falſe prophets, Antichriſt
and their father the diuell doe, as our redeemer forewarneth
vs, Math. 2
                  •
               . 24. and his Apoſtle, 2. Theſſ. 2. 9. wherewith
they that are founded vpon the firme rocke, which is Chriſt.
they that be taught by the word of God, ſhal not be deceiued:
But they that be founded vpon the ſand, they that confirme
their opinion with dreames, imaginations, and humane tradititions,
theſe ſhall beleeue them, and hold them for true miracles,

which God hath wrought & ſo beleeuing them, ſhall periſh,
except God hauing mercie vpon them, doe before they
depart this world conuert them. With their Lordſhips fauour,
conclude we thē, ſaying: that Mary de la viſitation, did her miracles
by the help and inuo
                  •
               ation of the diuel, for otherwiſe could
ſhe not doe them. I vehemently ſuſpect the cauſe of their ſo
ſaying they feare to giue occaſion, leſt ſome begin to think that
their Sacrament, which they ſell for the body of Chriſt, is not
the body of Chriſt, nor his Sacrament, which in his holy Suppe
                  •
               
he inſtituted, but their prophanation thereof. This if our Spaniardes
begin once to vnderſtand the pontificall kingdom will
wholly fall, the kitchin of the Preiſts and Friars, which is the
Maſſe and Purgatory, will bee cold: and ſo ſuperſtition, ignonorance,
hereſy and Idolatry, as a new thing, which hath no
foundation in the word of God, but in dreames, with falſe miracles,
and illuſions of the diuell, ſhall likewiſe fall, and the ancient
doctrine of the Goſpell of Chriſt crucified, written in
the holy ſcripture, maugre Antichriſt, ſhall flouriſh through the
worlde. Bleſſed and euer glorified be the holy name of the
Lord: who by his great mercie freed vs from ſuch ignorance,
errors, and ſuperſtitions, hereſies & Idolatries, where we were
nouriſhed: who deliuered vs, I ſay, from the power of darknes,
and tranſlated vs into the true kingdome of his beloued ſonne,
in whom we haue redemption by his bloud, and forgiuenes of
ſinnes. What ſhall we render (ſpeaking as doth the Prophet)
vnto the Lord, for all his benefites beſtowed vppon vs, we will
take the cuppe of our Saluation, and call vpon the name of the
Lord. No other willeth God, for all his benefites, but that we be
thankfull, and call vpon his name. Thus ſhall the number of
thoſe whom God hath elected to life eternall, encreaſe: and
ſo the kingdome of ſinne, death & the diuell, which is the kingdome
of lies, of falſe & new doctrine, confirmed with dreames,
falſe miracles, and illuſions of the diuell, ſhalbe deſtroied: and
that of grace, life and of Chriſt, which is the kingdome of truth,
& the true and old doctrin, confirmed with the word of God,
ſhal abide for euer. To whom, which is one God, Father, Sonne
and holy Spirit who liueth and raigneth be perpetuall hon
                  ••
               
and glory, Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            An Addition.
            I In the moneth of Aprill 1588. Philip the ſecond of that name
king of Spaine, pretending to ſend his inuincible fleet for the
Conqueſt of England made choiſe by the aduiſe of the Prioreſſe
of the monaſtery of the Anunciada, whoſe name was Mary
of the Viſitacion, as moſt worthie for her holineſſe to bleſſe his
Standard royall, the which ſhe did with vſing diuers other c
                  •
               
               remonies,
& in the deliuery thereof, to the Duke of Medina Sedonia,
who was appointed chiefe Generall, ſhe did pronounce
openlie good ſucceſſe and victory to the Duke, in ſaying he
ſhould return a victorious Prince. This ſtandard was carried in
proceſſion by Don Franciſco de Cordoua, who was a Spaniard &
the talleſt Gentl. that could be found, he being on horſe backe
to the end it might be the better ſeen: at the ſolemnzing wherof
there was ſuch a number of people aſſembled, that diuers of
them periſhed with the throng. There was preſent the Archduke
Albertus, which then was Cardinall and Gouernor of the
kingdom of Portugal, the Popes Nuncio the Archbiſhop, who
was head inquiſitor with diuers other Nobles, Prelates & Gentlemen.
This ſolemnization dured ſo long that Albertus fainted
with faſting, and this holy Nunne to comfort him, cauſed a
meſſe of the broth, which was for her owne diet to be brought,
preſenting it to him, which he accepted moſt willingly, cōming
from the handes of ſo holy a Nun, as then ſhe was holden to be:
but about the beginning of Decēber next after, all her holines,
falſe miracles, and great diſſimulations was then found out, and
ſhe condemned & puniſhed for the ſame, according as is r
                  •
               berſed
in this booke. About the end of this yeare 1588 that this
holy Nun was diſcouered in Lisbon, there was alſo diſcouered
in Seuil one father 
                  
                     •
                  yon, who was counted to be a moſt deuour
and religious man, but by his owne fellowes of his profeſſion,
he was diſcouered to be a great hypocrite, and a moſt vicious

                  〈◊〉
                giuen to carnall luſtes, and for this and diuers other cauſes
he was committed to the priſon which is in the Cardinals houſe
of 
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            
            A Table, wherein by certaine Antitheſes is
declared the difference and contrarietie which is betweene
the ancient doctrine of God, contained in the holy ſcripture,
and taught in the reformed Churches: and the new
doctrine of men, 
                  •
               aught and maintained in
the Roman or Popiſh Church.
            
               Ierem. 6. 16.
               Thus ſaith the Lord, ſtand in the wayes, and behold, and aske for the old way,
which is the good way, and walke therein, & ye ſhall find reſt for your ſoules.
            
            THe ancient doctrine of God doth teach, that the holy Scripture being
the word of God diuinely inſpired, hath moſt ſufficient authority
of it ſelfe, & containeth all neceſſary doctrin to pietie, and our
ſaluation: as S. Paul clearly teacheth. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 16. 17.
            The new doctrin of me
                  •
                teacheth, that the holy Scripture, although it 
be the word of God, ſhould haue no authority, were it not for the approbation
of the Church, and that it is an vnperfect and maimed doctrine, which
containeth not doctrine ſufficient to pietie, nor our ſaluation, but that this
defect muſt be ſupplied by vnwrittē traditions, Belar. de verb. De
                     •
                   nō ſcrip. l. 4.
            The ancient doctrin of God, doth teach that ignorance of the holy ſcriptures,
is the cauſe and mother of errors, as Ieſus Chriſt our Lord doth witneſſe,
Mat 22. 19. ſaying to the Sadduces, Ye erre, becauſe yee know not the
Scriptures, nor the power of God▪ and therefore the duty of euerie faithfull
Chriſtian is to reade, meditate, and ſearch the holy ſcripture, as God commandeth
his people, Deut. 6. 7. & chap. 12. 32. & chap. 17. 19. Ioſua 18. Eſa. 8.
20. And Chriſt our Lord in the new Teſtament, Ioh. 5. 39. And as did the
faithfull in the time of the Apoſtles Act 17. 11. 2, Tim. 3. 15.
            The new doctrin of men doth teach, that ignorance is the mother of deuotion:
and that to keepe religion ſafe, it is needful to forbid the lay or ſecular
men, the reading of the holy ſcriptures, ſeeing it is the cauſe of many hereſies.
Bellarm. de verbo Dei lib. 2 cap. 15 & 16. cenſ. col. f. 19.
            The ancient doctrin of God doth teach, that many deceiuers and falſe
Prophets are gone out into the world, and that the faithfull therfore are to
proue the ſpirits, whether they be of God, 1. Io. 4. 1. And that the holy ſcripture
is the touch, whereby this proofe and examination ought to be made,
Ioh. 5. 39. Act 17. 11. So that all doctrine contrary and repugnant to holy
Scripture (be it of Councels, Fathers, Doctors, old or new, and that as ſaith
the Apoſtle of himſelfe or of an Angel from heauen) ought not to be receiued 
nor taught in the Chriſtian Church, Gal. 1. 8. 1. Tim. 1. 3. & chap. 6. 3.
1. Pet. 4. 11. 2. Ioh. 10.
            The new doctrin of men doth teach, that whoſoeuer cōtradict the Pope,
& his decrees, & human traditions, be falſe teachers, & that the Pope hath
authority to iudge of all controuerſies, and of the true ſenſe of holy Scriptures,
and that from his iudgment it is not lawfull to appeale. Bellar. de verbo
D
                     ••
                   interp. lib. 3. cap. 3. &c.
            
            
               
The ancient doctrine of God doth teach, that we ought to ſerue God alone:
which is the Creator and gouernour of all the world: following the
doctrin of Chriſt which ſaith, Matt. 4. 10. Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lord thy
God, & him only ſhalt thou ſerue.
            
                The new doctrine of men doth teach, that we ought not to ſerue God alone
but alſo the Saints: that they hold them for patrons of kingdoms, people,
cities, ſocieties, and infirmities. Bellarm. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap 12.
Cenſ. Col. fol. 230.
            The ancient doctrine of God doth teach, that the lawful worſhip of God
is to be founded vpon the holy Scripture: & that God will be ſerued according
to his will and word, in ſpirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 24. and not after the opinion,
nor by the traditions nor cuſtomes of men. as God by his prophet
Eze. 20. 18. doth very expreſly teach vs, ſaying: Walk not in the ordinances
of your fathers, nor obſerue their lawes, nor defile your ſelues with their
idols: I am the Lord your God. Walke in mine ordinances, and keepe my
ſtatutes, and do them. The ſame teacheth Ieſus Chriſt, Mat. 15. 9 ſaying: In
 vane do yee honor me, teaching for doctrine the commandements of
men.
            The new doctrine of men doth teach, that in the worſhip of God, the
traditions, ceremonies, and conſtitutions of the Roman Church ought to
be obſerued: and that the Cannon law doth equall the conſtitutions of the
Popes in value with the Goſpell▪ and that it is neceſſarie to keepe them:
for (as ſaith Pope Leo 4.) The Goſpel cannot well be obſerued, if a man obey
not iointly therewith all the decrees and conſtitutions of the Fathers,
Diſt. 15. cap. Sicut. & Diſt 19. cap In canonicis & Diſt. 20. cap. De libellis.
            
            The ancient doctrine of God teacheth, that the worſhip of images is a
thing abominable, Deut. 27. 15. Leuit. 26. 1. and expreſly forbidden in the
ſecond commandement of the law of God, Exod. 20. 4. and Deut. 5. 8. 9. alſo,
that the holy Spirit calleth images, Teachers of lies and vanitie, Ierem.
10. 8. Habac. 2. 18. And therefore in no wiſe to be allowed in the Temples of
 Chriſtians, in which Ieſus Chriſt hath bene painted out before the eyes of
the faithfull, by the preaching of the Goſpell, Gal. 4. 1.
            The new doctrine of men teacheth, that the worſhip of images is well
pleaſing to God, and verie neceſſarie and profitable for the Church. And
that images are the Bookes of the Laytie. Hee therefore that teacheth the
contrary is curſed and anathema. Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 9.
            The ancient doctrine of God doth teach, that Chriſtians ought to imitate
the faith, godlineſſe, and good doctrine of the Saints, as they imitated
Chriſt. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Heb. 6. 12 cap. 13. 7. But that in no wiſe they ought to
inuocate them, nor put their confidence in them:
            
               1 Becauſe inuocation is an honor due to God alone, which he declareth by
his Prophet Eſay, 48. 11. Mine honour will I not giue to another.
               2 Becauſe the Saints being in this world will not receiue this honor, neither
the Angels. As Act. ch. 10. 26. chap 14. 14. Reu
                     •••
                  s 19. 10. chap. 22 9.
appeareth.
               3 Becauſe they be ignorant, and do not know vs: as Eſay. 63. 16. doth very

clearely teach, ſaying: Abraham hath forgotten vs, and Iſrael doth not
know vs Thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer.
            
            So that as the Iſraelites in the old Teſtament were id
                  •
               laters, and tranſgreſſours
of the Law of God, when they ſacrificed to another then God alone.
So be all they at this day, that inuocate Saints or Angels: wherein
they do contrarie to the doctrine of Chriſt. Ma
                  •
               . 6. 9. chap. 11. 28. Ioh. chap.
16. 24. And contrary to the example of all the Saints, Pſal. 22. 6. Ne
                  ••
               e.
9. 27. Gen. 32. 9. Exod. 2. 25. cap. 17. 12. Ioſua. 10. 13. Pſal. 107. and 11. 8. 5.
&c. Act. 4. and 24. and cap. 16. 25. &c.
            The new doctrine of men teacheth, that Chriſtians ought to inuocate
the Saints and to be ayded by their interceſſion to God: becauſe they be his
familiars. Alſo that it is a falſe and wicked opinion, to beleeue that the
Saints pray not for men, and that the inuocation of Saints is idolatrie, contrary
to the word of God: and that he which ſo teacheth and beleeueth, is
accurſed and anathema. Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 9.
            The ancient doctrine of God teacheth, that Ieſus Chriſt our Lord being
true God, and true man, 
                  •
               s the onely and perfect ſauiour of the world,
who ſaith by his Prophet Eſay, chap. 63. 3. I haue troden the wine-preſſe
alone, and of all the people there was none with me. And of whom ſaith
the Angell, Matth. 1. 21. Thou ſhalt call his name Ieſus: for hee ſhall ſaue
his people from their ſinnes. And the Apoſtle Saint Iohn doth witneſſe,
1. Ioh. 1. 7. that the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt the Sonne of God, doth cleanſe 
vs from all ſinne.
            The new doctrine of men teacheth, that Ieſus Chriſt is not a perfect Sauiour
for Chriſt (ſaith it) died onely for originall ſinne. And that by his
death he ſatisfied for the fault: but that God being iuſt, will, that man ſatiſfie
h
                  •
               s iuſtice for the puniſhment. Alſo that the purgation of ſinnes is made by
good works, ſatisfactions, Maſſes, indulgences and Purgatorie. Lib. 4. Sent.
diſtinct. 17. and 18.
            The ancient doctrine of God doth teach that Ieſus Chriſt is the onely
Mediator between God and man, and our Aduocate and Interceſſor to the
Father, and that no other can be found, nor ought to bee ſought for. 1. Becauſe
there is no ſaluation in any other, but in him alone, Act. 4. 12. 2. Becauſe

                  〈…〉
                other but Chriſt only, can be ſufficient for this office, which hath
all power in heauen and in earth, and remaineth euer with his to the end
of the world, Math. 28. 18. 20. 
                  •
               . Becauſe Chriſt hath loued vs, and more
loueth vs then anie other, ſeeing he gaue himſelfe for vs, and hath made
the purgation of our ſinnes with his bloud in his owne perſon. Heb. chap.
13. And ſo gratiouſly inuited vnto him all that trauell and are heauie
laden, Matth. 11. and 28. So that men haue no cauſe to doubt of his 
ſufficiencie, power, and good will: but that in all their afflictions they
ought to flie vnto him alone, who witneſſeth of himſelfe, Iohn. chap. 14.
6. I am the way the truth, and the life, no man commeth to the Father,
but by me.
            The new doctrine of men doth teach, that Ieſus Chriſt is not the onely
Mediator, but alſo the Saints which reigne with him in heauen: and that

Saint Mary alſo the mother of God, is the Mediatrix and Aduocatrix of
mankind, lib. 4. S
                     •
                  nt. Diſtinct. 45. in M
                     •
                  ſſale Pariſ. in proſ
                     •
                   M
                     •
                  ſſae de Anuntiat.
            
            The ancient doctrine of God, doth teach, that our Redeemer Ieſus
Chriſt, by the perfect ſacrifice of himſelfe once offered vpon the croſſe, for
the putting away of ſinne, hath reconciled all the faithfull with God his
 Father, and hath found eternall redemption: ſo that there remayneth now
no more ſacrifice for ſin. Heb. 9. 12. 26. and cap. 10. 12. 18.
            The new doctrine of men doth teach, that the Maſſe is a ſacrifice for the
remiſſion of ſins of the quicke and the dead. Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 6. Can. 
               
                  •
               .
            The ancient doctrin of God doth teach, that we are iuſtified by faith in
Ieſus Chriſt without the works of the law, Rom. 3. 24. 28. Gal, 
                  •
               . 16. as witneſſeth
the holy Ghoſt of Abraham, the Father of all beleeuers. Abraham
(ſaith he) beleeued God, and it was imputed to him for righteouſnes, Gen.
 15. 6. Rom. 4. 3. And the Apoſtle S. Paul expreſly addeth, that this was not
written only for him, but alſo for vs, to whom faith ſhall alſo be imputed for
righteouſnes, Rom. 4. 23. 24.
            The new doctrine of men doth teach, that not faith only but works alſo
do iuſtifie. Concil. Trid. Seſ. 6. can. 11.
            The ancient doctrine of God, teacheth that faith is not doubtfull, but aſſured
of ſaluation, which it hath by the bloud of Chriſt: and that it is not
barren, but full of works of charity, which are the fruits of righteouſnes, &
 of a true faith, Heb. 11. 1. Gal. 5. 6. Philip. 1. 11.
            The new doctrin of men teacheth, that the particular iuſtification of mē
and much more the ſaluation is very vncertaine: ſo that men muſt alwayes
doubt of their ſaluation. And that not to doubt of the grace and fauour of
God is preſumption. Conc. Trid. Seſ. 6. Can. 13. Cenſ. Colon. fol. 96.
            The ancient doctrine of God doth teach, that our good workes, for tha
                  •
               
they are imperfect, can deſerue nothing at Gods hand, as ſaith the Prophet
Eſay 64 6. All our righteouſnes is as a ſtained cloth. And Chriſt our
Lord ſaith, Luk. 17. 10 When ye haue done all that is commanded you,
ſay ye are vnprofitable ſeruants.
            
                The new doctrin of men teacheth that our good works deſerue the grace
of God and euerlaſting life alſo that men may do works (which they call)
of ſupererrogation, that is to ſay, ouer and aboue thoſe which the Law of
God commandeth: whereunto the doers thereof are not bound, and they
are auailable to helpe others 
                  
                     •
                  ellar. de Purgatorio, lib. 1. 
                     •
                  . 8. cenſor. colif. 175.
            The ancient doctrine of God doth teach that Ieſus Chriſt is the head &
Spouſe of the Church, which he gouerneth and teacheth by his word and
Spirit, & that the dutie of the Church is to heare and obey the voyce of
her Spouſe and faithfull Paſtor, according to the commandement of the
heauenly Father, Mat. 17. 5. Heare him and as Chriſt Ieſus alſo teacheth,
Io. 10. 27. My ſheep heare my voyce, & I know them, & they follow me.
            
                The new doctrine of men teacheth, that the Pope is the head & Spouſe
of the Church, and Vicar of Chriſt vpon earth: who hath the keyes of Paradice,
and of hell, and can both ſaue & condemne and therefore ought all
men to obey his decrees, and be ſubiect vnto him. And that whoſoeuer obeyeth

obeyeth not, but gaineſaith his conſtitutions is an heretique. In extra
                     •
                  ag.
Tom. 22. Tit. 5. In Gloſſ. 2. lib. 1. Decret. Tit 7. C. 5.
            The ancient Doctrin of God doth teach, that the paſtors & miniſters of
the Church ought to feed the Chriſtian people with the true ſpiritual food
which is the word of God, and wholeſome Doctrine of the Goſpell. As the
miniſters of Chriſt, & faithful Stewards of the miſteries of God: according
to the commaundement of Chriſt Matth. 28. 20. Iohn. 21. 16. 17. And following
the ſtteps of the Apoſtle which taught the Church, that which they
had receiued of the Lord 1. Cor. 11. 23. And that which was agreeable to 
the holy ſcripture Acts 26. 22. 1. Cor 15. 3. 4.
            The new Doctrine of men teacheth, that the eccleſia
                  •
               tical perſons ought
to ſacrifice, or ſay Maſſe, & ſing, and pray in the Latine tongue, and to
keepe the ceremonies and tradition of the Romane Church; And to teach
the people to obſerue all that which the Popes and Councels determine &
cōmād. Albeit it agreeth not with the holy ſcripture. Cōci. Trid. Seſ. vltma. &c
            
            The ancient Doctrin of God, doth teach that the vſe of ſtrange tongues
(albeit to the praiſe of God, is vnprofittable in the Church to the ignorant
auditory. Therfore that they which teach, pray, or ſing in the Ch
                  •
               rch ought
to vſe the vulgar tongue, vnderſtood of the people for edification and exhortation
and conſolation of all. 1. Cor. 14 3. 6. 7. 8. &c.
            
            The new Doctrine of men teacheth that the worſhip of God ought to
be vſed in the Latine tongue. And that it ſhould not be only vnprofittable,
but alſo to the common people hurtfull if the holy ſcripture in the Church
ſhould be read or ſung in the vulgar tongue. Bellar de verbo Dei lib. 2. cap. 
               
                  •
               5.
            The ancient Doctrin of God doth teach, that the ſacramēts be inſtituted
of Chriſt to imprint & confirme in our harts the truth of the promiſes of
God and that they may be healthful vnto vs, it is of neceſſity required, that
we be faithful in the vſe of them: for as the word of God not beleeued, doth
not only not profit the hearers thereof, but leaueth them condemned: So
haue the ſacraments the ſame effect, when by faith they are not receiued,
               Matth 28. 19. 20. Rom. 4. 11. 1. Cor. 11. 27. 29. Heb. 4. 2. & cap. 11. 6.
            The new doctrine of men teacheth that the ſacramēts of the new teſtament,
giue grace, ex opere operato. That is to ſay By the vertue of the worke
wrought, without any good motiō of his part, that receiueth thē 
               l. 4. ſe: diſt. 1
            The ancient Doctrine of God doth teach, that Ieſus Chriſt in the inſtitution
of the holy ſupper, brake the bread and gaue it to his diſciples: and
afterwardes the wine, ſaying: drink ye all of it, without making difference.
The ſame teacheth the Apoſtle Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. 23.
            
            The new Doctrine of men teacheth, that the ſacramēt of the altar ought
to be giuen & diſpenſed in bread and in wine to the prieſts onely: But to the

                  •
               ayty, the bread alone ought to be admoniſhed Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 
               
                  •
               .
            The ancient Doctrin of God, doth teach, that matrimony is honorable
among all men, Heb. 13. 4. And that it is better to marry, then to burne 
                  •
               .
Cor. 7. 9. Alſo, that to forbid marriage is a doctrin of diuels 1. Tim. 4. 3.
            The new Doctrin of men doth teach, that matrimony is a Carnal eſtate
and therefore with ſuch ſeuerity to be forbidden to the Clergy, that more 
               
                  〈◊〉
                it ſhould be for a prelate or eccleſiaſticall perſon to liue in fornication,

th lawfully to marry, according to the law of God, for (as ſaith Bellar.)
it is a greater wickedneſſe for an eccleſiaſticall perſon to marry then to
commit fornication. And adding the cauſe, ſaith: for that he which is ſo
married, is made vnable to keepe his vow
                  •
                the which he that committeth
fornication is not Bellar. de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 34.
            The ancient Doctrine of God doth teach, that that which entreth into
the mouth defileth not a man Math. 15. 11. And that all meates be cleane
creatures, and that the faithfull may indifferently vſe them with pure conſcience
 and thankſgiuing, 1. Tim. 4. 4. Tit. 1. 15.
            The new Doctrine of men teacheth, that it is not lawfull for a Chriſtian
vnder paine of mortall ſinne, to eate of all ſorts of meates on all dayes and
times. As in Lent: the foure times, the frydayes, the ſatturdayes and the
vigils of ſome Saints Diſt. 4. cap. Statuimus
            
            The ancient Doctrine of God doth teach, that the duty of a godly man
is, to ſpeake truth, & keepe his faith & promiſe, & not to violate his oath, although
it were to his owne hindrance. Pſal. 15. 2. 4. Zach. 1. 16. Eph. 4. 25.
            The new Doctrine of men teacheth, that faith ought not to be kept with
 heretiques, and that it is lawful to violate promiſe and oath in fauour of the
Roman Church as it is cōcluded in the Councel of Conſtance, & with the
death of Iohn Hus confirmed, contrary to the publike faith, & falſe conduct.
            The ancient Doctrine of God doth teach, that euery ſoule ought to be
ſubiect to the higher powers, which are the magiſtrates Ro. 13 1. Pet. 
                  •
               . 
                  •
               3.
            The new Doctrine of men teacheth, that eccleſiaſticall perſons are not
 ſubject to the ſecular power, or politique magiſtrate, but that all ought to
be ſubiect to the Pope: who compareth himſelfe to the Sun, and the Emperour
to the Moone. And therefore Emperours & kings in token of ſubiection
and obedience doe kiſſe his feete lib. Decret. Gregor. Tit. 33.
            The ancient Doctrine of God doth teach, that Antichriſt, as God ſitteth
in the Temple of God, attributing to himſelfe, that which is proper to
God. 
                  •
               . Theſſ 24. And that the place of his ſitting is the great City which
hath 7 mountaines, and raigned ouer the kings of the earth Apoc. 17. 9. 18.
            
                The new Doctrine of men teacheth that Antichriſt is to come, of the
race of the Iewes, of the tribe of Dan. And that the place of his kingdome or
ſeat, ſhalbe in Ieruſalem
                  •
                
               Bellar▪ de Roman Pontific. lib. 3. cap 12. and 13.
            The ancient doctrine of God doth teach, that for thoſe that depart out of
this world, there remaine but two wayes, for the faithfull, which paſſe frō
death to life: heauen, Iohn 5. 24. And hell for the wicked and 
                  〈◊〉
               .
As Saint Iohn Baptiſt very expreſſly doth teach vs. Iohn 3. 36. He that beleeueth
(ſaith 
                  •
               e, in the Son, hath eu
                  ••
               laſting life. But he that beleeueth not
in the Son ſhal not ſee life. But the wratth of God, abideth vpon him. And
 as is confirmed in Lazarus, who was carried by the Angels into Abrahams
boſome: And in the ritchman, that was tormented in 
                  •
               ell. Luke 16
                  •
                22, 23.
            The new doctrine of men teacheth, that there are many places for the
ſoules after death To wit heauen, hell, the Lymbe
                  •
                of the fathers and 
                  〈◊〉
                infants
dying without Baptiſme, purgatorie, and another place, more honorable,
ioyning to purgatorie, Bellar, 
               
                  〈…〉
               .
            
               
By theſe Antitheſes, the Chriſtian Reader ſhall eaſily vnderſtand and iudge,
what doctrine he ought to beleeue & follow to be ſaued. To wit, the ancient doctrine
of God, which cannot erre not lie which is the true mark of the Chriſtian
Catholique and Apoſtolique Church: As contrariwiſe, the new doctrine inuented
by men, is the true mark of the Antichriſtian & Apoſtaticall Church: which
the godly ought to fly, deteſt & abhor, as damnable & a deceiuer. Albeit ſhe glory
& triumph with high titles and outward appearaunce. But the almighty God
beholdeth not the outward appearaunce: but his eyes behold the truth in the inward
part, which he loueth Ier. 5. 3. Pſal. 51. 8. 1. Sam. 16. 7. Eſaie 11. 3. Let princes
and Magiſtrates be aduiſed what doctrine by their authorities they maintaine.
Leaſt by inconſiderate zeale, they perſecute Chriſt in his members, As in time
paſt, did Saule, which afterwards was called Paule Acts 9. Let doctours & teachers
of the people alſo, beware, what doctrine they publiſh in the world; that they be
not of the number of deceiuers and euill laborers in the Lordes vineyard: which
vainely, boaſting of antiquity, holineſſe, Multitude, and power, accuſe the ancient
doctrine of God, of nouelty, and ſhroude the new doctrine of men, with the title
and cloake of antiquity, ſhewing themſelues, not the followers of Chriſt, nor his
Apoſtles But of the prieſts, prelates & ancients of Ieruſalem, which alwayes gloried,
of the fathers of the law, the ſucceſſion of Aaron, of the Temple, of it ornaments
and priuiledges. And notwithſtanding did reſiſt and perſecute Chriſt and
his Apoſtles, accuſing and condemning the doctrine of the Goſpell, for new and
ſtraunge: As the Euangeliſts doe very clerely and largly witneſſe, And as S. Paul
in the firſt Epiſtle Theſſ chap. 2. verſe 18. 16. alſo declareth.
            Woe vnto them that ſpeake euill of good, and good of euill: which put darknes
for light, and light for darkneſſe. Eſaie 5. 20.
            Take heede that no man deceiue you, for many ſhall come in my name, ſaying:
I am Chriſt and ſhall deceiue many. Mat. 24. 4. 5.
            An end of the booke:
            to God be the glorie.
         
         
            THe good Biſhops of Rome continued almoſt 300. yeares. The firſt of whom
was Linus, and the laſt Silueſter. pag. 23.
            The Archbiſhops of Rome continued. 200 yeares. To wit, from the 320 yeare,
vnto the yeare. 520. page 26.
            The Patriarkes of Rome continued, from the 520. yeare, vnto the 605: yeare.
page. 26.
            The Popes began in the 605. yeare, the firſt was Boniface 3. page 34. Whoſe
tiranny to this day continueth: As is ſeene by all the progreſſe of the former
Treatiſe.
            The names of the Popes follow, after the order of their Alphabet. Of whom
mention is made in the former Treatiſe.
            
               Adrian 1. pag. 40.
               Adrain 3. 50
               Adrian 4. 73
               Adrian 5. 90
               Adrian 6. 
                     •
                  50
               Agatho 37
               Alexander 2. 64
               Alexander 3. 75
               Alexander 4. 87
               Alexander 5. 112
               Alexander 6. 113
               Anaſtatius 2. 30
               Anaſtatius 3. 52
               Anaſtatiu, 4. 73
            
            
               B
               Benedict 2. 37
               Benedict 3. 49
               Benedict 
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               
                  
Benedict. 6. or 5. 55
               Benedict. 7. or 8. 59
               Benedict. 9. or 8. 60
               Benedict. 10. or 9. 61
               Benedict. 11. or 9. 
                     •
                  3
               Benedict. 12. or 10. 102
               Benedict. 13. or 11. 111
               Boniface 1. 30
               Boniface 2. 31
               Boniface 3. 34
               Boniface 4. 35
               Boniface 5. 36
               Boniface 6. 50
               Boniface 7. 55
               Boniface 8. 92
               Boniface 9. 110
               Caliſtus 2. 71
               Caliſtus 3. 123
               Celeſtine 3. 79
               Celeſtine 4. 85
               Celeſtine 5. 92
               Clement 2. 61
               Clement 3. 68
               Clement 4. 89
               Clement 5. 96
               Clement 6. 102
               Clement 7 107
               Clement 8. 111
               Clement 9. or 
                     •
                  . 150
               Conſtantine 1. 37
               Conſtantine 
                     •
                  . 39
               Comelius 26
               Cunon. 37
               Damaſus 1. 28
               Damaſus 2. 62
               Deus dedit, or Theodatus.
35
               Donus. 55
               Eugenius 2. 42
               Eugenius 4. 120
               Felix 2.
               Felix 
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               For
                     〈◊〉
                   50
               Gelaſius 1. 30
               Gelaſius 2 70
               Gregory 1. 32
               Gregory 2. 37
               Gregory 3. 37
               Gregory 4. 42
               Gregory 5. 56
               Gregory 6. 60
               Gregory 7. 65
               Gregory 8. 71
               Gregory 9. 83
               Gregory 10. 89
               Gregory 11. 105
               Gregory 12. 112
               Gregory 13. 196
               Gregory 14. 200
               Honorius 1. 64
               Honorius 2. 71
               Honorius 3. 82
               Honorius 4. 92
               Hormiſda. 30
               Innocent 1. 30
               Innocent 2. 72
               Innocent 3. 80
               Innocent 4. 86
               Innocent 5. 90
               Innocent 6. 104
               Innocent 7 111
               Iooncent 8. 130
               Innocent 9. 200
               Iohn 1. 30
               Iohn 3. 32
               Iohn 5. 37
               Iohn 8. 43
               Iohn 9. or 8 50
               Iohn 11. or 10. 52
               Iohn 12 or 11. 53
               Iohn 13. or 12. 53
               Iohn 14. or 13. 55
               Iohn 16. or 15. 55
               Iohn 17. or 16. 56
               Iohn 18. or 17. 56
               Iohn 19. or 17. or 18. 58
               Iohn 20. or 18. or 19. 58
               Iohn 21. or 14. or 20. 60
               Iohn 22. or 20. or 21. 90
               Iohn 23. or 21. or 22. 89
               Iohn 24. 22. or 23. 114
               Iulius 2. 143
               Iulius 3. 163
               Lando 52
               Leo 2. 37
               Leo 3. 41
               Leo 4. 42
               Leo 5. 51
               Leo 8. 54
               Leo 9. 62
               Leo 10. 147
               Liberius 27
               Linus. 23
               Lucius 2. 72
               Lucius 3. 79
               Marcellus 26
               Marcellus 2. 165
               Martin 1. 36
               Martin 2. 50
               Martin 4. 91
               Martin 5. 118
               Miltiades 222
               Nicholas 1 49
               Nicholas 2. 64
               Nicholas 3. 91
               Nicholas 4. 92
               Nicholas 5. 101
               Paſcall 1. 42
               Paſcall 2. 68
               Paul 1. 38
               Paul 2. 124
               Paul 3. 15
                     •
                  
               
               Paul 4. 16
                     •
                  
               
               Saint Peter 20
               Pelagius 1. 37
               Pelagius 2. 32
               Pius 2. 1
                     •
                  3
               Pius 3. 143
               Pius 4. 187
               Pius 5. 19
                     •
                  
               
               Sabinianus 33
               Sergius 2. 4
                     •
                  
               
               Sergius 3. 50
               Sergius 4. 59
               Siluerius 3
                     •
                  
               
               Siueſter 1. 25
               Silueſter 2. 57
               Silueſter 3. 61
               Symachus 30
               Siricius 29
               Siſtus 4. 126
               Siſtus 5. 195
               Stephen 2. or 3. 21
               Stephen 4. or 3. 39
               Stephen 5. or 4. 4
                     •
                  
               
               Stephen 6. or 5. 50
               Stephen 7. or 6. 50
               Stephen 9. or 10. 63
               Vrban 2.
               Vrban 3. 7
                     •
                  
               
               Vrban 4. 88
               Vrban 5. 105
               Vrban 6. 106
               Frban 6. 200
               Victor 2. 63
               Victor 3. 68
               Victor 4. 75
               Vigilius 31
               Vitellanus 36
               Zacharias 37
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   