
      
         
            
            
            
               A
COLLECTION OF CERTAINE
LEARNED DISCOVRSES,
WRITTEN
BY THAT FAMOVS MAN OF MEMORY
ZACHARY VRSINE; Doctor and Profeſſor
of Divinitie in the noble and flouriſhing
Schoole of NEVSTAD.
            
               For explication of divers difficult points,
laide downe by that Author in his
CATECHISME.
            Lately put in Print in Latin by the laſt
labour of D. DAVID PARRY: and
now newlie tranſlated into Engliſh,
by I. H. for the benefit and
behoofe of our Chriſtian
country-men.
            
            
               AT OXFORD,
Printed by IOSEPH BARNES, and are to be ſold
in Pauls Church-yard at the ſigne of the
Bible▪ 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               COurteous & Chriſtian
Reader: at their inſtant
requeſt whom it
moſt concerned, and
of mine owne inclination,
which ſhall (I
profeſſe) bee ever ſervile
to thy godly deſi
                  •
               es, I did ſixe moneths
ſince begin (and only beginne) to teach this
ſtranger to ſpeake Engliſh (A ſtrāger indeed
for language, but for conſent in doctrine our
natural country-man, and fellow-citizen in
the heavenly Hieruſalem.) This courſe vpon
ſpecial occaſion interrupted, I haue now the
ſecond time attempted and perfited, at the
importunity of my friend this 
                  •
               rinter, whoſe
commodity had otherwiſe beene much preiudiced
by prevention.
            
               
If I haue truely expreſſed the Authors intent,
it is as much as I can deſire, or thou expect.
Jf I haue failed thereof, I hope it is neither
ordinarily, nor groſlie; wherefore being
vnworthy of pardon, much more of praiſe, I
humbly pleade for thy favourable cenſure.
Haſt is the enemie of circumſpection, and
ſeldome meetes a ſwift and wiſe reſolution.
Thou wilt (I preſume) the rather beare with
me, if thou remember but this, that I was
compelled to make a three weekes worke of
it, in a time when (beſides this) I did of dutie
diſpatch more buſineſſe, and of neceſſity endure
more griefe and heavineſſe, then in ſo
ſmall a ſpace did ever afore befall me. Some
proofe hereof may be this, that for certaine
howers I was enforced to imploy others,
whoſe ſtile (I know) thy quicke re
                  •
               iſh can iudiciouſly
diſtinguiſh.
            Touching the Author, all I can ſay is too
little, and of that little (leaſt thou ſurfette on
me, eare thou come to him) take only this little.
He was in his life laborious, religious, &
like an Angell amongſt men; in his ſtile
princely, pure, and plentifull like a ſweeping
torrent; in his learning (which was of all
ſortes, eſpecially in Divinity) ſound, ſubtile,

and profound as the deepe Ocean.
            
            The difficulty and obſcurity which muſt
needs be where is great depth, naturall brevity,
and neceſſitie of ſchoole-termes ſhould
haue beene plained and cleered (as farre as
my weake vnderſtanding could perfourme)
had not the niggardly ſhortneſſe of time, &
envious occurrent of buſineſſe, and diſquiet
of minde beene a barre to my honeſt intent.
Time may miniſter occaſion of ſupplying
theſe and all other defectes: In the meane
while for mine encouragement and thine
owne good, accept theſe firſt fruites of my
ſtudies in this kinde; and remember to read,
not for contention, but inſtruction. And ſo I
leaue thee to God; whom I deſire a
                  •
                well to
enable thee to the conceaving, as he did this
his ſervant to the vnfolding of the moſt deep
myſteries and ſubtle controverſies of religion.
         
         
            
            
            A TABLE OF THE SEVEral
diſcourſes contained in
this booke.
            
               1. Two prefaces of D. David Parrie prefixed before
the two laſt partes of the Catechiſme in the firſt Edition.
               2 An exhortatiō of Vrſine to the ſtudy of Chriſtianity.
               3. The Antiochian beleife touchinge the incarnation
of the Word, againſt Paulus Samoſatenus: with the catholique
faith and beliefe touching the vbiquitie of
Chriſtes bodie. Out of the 4. booke of Vigil. againſt
E
                     •
                  tych.
               4. An epiſtle of Vrſine vpon predeſtination: with ſome
fragments of certaine of his Epiſtles.
               5. Parte of an oration vpon this queſtion: Whether, &
how far forth Chriſt died for all: by D. David Parie.
               6. A ſhorte introduction to the controverſie of the
Lordes ſupper, by David Parrie.
               7. A breife expoſition of the controverſie about the
Lordes ſupper: betweene the Conſubſtantialiſts, and
maintainers of the truth: by D. Zacharie Vrſine.
               8. Poſitions of D. Zacharie Vrſine, about ſome principall
pointes of Chriſtian religion.
               9. The funerall oration of D. Frances Iunius, vpon
the life and death of D. Zacharie Vrſine.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A PREFACE
TO THE THIRD PART OF

                  〈◊〉
                his Catechiſme touching Sacraments.
Wherein is ſifted and refuted the
ſlaunderous and Satyricall Declamation of
Bellarmine, prefixea before the ſecond Tome
of his Disputations, touching
the Sacraments.
*⁎*
            
            
               THE third part of the Catechiſme
ſetteth downe
briefly the true doctrine
of the Sacraments, diſcovering
withal at large the
very fountaines thereof;
not only clearing to the
capacity and conceite of
younge beginners the
chiefe controverſies of our time, eſpecially of Baptizing
of Children, Tranſubſtantiation, Conſubſtantiation,
and Excommunication (depending on the doctrine
of the Sacraments) but alſo diving ſo far into
the depth of them, that even the diligent and
learned ſort may therewith all reſt ſatiſfied. Many
controverſies and contentions of wrangling

Sophiſtes are there of purpoſe lefte vndiſcuſſed:
for why ſhoulde a learner bee wearied with that,
wherevpon thoſe ſubtile diſputants cannot themſelues
as yet reſolue? or why ſhould men be ouercurious
& coſtly in trimming vp a trifle? notwithſtāding,
by thoſe ſolid grounds of doctrine it may
eaſily app
                  ••
               te, how vaine and varying from Gods
word they are, howſoeuer they vaunt themſelues
to the view of the ſimpler ſort in rich ſeeming
robes of reueren
                  •
               , but pretended Antiquity. For
Truth is a touch-ſtone, ſeruing for the triall both of
it ſelfe, and alſo of error.
            But we ſhall hereafter finde occaſion to tal
                  ••
               
of theſe matters in our publike ſchooles more
at large. For the preſumption of the Ieſuites is
growne to that height of impudēcy, that nothing
can be ſo abſurdely diſputed by their ſchoole men,
whereupon they doe not thinke themſelues able
by their ſophiſtry to ſet ſo faire a varniſh, that both
learned, and vnlearned ſhall accept it for currant
Catholique. And if there bee any (as doubtleſſe
there are many things) ſo groſſe & falſe, that they
admit no colour, then with ſhameleſſe oaths they
face vs downe, that they were neuer written, or ſo
much as once approued by any of their Catholiques.
For theſe (if I bee not deceiued) are thoſe
three impute Spirites,
               Apoc. 16. 13 lately ſpewed out of the
mouth of the Dragon, to bewitch the Monarches
of the worlde, and vnder-proppe the ruines of
Popery.
            
            Here they diſpute buſily, whether Sacraments be

thinges reall, or rationall, or accidentally compoſed and
conſiſting of things and wordes? and therefore Whether
they may properly bee defined, or no? and if they
may, whether the vulgar definition (that is, A viſible
ſigne of inviſible grace,) doe indifferently agree vnto
them all? Coldely indeede and ſlenderly they
teach, that Sacramentes are viſible and ſenſible
ſignes, ſignifying an holy thing by way of likenes
& proportion: but perverſly they deny that vnto
them is required the expreſſe commandement
of God in Scripture; they deny that in them is any
promiſe of grace and remiſſion of ſinnes, yea
or ſo much as annexed vnto them by the ordinance
and appointment of God: in a word, they
deny that they are ordained to ſtir vp, nouriſh, &
confirme our faith. But they maintaine, that they
are the cauſes of grace in vs, that they beſtow grace
vpon vs, that they are the inſtruments of iuſtification,
that of themſelues they effect grace, iuſtification,Opus operatum.
and ſanctification by the very worke done, that
is, by the naturall power and vertue of the ſacramental
action it ſelfe thereunto appointed by God;
or (as others wil) by the power of God aſſiſtant to
the things ſigned, according to covenant, euen
without faith or in warde motion of the receiver.
And this force and efficacy they attribute onely
to ſacraments of the New Teſtament: as for thoſe
of the Olde. ſome there are which leaue vnto
them only the bare and naked ſignification of iuſtification;
others beſides that doe alſo yeeld the
effect of iuſtification, but only in regarde of the

worke of the worker,
               Opus operā
                  tis. that is in reſpect of the devotion
and deſert of the vſer. And here againe ſome
except circumciſion, as iuſtifying through the
vvorke done; others reckon it with the reſt. And
this is that ſtale ſtuffe of the olde ſchool
                     •
                  -men,
which theſe late iuncketters haue nowe againe
ſumptuouſly dreſſed, and diſhed out to the world
for delicates.
            Eſpecially Bellarmine the Arch-ſophiſt of this
age doth flatter himſelfe in theſe follies,Bellarmine a calling diſputant. that he is
fully perſwaded he can obſcure the cleere ſunneſhine.
And therefore inſolently and ill-beſeeming
the duty of ſo great a diſputant, he ſlaundereth
& taunteth our Doctors (moſt of them now
dead) neither ſhewing nor obiecting to them falſhood
or paralogiſmes in their proofes, but onelie
with ſcorne and diſdaine giving them the lie, &
the lie: which ſtrange manner of diſputation is
now taken vp for a faſhion amongſt thoſe railers.
But the moſt worthy Divines Whitaker, Danaeus,
Sibrandus & the reſt haue now ſo diſcovered the
folly of that moſt inſolent man, that even the leſuites
themſelues are aſhamed of their Galiah, and
beginne to repent them of his too great liberty vſed
in diſputation.Bellarmines ſaty
                  
                     •••
                  all pref
                     ••
                  e to his 2. Tome of of Sacraments examined and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            He hath prefixed before his ſecond Tome of
diſputations which lately hee ſet forth about the
ſacraments A Satyricall Declamation or Libelling
speech, wherein he profeſſeth that he will play▪
Stage-part, and repreſent vnto his Romiſh auditory
a ſpectacle not vnpleaſant, concerning the furious

contentions of Heretiques. His maine purpoſe
therein is to oppoſe our Doctors betweene
themſelues each againſt othe
                  •
               , and by his vpſtart
ſophiſtry to de barre vs the ſpeciall vſe of the Sacraments,
namely the ſea
                     •
                  ing of the promiſe of grace,
and ſtrengthning of our faith. But how perverſely
he dealeth I haue here thought good briefely to
declare.
            Firſt of all he goeth about to ſhew out of Luther,
               Of the word Sacr
                        ••
                     ment.
               
               Caroloſtadius, Melancthon, Zwinglius, and Calvin,
that the worde Sacrament hath beene by diverſe,
and thoſe our wrighters, partly received,
partly reiected. As if the Schoole-men themſelues
did neuer doubt or diſpute about the originall ſignification,
propriety, and vſe of a Sacrament? And if at
any time our wrighters haue ſeemed to make queſtion
of the worde, yet it is a cleere caſe, that by
conſent of all it hath beene hitherto receaved
in our churches▪ and retained vnto this day without
controverſie. Wherefore that which he ſpeaketh
of Luther and Melancthon is plainely frivolous.
The opinion of Caroloſtadius (a man gauled
by Luther) none in a maner haue followed. With
Zwinglius he doth manifeſtly cavil. For he indeed
could haue wiſhed the word Sacrament had never
beene receaved by the Germanes; but why? truely
for no other reaſon, but becauſe he deteſteth the
horrible abuſe of a Sacrament, in ſwearing thereby:
a thing (alaſſe!) to familiar with the Germanes.
As for Calvin, that he ſhould little allowe of the
word, and reprehend it, yet not accompt it a matter

worthy the ſtriuing about, it is an impudent
deviſe of the Ieſuits, which without ſhame hee
might babble out in his theater at Rome, frō whēce
Calvines Chriſtian Inſtitution is exiled.Inſtit. lib. 4. cap. 14. They who
with iudgement ſhal read the whole 13. Section
wherevnto afterwardes the Ieſuit pointeth, ſhall
ſee that Calvin doth not reprehend the word, but
the ſubtility of Sophiſts, who out of the ſignification
of the Latin word do impugne the confirmation
of our faith by Sacraments.
            Then comming to the nature of a Sacrament,
he bringeth forth vpon the ſtage Luther, Zwinglius,
and Calvin as it were skirmiſhing there-about
betweene themſelues: ſaying, that Luther would
haue the Sacramentes to be only teſtimonies ordained
by God, for the ſtirring vp of our faith: Zwinglius
certaine engadgings of our ſelues vnto God: laſtly,
Calvin ioining (as it were) both opinions into one,
would haue them to be ſignes of Gods loue towardes
vs, ſealing our faith; and teſtimonies againe binding vs
vnto Godlineſſe. And this is the conflict. But indeede
the Ieſuite would faine ſhew his auditors a
fault where none is.
            The conſent of Calvin & Luther in this point
is ſo evident,Of the nature and force of a Sacramēt. that it needes no proofe. That the
opinion of me
                     •
                  re tokens and markes of our binding and
profeſſion is by way of cavill fathered on Zwinglius,
the Ieſuite himſelfe afterwardes vnwittingly witneſſeth,
where he writeth, that the opinion of Caroloſtadius
and the Anabaptiſtes touching meere tokens
of our profeſſion hath beene as wel by others, as

by Zwinglius confuted, and almoſt quite buried:
And this that he write
                  •
               h is true. For Zwinglius both
elſewhere, and alſo in his booke wrighten to the
Princes of Germany, doth plainly enough expoūd
himſelfe wrighting after this manner: The verie
ſignes are ſo ordained by Chriſt himſelfe, that even by
their analogie and proportion they prevaile very farre, in
le
                     •
                  ding vs vnto the thing preſent by faith and contemplation.
And afterwardes more plainely; The Sacraments
are not in vaine; for they ſhewe vs the ſaluation
giuen by God, thither they 
                     •
                  ourne our thoughts, & continually
EXERCISE OVER FAITH which immediatly
they promiſe, & drawe vs to brotherly charity. And
whileſt all this is don, one & the ſame Spirit worketh
in vs, who inſpiringe ſomtymes without meanes, ſomtymes
with meanes, draweth whither, how farre, and
whom it pleaſeth him. Thus farre Zwinglius. Now
wh
                  •
               t could haue ben ſpoken more clerely touching
the conſent betweene Luther and Caluin,
then that Sacramēts were ordained for this end,
namely to leade vs by ſimilitude & proportion
vnto the thing preſent by faith, to declare vnto
vs our ſaluation, to turne our thoughts, to exerciſe
our faith, and to be meanes and inſtruments
of the holy Ghoſt? Is this of Sacraments to make
meere tokens & markes of our Profeſſion & obligation
vnto Chriſt, and his church? the Ieſuite doth openly
wrong our Doctors.
                  Defence of Luthers opinion 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   as Sacraments confirm
                     •
                   faith.
            
            Neyther doth he ſtay here, but hath a farther
fling at euery of them by courſe. He exclaimeth
on the opinion of Luther, that ſacraments ſtrenghthen

our faith, as ſo abſurd, that nothing poſſibly
could be deviſed more abſurd. And why, I
pray? Becauſe (forſooth) that is the vſe of miracles:
for this is the ſume of all he ſaith.
            But abſurd is the Ieſuite himſelfe,Ideo 
                     〈◊〉
                   differē
                  ren
                     •••
                   gener
                     ••
                  am ab vnà ſpecie quia &c. who therefore
remoueth the Generall Difference from one
Kind, becauſe it agreeth with the other; whereas
he cānot be ignorant, that General Differences are
cōmonly & indifferently in all their Kindes. Is not this
the generall vſe of all diuine ſignes, to put men 
                     〈◊〉
                  
mynde of Gods pleaſure & benefites, and to ſeale vnto
vs the certainety of our faith in his promiſes? for therfore
doth God 
                  •
               incke thoſe ſignes with his word,
that ſo he might prouide for our weaknes, & confirme
vnto vs his promiſes. Yf the Ieſuite make
doubt hereof, let him ouer-runne the ſcripture
from the firſt Sacrament or immortality in Paradiſe,
vnto the laſt ſignes of 
                  •
               he ſmall comminge
of Chriſt; & he ſhall finde they agree all in this, as
well vniuerſall, as particular; as well thoſe that
were deliuered in things naturall, as miraculous;
as well ordinary, as extr
                  •
               ordinary:) But I hope
he will not deny that a miracle is a diuine ſigne
& Lombard himſelfe can teach him that a Sacrament
is one ſorte of diuine ſignes.
                  Lib. 4 
                     •
                  . 1. How farre miracles & Sacramēts agree in their vſe. 
               Miracles therfore
& ſacraments agree in this vſe, but that miracles
are ſeales, either of the whole doctrine in generall,
or of ſome certaine promiſe; Sacraments,
onely & eſpecially of the promiſe of grace.
            Neyther makes it to the purpoſe that he ſaith
miracles are of themſelues knowne,
               E
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ta. & depend not any

way on preaching; & that Sacraments are not
vnderſtood, vnleſſe they be confirmed by the teſtimony
of the word: 
                  〈…〉
                speaketh 
                  〈◊〉
                the
force of miracles is vaine. They may indeed of
themſelues ſtrike into 
                  〈…〉
               , but
they can no more of them ſelues teach & confirme
that heauenly doctrine whereof they are
ſeales then can the Sacraments without declaration
of their doctrine. Beſydes, how followes
this? 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   themselues do not ſeale vnto vs the
promi
                     •
                  es, as 
                     〈…〉
                   they do not at all ſeale thē.
Suppoſe miracles haue force & efficacy of themſelues;
that hinders not but that Sacraments alſo
may haue their force & efficacye by the appointment
of God. For both naturall, & miraculous,
and alſo voluntary ſignes doe ſignifie, though in
one ſorte the flame be ſignified by ſmoake, in an
other the power of God by miracle, in a third the
promiſe of grace by ſacrament.
            After this he ſcoffes at that compariſon (as fooliſh)
wherein our wrighters lyken the worde to
Princes Charters o
                     •
                   Letters Patentes,
               II That the 
                     〈…〉
                   & a writ
                        •
                     , a Sacrament & a 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   is not absurd. and the
Sacrament to their ſeales: maintaining the contrary,
that the word rather ſhould be called the
ſeale of the ſacrament, thē the Sacramēt the ſeale
of the worde. And why ſo? Becauſe (ſaith hee)
as the ſeale without the wrighting hath his force, and
not the wrighting without the ſeale; ſo the word of God
euen without ſacrament hath very great authority, the
Sacrament without the worde none at all. But twiſe
ridiculous and fooliſh is the Ieſuite: firſt in attributinge

force to the ſeale without the wrighting,
& none to the wrighting without the ſeale:
ſecondly in making the worde a ſeale, becauſe of
it ſelfe it hath authority. For (tell me Bellarmine)
what force hath the Popes leaden bull? or what
doth it ſeale vnto you being plucked from his
pardon? and if you deny that the wrightings &
charters are acknowledged without their ſeales;
I anſwere that this is neither generally, nor of it
ſelfe true.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Did you neuer ſee any billes, handwritings,
acquittances, or reſcriptes of Princes
ratifyed without their ſeales? The wrightings even
of good men, much more of Princes, & moſt
eſpecially of God himſelfe, haue and deſerue
ſufficient authority in themſelues, as appeareth
in times paſt how the wrightings of Emperors were
wont to bee confirmed rather by markes ſubſcribed,
then by waxen ſeales. But by accident, that
is, by reaſon of the fraile faith & life of man it is
now come to paſſe, that wrightings though confirmed
by many ſeales are ſcarſely ſure enough.
Now what folly is it in you, of the word to make
a ſeale, becauſe without any ſacrament it is of
ſufficient authority? whatſoeuer is in it ſelfe authenticke,
will you preſently take that for a ſeale?
A ſeale is the viſible ſigne of any writting, whoſe
vſe is not ſo much to adde authority, as to aſcertaine
vs of the truth. Such a ſigne is not the word
of God. But it is more fitly compared vnto
wrightings, becauſe therein God inſtructeth his
Church in his will, & doth as it were bequeath

vnto it certaine goods, or good things. It hath in
it ſelfe authority from God the author; the ſacraments
are thereunto added as ſeales, not (as you
ſuppoſe) that from them it might receiue authority,
but that by them God might ſtrengthen our
feebleneſſe & infirmity. For they are viſible pictures,
or rather the promiſes themſelues attired
in certaine ceremonyes, & (as it were) viſible
wordes,
               Tract. 80. 
                     〈…〉
                   c. 15. & contra 
                     〈…〉
                  . 19. cap. 
                     •
                  6. as Auſtin pretely termeth them; becauſe
they picture and preſent vnto our eies thoſe benefites
which the vvorde ſoundeth vnto our
eares. But more credit is giuen to a thinge ſeene
then onely heard.
            Thirdely he cavilles with Luther in this ſorte.III Baptiſme of children doth not di
                     •
                  prooue the ſtrēgthning of our faith by ſaments.
If a ſacrament were nothinge els but an inſtrument
to ſtirre vp and nouriſh 
                  •
               aith in vs; why are
infantes, mad men, and men aſleepe ſometimes
baptized in the Church? But why doth he not
lykewiſe make a queſtion ofFor they alſo are chriſtened amongſt Pap
                     •
                  ſtes. belles, churches, &
altars? let your church (if it will) baptize madde
men, and men aſleepe: as for infantes of the
church of Chriſt, we anſwere that they indeed although
wanting the vſe of reaſon are notwithſtanding
baptized, becauſe of the commaundement
and promiſe of God. But (you will ſaye)
they do no beleeue: ergo baptiſme confirmes not their
faith. Deny not what you know not. They belee
                     •
                  e
not as men of age: ergo beleeue they not at all? yf this
be true, why may not this alſo be as true? they are
not reaſonable as men of age: therefore they are not reaſonable
at all. To them is promiſed the holy Ghoſt

workinge faith in vs, to them is promiſed the
grace of the couenant
                  •
               , & the kingdome of God.
And although actually they do not beleeue, yet
why may they not as well by inclination beleeue
through grace, as by inclination they ſin through
nature? As therefore they beleeue: ſo baptiſme
is vnto them a ſeale confirming their faith. But
who ſayd a Sacrament was nothing elſe but an
inſtrument to ſtirre vp, & nouriſh our faith? there are
more vſes of a Sacrament beſides this. But admit
baptiſme doe not confirme fayth in inſants;
yet it will confirme them when they are come to
age. For the fruit of baptiſme is not reſtrayned to
one moment;Auguſt. li. 4. ca 4. de Bap. Lomb. lib. 4. diſt. 4. ca. 7. witneſſe Auſten & Lombard himſelfe.
Yet are they to be baptized, that their adoption
& regeneration may be ſealed vnto thē,
and they diſtinguiſhed from Infidels: which
things, as they are not to be accounted nothing;
ſo truly we doubt not but that through baptiſme
they are imparted & ſealed vnto the infantes of
the church, not (as you teach) becauſe of the
worke don, but in regard of the Inſtitution & appointment
of Chriſt. Thus therefore the Ieſuite ſeeth
how the baptiſme of Children doth not diſſemble
or take away the confirmation of faith.
            
            But here maſking wholy vnder a vizard of the
Anabaptiſtes,
               Bellarmines ſophiſtical dilemma for Anabaptiſts recorted. 
               Infants (ſaith he) who while they are
in baptizing crye & ſtruggle, either vnderſtand what
is doing, or not: yf they doe not vnderſtand, neyther doe
they beleeue, and are in vaine baptized; & then the
Anabaptiſtes preuaile: yf they vnderſtand, then are

they willfull ſinners, & ſacrilegious, & then againe the
Anabaptiſtes preuaile. Indeed the ſtage-man playeth
his part cunningely. But what if with an armed
dilemma (as he termeth it) I ſhould lykewiſe
ſay? The Ieſuite, that writt this, is eyther a good
man, or a cauiller. If a good man, he ſhould not ſo haue
tyed, & then wee haue the better: if a cauiller, he ſhould
not be beleeued, & then againe we haue the better. Is
not this the like reaſon? Either horne and part of
the Ieſuites dilemma is deceiptfull: and in the former
there is a double fallacy.Fallacia eſt▪ à ſecundum quid, cùm ſic colligit. 
               Firſt frō that which
is but partely true he concludeth as if it were ſimply
and wholy true; as where he reaſoneth thus,
Infants do not vnderſtand: ergo they do not beleue; it
is true of the actes and vſe, not of the poſſibilitie of
beleefe. I meane that poſſibilitie, not which wee
haue by nature,Eſt eti
                     •
                  
                  ̄ paralogiſmus non cauſae. but by grace of that promiſe, I
will be thy God, & the God of thy ſeede,. Secondly he
diſputeth from that which is no cauſe as if it were
a true cauſe, thus, Infants do not actually beleeue: ergo
they ought not to be baptized. For the cauſe of baptizing
of infants is not the actuall vnderſtandinge or
beleefe of infants, but the promiſe pertaining vnto
them,Act. 12. 38. as being children of the couenant, & Church,
as Peter wittneſſeth, Let every one be baptized in the
name of Ieſus Chriſt &c.: becauſe to you and to your
children is the promiſe made.
            
            In the latter part of his argument is the ſame
ſophiſme. Infantes when they are to be baptized cry.
struggle, & often vſe miſhapen & diſtorted motions.
But why? is it becauſe they ſtriue againſt the ſacred

action of baptiſme? no, but becauſe ſome other
thinge grieueth them, as that they endure
ſome paſſion paynefull to their tender infancye.
But what thinkes the Ieſuit of thoſe Infants which
were vnder bloudy circumciſion? what thinkes he
of Abraham an oldeman? of the males of his familye?
& of the Sichemites? was there (thinkes
he) no ſtruggling? no miſhapen or diſtorted
motion? Or why ſhould he rather terme infants
ſacrilegious, then he doth his Veſtal Nannes, who
in tune of their confeſſion, penance, and communicating
(ſo leſſoned by the E
                     ••
                  ers) do often
let fall many à tender teare? who in ſacred actions
vſe more miſſhapen motions then the
Preiſt at Maſſe? nay did the Ieſuit himſelfe never
weep for devotion in ſaying Maſſe, and ſo proue
himſelfe ſacrilegious? Bellarmine
                     •
                  
                ſo great a Doctor
(me thinke) ſhould be a ſhamed of ſo childiſh
trifles. Here what Auſtin ſayth of this matter.
Wheras infants ſtriue as much as they can by cryes &
ſhrinkings,
               Epiſt. 75. ad Dard. 
               it is not imputed vnto them, & all their
reſiſtance is accounted nothing &c. becauſe they know
ſo little what they doe, that they are not thought to do it.
the like vnto this we may read, in his 23 Epiſtle,
& in his 4. booke & 25. Chapter of Baptiſme againſt
the Donatiſtes.
            
            In the end he diſmiſſeth Luther with this frūp.
I pray 
                     〈◊〉
                   what Gospell, Apoſtle, or Prophet did he euer
read that Sacraments of the new Teſtament were ſeals
of the worde of God? was it (belike) in the Gospell of
Saint Luther? But where as he ſayth were ſeales of

the worde of God, for were ſeales of the promiſe of
grace, it is but a cunning peece of forgery,
thereby to make vs ſeeme to repoſe all the authority
of Gods worde on the Sacraments, which
we before haue refuted. Thus he preſumes to
pul a dead lyon by the beard, whoſe very lookes,
were he liuing, he durſt not abide. But I pray, Sir,
tell vs firſt in what Goſpell you read that Sacraments
are not ſeales of the promiſe of Grace, nor confirme
our faith, but that they beſtowe grace, that
they iuſtifie & ſanctifie, if they be of the old teſtament,
by vertue of the very actiō of the receiuer;
if of the new, by the worke done, evē without faith,
or any good intēt, or motiō of the receiuers (wheras
contrary-wiſe the ſcripture ſpeaketh playnly,
that Circumciſion profitteth
                     •
                   them that keepe the lawe,
               Rom. 2. 26.
               but to the tranſgreſſors thereof it is vncircumciſion.
               Mar. 16. 16.
               Thoſe which beleeue and are baptized ſhall be ſaued.
               1. Cor. 11. 28.
               Wee muſt examine our ſelues, 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo eate of this holy
bread) In what goſpell (I ſaye) reade you this?
Belyke in ſom Layolan or Gregoriō Calendar. Now
one the other ſide hearken where Luther hath
reade, that ſacramēts are ſeals of the promiſe of grace.
God ſayth of circumciſion,Gen. 7. 11. 
               That it may be a ſigne
of the couenant betweene me and you. But Paule interpreteth
this couenant to be grace,
               Rom. 4. 11. 
               & the righteouſneſſe
of fayth.
               Exo. 12. 13. Of the Paſſeover, That bloud ſhall be
vnto you for for a ſigne vpon thoſe houſes where yee are,
that ſeing that bloud I may paſſe over you. But this
Paſſeover did ſignifye the grace of Chriſt.
               1. Cor. 5. 7. Of Baptiſme,
               Mat. 28. 28.
               Baptize all nations in the name (that is, in the

authority, commaundem
                  •
               nt, & ſteede) of the
father,
               Act. 22. 16. 
               the ſonne, & the holy Ghoſt. And: Ariſe,
waſh away thy ſinnes. And, Baptiſme is the waſhing of
new birth.
               Tit. 3. 5. 
               Baptiſme ſaueth vs. not that wherewith
wee waſh away the filth of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , but that whereby
with a good conſcience we make requeſt vnto God.
               1. Pet. 3. 21. Of
the Lords Supper:1. Cor. 11. 25. 
               This cup is the new teſtamēt in my
blood. Alſo Doe this in remembrance of me. This if
you vnderſtand you haue the thinge you ſought
for, namely where in ſcripture Sacraments of both
lawes are ſaid to be ſeales of grace. (For why, as you
vſe to ſay, ſhould ſacraments of the new teſtamēt
be of worſe conditiō thē thoſe of the old?) if
you do not vnderſtand, you are not worthy to be
called a maiſter in Iſrael, which know not thatForma
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   eſſe. Baſil. lib. 3. contra Eunon. naturally
it belongeth vnto all ſacraments to ſignifie
& ſeale vnto the faithfull ſome promiſe of grace. Liſten
farther vnto the Fathers of the Church, as Baſil,
who confeſſeth plainly what you deny impudētly:

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, For
baptiſme is the ſeale of ſaith.
               Tertull. li. de poenit. And Tertullian, ſpeaking
of baptiſme in this ſort;Auguſt. de cat. rud. cap. 18. 
               This waſhing is a ſeale
of our faith: And Auſten, who termeth the ſacraments
certaine viſible ſeales of heauenly thinges. Do
you not now bluſh at your owne queſtion, Where
red Luther this?
            
            So diſmiſſing Luther he ſettes vpon Zwinglius,
taking vpon him to laſh (for ſooth) & ſcourge
his opinion That Sacramentes are ſignes of engadging
our ſelues vnto God. But we haue already proved
that here the Stage-mā doth but play the caviller.

At the length rouzing himſelfe more terribly againſt
Caluin,
               Of 
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Betweene Luther (ſaith he) & Caluin
this is the difference, that whereas hath 
                     •
                  ake the Sacraments
teſtimonies or ſcales of Gods promiſe, Luther
will haue that promiſe to be of preſent iuſtificatio
                     •
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Caluin
of eternall election. And leaſt he ſhould 
                  〈◊〉
               
to ſay an vntruth, he cites a place out of Cal
                     ••
                  n,
Antidor. concili
                     •
                  , Seſſ. 6. ca. 5. as if he ſhould there
ſay, that infants are baptized, not to the end
they might be receiued into adoption of the
ſonnes of God, but that vnto them the promiſe
of life might be ſealed, vnto whome before by
grace of predeſtination it pertained.Cauill And out
of the 7. Seſſion and 8. Canon, as if there hee
ſhould wright, that the right end and vſe of ſacraments
is this, to aſcertaine vs of the eternall ado
                     •
                  
                  tion
& grace, whereunto before the foundation of the
world we were predeſtinated, Thus farre the Ieſuite,
but all impudently & without ſhame. For Caluin
in neither place ſpeaketh one 
                  •
               ote of eternall electiō,
or the grace of predeſtination. Only in the
former this he ſaith: Inſants are for this reaſon baptized,
becauſe they are heires of the promiſe. For vnleſſe
the promiſe of life did before pertaine vnto thē, that man
ſhould prophane baptiſme, whoſoeuer did but miniſter it
vnto them. In the latter theſe are his wordes. Allthough
baptiſme be the hand-wrighting of that mutuall
obligation which is betweene God & vs, yet the eſpeciall
vſe thereof is, to aſſure vs of free remiſſion of our ſinnes,
and perpetuall grace of adoption. But is this to deny
that ſacraments are ſeales of the promiſe of preſēt

iuſtification? Is this to reſtraine ſacraments onely
to thinges paſt, as namely to the grace of electiō?
But this is Bellarmines truſt and fidelity in citing
the wordes and ſentences of the Fathers and our
Doctors. Such are his two whole▪ volumes of diſputations,
namely a rude rable of falſe quotatiōs,
which if the learned ſhall vouchſafe in courteſie
to examine, they ſhall ſoone ſee this doubtie diſputant
left as as dry as a kexe. But to the purpoſe.
That the ſacraments are ſeales of our eternall election,
although I deny not but that in the lawfull vſing
and worthy receiuing of them it is moſt true yet
remember I not, that Caluin hath any where thus
written, nay the Vbiquitaries of our daies ſlander
Caluin & Beza as maintainers of a cleane contrary
error, to witt, that they vtterly deny the ſacraments
to be ſeales of our election: which alſo
is altogether falſe. But the ſimple & naked truth
of Calvines doctrine is this. Sacraments profite beeing
vſed a righte, and doe exhibit ſeale and confirm
                     •
                  
grace vnto the worthy receiuer, not in regard eyther of
the worke wrought, or the deſerte of the worker, but in
reſpecte of the promiſe of God inſtituting or ordaininge
them, as alſo through the faith of the worthy receiuer.
And here by grace he vnderſtandeth euen our
ſaluation it ſelfe, together with all the precedent
cauſes, meanes, and conſequentes thereof, ſuch
as are, our free election, remiſſion of ſinnes, regeneration,
ſanctification, and life eternall: So that
by the name of grace he cōpriſeth, both grace paſt
and already giuen, togither with that which is preſēt

and to come, but eſpecially that which is there in
the ſacramente exhibited and preſent. For euen
our election before the world was, is ſealed and
and aſſured vnto vs by the ſacraments, not as it
is from aleternities decreed by God, or as a thing
done heretofore and paſt, but as the preſent and
conſtante decree of God reuealed in the Goſpell
concerning our ſaluation in Chriſt, and by the
ſame ſacramentes everlaſting life is confirmed
not as a future good, but as already we haue takē
poſſeſſion thereof by faith.
            
               For confirmation of this truth I could produce
an infinite number of teſtimonies out of Caluin
his Chriſtian inſtitution: but it ſhall ſuffice to refute
the Ieſuite by the coūter-poyſon of his Coū
                  ſels:
Can: 7. on the ſacraments Caluin ſaith thus:
God in the ſacramēts doth promiſe grace not only of election,
but alſo of iuſtification, Can. 4. Sacramentes are
ſeales of the Gospell. And can it bee denied but that the
Gospell is a promiſe of actuall & preſent iuſtification by
faith? Can: 8. In baptiſme God waſheth vs by the bloode
of his ſon, & by his ſpirite doth regenerate vs. In the ſacrament
of the ſupper he feedeth vs with the body and
blood of Chriſt. Can 7. of baptiſme: this is a principall
part of baptiſme, that is aſſureth us of free remiſſion of all
our ſins: & what is this els but preſent suſtification? and
theſe may ſerue to cōvince the Ieſuit of a militious
ſlāder, cōcerning the ſeals of our electiō, that Calv
                  ••
               
               vnderſtandeth them not onely of things paſt.
            
            But who ſeeth not his abſurd collection, that
if the Sacraments may goe for ſeales of our eternall

election, that then they ſhall not be ſeales
of preſent iuſtification? Are not election & iuſtification
ſubordinate, and conſequents one of the
other? ſo farre are they from aboliſhing one the
other, that the contrary ſhould rather be infered;
they are ſeales of our eternall election, therefore
of iuſtification & preſent grace. For iuſtification
is ſo proper, & naturall an affecte of election,
that there can be had no certainty of the
latter, without aſſurance of the former. For they
who are iuſtified in Chriſt,
               Eph: 1. 4. 
               are alſo choſen to him before
the foundation of the world. Whome God hath pr
                     •
                  deſtinated
theſe alſo hath he called,
               Rom 8. 30. 
               iuſtified, and glorified.
Now then let the Ieſuite with open mouth exclāe
on Caluins opinion as falſe, abſurde, dangerous,
and impious. And why forſooth falſe? Becauſe
(ſaith he) Caluin, contrary to that which the Scripture
teacheth, reſtrayneth Sacraments only vnto the thinge
paſt, namely to the grace of election. But this cauill is
already refuted.
            And why abſurde? Becauſe (ſaith he) he reacheth
that by the Sacraments the promiſes are ſealed vnto
our conſciences, & yet that infantes are lawfully baptiſed,
which noyther haue vſe of reaſon nor conſcience.
But we haue already ſufficiently proued, that
neyther infantes borne in the Church of beleeuing
parentes, are altogether voyde of reaſon o
                  •
               
faith, if we reſpecte the promiſed grace, although
actually they haue neyther the faith nor reaſon,
which is in thoſe of riper yeares: nor that baptiſing
of Children & confirmation of their faith

by Sacraments is therfore to be differred becauſe
they doe not beleeue, ſeeing of the Sacramentes
there are other endes & purpoſes whereunto
they are ordained.
            But why pernicious and dangerous. Becauſe he
teacheth that the children of the faithfull are borne iuſt
and holy, and hath perſwaded many that the ſacraments
are not neceſſary vnto the receiving of the grace of
Chriſt. Whence it is come to paſſe, that many contemne
the ſaid ſacraments, and in the meane while the ſoules of
many infantes never purified by the ſaving vvaters of
baptiſme, abide in perpetuall corruption. And is it in
deed pernicious to teach, that the children of the
faithfull are borne holy, that is, not ſtraungers, but
heires of the covenāt, according to that promiſe;
I will be thy God, and the God of thy ſeede? That therefore
is likewiſe pernicious which the Apoſtle teacheth;Rom. 11. 16
               If the roote be holy, the branches alſo are holie.
And the vnbeleeving wife is ſanctified by her huſbande,
               Cor. 7. 14.
               elſe were your children vncleane; but now they are holy.
And this is the chiefe comfort of godly parentes,
that they knowe that both branch and roote are
ſanctified, that is, that they & their children may
from their mothers wombe plead priviledge in
the covenant with God, by vertue of the free promiſe
made vnto them and their ſeed after them.
            But they are by nature the ſonnes of wrath? Who
knowes not that? Calvin teacheth both that they
are the ſonnes of wrath in regard of nature; and ſonnes
of the covenant in reſpect of grace: according to that
of Saint Peter;
               Act. 3. 25 
               Yee are the ſonnes of the Prophets &
               
nall election, that then they ſhall not be ſeales
of preſent iuſtification? Are not election & iuſtification
ſubordinate, and conſequents one of the
other? ſo farre are they from aboliſhing one the
other, that the contrary ſhould rather be infered;
they are ſeales of our eternall election, therefore
of iuſtification & preſent grace. For iuſtification
is ſo proper, & naturall an affecte of election,
that there can be had no certainty of the
latter, without aſſurance of the former. For they
who are iuſtified in Chriſt,
               Eph: 1. 4. 
               are alſo choſen to him before
the foundation of the world. Whome God hath prodeſtinated
thoſe alſo hath he called,
               Rom. 8. 30. 
               iuſtified, and glorified.
Now then let the Ieſuite with open mouth ex
                  ••
               āe
on Caluins opinion as falſe, abſurde, dangerous,
and impious. And why forſooth falſe? Becauſe
(ſaith he) Caluin, contrary to that which the Scripture
teacheth, reſtrayneth Sacraments only vnto the thinge
paſt, namely to the grace of election. But this cauill is
already refuted.
            And why abſurde? Becauſe (ſaith he) he teacheth
that by the Sacraments the promiſes are ſealed vnto
our conſciences, & yet that infantes are lawfully baptiſed,
which neyther haue vſe of reaſon nor conſcience.
But we haue already ſufficiently proued, that
neyther infantes borne in the Church of beleeuing
parentes, are altogether voyde of reaſon or
faith, if we reſpecte the promiſed grace, although
actually they haue neyther the faith nor reaſon,
which is in thoſe of riper yeares: nor that baptiſing
of Children & confirmation of their faith

by Sacraments is therfore to be differred becauſe
they doe not beleeue, ſeeing of the Scramentes
there are other endes & purpoſes whereunto
they are ordained.
            But why pernicious and dangerous. Becauſe he
teacheth that the children of the faithfull are borne iuſt
and holy, and hath perſwaded many that the ſacraments
are not neceſſary vnto the receiving of the grace of
Chriſt. Whence it is come to paſſe, that many contemne
the ſaid ſacraments, and in the meane while the ſoules of
many infantes never purified by the ſaving vvaters of
baptiſme, abide in perpetuall corruption. And is it in
deed pernicious to teach, that the children of the
faithfull are borne holy, that is, not ſtraungers, but
heires of the covenāt, according to that promiſe;
I will be thy God, and the God of thy ſeede? That therefore
is likewiſe pernicious which the Apoſtle teacheth:Rom. 11. 16.
               If the roote be holy,
               Cor. 7. 14. 
               the branches alſo are holie.
And the vnbeleeving wiſe is ſanctified by her huſbande,
elſe were your children vncleane; but now they are holy.
And this is the chiefe comfort of godly parentes,
that they knowe that both branch and roote are
ſanctified, that is, that they & their children may
from their mothers wombe plead privilege in
the covenant with God, by vertue of the free promiſe
made vnto them and their ſeed after them.
            But they are by nature the ſonnes of wrath? Who
knowes not that? Calvin teacheth both that they
are the ſonnes of wrath in regard of nature; and ſonnes
of the covenant in reſpect of grace: according to that
of Saint Peter;
               Act. 3. 2
                     •
                  . 
               Yee are the ſonnes of the Prophets &

of the covenant. That is ſpoken againſt the Pelagians
denying originall ſinne; this againſt the ſophiſtes,
tying grace to the ſacraments: neither of
theſe is perniciouſly taught, becauſe either 
                  〈◊〉
                &
according to ſcripture. Let Calvines Chriſtian inſtitution
be ſearched, and his Commentary on thoſe
words of Saint Paule; we are all by nature the ſennes of
wrath. Thence may the Ieſuite, and Selneccer, and
Hunnius, and all the rabble of Calvines adverſaries
learne, that originall ſinne is as naturall vnto vs as
poiſon to a ſerpent, & yet nevertheleſſe the children
of the faithful are a ſeede bleſſed even from
their mothers wombe. Or if it like them better)
let them heare and reconcile David confeſſing of
himſelfe,Pſal. 51. 5. 
               Behold I am borne in ſinne, and my mother cō
                  ceived
me to inquity. And yet elſe-where he comfortes
himſelfe in this manner,pſa. 71. 4. 5. 
               On thee haue I depended
from the time wherein I was borne, and from my
mothers wombe thou art my God: or God himſelfe
cōplaining in this ſort of mans nature.Gen. 6. 
               The thought
of mans heart is wicked from his childhood, and yet Ieremie
witneſſing, Before I framed thee in thy mothers
belly I knew thee; & before thou cameſt out of her womb
I ſanctified thee. Thus the Ieſuite ſees in what reſpect
Calvin ſaith that infantes are borne holy:
namely not ſimply, and wholy, but in ſome ſort I
ſhall hardly beleeue vnleſſe the Ieſuites ſhewe it,
that it is found in Calvin that they are borne iuſt.
For in this life it is not all one to be holy, and to be iuſt.
            
            Now whereas hee patcheth this vnto the reſt,
that Calvin hath perſwaded many, that the ſacraments

are not neceſſary vnto the receiving of the grace of
Chriſt, and that therevpon hath followed the contēpt of
baptiſme with the deſtructiō of many ſouls, this is partly
a cavill, & partly a plaine ſophiſme. A cavill that
Calvin ſhould altogither deny the neceſſity of ſacramēt,
a ſophiſme in imputing to his doctrine the
contempt of baptiſme, which the Ieſuite faineth
to haue enſued therevpon.
            
               Indeede he doth not binde God and grace vnto
the ſacraments, nor falſly placeth in thē an abſolute
neceſſity, as do theſe Sophiſters. His purpoſe
is only with Bernard to cond
                     •
                  ne, not the abſence,
but contempt of ſacramentes. But is this to perſuade
many that ſacramentes are not neceſſary.
Heare (I pray you) what himſelfe hath written of
this matter in his 
               
                  ••
               ſtitution. Now (ſaith hee) even
hereby it appeareth that their conceit is to be caſſiered,
who adiudge all that haue not beene baptized vnto eternall
death, &c. The promiſe of God is manifeſt: whoſoever
beleeveth in the ſonne ſhall not ſee death, nor come
into iudgment, but is already paſſed from death into life.
Which I would not haue ſo taken, as if I meant that baptiſme
might be contemned without offence (for I
am ſo farre from excuſing this contempt, that I affirme
the league and covenant of God thereby to bee violated
and broken) thus much it ſuffiseth to proue, that it is not
ſo neceſſary, that we muſt needes thinke him damned,
who ſhall be debarred all meanes and opportunity of obtaining
it. But if we yeeld to their deviſe we muſt without
exception condemne all thoſe whom any chance ſhall
hinder from baptiſme, how great ſo ever bee their 
                  〈◊〉
               ,

whereby Chriſt himſelfe is poſſeſſed. And in his Antidot
               
                  〈…〉
                (ſaith he) that the vſe of thoſe helpes
of our ſalva
                  •••
               n which Chriſt hath giuen vnto vs may be
ſaid to be nec
                  ••••
               ry, 
                  〈◊〉
                there is opportunity of receiving

                  〈◊〉
               . Howbe
                  ••
                
               
                  •
               he faithfull are alwaies to bee admoniſh
                  ••
               
that the neceſſary of a ſacrament is none other the
                  •
               
               
                  〈…〉
                wherevnto the power of God
is not to 
                  〈◊〉
               . Indeede there is no good man whoſe 
                  〈…〉
               
tremble at that 
                  〈◊〉
               , The Sacramēts
ARE THINGS SVPERFLVOVS, &c. Theſe are
his word▪ which thoroughly retort and refell the
               
                  〈…〉
               .
            But children are borne holy, therefore they need not
be baptiſed, whence en
                     •••
                  th a contempt of baptiſme. Nay
rather contrarywiſe becauſe they are borne holy,
that is, ſons and heires of the covenant, they had
neede be baptiſed. For (ſaith Calvin elſewhere)
they are not received into the church by baptiſme for any
other reaſon, but becauſe before they were borne they
did appertai
                     •
                  e vnto the body of Chriſt. Otherwiſe the
children of Chriſtians ought no more to be baptized
then the children of Turkes. Wherefore Peter
exhorteth the lews to be baptiſed in the name
of Ieſus Chriſt. Wherefore? becauſe (ſaith he) the promiſe
was made to you and to your children. This therfore
is the reaſon why baptiſme is due vnto our
children and not vnto the children of Turkes becauſe
they from their mothers wombs are childrē
of the promiſe, which theſe are not. Wherefore
the contempt of baptiſme cannot enſue on that,
which vnto the godly, is the chiefe motiue of deſiring

and miniſtring baptiſme: neither neede we
to feare leaſt that ſhould turne to the deſtruction
of ſoules, wherevpon is grounded the eſpeciall
comfort of parentes & children, togither with the
iuſt deſire of baptiſme. And if the Ieſuite proceed
therefore to accoūt the baptiſme of childrē vaine,
becauſe the infants of the church even from their
birth are reckned in the covenant: let me intreate
him to learne of his maiſter Lombard, that baptiſme
is a ſacrament of remiſſion of ſinnes before graunted
through faith. But O heavy ſentence pronounced
by the Maiſter of Sentences, Infantes dying vnbaptiſed,
though in carrying vnto baptiſme are damned! O
not onely pernicious, but impious alſo and cruell
divinity of the Ieſuites, enthralling God vnto elements,
chaining his power with abſolute neceſsity
(wil he nil he) vnto ſignes and ſacraments, condemning
no leſſe bloudily, then impiouſly vnto
hel many thouſands of infantes who without any
faulte of theirs coulde not bee baptized, yea although
they be adiudged by Chriſt himſelfe vnto
the kingdome of heaven. I know the authority
of Auſtine is here pretended, who writ that infantes
dying vnbaptiſed muſt needes be damned, but to
milde and gentle damnation. And if they ſo applaud
this error of that moſt holy & learned Father, why
doe they not as well mainetaine an other of the
ſame Fathers, altogither relying on the ſame 
                  〈◊〉
               
               that infantes likewiſe without receiving the 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſ
                     •
                  pper
cannot bee ſaved? Heerevnto they force Saint
Ambroſe, but the learned not without good cauſe

doe rather thinke that Prosper was the author of
thoſe books wherein this is found then Ambroſe.
For what Ambroſe thought may appeare by his oration
of the death of Valentinian; as alſo how godly
is the iudgement of Bernard concerning the
godly not baptized: God be mercifull vnto me. For I
cannot desparre of ſaluation, for want onely of the water
of baptiſme: I can not accoumpt faith vaine, I can
not confoud hope or forgoe charity, eſpecially it onely impoſſibility,
& not contempt forbidde that water.
            
            Laſt of all the Ieſuite inueigheth againſt the
opinion of Ca
                     •
                  uen as impious. But why! becauſe
(ſaith he) it maketh the ſacraments falſe, the miniſter
ſacrilegiouſe, Gea himſelfe altar, & as it were pertured.
For if a ſacrament be a diuine oath & ſeale,
wherby the promiſe of eternall election is ſealed, then
as often as it falleth out (which is very often) that the
reprobate are baptized, euen ſo often is cōmeth to paſſe
that the wordes of the ſacrament are falſe, & God himſelfe
altar in the mouth of the miniſter. This iniurious
vntruth is more ſharpe & ſhameleſſe then
all the reſt, whoſe bull-warkes notwithſtanding,
builded forſooth on the ſeales not of preſēt grace
but onely of election already paſt, we haue ſufficiently
battered. The reſt is anſwered in a worde:
that ſacraments do promiſe and ſeale vnto vs the
grace of God, if they be in their right vſe: which is
not, when they are received by the reprobate.
This only might ſuffice to cauſe the Ieſuites cavill
to vaniſh like ſmoake before the winde. Howbeit
I am content to anſwere more diſtinctly.
            
               
A ſacrament doeth not become falſe, though
ſometimes it bee in vaine miniſtred vnto the reprobate
making ſhew of faith. For in it ſelfe it ſtil
remaineth a ſeale of grace, though not vnto thē,
becauſe they beleeue not: as the ſonne howſoever
in it ſelfe glorious and gliſtring, yet ſhineth it
not vnto the blinde, becauſe they ſee not. For it is
a ſigne, conditionall, ſo offering and ſealing grace
vnto vs, that withal on our parts it requireth faith
& converſion: which whoſoeuer bring not with
them, it neither beſtoweth nor ſealeth vnto them
any thing, neither is it vnto them a ſacramēt, that
is, a ſeale of grace, through their owne fault: for it
is no vſe but an horrible abuſe of a ſacrament, to
be received of the reprobate without faith. The
ſcripture every where teacheth that nothing can
be accounted a ſacrament without the vſe therevnto
appointed by God:Rom. 3. 35. 
               If thou be a tranſgreſſor of
the law thy on cumciſion is made vncircumciſion. And
This is not to eate the Lordes ſupper.
               Cor. 11. 20. And he which offereth
an oxe,
               Eſ. 66. 3. 
               is as if he offerea a dogge. The baptiſme
of Simon. Magus was a true ſacrament, but not vnto
him,Act. 5. 21. for his hypocriſie, as Peter witneſſeth, Thou
haſt no part nor fellowſh p
                     •
                  nth buſineſſe, for thy hearte
is not right. That ſop in the Lords ſupper was a true
ſacrament, but poiſon to Iudas, not becauſe in it
ſelfe it was evill, but becauſe the evill man did evilly
receiue that which was good. To conclude,
by Lombard his owne confeſsion, baptiſme is alike
holy, whether miniſtred vnto the good or evill: & therefore
alike true. But will you cal Peter ſacrilegious,

becauſe to Simon Magus a reprobate, but profeſſing
the Apoſtolique faith, he in Gods name oſtered
grace, and to his power ſealed it by baptiſme?
But this he did not abſolutely, but with conditiō
if he truely beleeued: as Phillip ſaid vnto the Eunuch,
thou maiſt bee baptiſed, if thou beleeue withall thy
heart. If therfore he did not truely beleeue he ſealed
nothing vnto him, as rightly faith your friend
Lombard, The viſible baptiſme did nothing profit Simon
Magus, becauſe he wanted the inviſible. Moreover
he diſcharged his duety, which was not to ſearch
the ſecrets of hearts, or ſounde the vnmeaſurable
gulfe of Gods predeſtination, but to baptiſe the
profeſſors of faith, whether hypocrites, or no. For
the church iudgeth not of things ſo ſecret, but only
the hart-ſearching God. The like reaſon ſerveth
for all other Miniſters, which ought to iudge of
thoſe that are to bee baptiſed, not according to
Gods predeſtinatiō, but mans profeſſiō & Chriſts
commandement. This if they doe, themſelues are
not ſacrilegious, but the reprobate hypocrits who
vnreverently and irreligiouſly preſſe to the ſacraments.
            But fie on that his blaſphemy, where hee ſaith,
that if ſacraments bee miniſtred vnto reprobate hypocrites
yet vnrevealed, then God muſt lie by the mouth of
the miniſter. Did God (thinkeſt thou) lie by Peters
mouth when he baptiſed Simon Magus? He ſetiouſly
and ſincerely by his word & ſacrament offereth
adoption and grace vnto al, purpoſing alſo
to beſtow it, but cōditionally, if they beleeue: & cō
               mandeth

thē to beleeue, and receiue by faith the
grace offered. But to infidels and hypocrites he is
ſo far frō promiſing or ſealing any grace of adoption
and election whē they force themſelues vnto
the ſacrament, that he threatneth them with a
terrible and feareful iudgement. Hee therefore is
true in offering, howſoeuer the grace offered to
the vnbeleeuers be of none effect.
            But (ſaith the Ieſuite) he doth not onely offer,
               Art. 2. 
               but
indeede alſo beſtowe it, when men are indeede baptized.
We graunt it. For this Calvin alſo confeſseth in
Antidot. Artic. Pariſ. ſpeaking on this manner.
The godly do all confeſſe that in baptiſme is offered,
               Antidot. Concil. Seſſ. 7. in Can. 7. 
               yea
& exhibited or giuen vnto vs both remiſſion of our ſins,
& grace of the holy ſpirite. But (ſaith he els where)
theſe good fathers by reaſon of their groſſeneſſo doe not
here obſerue, that what grace ſo euer is by ſacraments
beſtowed on vs, muſt notwithſtanding be imputed vnto
faith; For he which ſondereth faith from the ſacramērs,
doth as 
                     •
                  f he ſeuered the ſoule frō the body! God therefore
doth indeed giue that which he offereth, but
vnto thoſe that beleeue. To the vnbeleeuing he
neyther promiſeth nor performeth any thinge as
longe as they continew in their vnbeleife: & that
through their owne fault; becauſe by infidelity
they refuſed the good offered, & as much as in
them lieth, make a mocke of God which offereth
it. This Cauill therefore of the leſuites is no leſſe
impudent and blaſphemous againſt God, then
was that of the Iewes, who accuſed God of perfidiouſneſſe,
vnleſſe he would performe the couenant

evē to the vnbeleeuers: which the Apoſtle
retorting: ſhall (ſaith hee) their vnbeleife make
the faith of God vaine?
               Rom. 3. 3. 
               God forbidae. Let God be 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
& euery man a lyar.
            
            Well then. Let vs now returne the Ieſuites
blaſphemy vpon his head. Both he & his mailler
Lombard teach, that reprobation is nothing elſe, but
that ſome there are on whom God will haue no mercy.
For ſo doeth the maiſter of ſentences define it.
Suppoſe thē that the Ieſuite even by the very worke
wrought either of baptiſme or of the maſſe ſhould
beſtow the grace of ſanctificatiō vpon Simon Magus
or the like reprobate, ſhall not hee and the ſacrament
become now ſacrilegious, in conferring
grace on a reprobate, of whom God will haue no
mercy? may ſhall not he make God himſelfe a lier
and contrary to himſelfe, in his name beſtowing,
or teſtifying (vnleſſe he altogither exclude God
out of the ſacraments) that God himſelfe beſtoweth
the grace of ſanct
                  •
               fication on a reprobate, on
whom notwithſtanding hee hath for all eternity
decreed to beſtowe nothing, and on whom God
will haue no mercy. From this blaſphemy howe
the Ieſuite can acquite himſelfe maintaining his
opinion of the worke wrought, let him looke to it.
But howſoeuer he acquite himſelfe. he muſt withall
diſcharge Calvin of the cavill deviſed againſt
him.
            Let this ſuffice briefly for anſwere to the perverſe
peeviſhneſſe of this ſtage declaiming Ieſuit.
The reſt which hee diſputeth towardes the ende

pertaineth nothing to vs: well they may prevaile
vpon thoſe againſt whom they were vvritten,
namely Swenckefield & his brethren Vbiquitaries,
common corrupters of the doctrine of Chriſt his
perſon, and the ſacraments.
         
         
            
            A PREFACE
TO THE FOVRTH PART OF
the Catechiſme, wherin are deſciphered the
peſtilent pamphlets of ſome Divines of this
age: and Calvin the moſt valiant Champion
defendant of Chriſt his glory is briefely
cleered of the ſlaunderous crime
of Arrianiſme.
*⁎*
            
            
               THe argumēt of this part,
(which is Of mans thankfullneſſe
towards God) enforceth
me to enter the
Common complaint of
all the godly againſt the
bruit blockiſhneſſe and
foule in gratitude of the
world, which after ſo many
ineſtimable benefits heaped by almightye
God moſt aboundantly on theſe our latter daies,
hath onely thus farre profited, that vnthankfull
men continually become worſe and worſe, as if
they had ſworne perpetual warre againſt ſo good
a God, & gracious a benefactor. For howe huge
a cloud of witneſſes of Gods cōtinuall kindneſſe.

doth enuiron vs round about what hath been denied
vnto this age that men could haue wiſhed,
thereby to haue made this life happy & bleſſed?
I ſpeake not of bleſſingee common or generall,
how many, & how pretious are thoſe we haue
receiued in particular? The light of the Goſpel &
ſincerity of doctrine renewed; the purity of ſacraments,
the trew worſhippe of God, and reading
of holy ſcripture reſtored, the diſcouery of
Antichriſt, the chaſing of darkneſſe, the flight of
ſuperſticion, the ruine of of idolatry, & the liberty
of the church after long ſeruitude reſtored.
Theſe ſo ineſtinable treaſures how few of vs doe
worthily regard▪ & not rather with beſtiall blockiſhneſſe
overpaſſe, or ſhameles impudency diſdaine?
One ſaide ſome times of the Athenians
that they knew what was good, but did it not. How
much more may we Chriſtians be aſhamed of our
ſelues, who not only do not that which we know
to be good, and know it by the light of the Goſpell
(not as they did by the light of nature:) but
alſo doe euen thoſe thinges which we know are
not good? The whole worlde is now poſſeſſed
with ſecurity, profanenes, ambition, luxurye, envy,
contempte of doctrine, abuſe of ſacraments,
ſurfet of preaching, & what not? How many
are there of thoſe which withhold the truth in vnrighteouſneſſe▪
of thoſe which profeſſe God in
their knowledge but deny him in their life? of
backeſliding Apoſtataes, who eyther inforced by
the vnſta
                  •
               edneſſe of the
                  •
                owne conceipt, looke

backe to the Aegigptian fleſh-pottes, or beguiled
by ſeducing ſpirites daily reuolt from Chriſt
to Antichriſt, like dogges returning to their yo
                  •
               
mit? but this ingratitude is perhappes a fault incident
to the common ſort.
            O then that the greater part of our Prelates
would aſcend vnto theſe breaches, and draw a
counter-mure and ſence before the houſe of Iſrael,
& not lyke ſubtile foxes ſecke to fat
                  •
               e themſelues
with the ſpoiles, & publique ſcandales of
the church, as Ezechiel complained of the prophets
of his time. It hath bin euer a great plague
vnto the church to make ſale of the word of G
                  •
               d
or wreſt it to the affections of men, to the luſt &
fauour of the mighty, to pride and vaine glory,
to couetouſneſſe and luxurie. But much more
perniciouſe is that plague which at this day with
applauſe of the multitude conſumeth the very
bowelles of the church, namely the decay of eccleſiaſticall
iudgment: whereas in the meane
time through ambition, auarice, enuy, & deſire
of attempting any thing, as euery one is of face
moſt brazē, of tongue moſt intēperate, ſo much
the rather he affecteth, & by fauour of the multitude
obteineth the moſt eminent places of dignity
in the church. Hence proceede thoſe infortunate
broils betweene gouerners of the church,
who for the moſt part ſtudying ſtrife not quietneſſe,
& plotting quarrell vpon quarrell, labour
by all meanes poſſible that eccleſiaſticall controverfies
(by which they ſtudy to advance themſelues

to a rich and glorious eſtate) may neuer
come to the lawfull hearing, debating or quieting.
Hence alſo haue proceeded ſo many peſtilent
& pernicious wrightings neuer ſpiced with
any ſpirit of mildeneſſe & charity, but ſeaſoned
with the vnſauoury ſalt of vnulence & malice, &
tainted with the poiſoned ſ
                  •
               inges of harefull ſlanders,
wherwith (for ſooth) at this day Diuinity
is thought to bee beautified, and our doctrine
of holineſſe ſhall be preſented vnto poſteritie.
This is the head of the miſcheife;Two ſorts of ſlounderous wrightings among Diuines. which that it
may the better be cōceiued I ſpeake of two ſortes
of wrightings now publiſhed.
            The firſt is meerely ſlanderous, wherein the
memory of Chriſtes faithfull ſeruantes deſeruing
paſſing wel of the church (namely Zwinglius Calvin,
Bucer, Martir, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Zanchius, Bizi, Grynaeus,
& others as well liuing, as dead, who teach
that the fleſhly feeding on Chriſtes body with
our mouthes is contrary to the truth of the Goſpell)
is fowly wronged, their fame rent & razed,
their wrightings (whence notwithſtanding thoſe
foxers after their preaching cā be cōtent in their
priuate ſtudies to borrow moſt of ther ſkill) are
ſpightfully taxed, their true ſenſe peruerted their
wordes wrongfully wreſted, & laſtly themſelues
proclaimed authors of moſt damnable hereſies.
            In this kinde next vnto Schmi
                     •
                  line that Arch-Vbiquitar
                     •
                  e
excelled lately one Selneccer, and now
Hunnius and Heilbrunner; wherof the former hath
not long ſince put in printe twelue chiefe heades

miſchievouſly compiled; the later hath in maner
afore-ſaide lately publiſhed fifteene chapters of
Calvines errors: the middlemoſt being a Queſtioniſt
burdeneth Calvin with A
                     ••••
                  ſme, 
               
                  •
               iting
certaine places which by the Fathers were interpreted
of Chriſt, but by him ſomewhat otherwiſe
vnderſtood. But no ingratitude more ſpightfull,
then to ſlaunder them by whoſe paines
thou haſte reaped profitte, and the Church in
generall ſo greate a benefite; no preſumption
more intollerable, then to bite and beate ſellow-ſervaunts,
and to revile the deale and 
                  〈◊〉
               
nothinge leſſe ſutable to the dignity of a Divine,
then to play the ſycophant or falſe accufer.
            Let vs for examples ſake inſtance in that one
place of Geneſis the 3. concerning the ſeede of
the vvoman that ſhoulde breake the ſerpentes heade
which they complaine to bee horribly corrupred
by Calvin, becauſe hee interpreteth the ſeeat
of the vvoman not particularly of Chriſt alone, but
generally of the whole Church and poſterity of
the woman. But were they not ſhameleſſ
                  •
                in
mangling that interpretation of Calvines which
ſhould be wholy cited, they would ſ
                  •
               ne be: ſhamed
of ſo groſſe a cavil. For to let paſſe, that many
ancient Fathers before Calvin, and amongſt
them Chryſoſtome doeth ſo interpret that place▪
               Firſt they never date deny,Homil. 17. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Geneſ. that the ſeede of the
ſerpent, wherevnto the ſeede of the vvoman is oppoſed,
muſt by right in this place be generally vnderſtood.

               Secondlie the vntruth of this cauill is
hereby deſcried, in that they wright that Calvine,
ſhould reſtraine this enmity to men and externall,
that is common and viſible ſerpentes:
whereas Calvine expreſſeley addeth, that GOD
in this place vnder the name of the ſerpent, doth
eſpecially 
                  〈◊〉
                at Sathan, againſt whom he thundereth
out this iudgement. Laſtly, that hee ſo
interpreteth the womans ſeede of the Church, that
withall eſpecially he includeth CHRIST the
head of the Church, his very wordes doe witneſſe
which they wickedly diſmember, when he
addeth. VVhereas experience teacheth that all the
ſo
                     ••
                  es of Ad
                     •
                  m are farie from vanquiſhing the
divell; vvee muſt therefore needes haue recourſe vnto
one heade, that ſo wee may learne to vvhome eſpecially
this victorie doeth pertan
                     •
                  e. So Paule leadeth
vs from the ſeede of Abraham vnto Chriſt. &c.
But is this to make ſlay vpon the externall enmity
betwixt men and ſerpents? to reſtraine the victory
vnto men? to exclude Chriſt?
            All this not withſtanding Hunnius proceedeth
yet father, chardging Calvin with the ſhifting
of many moſt evident oracles concerning Chriſts
protecting and p
                  •
               tronaging the blaſphemies of
the lovnes, furthering that damned hereſie of
Arrianiſ
                     •
                  e, weakening the grounds and argumentes
of the Church, and diſanulling the authoritye
of aunciente Fathers. Theſe indeede
are grieuous crimes, whereof notwithſtanding
I coulde caſilie cleare him, were it not for miſpendinge

too much time and talke. But by the
two firſt ſlaunders wee may eaſily iudge of all
the reſt.
            And is it indeed ſo euident an oracle when
Moſes ſaith: Bara El
                     •
                  him: that a verbe ſingular
ioyned with anoune plurall muſt needes ſignifie
the vnity of the diuine eſſence, & trinity of perſons?
This Caluin tooke for none of the ſufficient
reſt proofes of ſo great a matter. But if it bee ſo
ſtrong and evident an argument of the Trinity,
wh
                  •
                did not you (Maſter Hannius) place it with
the 
                  〈◊〉
                in your tracte vpon the Trinity? why did
you quite over ſlip it?
            The words of Eue,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                Gen. 4. Canuhiiſ
                     •
                   hath Iehovah:
Calvin thus tranſlated; I haue obtained a man to
the Lord: Hunn
                     •
                  us exclaimeth againſt him for corrupting
a moſt evidēt teſtimony of the God head
of the M
                     •
                  ſuas:
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . becauſe (in his opinion) Eue 
               
                  •
               aith,
I haue obtained a man he Lorde. for a
                     •
                  h in Hebrew
is a perpetuall note of the accuſatiue caſe. But if
this be true, why then did the 70. Interpreters trā
               ſlate
it by the Lord?
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . the Tha
                  •
               gum before the Lord the
ancient Latin, & 
                  〈◊〉
                
               through the Lord? the
Dutch tranſlation of Luther 45. yeares ſince of the
Lord?
               Per Deun. Domini. doe all theſe play the lewes with Calvin? I
inſtance no farther.
            Well then: ſhall Calvin therefore be an heretique,
for n
                  •
               t ſimply approving theſe and other
ſuch like argumentes vſed by the Fathers againſt
heretiques? muſt he needs therefore be an Arrian
and a lew? too hard a ſlander of ſo excellent a ſervant

of God. For what man is there that with greater
courage and learning hath maintained againſt
all heretiques the reverend miſtery of the ſacred
Trinity, or Chriſtes eternall Deity? who hath euermore
ſharpely reproved and repreſſed thoſe mad
dogges Servetus, Gentilis. with their confederates
in villany, Alciat, B
                     •
                  andrat and the reſt?
            And if he obſerved ſome proofes not plaine or
pregnant enough vſed by the ancient fathers in
their conflictes againſt heretiques, what of that?
for al this he hath reſolutely avouched an hūdred
other thinges concerning the eternall Deity of
Chriſt againſt all fallacies and forgeries of lews &
heretiques: whereof leaſt any ſhould make doubt,
I will ſhew iuſt proofe by one or two examples
out of his commentaries.
            
               Gen. 1. v. 3. Which alone, ſaith he (meaning the
creation of the world by the word of God) is ſufficient
to refu
                  •
               e the blasphemie of Servetus. Heere the
foule-mouthed heaſt doth barke. ſaying that this was the
firſt beginning of the Word, when God commandea that
there ſhould be light. Whereas much better might be inferred
the eternal eſſence thereof, conſidering that there
we
                  •
               e vpon the ſuddame created by the word of God, ſuch
things as before were not Where fore the Apoſtles proofe
of Chriſts Divinity ſtandes with good reaſon, that wheras
hee is the Worde of GOD, by him were all thinges
created.
            
               Exod. 3. v. 2. Proving that Chriſt was that Angell
of the Lord, he wrighteth after this manner:
The anciens Doctors 
                     〈◊〉
                   truely thinke that the eternall

Son of God was ſo called in reſpect of his Mediatorſhip.
And ſhortly after No maruell therefore if the eternall
worde of God, being one & the ſame in eſſence and
deitie with the father, tooke vpon him the name of a
                     •
                  
angel, in regarde of he embaſſage by him afterward to
be vndertake. The two oracles of Eſaie in the 7. cha.
and 
                  •
               4. v. touching the fruit of the virgins wōbe
called Immanuel: & in the 9. cap. & 6. v. cōcerning
a ſonne giuen vnto vs, he doth ſo violently
extorte from the Iewes, & ſo ſtrongly proue thē
to be meant of the onely begotten ſonne of God
borne of the virgin Marie, that no man lightly
could haue done it better. And where Ieremie in
his 
                  •
               3. ca. & 5. v. ſpeaketh of rayſinge vp a budde
or branch vnto Dauid, he vſeth theſe words: Here
therefore God recall
                     •
                  th them vnto the Meſſias. And
ſoone after, Without doubt heere the Prophet ſpeaketh
of Chriſt. Where alſo at largelie refuteth the
Iewes, endeuouring to ſtreame this branch to all
the poſteritie of Dauid. And after againſt the
ſame Iewes: One & the ſame redeemer as called as
well the ſonne of Dauid as Iehouah. How is he called
the ſonne of Dauid? becauſe he was to 
                     〈◊〉
                   of that
liue. How then Iehouah? Hence trulie is gathered
that 
                     〈…〉
                   there is ſome thing more excellent the man
and he is called Iehouah or the Lord, becauſe he is the
onely begotten ſonne of God one altogeather with the father
in nature, glorie, eternitie, & Divinitie.
            
            
               In the 12 ca. & 14. v. of the prophecy of Hoſe,
ſhewing how he is both Iehouah & alſo an angell:
Chriſt (ſaith he) the eternall wiſedome of God, did

put on the perſon of a Mediator before he was clothed
with our fleſh. He was therefore even then a Mediator,
and in that respect alſo an angell. Meane while he was
alſo then Iehouab, who is now God manifeſted in the
fleſh. And afterwards Thus is this place worthie the
remembrance to witneſſe the Deitie of Chriſt.
            
               Vpon the 4. ca. of Micah, the 3. v. The Prophet
M
                  •
               cah ſpeaketh of God himſelfe, not expreſſely mentioning
Chriſt, becauſe he was not as yet manifeſted in the
fleſh: how be it we know that this was fulfilled in his perſon,
that God hath gouerned the worlde, & ſubdued
vnto himſelfe all the nations of the earth, we therefore
avouch Chriſt to bee true God, becauſe he did not onely
minister to his father, as Moſes or any other of the
Prophets; but was himſelfe alſo high ſouereigne of his
church. & in the 7. ver. of the ſame chap. Though
Chriſt was the true ſeede of Dauid, yet was he withall
Iehouah likewiſe, that is God reuealed in the fleſh.
            
               In the 1. of Zachar. the 19. v. Wee muſt remember
what I ſaide before: that this cheife a
                  •
               gell was the
mediator & head of the church. But he alſo is Iehouah.
becauſe we know that Chriſt is God manifeſted in the
fleſh.
            Zach. 2. v. 8. Hence we geather that Chriſt is
here pr
                  •
               figured, who is himſelfe verie Iehouah, but
withall the angell & meſſenger of his father. & in the
10 ver. We ſee therefore that the name of Iehouah is
fitted vnto Chriſt, & that there is no difference of nature
betwixte the father & the ſonne, but that they are
to be diſtinguiſhed onely in perſon. As often therefore
as Chriſt declareth his Diui
                  •
               itie, he taketh vnto himſelfe

the name of Iehouah: But afterwardes he ſhewed
that in himſelfe he hath ſome thinge peculiar and diſtinct,
namely this, that he is the meſſenger or Embaſſadour
of his father.
            
               Zach. 3. ver. 3. Now we ſee that he is termed an
Angell, who was of 
                  •
               n named Iehouah. For my 
                  〈◊〉
               
therefore I make no queſtion but that the name as wel
of angell as of ehouah ſhould be referred to the perſon
of Chriſt, who is the true & onelie God.
            
               Zach. 11. ver. 14. This wee muſt holde for a principle,
that Chriſt from the beginning was the true Iehouah.
Becauſe therefore the ſon of God is of the ſa
                  ••
               
nature with the Father, & alſo one God together with
him, &c. with like fidelitie & perſpicuitie doth
he euerie where in his commentaries vpon the
new Teſtament, maintaine the eternal Deitie and
Coexiſtence of our ſauiour Chriſt.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               Coloſſ. 2. v. 2. This in the meane time is a memorable
place to proue the Deity of Chriſt, and his vnity of
eſſence or nature with the father. For having prefaced
ſomewhat touching the knowledge of God, hee ſtraight
waies applieth it as well to the Sonne as to the Father.
Whence it followeth that the Sonne is one and the ſame
God with the father. See gentle Reader what hee
wrighteth vpon thoſe words of the Apoſtle, God
was manifeſted in the fleſh. After many words: So
ſaith he by this one teſtimonie is the true and catholike
faith excellently fenced and fortified againſt Arrius,
Marcion, Neflorius, and Eutyches.
            
               Ioh. 5. v. 20. Although the Arria
                  •
               s haue endevoured
to ſhifte this place, & ſome there be even at this day

which ſubſcribe vnto them: here notwithſtanding vvee
haue a notable teſtimony of the Divinitie of Chriſt.
            Act. 7. v 20. So this place yeeldeth apparant proofe of
the eternel Deity of Chriſt, & vnitie of eſſence with the
Father. But in ſo cleere a caſe what neede more
words? A thouſande like places are every where
obvious in his golden wrightings, which may
yeeld plentiful matter vnto al poſterity to ſtoppe
the beaſtly barking of theſe raging dogs.
            But to return to my purpoſe, if Calvin in this
cōflict did not make all fi
                  •
               h that came to net, but
ſignified that many things approued by auncient
Fathers were now too much expoſed to cavil of
heretiques being otherwiſe of himſelfe a moſt valiant
maintainer of Chriſts eternal maieſty, which
preeminence even the ſlanderous adverſary (to
his griefe) muſt of conſcience yeeld vnto him:
muſt he therefore be proclaimed an Arrian, or patron
of Arrians? doth he deſerue to be ſo contumeliouſly diſtained, as if carried headlong with a
violent ſtreame of vaine glorious boaſting, he did
of ſet purpoſe corrupt the plaineſt oracles of ſcripture
touching the myſtery of the ſacred Trinity,
& eternal Deity of the Son & holy Ghoſt
                  •
                or as
though he wreſted the Chriſtians weapons out of
their hands? or by manifeſt conſent were an opē
abetter of the Arriniſh gloſies? No, no, would to
God rather you Vbiquitaries did not ſo, o
                  •
                would
at leaſt ceaſe to ſpread the infection of your Arrian
leproſie throughout the church. He indeede
made choiſe of ſome argument before others, not

vnadviſedly, or to ſuch purpoſe as you ſlaunderouſly
imagine, but as himſelfe often profeſieth,
becauſe he did wiſh we would bring nothing but
what were ſound and ſubſtantiall.
            And good reaſon: for he found by experience
in his conflictes with Servetus, Gent
                     ••
                  is, & the like
monſters, which were arguments of ſtrength and
perſpicuity, and which were not; which did powerfully
preſſe the adverſary, and which did not▪
And therefore he ſaw well that he was to cōbate
not with number but waight of arguments, & by
his example taught others how to encounter heret
                  •
               ques,
who are now growen far more ſubtile &
ſlippery then heretofore was either Samoſate
                     •••
                  
               
himſelfe, or Arrius, or any other of their principal
patriarchs For now the adverſary which by theſe
his inſtruments impugneth the glory of Chriſt is
growen old and wily. There are now (to vſe the
words of Cip
                     •
                  ian) almoſt ſixe thouſand yeares accompliſhed,De exhort. 
                     〈◊〉
                   ad Fortunarum.
ſince firſt the Divel beganne thus to
war againſt God. He hath by this t
                  ••
                even by
practiſe of antiquity throughly inſtructed heretiques
in all ſleightes of attempting, all tr
                  ••
               kes &
deviſes of vndermining. Laſtly, ſeeing the ſpirites
of the Prophets are ſubiect to the prophets; this
worthy & excellent ſervant of God did only by
wrighting adviſe, not preſcribe vnto the church
any interpretations or opinions of his own. Ceaſe
therefore (ingratefull exclaimers) to for
                  •
               e out againſt
him the peſtilent poiſon of ſlaundering
tongues in your pulpits, which without him many

of you were ſcarſely able to mainetaine with
credit.
            But to let theſe paſſe, I come now to the ſecōd
ſore of wrightings which is both heretical and intollerable,
for monſtrous paradoxes therin maintained,
plaine principles of divinity d
                  •
               faced. opē
teſtimonies of ſcripture perverſely corrupted, hereſies
long ſince condemned lately reſtored, and
impoſed vpon the ſimple vulgar for verities Evā
               gelicall.
In which kinde the moſt bitter A
                     •
                  chilochian
diſputant Huber
                     •
                  us an impudēt back iuding
Apoſtata doth now Lord it; whom hatred againſt
the truth truely knowen, but want only denied &
wilfully impugned doth euerie day more then other
ſo ſwiftelie ſweepe away with a continuall
current of barking and back-biting, that mē may
iuſtly ſuſpect him for a fearfull example of one
giuen over by God into a reprobate ſence. God
of his mercie g
                  •
               aunt him a better minde if he be
not paſt cure, or at leaſt ſo bridle his furie, that he
cary not others with him headlong to deſtruction.
            He as an impe of Pelagius, & mouthy ſectary
of E
                     •
                  icur
                     •
                  us filleth all Germanie with horible exclamations,Theſſ. 19. 60. 65. 66. 68. 94. 112. 182. 187. 214▪ 735. 75
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
that all men without exception, as
well faithfull, as Infideli; alreadie dawned, as hereafter
to be condemned, reprobate, as others, ſuppoſe doggs
& hogs, as Chriſt his ſheepe; Nero & Heliogabalus, as
Dauid & Ioſaphat; Iudas, as Peter are by the death
of Chriſt reconciled vnto God, ſanctified, iuſtified,
their ſius pardoned, thēſelues receiued into

the boſome & ſauor of God,Lib. germ. pag 94. 98. 99. 106. 10
                     •
                   &c. in a word ſaued (applaud
your patrō & procter, ò you dogs, & hogs,
which hath opened ſo wide a gate vnto Athe
                     •
                  ſme)
no mā dāned for ſin,Schmidlin, and Oſiander condē
                  ned by this Apoſtata, for putting out of controverſie that with God there is a certein number of thē which ſhall be ſaved. but only for vnbeleife▪ that in
God there is no eternal decree of electiō & reprobatiō;
that God hath not defined a certaine 
                  •
               ūber
of them which ſhalbe ſaued; that al mē euer ſince
the fal of Adam are elect in Chriſt, that Election
grace and forgiuenes of ſins is generall and cōmon
vnto all and that with God there is no speciall Election,
but this ſpeciall Election is only in reſpect
of men, as every man privately applyeth to himſelfe
that grace which is cōmon vnto al; that God
knew from everlaſting who woulde embrace his
grace offered, and who againe would make ſhipwracke
thereof; that to Elect is nothing elſe but
to invite and win mankinde vnto himſelfe;Protocol. that
many of the Elect do periſh;Mompelg. 503. that the certeinty
of Gods giftes and graces whereof wee boaſt out
of Rom. 11. 29. where they are ſaid to be without repentance
is a vaine brag; that our Electiō in Chriſt
is founded on a ſuppoſition and condition If wee
beleeue; that it relyeth wholy on our faith; that
faith is not given vs indeed without the grace of
God, howbeit the meanes by which it is giuen vs
are in our own power, that the vnregenerate haue
an arbitrary ability to run aſſone as God calleth
them by his worde; that they can of them ſelues
perceiue and vnderſtand the Lordes voice when
he crieth vnto them; that the cauſe why of many
who vſe the ſame meanes, ſome beleeue and perſevere;

               
                  〈◊〉
                her ſome beleeue not, or beleeving perſevere
not, is the right or not right vſe of the
meanes, & that this vſe is in our owne power; that
the 9. Chapter to the Romanes treateth not of
Predeſtination to life or death; that this doctrine
of pedeſtination maketh God a lying God, a cruel
God, a God reioycing in euill, and an vniuſt
God; that it ouerthroweth the miniſtery, & leaveth
no place for wholſome exhortation; that it
breedeth ſecuritie & deſpaire in men: and an
hundred other poſtions of this kinde, wherwith
if you conferre the auncient peſtilent hereſies of
Pedagius & Coeleſtius, they will concurre with this
doctrine, & meete therwith as iuſt as germans
lipes. For the Pelagians taught the ſelfe ſame as
appeareth both out of the writinges S. Auſten, &
out of the epiſtles of Prosper, and of Hilarie. vnto
him, touching the reliques & remainder of the
Pelagian hereſie in Fraunce. They taught that in
deede all men had ſinned in Adam,
               The erroneous doctrine of the Pelagians. and that no
man was ſaued by his owne workes, but by the
grace of God in regeneration, howbeit the proptiation
of Chriſtes bloud is (ſay they) propoſed vnto
all without exception, that whoſoeuer will laie hold
on faith, & receiue the Sacrament of Baptiſme
may be ſaued; that God knew before the framing
of the world, who would beleeue & cōtinue faith
full, & that he predeſtinated them vnto his kingdome
whom he forſawe to be ſuch, as being freelie
called by grace would proue worthie their Election,
and departe this life with a laudable &

happy end; & that therefore all men are admoniſhed
to beleeue & liue well, that no man might
deſpaire of attaining ſaluation. They denied that
there was a ſet number predeſtinate of God,
leaſt the vſe of exhortation thereby ſhould bee
voide, and the force and edge of preaching rebated.
They avered that all ſerious induſtrie in
weldoing was cleane remooued, & all manner of
vertues cancelled, if Gods decree preuent men
                  •
               
willes; that vnder the title of Predeſtination the
Stoicks fatall neceſſitie was againe ſet on foote and
eſtabliſhed; that the. 9. Chap. to the Rom. was
was neuer vnderſtoode by the auncient Fathers
of the Church of a free Election preuenting our
will and merits; That this doctrine thwarteth &
croſſeth the edification of preachers & teachers;
and were it true, yet is it not to be divulged and
vttered in publicke, becauſe it may miniſter vnto
ſome cauſe of deſpaire; & the hearts of ignorant
men are by this kind of diſpute ſet on mamme
               
                  •
               ing:
becauſe the Catholike faith may be taught
and defended without it. Fauſius added vnto
mans endevour the helpe of grace, that for ſooth graces
& mans endeuour yoaked together finiſh 
                     〈◊〉
                   workes
which remaine, & God by his worde worketh in us it
will that which wee read or heare: but to conſ
                     •
                  et, or 
                     〈◊〉
                  
conſent therevnto is ſo abſolutely our owne, that if we
                     •
                  
will the master is to thwathput in execution; if we 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
we make the working of God to bee of no force or effect
with vs.
            
            Theſe and ſuch like were the olde braine ſicke

ſollies of the P
                     •
                  lagians, which I thinke no man
ſo far to ſeeke in Chriſtian religion, that he conceiueth
not howe this curſed wretch hath ſet
them downe worde for worde as it were, & publiſhed
for newe oracles.
            Nevertheles I know his proteſtatiō wil be, that
hee hath hitherto neuer ſucked at the noiſome
ſinke of Pelagius hereſies, but in heart deteſteth
them. But Puccius that newe vpſtart Pelagian as
vaine & wauering an Apoſtata as Huber himſelfe
hath cleered the caſe; Puccius, who lately trampling
the truth of the Goſpell vnder his feete, and
betaking himſelfe to the Ieſuites, hath ſo openly
and ſhamfully ſet a broach againe and defended
the Pelagian errours, that very ſhame & conſcience
with-helde the Ieſuites of Prage from publiſhing
in printe that monſtrous booke of his.
He togither with his Haber our Apoſtata mainteineth
all the former poſitions, & yet himſelfe
would not ſeeme, no nor endure the name of a
Pelagian. Howbeit in moſt matters he is more apparant
to be ſuch a one. For that which this our
Apoſtata oftentimes feighneth he will doe, & yet
for verie conſcience dares no where performe, he
taketh on him to define predeſtination on this
maner. Predeſtination is an order, foreſeene and propoſed
by God vnto himſelfe, wherein he hath decreed
from all eternitie, what ſhould befall euery, particular
perſon, which he hath created partakers of Chriſt their
Sauiour, & heires of an euerlaſting heritage, leauing
to euery one free w
                  •
               ll in this life to fall, or not to fall from

               him, as he ſhall make choiſe vnto himſelfe when he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
poſſeſſed of the vſe of reaſon. For h
                     ••
                   will was that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
many as forſooke not their 
                     •
                  reat
                     ••
                   ſhould be ſaued
but they who perſiſted ſtedfaſt in their faith & allegiāce
unto him, & manfully reſiſted the adverſaries ſhould
be his approued and choſen, & not onely be ſaued, to
reigne alſo with Chriſt in his kingdome:, & in life eternall.
Againe who for a time ſtarted aſide & fell fr
                     ••
                  
him, ſhould be reformed & purged by temporary puniſhments:
but they who make one vtter defect, & 
                     •••
                  a
                     •
                  ely
reſiſt the ſecret working of his spirite, ſhould
become reprobates & inflexible. Thus farre Pucciu
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
He farther maintaineth that as Chriſt is the Creatour,
ſo is he the Redeemer alſo of all men, and
every particular man: that all are borne in the
ſtate of ſalvation and grace; and by Conſequent
are bleſſed, if they procure not the
                  •
               r own deſtr
                  •
               
               ction
through infidelity, and vnbeliefe; that E
                     •••
                  tion
and Grace are generall, that Faith is a gift of
God generall, and common vnto all 
                  〈◊〉
               , nay tha
                  •
               
it is natural; & that al men haue a proneneſſe vnto
prety; that the difference of good and evil 
                  〈◊〉
               
on earth ariſeth from the good or evil vſe of the
knowledge of God; that Reaſon in deciding controverſies
of Religion is ſovereigne Empereſſe; 
                  〈◊〉
               
that this doctrine wel agreeth with that doctrine
of the Apoſtle Rom. 9. 10. 11. only it is repugna
                  •
               
to S. Auſte
                     •
                  s diſputations, and certaine Councel
and Schoolemen, who are wholy groūded on the
opinion of S. Auſten. He beſeecheth the Ieſ
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
& amongſt them eſpecially Bellarmine, that the

cleaue & ſticke not over-much vnto the definitions
& interpretations of Auſten & the Schoolmen;
and that they no longer debar and defeate
the worlde of this his notable courſe of interpreting
and vnderſtanding the Scriptures, &c.
            Now I demand of this our Apoſtata & his purple
Prelate of Tubinge, whether they heere de
                  •
               ery
Pucc
                     •••
                  
                as a Pelagian or no? I know wel they will
anſwere that this is a dunghil of Pelagian draffe &
filth. He are therefore yet a little farther this your
vpſtart gloſer Puccius. He hath prefixed before the
33. chapter of his booke this argument: I will ſhew
how the Divines of Wittē
                  
                     •
                  erge Luthers ſucceſſorsioin
                     •
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   opinion with vs: but Beza and the reſt of Calvnes
complices perſiſt in their headſtrong wilfulneſſe, and corrupt
divers textes of Scripture. Afterward he breaketh
out into your praiſes, and applaudeth your
good proceedings in Chriſtian doctrine on this
maner. Whileſt I was comp
                     •
                  ling this tract I happened

                     •
                  n the anſwere of Th. Beza Calvines ſucceſſour to the
Actes of the Conference held in Mountpelier publiſhed
at Tubinge; which Aunſwere was printed at Geneva in
the yeare of our Lord 1588; wherein I ſaw how deſperately
the Calviniſts contende with Lutheran Divines
both about other opinions, and expreſſely in this touching
Predeſtinatiō; I perceived how miſerably they mutinize
within themſelues, who ſtray and wander without the

                     〈◊〉
                   and limits of the Church and ſucceſſion of the Apoſtles.
Howbeit the zeale of truth wherewith I was inflamed
cauſed me to re
                     •
                  oice, whereas I ſawe that the Divines
of Wittenberge had laid aſide a great parte of

Luthers tyrannous crueltie, and barbarous abſurdity 
                     〈◊〉
                  
this pointe. And that THEY CONSENT
VVITH VS IN THE SVBSTANCE
OF THE THING IT SELFE
although they ſtagger and erre in the interpretatu
                     •
                  
of the Scriptures, and Sacramentes. This Pucc
                     •
                  
                  us
reporteth of our good neighbour Divines 
                  〈◊〉
               
               Wittenberge. Out vpon this dolefull and lamen
                  •
               
               table
conſent! out vpon this ſhamefull 
                  •
               oint co
                  •
               
               ſpiracy!
            Heere they will call heauen and earth to wi
                  •
               
               neſſe,
that this pertaineth not vnto thē, that the
                  •
               
deſire is to haue their opinions refuted by vs: 
                  〈◊〉
               
not long ſince that curriſh A poſtata wiſhed for 
                  〈◊〉
               
Champion on whom he might faſten his holden 
                  〈◊〉
               
and purchaſe to himſelfe a name by his glorio
                  •
               
conflict. But let him knowe that no man is
                  •
               
mad as to enter combate with a ſelfe condemne
deſperate perſon. In vaine he provoketh me
                  •
               
name, notwithſtanding, in the meane ſpace,
know that I haue not beene retchleſ
                  •
               e in defen
                  •
               
of the truth, and arming my hearers againſt th
                  •
               
his doctrine, whileſt I haue at home ripped
his ruderabble of deteſtable opiniōs. And in the
                  •
               
Treatiſe of the Vniverſalitie of Redemption that fa
                  •
               
               mous
perſonage D. IAMES KIM
                  •
               
               DONCE
the worthy Governour of our Vn
                  •
               
               verſit
                  •
               ,
whom in honour I heere name, hath imployed
himſelfe, debating the maine queſtion,
reſolving it very iudiciouſly in his publike L
                  •
               
               ctures.
Concerning the reſt it were impertine
                  •
               
               
to chew a dry Colewott, and harpe daily on one
ſtring.
            
               Auguſtine long ſince, and Alipius his companion,
as Hierome teſtifieth in his Epiſtle dated
vnto them, hath taken much paines and travel in
confuting the hereſie of the Pelagians, and
hath written thirty whole bookes diſtinguiſhed
by diverſe titles, beſides certaine Epiſtles in
which of purpoſe hee beateth downe this Pelagian
outrage. Prosper reporteth of aboue
three hundred who wrote againſt that hereſie.
Auguſtine himſelfe witneſſeth that it was condemned
in fiue ſeuerall Councels in Africke.
There is a notable tracte of Fulgentius his firſt
booke vnto Monimus extant touching the twofolde
predeſtination of GOD, the one of the
good vnto glorye; the other of the evill vnto
puniſhmente. Maxentius alſo hath certaine
ſhorte Theſes directed againſt theſe Pelegianst
and that golden booke of Luther of MANS
SLAVISH WIL againſt that halfe-Pelagian
declamation of Eraſmus is every where common
and obvious. Laſtly, there are diverſe ſound
diſputations of BRENTIVS, HESHVSIVS,
SCHNEPFFIVS, and eſpecially
HEREBRAND touching this matter. And
doeth the curſed Apoſtata looke then that ſome
one of vs ſhould ſtoppe his blaſphemous mou
                  •
               h?
Let him over-read theſe, and refute them: or if he
be not able ſo to doe, henceforth let him ſurceaſe
his profaning Gods truth.
            
               
               The truth of Scripture ſhall ſtand invincible againſt
this barking dogge, and the very gates of
hell it ſelfe; which teacheth of redemption by
Chriſt.
               oh. 3. 36. Hee that beleeveth in the Son, hath everlaſting
life: and hee that beleeueth not the Son, ſhall not ſee life
but the wrath of God abideth ô 
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               abideth, it abideth
on him.Epeſ. 1. 3. 
               Of Predeſtinatiō & grace, He hath choſen
vs in Chriſt before the foūdations of the world. Whō he
                  •
               
hath Predeſtined,
               Rom. 8. 30. thē alſo he called. Yet the children
were borne it was ſaid,Rom. 9. 11. 12. 13. 18. The older ſhal ſerue the younger▪
As it is written, I haue Loved Iacob, and haue hated
Eſau. Therefore he hath mercy on whom he will, 
                  〈◊〉
               
whom he will he hardeneth. The Election hath obteined
it,Rom. 11. 7. and the reſt haue beene hardened. Of faith,
al Men haue not Faith.
               2 Theſt. 3. 2 Vnto You it is givē for Chriſt,
that not only yea ſhould Beleeue in him, but alſo ſuffer
for his ſake.Phil. 1. 29. It is God which work
                  •
                bin you both the 
                  〈◊〉
               
and the deed.Act. 13. 48. And as Many is were Ordeined vnto
eternall life Beleeued. Of Perſeverance. The foū
               dation
o God remaineth Sure,
               2. Tim. 2. 19. and hath this ſeale, The
Lord knoweth who 
                  〈◊〉
                his.Ioh. 10. 28. I giue vnto my ſheepe etern
                  ••
               
life (Eternall ſaith Chriſt, not for three daies) and they
ſhall Never Periſh, neith
                  •
                ſhal any man plucke thē 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
of mine hand. I haue praied for thee that thy Faith Faile
Not.
               Luc. 22. 32. Falſe Prophets ſhall ſhew great ſignes and wonder
                  •
               
ſo that,Mat. 24. 24. 
               if it were poſſible, they ſhould deceiue the very
elect. I give thee thankes O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth,Mat. 11. 25. 26. becauſe thou haſt hid theſe things from the 
                  〈◊〉
               
and men of vnd
                  •
               rſtanding, and haſt opened them vnto
babes. It is ſo, O Father, becauſe thy good pleaſure
was ſuch. Let them, who carry themſelues as 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
as heauen, learne firſt to adore and bow the knees
of their heartes at theſe and ſuch like myſteries of
Gods truth, ere they peiſe them after the light
phantaſies of their owne braine.
            
            Here I had purpoſed to haue declared in briefe
what a variable inconſtant Proteus they imagine
God to bee: what a newe ſtampe of Diuinitis
they haue coined: what principles of religion
they in ringe, what ſcriptures they ſcoffingly ſhift
and ſhake of. But I haue not the leaſure of performing
thus much; yet can I not but briefely
inſert one example at leaſt amongſt many of the
deſperate boldnes of this impudent man.
            Whereas Luke ſaith of the Antioclnans Paules
hearers,Act. 13. 48. And they Beleeued, As Many as were
Ordeined vnto eternall life, he manifeſtly ſetteth
downe who they were, and why they beleeued
the Goſpell: to wit, They who were predeſtinate
and ordeined by God in Chriſt before the foundation
of the worlde vnto faith, repentance, &
life eternall. Herein there is a ioynt conſent of all
the true profeſſou
                  •
               es of Chriſtian religion. Chryſoſtome
ſaith,Homil. 30. in Act. 
               They beleeued who were before Ordained,
that is, before Appointed by God.
            
            But heare what this newe Prophet ſaith; They
beleeued (ſaith he) who were ordained vnto eternall
life, that is, as many as followed and traced the order
preſcribed by God, & were to be ſaued by him: or, as
imbraced Gods ordination, 
                     •
                  b
                     •
                  ied him, ſwarued not frō
this his ordination, is others, were preſerued vnto life
eternall. Who ever ſawe a more ſhameleſſe man?

Let him ſhew vs in ſcripture that which he vaun
               
                  •
               eth
of his order: let him proue vnto vs, that to be
ordeined:
               Ordinem, ſequi. 
               vnto life eternall is equiualēt & al one with
that, to follow Gods preſcribed order. Firſt therefore
 of this forgeue he can pretend no colourable
 ſhew out of ſcripture. Next the vniuerſall conſent
of all Interpreters both olde & newe convinceth
 him. Thirdly Luther himſelfe vnmaſketh
his impudent face in his mother-tounge Tranſlation
 Fourthly the Scripture crieth out vnto vs▪ &
telleth vs, that they which beleeue are ſaid to be
ordeined vnto life eternall in Chriſt, not for obſeruing▪
Gods order, that is to ſay, the meanes directing
vs vnto life, but for the eternall decree alone
of God, I meane the predeſtination of the
Elect vnto ſaluation: and that they are not now
ordeined of themſelues, but were from euerlaſting
preordeined of God: ſo that this Gods ordination
is precedent vnto faith, and the other
ſubordinate meanes of ſaluation both in reſpect
of time, and in that it is their cauſe and they are
the effects of this cauſe. For ſo the Apoſtle te
                  •
               cheth
Epheſ. 1. And Rom. 8. Whome he knewe before
thoſe he predeſtinate;
               1 Theſſ. 5. 9. he meaneth God. And in an
other place: God hath not appointed vs vnto wrath
               
               but to obtain
                     •
                   ſaluation &c. Fifthly they were ordeined
vnto life eternall as vnto their end. Now the
ordination of man vnto his end iſſueth from God
 the creator, not from himſelfe the creature. Sixtly
Paccius himſelfe ſaith that this order which
man enſueth as preſcribed by God is to beleeue

the Goſpell, and ſo to be ſaued. But if ſo, then
through this forgerie the ſence of this place ſhall
be on this manner: As many as were ordeined beleeued,
that is forſooth, as many as beleeued, beeleeued.
Then which iteration nothing can be deviſed
more abſurde and fooliſh. To conclude,
let vs graunte & winke at the gloſſe, and let him
tel vs why (according to this opinion) ſome were
ordeined, that is, ſome followed Gods order and
good motions, other ſome followed it not. For
this they did either of themſelues, or through the
aſſiſtance of Gods ſpeciall grace: If of themſelues;
then hence forth let him not deny the name of a
Pelagian: If of God; then remaineth there yet an
other queſtion, to wit, why God gaue grace vnto
ſome, and not vnto other ſome; and eſcape he
cannot, but that he muſt either tye grace vnto
mans will, as did Pelagius; or confeſſe Gods ſpeciall
ordination, which is the truth wee labour for.
         
         
            
            AN ORATION
OF D. ZACHARY VRSINE,
exhorting to the ſtudy of Chriſtianity: pronounced
by him in the ELIZABETH Schoole
when he began his Lectures vpon PHILIP
MELANCTHON his groundes
of Divinitie intituled
Eramen Theologicum.
*⁎*
            
            
               SInce by adviſe of your regents
and overſeers in ſtudy,
I haue beene wiſhed
to deliuer vnto you ſome
ſhort ſumme of Chriſtianity,
I muſt acknowledge
my weakeneſſe farre vnable
to ſupport a burden of
ſuch waight. For this is a
doctrine ever paſt vnderſtanding not only of the
moſt wiſe and ſharpe-ſighted of this worlde (vnleſſe
inſtructed by the voice of the Church and
power of the holy Spirit) but for a great part vnknowen
even to the Angels themſelues, vntill it
pleaſed the ſonne of God to reveale it out of the
deepe wiſedome of his eternal father, which if all

the wits and tongues of men and angels ſhoulde
ſtraine themſelues to vnfold and grace with curioſity
of ſtile and depth of invention, they coulde
never be able to ſpeake any thing correſpondent
to the dignity and deſerte of ſo diuine a ſubiect.
Being therefore to my ſelfe guilty of mine owne
defects, I had rather leaue this labour to ſome other,
who might more worthily attempt, & more
happily perfourme it then my ſelfe: but conſidering
againe the place and perſon I ſuſtaine, I haue
thought it my duty to do you al ſervice in furthering
your ſalvation, & to ſhew obedience to God
inviting me to theſe religious labours, and promiſing
(which is the chiefeſt thing) his gracious aſſiſtance,
which who ſo enioieth neede not deſpaire
of any thing, for it pleaſeth God to ſhew his mighty
power in weake and abiect inſtruments, according
to that of the Pſalmiſt, Out of the mouth of
babes & ſucklings haſt thou ordeined ſtrength, becauſe
of thine enemies, that thou mighteſt ſtill the enemy and
the avenger. Pſal. 8. 3. The worde which he vſeth
ſignifieth a childe which beginneth to ſpeake &
vnderſtand. But it is a thing vſual to attribute the
name of children, not vnto thoſe only which are ſo
in years, but vnto thoſe alſo which are ſuch in vnderſtanding
or doing ought beſides. They alſo
which are infants in years, are ſufficient witneſſes
of Gods goodneſſe and providence. The manifeſt
tokens of Gods preſence in miraculous propagation,
preſervation, & ſuſtaining of mankind do
ſufficiently refell and 
                  •
               efute Di
                  •••
               s and Ath
                  •
               ſts of

al ſortes, both ſuch as deny at all that there is any
God, and ſuch as doe not acknowledge him to
be ſuch a God as he profeſſeth himſelfe to bee.
But Chriſt in 21. of Mat. 16. v. draweth this place
to a confeſſion, in which ſence it agreeth to vs al,
euen as many as thincke or ſpeake ought of God.
For we are infantes in vnderſtanding & vtterance
of all heauenly things. Wee learne in this
life ſome ſmale rudiments of them, as truly and
religiouſly ſaith the Emperour Gratian in his confeſſion
to Ambroſe: Wee ſpeake of God ſo much, not
as we ought, but as we can. Yea even the Prophets
and Apoſtles confeſſe as much of them ſelues.
As 1 Cor. 13. 9. Wee know imperfectly & we prophecie
imperfectly. But when that which is perfect ſhall come,
then that which is vnperfect ſhall be aboliſhed. And in
the 
                  •
               2 ver. Now we ſee through a glaſſe darkely, But
then ſhall wee ſee face to face.
            
            But though both thoſe rudiments which wee
learne be feawe, & the word of preachinge bee
plained to our capacitie, wherein God himſelfe
ſpeaketh to vs as vnto infants, & ſuffereth vs to
ſpeake like infantes of himſelfe, yet will God ſo
exact of vs in this life ſkill in this doctrine of himſelfe,
that otherwiſe he giueth vs no hope of an
other life, & theſe rudiments (how ſimple ſo
euer) do ſo farre exceede all humaine wiſedome,
that betwixt the one and the other is no compariſon.
For theſe principles or groundes are a wiſedome
vnknowne to reaſon, neceſſary & ſufficiēt
to everlaſting ſaluation. Let vs, therefore not only

acknowledge our infancie, but alſo ſhew our
ſelues willing to be reckned in the number of
ſucklings & infants. For as the childe groweth not
that is not ſuſtained with the mothers milke or other
conuenient noriſhment: ſo neither muſt we
refuſe the milke of Gods worde, whereby we are
noriſhed and ſuſteined vnto eternall life, leaſt
we be put beſides all hope of our perfection. This
is that ſpirituall infancy,Mat. 21. pleaſing God as Chriſt
witneſſeth when he rebuketh the Phariſes which
were offended at the children ſinging in the tēple
Hoſanna to the ſonne of Dauid. Theſe are thoſe infantes,
in whoſe wordes it pleaſeth him to bee
powerfull, by whoſe mouth, as the pſalme addeth,
he perfiteth his ſtrength, or (as they tranſlate
it who conſider the originall) he ſtabliſheth his
kingdome. But he ſpeaketh of that ſtrength or kingdome
which is ſeene in this life:The kingdome of Chriſt. which is for the
ſon of God to appoint & vphould his miniſtrie,
to gather his diſperſed church, to quicken the
faithfull beleeuers by the preaching of the Goſpell,
to ſanctifie them by the holy ſpirite vnto
eternall life, to protect his church in this life againſt
the kingdome of Satan, after this life to
raiſe vp the faithfull vnto life eternall, that in thē
his Deitie may raigne openly, not by miniſtry.
            What the foundation of this kingdome is Saint
Paule teacheth, 1. Cor. 3. 11. ſaying, Other foundation
can no man lay then that which is ſaid, which is Ieſus
Chriſt. The foundation is Chriſt, firſt in his perſon,
for that he beareth, keepeth and comprehendeth

all the members and parts of this kingdome,
vnited and ingraffed in him, as doth the foundation
al other partes of the building, or as doth the
vine all the branches: 
                  •
                then to the doctrine of himſelfe,
that is of his perſon and office. For as good
lawes are the ſtrength and ſinewes of kingdomes
politique; ſo this kingdome is compoſed, confirmed
and ordered by this doctrine deliuered of
Chriſt. And as the houſe cannot ſtande without
the foundation, ſo except we know who Chriſt is,
and what he hath perfourmed for our ſakes, al religion
beſides is but vaine, forged, none at all.
            This foundation is laid by the mouth of ſuckelings
and b
                  •
               bes which beleeue, and being 
                  ••
               red
vp by the holy Ghoſt doe learne & embrace the
doctrine which they hea
                  •
               e & ſo grow into Chriſt,
in whom they be ingraffed.
            In this weighty worke God vouchſafeth to vſe
our infancy for an inſtrument, to the advancemēt
of his glory (whileſt the weightines of the worke,
and weakeneſſe of the inſtrumentes doe plainely
ſhew, that all this is done not by our ſtrength; but
by the power and might of the almighty God:)
and alſo to abate the pride of his enemies, whileſt
their might and power is ſurpaſſed by our weakneſſe,
and our ſhew of wiſedome doth in the ende
ſhew that nothing is more fooliſh then their wiſdome,
as it is ſaid; your ſtrength ſhall be in ſilence and
hope. For the ſon of God deſtroieth the workes of
the Devill, deliuering thoſe that beleeue from his
tyranny, pardoning and putting away their ſins,

beginning in them righteouſneſſe & life eternal,
defending his church, accuſing & diſcovering the
malice of his enemies, repreſſing & puniſhing thē
both now, and in the finall delivery of his church
from all evils. And all this (manger the gates of
hell) he doth partly bring to paſſe and partly teſtifie
by the vnworthy & ſimple mouthes of mē;
as it is ſaid 2. Cor. 10. v. 4 The weapons of our wa
                     •
                  far
                     •
                  
are not carnal, but mighty through God to caſt dovvne
boldes, caſting downe the imaginations, and eve
                     •
                  e high
thing that is exalted againſt the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Chriſt, And having ready the vengance againſt all
diſobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.
            
            As therefore the baſeneſſe of the veſſell doth
not preiudice the preciouſeneſſe of the merchandize
therin conteined: ſo neither muſt you diſdaine
the meaneſſe and infancy of him that delivereth
this doctrine vnto you, as derogatinge
ought from the weight of thoſe reaſons, which
ſhall be alleadged to perſwade you to the ſeriouſe
ſtudie of Chriſtian religion.Catechiſing is neceſſary. But purpoſing forthwith
to recite ſome of them, I find my ſelfe ſo
plunged in the depth therof, that I can hardely
reſolue where to beginne. Yet becauſe I muſt
of neceſſitie handle ſome of them, let that be the
firſt which ſhould be the rule of all our actions &
ſtudies,1 For Gods commaundement. namely the will of GOD reuealed in
his word. For we now conferre togeather which
are fellow-citizens of the church. Knowing for
certaine that the bookes of the Prophets and

Apoſtles are ſure interpreters of Gods will and
purpoſe. In them are preceptes everie where delivered
and repeated, commaunding without
exception to ſearch & know the doctrine therein
conteined. This is that precept of the ſabaoth
deliuered in the ten commaundements, this is
that whereof our ſauiour ſaide in the 10 of Luc.
42. v. that one thing was neceſſarie. This is that wiſdome
whoſe knowledg he ſaith is eternall life:
this Dauid commēdeth, as in many other places,
ſo in the firſt pſalme, where he layeth downe as
it were a breife therof. But this our heauenly father,
mercifull to mankinde, & carefull for our
ſaluation thought not ſufficient; he added therefore
a peculiar charge of propoſing a ſūme of this
doctrine vnto all, eſpecially the younger ſorte, &
this▪ is that which wee terme Catechizinge. As
Deuter. 4. 9. Thou ſhalt (ſaith he) teach thy ſonnes.
And Deuter. 6. & 11. Lay vp theſe wordes in your
heartes & in your mindes, and hange them for a ſigne
in your handes, & place your eies thereon. Teach thy
children to meditate in them, when thou ſitteſt in thine
houſe, & wa
                     •
                  keſt in the waie, & when thou lieſt downe,
& when thou rizeſt vp. Thou ſhalt wright them vpon
the poſtes and dores of thine houſe, that thy daies and
thy childrens daies may be multiplied in the land. Here
we ſee parents & thoſe which are 
                  •
               nſteed of parents
are commaunded to teach, & prouide that
there be teaching: the yonger ſort to learne; both
ſorts daily to inculcate, repeate, & meditate vpō
this doctrine. Now whereas he will that this doctrine

ſhould be deliuered to our children, & alwaies
placed before our eies, it is plaine that he
requireth breuitie and perſpicuitie, that is a catechiſme
or ſhorte ſumme of Chriſtianitie, with an
expoſition neyther tediouſe nor difficult. So
Paule 2. Tim. 1. v. 13. Keepe the trew paterne of wholſome
words, which thou haſt heard of me in faith and
loue, which is in Chriſt Ieſus. Heere together with
the definition of our Catechiſme, we haue the exerciſe
and practize therof commaunded.
            This trew paterne wherof the Apoſtle ſpeaketh
doth ſignifie trew ſentences of each parte of this
doctrine.True patterne of wholeſome wordes. breifly and orderly comprized, & as it
were preſented to our view: with a forme of teaching
and ſpeaking that is proper, plaine, and ſutable
to the wrightinges of the Prophets & Apoſtles.
Wherupon he nameth them wholſome wordes
deliuered by himſelfe in faith,
               What a catechiſme is. or concerninge faith and
loue which is in Chriſt, that is in the acknowledging of
Chriſt: as euerie where he reduceth all pietie &
religion to faith and charitie. The Catchiſme therfore
is a ſūme of the doctrine of faith and loue in Chriſt,
deliuered by the Prophets and apoſtles. Or A ſumme of
Chriſtianitie, breifely, orderly, and plainely comprized.
For we muſt not deuiſe a doctrine of our owne,
but of neceſſitie referre our ſelues (as it is ſaid Esai
the 8. v. 20.) to the lawe and to the teſtimonie. But
hereunto alſo muſt be added an expoſition, to
vnfolde truely the partes and method, and to
interpret plainly the wordes and phraſe.
            This reaſon alone might be ſufficient to ſtirre

vp mē not prophāely minded,2. Our ſalvation. to the ſtudy of this
heavenly doctrine.God converteth & ſaveth ſuch as are of age & vnderſtāding by knowledge of this doctrine as the chiefe inſtrument of his word For to ſuch the wil and commandement
of GOD is ſufficient though there
were no other reaſon beſides. But ſince it hath
pleaſed our merciful God to yeeld vnto our weaknes
ſome reaſons why he hath giuen vs this commandement,
it behoueth vs to conſider of them
with all reuerence. Now God teacheth vs that we
muſt therefore learne this doctrine, becauſe by
knowledge thereof, & no other meanes, he purpoſeth
to convert & ſaue all thoſe, who through
age are able to vnderſtand, and amongſt thē ſuch
as ſhal be heires of eternall life. It is a confident &
ſtrange ſaying of Saint Paule Rom. 1. 16. The goſpell
is the power of God vnto ſalvation to every one that
beleeveth. And 1. Cor. 1. 18. For the preaching of the
croſſe is to them that periſh fooliſhneſſe: but to vs which
are ſaved it is the power of God. And in the ſame
chapter the 21. v. It pleaſed God by the fooliſhneſſe of
preaching to ſaue them that beleeue.
            
            But this opinion as it is delivered & confirmed
by many & weighty teſtimonies of the holy Spirit:Of the efficacy and power of the holie ſpirit by the miniſtry; againſt the Swencke-feldians.
ſo it is very forcibly impugned by the Devill.
For the Father of lyes ſeeing that this paradox of
the fooliſh preaching of the croſſe did not a little
poſſeſſe the mindes of men, tooke occaſion to incite
brainſicke heads to ſay that this our teaching
was in no wiſe a meane to convert ſoules, but that
God without meanes did imparte and communicate
himſelfe to vs, and that we did but make an
idoll of our own words, and here they power out

wonderful words, ſeeming in ſhew very glorious.
But harken (I pray you) and conſider vpon what
grounds they ſtand. God (ſay they) needeth not
at all this voice of ours, either miniſtry, reading, or
meditation, to convert men: therefore he vſeth
no ſuch meane, neither is the learning therof neceſſary
to ſalvatiō. Now therfore (I ſpeake to you
which are children) is there any amongſt you of
ſo ſhallow and childiſh conceite which will not
ſkorne him that ſhal reaſon in this ſort? God by
his omnipotency can eaſily bring to paſſe, that a
man without bookes, or teachers, or ſtudy may
become learned (as the Apoſtles & others in the
primitiue church did ſpeake with tongues which
they neuer learned) he can make the earth fruitfull
without labour of the husband-man, hee can
ſuſteine mans nature without meate, as hee did
Moſes and Chriſt forty daies: and therefore it is a
labour vnneceſſary, (not a meanes to compaſſe
what we wiſh and expect) either for ſchollers to
buſie themſelues about bookes and ſtudy, and to
go to their inſtructors & ſchooles, or for huſband
men to manure their grounde, or for any of vs to
ſpend our life in ſuſteining our life. Doe you ſee
vpon what rockes of blindneſſe and diſtraction
the Divell doth driue theſe vnhappy men, who
hauing neuer learned the grounds of godlines or
good artes, nor loving the labour & toile of learning,
would notwithstāding ſeeme what they are
not, deſiring to extol thēſelues againſt the knowledge
of God, not doubting to ſubiect the eternal

wiſdom to their vile cenſures? for they ſhew them
ſelues as wel witles, as ſhameles, in alleaging exā
               ples
either of ſuch as by miracle were cōuerted, as
Paule, or endewed with giftes extaordinarie, as
the Apoſtles in the Pētecoſt: or of many hearing
the Goſpell & not beleeuing, or laſtly in 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſuch places of ſcripture as pre
                  •
               ch vnto vs the
power and office of the holy Ghoſt. We know
(God be thanked) & confeſſe, the God can
without helpe eyther of teachers or learners cō
               verte
whom he will, and that the end and vſe of
miracles is this, to ſhew that the order of nature
(wherin he is powerfull) was by him before created,
and is ſtill by him moſt freely preſerued. We
know further, that the conuertinge of ſoules is
the gifte of God aboue, ſo that looke how much
greater and more miraculouſe a worke it is to reſtore
man being loſt vnto ſalvation, then to create
him of nothing, ſo much more impudency &
madneſſe is it rather to attribute our redemption
then our creation to the force & efficacie of mans
wordes. This alſo we know, that it pleaſed God
by fooliſh preaching to ſaue thoſe that beleeue,
why it hath ſo pleaſed him, although he need not
make vs accoumpt, yet is he content to yeeld vs
ſome reaſons ever of this his purpoſe, though he
propoſe not the like reaſons to the godly and vngodly.Cauſes why the miniſtry was ordeined.
To the vngodly he yeeldeth this reaſō, becauſe
his iuſtice in cōdemning their malice, which
reſiſt the word reueald, ſhould be more manifeſt
in ſight of the whole church, their conſciences alſo

bearing witneſſe. But we may alſo conſider other
cauſes, which make for our inſtruction and
comforte. Wheras the voice of the miniſtrie and
all our conceipt of God is vailed with darkeneſſe,
wherin we now behould God, and know his pleaſure,
hence he admoniſheth vs of the greateneſſe
of our fal, whereby it is come to paſſe that now we
enioy not the preſence of God, dealing with vs as
it were a far of & by interpreters, ſtirring vs vp to
aſpire vnto that heavenly ſchoole wherein God
will be ſeene of vs face to face, and ſhal be al in al.
Beſides God in this life will haue the ſearching,
meditation, and confeſſion of this doctrine touching
himſelfe and his will, not to bee concealed
in the mindes of men, but to bee openly ſounded
and celebrated, and therefore on his authority he
hath bound vs to a neceſſity of knowing it, promiſing
thereby to reſtore vs to ſalvation. Furthermore,
being willing to haue vs fellow-labourers in
the moſt excellent of his divine workes, wherein
could he better ſhew his loue to vs miſerable creatures,
except in giving his only begotten ſonne
a ranſome for our ſinnes? wee therefore affirme,
the reading, hearing, and knowing of this doctrine,
to be a neceſſary inſtrument of our ſalvation;
not in reſpect of GOD, but in regarde
of our ſelues: not becauſe GOD coulde not
otherwiſe haue converted vs (as the builder
cannot builde an houſe without his tooles) but
becauſe he would not otherwiſe doe it. True faith
is indeede the gift and worke of none but GOD

onely, yet ſo that it is wrought in vs by the holy
Ghoſt through the hearing of Gods word. Pauls
planteth, Apollos watereth, but God giueth encreaſe.
And when Paule tearmeth the goſpel preached
by him the power of God vnto ſaluation to as many
as beleeue; & Epheſ. 4. v. 11. He gaue ſome to bee
Apoſtles and Prophets, and ſome Evangeliſts & ſome
paſtors and teachers, for the gathering togeather of the
ſainctes, for the worke of the ministerie, for the edification
of the bodie of Chriſt; can any more gloriouſe
worde be ſpoken concerning the office of teaching?
let not vs therfore preſume to be wiſer thē
God, let not vs forſake thinges ordinarie to follow
thinges extraordinarie, neyther let vs ſo
much eſteeme the pride and reprobate coniumacie
of ſuch as contemne the voice of the Goſpell,
that we leſſe regard and reuerence the force and
fruit of Gods ordinance in his inſtrumēts of mercie;
as neither the ſloth and peruerſe peeuiſhnes
of ſome ſchollars, being baries to profit and all
good proceedings, can perſwade others, that inſtruction
and ſtudy are things vnneceſſary to the
attaining and encreaſe of learning and vertue: but
let vs rather with al ſubmiſſion and thankefulnes
embrace this ſweeteſt comforte, whereby we are
aſſured that our labours pleaſe God, and are not
vndertakē by vs in vaine: according to thoſe ſayings
Eccleſ. 11. 1. Caſt thy 
                     •
                  read vpon the waters, for
after long time thou ſhalt finde it againe. 1. Cor. 15. 58.
Your labour is not in vaine in the Lorde. Mat. 18. 20.
Whereſoeuer two or three are gathered togither in my

                  
                     •
                  ame, I am in the middeſt of thē. Were not theſe promiſes
wel knowne vnto vs, and certaine in themſelues,
in this ſo great fury of Satan and miſery of
mankinde, our beſt teachers and moſt careful furtherers
of the publique ſalvation were in conditiō
moſt vnhappy, & could not maintaine this place
without great difficulty. I truly for mine own part
knowing my ſelfe to be of no reckoning, feele my
ſelfe ſo ſurpriſed with ſorrowe, that for griefe I
ſhould nether be able to abide this place, nor giue
paſſage to my ſpeech, did not I certainely know,
that evē in this cōpany there ar ſome, whoſe harts
receiue and approue true & wholſome doctrine,
& are by the holy Spirite inflamed with deſire of
acknowledging and worſhipping God aright, &
are living temples of God, ſuch as ſhall hereafter
glorifie him with the Angels in heauen. Neither
do I ſo ſpeake this as if I did expect that all men
ſhould haue like knowledge of this doctrine, and
equal giftes of the holy Ghoſt without difference
(for Saint Paule willeth vs in the 12. to the Romaines
to bee wiſe according to that meaſure of
faith which God hath given to every man) but it
is neceſſary that al which look to be ſaved ſhould
hold the ſame foundatiō, that is, they muſt know
and beleeue what Chriſt is, and what he hath perfourmed
for every of vs, as it is ſaid by Iohn the 17.
cap. & 3. v. This is life everlaſting, to know that thou
art the only true god, & whō thou haſt ſent Ieſus Chriſt.
Ioh. 3. 36. He that beleeveth in the ſenne hath eternall
life. By theſe and other ſuch like ſentences we vnderſtande,

that it is a true ſaying, which Dionyſi
                     ••
                  
               
(falſly ſirnamed Areop
                     •
                  gita, but indeed ſuppoſed
to be of Corinth) doth attribute to the Apoſtle S.
B
                     •
                  rtolme, The gospell is ſhort and long. The ſhortnes
thereof is manifeſt, excelling therein the lawe of
Moſes, and this ought and may be rooted in every
of our harts and minds, which is the reaſon why
a briefe of the goſpell is ſo often deliuered & repeated
by the Prophets and Apoſtles. But the
wiſedome of the goſpell will far more hardly bee
ſounded and ſearched through all eternity then
that of the law. But knowing for certainty that we
muſt in this mortality begin our eternal life (for we
ſhal be cloathed vpon our cloathing if we be not
found naked) the nature of true converſion is, never
to ſuffer thoſe which are conuerted vnto
God to reſt in their race, but kindleth in them a
perpetuall deſire of of proceeding. Therefore is
that commaundement giuen in the 2 of Peter 3.
18. Increaſe in grace & knowledg of our Lord & ſauiour
Ieſus Chriſt. & Epheſ. 2. 19. Now therefore yee
are no more ſtrangers, but Citizens with the ſaintes, &
of the houſhould of God. And ar built vpon the foundation
of the Apoſtles & Prophets, Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe
being the chiefe corner ſtone; in whome all the building
coupled togeather groweth vnto an holy temple in the
Lord. And Marc. 9. 24. He prayeth, Lord I beleeue,
but helpe thou mine vnbeleife. And Luc. 17▪
                5.
his diſciples pray, Lorde encreaſe our faith. The
godly are ſaide and commaunded to goe forwarde,
& do alſo pray themſelues that they may

goe forwarde. They are not therfore of that ſort
of men which haue no deſire to go forward. Yet
muſt not ſuch be diſcouraged, who finding in
themſelues leſſe light & vigor do with true greife
of hart acknowledge and bewaile their weaknes
and curruption. For thus ſaith the eternall father
of his ſon Eſay. 42. 3. A bruized reede ſhall he not
breake. & the ſmoking flax ſhall he not quench. And
the ſon of his father M. 18▪ 14. It is not my fathers wil
that any one of theſe litle ones ſhould periſh. & himſelfe
of hīſelf, Ioh. 6. 37. Al that the father giveth me ſhal
come to me, and him that cōmeth to me I caſt not away.
Whereſoever is vnfeigned godlines, that cōmeth
from God, and is by him furthered, and there vnto
are linked by the indiſſoluble bande of Gods
truth all the bleſſings of the goſpell which are eternal
and without repentaunce. For did not the
certainety of our faith and ſalvation depend vpō
the free mercy of God alone, whereby he receaveth
into favour all ſuch as beleeue, and not vpō
degrees of our renuing & amēdment, our cōfort
(God knows) were built but on a weake foundation.Three trials of a Chriſtian man.
Hēce may be gathered three trials of a Chriſtian
man, firſt the embracing of this foundation,
ſecōdly a deſire of going forward (which two include
every of vs vnder the vniverſall promiſe of
eternal ſalvatiō) thirdly this comfort, that for difference
or inequ
                  •
               lity of giftes & degrees we ſhall
not be c
                  •
               ſt of and ſuffered to periſh, which comfort
muſt be oppoſed to the griefe conce
                  •
               ved 
                  •
               pon
our owne vnworthineſſe. Theſe 
                  〈…〉
               
               
can neuer be ſeparated hath Saint Pauls compriſed
in 1. Corinth. 3. ca. 11. v. ſaying, Other foundation
can no man lay then that which is laid, that is Ieſus
Chriſt. And if any man build on this foundation gold, ſilver,
pretious ſtones, timber, hay or ſtubble, Every mans
worke ſhal be made manifeſt; but he ſhal be ſafe himſelfe,
nevertheleſſe yet as it were by the fire. By this therefore,
which hath hitherto beene ſpokē, it is manifeſt,
that Gods commaundement, and each mans
particular ſalvation exhorteth and bindeth al mē,
and amongſt them the younger ſort (which are a
great part and ſeminary of the church) to learne
aſlone as their yeares will permit, this foundation
of Chriſtian doctrine: which moſt grauely and ſeverely
admoniſheth all ſuch of this parte of their
duty, who take vpon them the charge of inſtructing
youth.
            For both teachers & learners are all debtors
of diligent & ſerious care of preſeruing pietie &
religion;The preſeruation and propagatiō of pure & ſincere religion to proſterity. debters, not vnto our ſelues only, but to
as many as are oures and belong any way vnto
vs, yea and to all ſucceeding poſteritie. For
wee ſee by daily experience how eaſily in ſmall
proceſſe of time manifolde defacings & corruptions
and at length finall & vtter aboliſhment overtaketh
that religion and doctrine, the ſumme
whereof is not breifely and perſpicuouſly ſet
downe, knowne in publique, daily repeated, &
beaten as it were into mens vnderſtandings. Neither
are we ignorant of the common prouerbe
how the caſke or barrell reteineth ſtill the ſauour and

ſmell which it firſt receiued be it good, or ill. Whereas
then for the moſt parte the evill we learne taketh
ſuch deepe roote in vs, and cleaueth ſo faſt vnto
vs; and youth not being daily inſtructed and trained
vp vnto pietie threatneth a barbarous contempte
of God, and profaning of religion to enſue
in time to come; againe wheras ſcarcely by
the greateſt endeuour, and continuall care of gouernours
we are wonne to any good, no man of
diſcretion and iudgement but will grant that it is
wiſedome & our duty to attēpt betimes ſo weighty
and difficult a matter.
            The inſtitution therefore of Catechiſme is not
only neceſſary for preſeruing pure & ſincere doctrin
with vs & our poſterity after vs,4 The capacity of youth, and 
                     •
                  uder ſort. but in regard
of youth to whō (as hath already bin proved) it is
to be imparted, becauſe it is framed fit for their capacity.
For if it be wel ſaid of other arts wherin this
age is to be informed, In al thy precepts vſe ſuch brevity,
that intelligēt wits may ſone cōceiue, & faithfullie
preſerue them in memory: how much more is ſhortnes
and plaineneſſe to be affected and practiſed
in this heavenly wiſedome ſo ſtrange vnto mans
vnderſtāding? eſpecially whereas the teſtimonies
of holy Scripture ratifie and confirme our experience
herein,Heb. 5. 13. 14. ſaying; Every one that vſeth milke is inexperte
in the worde of righteouſnes: hee is a babe. But
ſtrong meate belongeth to them that are of age. Therefore
both the Apoſtle Paule thus intimateth and
ſignifieth vnto vs his maner of teaching,1. Cor. 3. 2. 3. 
               I gaue you
milke to drinke, and not meate; for yee were not yet able

to beare it,
               The continuall cuſtome of the church. 
               neither yet now are yee able. For yee are yet
carnall: and ſince the firſt preaching of the goſpel
in the church ſome notable argument or ſubiect
of doctrine ſhort and pithy, plaine and eaſie hath
beene extant and derived vnto poſterity. Inſomuch
as certaine compendious ſummes delivered
by Gods owne mouth ſeeme to bee of equall
growth, and continuance with mankinde both of
the law, as; If thou continue righteous, thou ſhalt be accepted:
and alſo of the Goſpell as, The ſeede of
the woman ſhall breake the head of the ſerpent. So not
long after the promiſe and the covenant was repeated
vnto Abraham. Finally in proceſſe of
time certaine briefe Articles were publiſhed abroad
in the Apoſtles writings, the forme and
manner of confeſſion of Chriſt and Chriſtian Religion
beeing proportionably applyed to that
which GOD had revealed in every age. Further
that this our cuſtome of teaching, which we
call Catechiſme, was practiſed both in the Primitiue
Church, and in the Apoſtles dayes, Paule
witneſſeth Romaines 2. verſe 18. where hee tearmeth
the Iewes, inſtructed in the lawe from then
childehoode and Galat. 6. 6. where he ſaith, let him
that is taughte in the vvoorde make him that hath
taught him, partaker of all his goods. Luke alſo
in his 1. Chapter. verſe 4. That thou mighteſt acknowledge
the certainetie of thoſe thinges vvhereof thou haſt
beene inſtructed. For as much then as theſe teſtimonies
are ſuch as deſerue to be preferred before
all others, whereas the Authors of them immediately

followed the Apoſtles times, I therefore
inſtāce in no one example, ſuppoſing it to be generally
knowne out of the commō hiſtories. I rather
adde this, that if the primitiue Chruch being
yet in her infancy, did with ſo great cōtancy obſerue
and retaine this cuſtome & forme of inſtruction
eſtabliſhed, as we ſee, not by the counſel &
advice of man, but the deepe wiſedome and providēce
of God; how much more ought we in this
doating age of the world, in which the church is
ready to giue vp the ghoſt, & the light therof being
extinguiſhed, loathſome darkenes more and
more ready to overſhadow the whole world; how
much more ought we,6. The hereſies and dangers of the laſt times. I ſay, adde vnto the ſmall
meaſure of our diligence in maintaining & advā
               cing
the doctrine of the church, rather thē detract
any the ſmalleſt portiō thereof. For this is that age
of which it is ſpoken Mat. 24. v. 23. Then if any ſhal
ſay vnto you;
               Mat. 24. 23. 
               Lo here is Chriſt, or there, beleeue it not.
For there ſhall ariſe falſe Chriſts, and falſe Prophets, and
ſhall ſhew great ſignes and wonders, ſo that, if it were poſſible,
they ſhould deceiue the very elect. And Paule at
large diſcourſeth, 1. Tim. 4 & 2. Tim. 3. & Peter alſo
in his 2. Ep. 23. c. of the iniquity & danger of theſe
laſt troubleſome time; by the illuſiōs of the Divel
wrought by the hands of thoſe falſe prophets his
ſuppoſts & proctors. Now theſe predictiōs of the
miſeries which are to befall theſe later daies are
written & revealed vnto vs not only for our cōlolatiō
& cōfirmatiō in the truth & faith of Chriſt:
but to be a ſpur vnto vs that we cōtinue 
                  〈…〉
               ,

and careful to provide ſuch weapon & furniture
as is requiſite to the beating downe and razing to
the ground the bulwarkes of all errours. For thus
beginneth Chriſt this dolefull prophecy, Take
heed that 
                     •
                  o man deceiue you.
               Mat. 24. 4. Let vs therfore thinke
it neceſſary not only for them to whom is, or here
after may be committed the charge of preaching
& teaching in the Church, but for every particular
man alſo which deſireth to be ſaued, to haue a
true concerte and opinion of every point of Chriſtian
Religion grounded and deepe rooted in his
heart; to be fenced and fortified as ſtrongly, as by
all meanes he may, againſt ſectes and hereſies: &
that they who haue received commiſſion of governing
and teaching in the Church ought with
great paine and travell either themſelues teach &
inſtruct, or take care that they who are committed
to their cure and charge be taught and inſtructed
in al theſe; vnleſſe they had rather as vnfaith
full and careleſſe ſtewards and diſpenſers of the
word giue an account of the deſtruction of their
flocke. Wherin the entire good affection of your
parentes is worthy high commendation, in that
they haue taken eſpeciall order for your daily inſtruction
in the principles of religion not at home
only in their private houſes, and Churches; but abroad
alſo in publike and free ſchooles. For they
well perceiue what ignorance then enſued, and
how wide a gate was then ſet open vnto the Divell
to intrappe all men in theſe groundes of doctrine,
when firſt the cuſtome of the primitiue

church in teaching, & requiring againe the points
of Catechiſme at the handes of the Catechumeni
began to be ſlacked, and in the end finally decaied,
and in place therof the vaine and childiſh
ſpectacle of Popiſh confirmation ſucceeded: They
well foreſee, that as great miſchaunces, or greater
then theſe are like to betide vs, vnleſſe God in
mercy looke on vs, and in time viſite vs. Then
which danger as nothing can fal out more dreadfull
and lamentable to the godly; ſo the godly
and religious can inuent no greater ioy and comfort
vnto themſelues, then to be able aſſuredly to
promiſe vnto themſelues, that their children &
childrens children ſhall long time after their deceaſe
enioy that bleſſed light of the truth which
ſhineth among vs. Wherfore if we be not vtterly
bereft of all humane affections, and waxe not
cruell againſt thoſe who loue vs rather then thē
               ſelues;
let vs endeuour by all meanes not to fruſtrate
through our retchleſnes this their good
hope conceiued,7 The reward of the embracing of the Goſpel, and the puniſhment of the contempt therof. and annihilate their earneſt harty
deſires: but let vs togither with them preſent
our ſelues thankfull vnto God, who purpoſing
to gather vnto himſelfe out of this ſcōbe of the
world an everlaſting church, by cauſing the Sun
of this Goſpell to retire backe and ſhine in our
hea
                  •
               tes, hath ſo chaſed awaie the cloudes and
darkenes of the kingdome of Antichriſt, that no
man, vnles wilfully ſhutting his eies and ſtopping
his eares he reſiſt Gods truth diſcloſed vnto him,
cannot but perceiue, and cleerly ſee the diuell

vnmaſked of thoſe viſardes of deceipt & errour,
wherin he vaūted himſelfe, & blinded the world.
Which if we ſhall performe, Chriſt the ſonne of
God ſhal cōtinue vnto vs al his benefits in former
times, and heape daily new bleſſinges on vs according
to his promiſe; To him which Hath, that is,
to him which hath a deſire of proceeding, i
                     •
                   ſhall
be giuen: But if we doe otherwiſe, the paines which
are threatned in the cōtrary doome ſhal overtake
vs, From him which hath not ſhalbee taken away even
that he hath. The Scriptures themſelues and the
hiſtories of all times cry and thunder out in our
eares Gods iealouſie in not being able to endure
the contempt of his Goſpell revealed, Eſay complaineth,Eſ. 5. 24. 26.
               They haue caſt of the law of the Lord of hoſts,
and contēned the word of the Holy One of Iſrael Therefore
is the wrath of the Lord kindled againſt his people,
and he hath ſtretched out his hand vpon them,
               Amos. 8. 11. 12. 
               and hath
ſmitten them. And Amos threatneth: Beholde the
dates come, ſaith the Lord God, that I will ſend a fam
                     ••
                  s
in the land, not a famine of bread nor a thirſt for water,
but of hearing the word of the Lord. And they ſhal wander
from ſea to ſea, and from the North even vnto the
Eaſt ſhall they runne to and fro to ſeeke the worde of the
Lord, and ſhall not finde it. Behold we ſee the Iſraelitiſh
nation, which God had enriched with ſo honorable
titles and priviledges, and made famous
and glorious over all the kingdomes of the earth
for the many ſtrange eventes, and wonderful miracles
ſhewed amongſt them; behould wee set
this 
                  〈◊〉
                natiō now grown baſe & cōtemptible

troden vnder foot of the very out caſts of the
earth, and in the very mid-day and noone-light
of their prophecies ſo beſti
                  •
               lly and blockiſ
                  •
               ly
blind that the conſideratiō of this their example
is able to moue and ſtir vp evil men, I ſay not vnto
laughter or indignation, but rather to ſt
                  ••
               ke into
their harts a dreadfull horror of the like iudgement.
Nowe that the contempt and neglect of
ſound doctrine touching God and our ſalvation
is the cauſe of ſo great miſchiefes & miſeries wee
haue for teſtimony the voice of the prophets and
of Chriſt himſelfe,Ioh. 5. 43. 
               Ioh. 3. 43. I am come in my Fathers
name, and yee receiue me not, if another ſhall come
in his owne name,
               The perſecution in England in Q. Maries daies. 
               him will yee receiue. I omit the rehearſall
of other examples; that one of the late
moſt flowriſhing and happy kingdome of England
I will touch in a word, not only becauſe the
example is exceedinge lamentable, but becauſe
alſo there is none ſo very a childe in all
this Auditory in vvhoſe time it chaunced not.
For of late yeares that kingdome and Countrey
of Englande beeing endowed and beautified
with the profeſſion of the Goſpel in the happy
Reigne of King Edwarde the VI. the Churches
and ſchooles of learning being nobly 
                  •
               ounded,
honorably enriched, & religiouſly ordered;
the king himſelfe, though but 16. yeares of age,
yet ſo farre aboue the hope of his yeares indued
with ſuch ſingular piety, 
                  •
               dmirable learning, and
all Princely vertues that in all that glorious kingdome
nothinge might ſeeme more glorious then

the king and governour himſelfe, that kingdome
of late yeares was inferiour in perfect happineſſe
to no nation of the earth. But 
                  •
               o on the ſuddaine
through the vntimely deceaſe of that moſt noble
Edward a Prince of ſo great hope, the Popiſh tyrannicall
dominion reentered this kingdome, and
tooke ful poſſeſsion thereof, waſting and ſpoiling
with impriſonments, baniſhments, fire and ſword
the moſt famous churches of that Realme, taking
ſome of the beſt renowned for learning and integrity
of life without all reſpect either of age, ſexe,
or dignity▪ and torturing them with fiery flames;
and other puniſhments of like barbarous cruelty:
and ſcattering and diſperſing others towardes all
partes and corners of the earth: It is now the fifth
yeere ſince this ſcourge & theſe calamities haue
leine heauy on this land and oppreſſed the ſame,
I rather acknowledge and bewaile our owne offences,
then take on me to cenſure the defaulte
                  •
               
of others. Howbeit the report of Engliſh exiles is
yet 
                  〈◊〉
                in mine eares, wherin they much complained
of and bewailed the ingratitude, ſecurity
& loathing of the Goſpell, which had overtun
their whole countrie. And do we then ſeeme to
regard our good eſtate we enioy more thē they?
I would we did. When Pilate had mingled the
bloud of the Galileans which he ſlewe with the
ſacrifices,Luc. 13. 3. 
               Vnles yee repent, ſaith Chriſt, yee ſhall all
periſh▪
                The tumultes and downe falles of Empires
and kingdomes wherwith the church is ſhaken
are open conuerſant before our eies, and threatē
               
and menace vs ſome bitter ſcourge. The Turkiſh
cut throtes gape on vs ready to d
                  •
               v
                  •
               ur vs
ſtriuing by mai
                  •
               e force to take Chriſt from amōg
vs and by 
                  •
               n
                  •
               ruſion to ſeate their profane Mahome
                     ••
                  
               
ſt
                  •
               ede of Chriſt in our churches; of whome
reporte goeth that they daily withdrawing Chritian
youth vnto their b
                  •
               aſphemou
                  •
                filthy, Paganiſm
                     •
                  ,
and ſheading and ſu
                  •
               king the b
                  •
               oud of our
a
                  ••
               es and kinſfolke, threaten and attempt farther
irruptions and inuaſions on our bo
                  •
               ders. That execrable
ſincke the Courte of Rome curſeth and
banneth vs, crying out Away with vs that wee
may be rooted out from of the earth; hereſies
d
                  •
               ily bud and bloſſome both, within and without
the Church, and the erroures and corruptions
of truth crept into the Church are beyond all
number. And verily nowe is that time when vnles
the Lord reſerue a 
                  •
               eede vnto vs nought remaineth
but that we ſhould become as Sodom
and Gomorrah. O then let vs not be ſo iron harted,
let vs not be ſo bitter enemies of our owne
ſoules, that we regard not theſe Gods merciful viſitations,
and threatnings of more ſharper iudgements
to enſue. O let vs ſeeke the Lord while he
may be found: let every one take ca
                  •
               e of his owne
ſalvation, and beare in minde whatſoeuer thinges
concerne the ſame, ſo that if the frame of nature
ſhould on a ſuddaine be diſſolved we may be ready
cheerefully to meet the Lord in the aire▪ this
comming in glory.
            Theſe things which I haue hitherto ſpoken cō
               cerne

all in generall,8 Church-doctrine eſpeci
                     •••
                  y ough
                     •
                  t to be known vnto ſcholers. but more particularly vs
that profeſſe the ſtudies of learning. For it is the
common conſent of all that ever either founded,
or governed ſchooles, or euer were converſant in
them, or would that others ſhould frequent them,
that they who are here brought vp ſhoulde become
not only more learned but better mānered
alſo then other men. Which trueth being ſo evident,
they deſcribe a ſchoole to be A company appointed
by GOD, of ſuch as teach and learne ſciences
meete & neceſſarie for mankinde both touching God
and other good things, that the knowledge of God amōgſt
men be not cleane aboliſhed, that the Church be continued
and preſerued, that manie may be made heares of life
eternal, that diſcipline be maintained, and that men may
enioie other honest commodities iſſuing out of the artes.
            
            We therefore ſhoote wide and miſſe much of
the m
                  ••
               ke we ai
                  •
               e at, vnleſſe we holde it for certaine
and true, that our earneſt and diligent endevour
in theſe ſchooles and nu
                  •
               ce
                  •
               es of Chriſt, &
Chriſtianity muſt bee employed not ſo much for
this ende that we may be the more fraught vvith
humane and divine learning, but rather that being
beautified and adorned with all laudable behaviour
towards men and holineſſe to the Lord,
may be found acceptable in the ſight of God and
men. And it is a truth apparāt in the Church, that
all the exhortations vnto civill vertues without
the doctrine of piety is nought elſe but an eſtraying
and ſwar
                  •
               ing from God, true godlineſſe, perfect
iuſtice, and aſſured ſalvation. For the holy

Ghoſt hath pronounced this ſentence; that whatſoever
we doe not with intent thereby to glorifie GOD,
whatſoever vvee doe not in the name of CHRIST,
whatſoever is not of faith, it is all, even altog
                     •
                  ther
ſinne. VVherefore vvere the doctrine of the
Church ſecluded from our ſchooles, we ſhould
not only not be able to teach or learne any thing
that belongeth to true and entire vertue, ſuch as
GOD requireth of vs; But that ſmall portion
and remainder we haue ſhould make vs of evill
men worſe and more impious, and that indeed
not by the increaſe thereof ſo much, as by the
decreaſe and defect of thoſe ſpirituall and ſupernaturall
qualities, without which nothing is holy,
nothing wholſome vnto vs. And heere although
the conſent of men wiſe and iudicious
may ſatisfie vs, yet let GODS preceptes prevaile
more with vs,Ioh. 5. 
                     ••
                  . which commaunde vs reſearch
the Scriptures,
               1. Tim. 4. 
                     •
                  3. 
               to giue attendance to reading,
to divide the worde aright &c. Nowe whereas no
man can without ſchoole learning and exerciſe
either himſelfe perceiue and diſcerne aright, or
expound and impart vnto others in any good order
and perſpicuity, who is ſo purblinde that hee
ſeeth not the neere affinity wherwith the ſtudy of
Religion & piety is linked with ſchoole▪ learning?
Let vs therefore eſteeme that to bee the exerciſe
of greateſt weight & momēt in ſcholes, which is a
worke of greateſt importāce in the world, & with
out long & cōtinual ſchole-exerciſe cānot be performed
by vs, I mean the vnderſtāding & expoū
               ding

of the writings of the Prophets & Apoſtles. And
whereas we haue opportunity offered vs of ſearching
out & ſitting the truth of doctrine in greater
meaſure then other Countries and people; of
a truth if wee faile to vſe the ſame wee giue the
vvorld occaſion to ſuſpect our cold zeale in Religion,
& our puniſhments for this our negligence
and ignorance ſhall be the greater For God hath
giuen vnto ſcholers eſpecially the charge and
care of preſerving and advauncing this his trueth
not for our owne ſakes only, but for the good of
others alſo. For other men with good reaſon expect
inſtruction in the Scriptures, and the interpretation
of the word at their mouthes, who for
their learning are able to vnderſtande diverſe
tongues, and ſearch the courſe of doctrine.
            Whereas then 
                  •
               eligion and Chriſtianity is to
be taught in ſchooles, that children may wel conceiue▪
it Catechiſme is eſpecially neceſſary. For
neither can this age learne any thing except it be
taught 
                  〈◊〉
                briefe▪ neither cā either the teachers, or
the learners handle aright and in good order the
parts of any ſcience, whereof both of them haue
not digeſted in minde ſome rude ſumme. Both
theſe are the cauſe why ſo often in Scriptures we
read ſhort briefes of Religion repeated; as Repent,
and beleeue the Gospell. He which beleeueth, and is baptiſed
ſhalbe saued. Fight a good fight, keepe the faith, and
a good conſcience &c.
               Col. 3. 16. And wheras it is ſaid Col. 3▪ 16.
Let the word of God dwel in you plenteouſly, & in all wiſdome,
the Apoſtles meaning is, that wee muſt vſe

explications & interpretations ſuch as are ſutable
with the ſentences and doctrine of the Prophets
& Apoſtles.Philip Melancthons examen. Neither is Catechiſme any other thē
a ſummary declaration of ſuch ſentences of Scripture.
Now whereas this litle examen we intende to
propoſe vnto you is ſuch, and the Author thereof
hath faithfully and with great dexterity compriſed
the chiefe grounds of Chriſtianity in proper
& plaine tearmes; & it ſeemeth that it would bee
very beneficial that in other churches ther ſhould
the like forme of Catechiſme be extant, prepare
your ſelues to the ſpeedy learning thereof, & ſuppoſe
that theſe our ſimple writings are the ſwadling
clouts wherein Chriſt as it were ſwathed will
be found of vs. You ſee how many vrgent cauſes
they are which they commend vnto you, which
they earneſtly exhort you to embrace, which I
beſeech you to carry in minde & memory as they
haue bin ſet downe vnto you: The cōmandement of
God, your own ſalvation, your duty which you owe to poſterity,
the good example of a reformed church, your maner
of life, your age or years▪ your friends deſires, & hopes
the imminent dangerous times, the rewardes & puniſhments
we are to looke for at Gods hands. But as our admonitions
& exhortations are neceſſary, ſo without
the ſecret motiō & working of the holy ſpirit
we know they litle availe. Let vs therefore turne
our ſelues & looke towards God, & giue him harty
thanks for this his ineſtimable benefite, that it
was his good pleaſure to bring vs into the worlde
in this ſun-ſhine of the goſpel, & let vs begge and
craue to be taught & governed by him.
         
         
            
            OF THE INCARNATION
OF THE WORD. A confeſſion made by the fathers of the Church
of Antioch againſt Paulus
Samoſatenus.
            Taken out of the Actes of the firſt
Epheſ
                  •
               e Coun
                  ••
               l
                  •
               .
            
               
                  WE confeſſe that our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt, begotten of
his Father before all
worldes, but in the latter
times conceiued by the
holy Ghoſt of the virgin
Mary according to the
fleſh, is but one perſon, of
the godhead & humane
fleſh ſubſiſting Perfect God, & perfect man: perfect
God euen with the fleſh, but not accordinge
to the fleſh; perfect man euen with the godhead,
but not according to the Godhead. Wholy to be
worſh
                     •
                  pped, euen with the fleſh but not according
to the fleſh: wholy worſhiping, even with
the god
                     •
                  ead but not according to the godhead.

                     〈…〉
                  , euen with the bodie, but not
according to the body. Wholy formed, or endued

with ſhape & faſhion, euen with the divinity
or godhead, but not according to the Diuinitie
or godhead. Wholy coeſſenciall, that is of o
                     •
                  e
and the ſelfe ſame nature togeather with God,
even with the bodie, but not according to the
body: as likewiſe he is not coeſſential to men according
to his godhead, but being in his godhead
he is coeſſētial to vs according to the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
For when we ſay that he is conſubſtantial, or of
the ſame nature togeather with the father according
to the ſpirite, we ſay not that he is con
                     •
                  ubſtantial
with men according to the ſame ſpirite.
And contrariewiſe when we prea
                     •
                  h that after the
fleſh he is cōſubſtantial to men, we do not preach
that according to the fleſh he is coeſſential with
god, for like as he is not coeſſētial with vs after the
ſpirite (for ſo he is coeſſential with God) euen ſo
is he not according to the fleſh coeſſential to
God, but conſubſtantial with vs. But 
                     〈◊〉
                   pronounce
theſe thinges to be different and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
betweene themſelues, not to deuide that o
                     •
                  e
vndeuided perſon, but to ſhew a diſtinction betweene
nature and properties of the word and
the fleſh, which can neuer be confounded: ſo we
profeſſe and reverence that vnitie, which cauſeth
this indiuiſible vnion and compoſition.
            
            Vigilius in his 4. booke againſt
E
                  ••
               tyches.
            
               If the worde and fleſh bee of one nature,

how commeth it to paſſe,Therefore contrariwiſe, if the fleſh bee found every where, how comes it that the nature of the fleſh & worde which is every where is not one? that the worde being every
where, the fleſh alſo is not founde every
where? for what time it was heere on earth, it was
not then in heauen: and now becauſe it is in heaven,
even therefore it is not in earth: ſo ſure wee
are that it is not in earth, that even according to
the fleſh we verily expect that Chriſt ſhall come
from heavē, whom according to the word we beleeue
to be with vs alwaies here on earth. Wherfore
(as your ſelues confeſſe) either the word togither
with the fleſh is contained in ſome place,
or elſe the fleſh togither with the word is in every
place, for one nature is not in it ſelfe capable of
contrarieties. But theſe two differ very far, to bee
contained in ſome place, & to be in every place:
and becauſe the word is every where, & the fleſh
is not every where, it appeareth that one and the
ſame Chriſt conſiſteth of both natures, & is in every
place by nature of the godhead, and contained
in ſome one place according to the nature of
his humanity. So that the ſame Chriſt was both
created & without beginning, ſubiect to death,
and yet immortal, the one by nature of the worde
as he is God, the other by nature of the fleſh, as
the ſame God is alſo man. Being therefore both
the ſon of God & man, he hath a beginning, was
created, & is comprehēded in ſome place by nature
of his fleſh, being otherwiſe before all beginning
vncreated, and without limitation of place,
according to the nature of his godhead. He is inferior
to the Angels in reſpect of his fleſh, but equall

to the Father as touching his Deity: deade
ſometimes in his māhood, ever-living in his godhead.
This is the catholique faith and confeſſion,
which the Apoſtles delivered, martyrs co
                     •
                  firmed,
and the faithfull to this day h
                     •
                  ue retained. W
                     ••
                  rfore
impiouſly, as tainted with the p
                     ••
                  enous hereſie
of E
                        ••
                     yches you preſume to taxe Leo, whiles
by the different actions of one Lorde Ch
                        ••
                     ſt hee
proveth the verity of both natures in him: ſo that
what he wrought for demonſtration of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of two natures, you pervert as if it were a proo
                     •
                  e
of two perſons.
            
         
         
            
            OF PREDESTINATION.
            A letter of Vrſinus to his friend, briefely
conteining a full and learned diſcourſe
of predeſtination, with
wholſome adviſe for the
weaker ſorte to
follow.
            
               HItherto I haue not had
leaſure to peruſe your
diſcourſe of predeſtination.
Neither haue I now;
but I ſteale ſo much time
from other my affaires
which I deferre, that I
may at lēgth ſatiſfie your
requeſt, which in my opinion
is not ſo neceſſarie, if it would pleaſe you
to read D. Beza and P. Matyr on this queſtion

whervnto I thinke you were before directed by
me. Hereby alſo I would giue you to vnderſtād,
that hitherto I haue rather wanted abilitie then
will to gratifie you. Of you let me entreate this
courteſie, that you do not by diſputation trouble
others, who either will not heare ought beſides
that which they haue before conceiued, or can
not readilye vnderſtand thoſe thinges whereof
they never thought before, and haue in their infancie
learned falſe in ſteede of trew principles &
foundations. And were I not fully perſwaded
that in this queſtion you would frame your ſelfe
to Chriſtian wiſdome and patient for bearance of
the weaker ſorte, I would not anſweare one
worde to your demaunde.
            The doctrine of predeſtinat
                  •••
               ,The doctrine of Predeſtination is not difficult. is not in my
iudgment (as you wright) the moſt difficult point
in all Chriſtianitie, if we read holy ſcripture without
preiudice or affectiō, & with ſerious purpoſe,
not to reforme God after our phanſies, but to
learne of him, and to yeeld all glorie vnto him
& none to our ſelues. For by theſe meanes that is
now become eaſie to me which before ſeemed
very difficult, whileſt I depended on the authoritie
of men, who neuer vnderſtoode themſelues,
nor could reſolue me. There is no one common
place of Divinitie, wherof more is wrighten by
the prophets and apoſtles, then this verie place
of Prouide
                     •
                  ce, Election, and free will: in ſo much
th
                  ••
                I can not but marvell learned Chriſtians

                  〈◊〉
                ſo doubt thereof.
            
               
Do you as I haue don, who for this onely reaſon,
that I might gather, weigh, and confer
                  •
               e whatſoeuer

                  •
                conteined as well in ſermons as examples
of holy ſcripture to this purpoſe, haue diligently
peruſed the whole bible, euen from the begining
of Geneſis to the end of the Revelation,
Which after I had don, I did partely perc
                  •
               iue, &
p
                  •
               rte
                  •
               y deteſt that ſkumme of diſputation, and
foggie fume of fallacie and ſoph
                  •
               ſtrie, labou
                  •
               ing
(but to no purpoſe) to eclipſe the gloriouſe ſunneſhine
of this doctrine. You may at your better
leaſure do this in Italie, where you ſhall haue no
exerciſe of religion beſides reading the bible, &
priu
                  •
               te prayer. Which libertie ſome verie good

                  •
               en heretofore haue wanted, who otherwiſe had
neuer ben ſo entangled. But eve
                  •
                be are this in

                  •
               inde whereof before I warned you. Yf for the
preſent every thinge be not plaine and eaſie to
you, be not therfore troubled, but by leaſure diligently
meditate with your ſelfe callinge vpon
God, and houlding that foundation, which amogſt
the godly is without cōtrouerſ
                  •
               e: remembring
alwaies that not your ſelfe, but God is author
of your ſalvation, and of all beſides whatſoeuer
you are, haue, or d
                  •
               e, be it great or little.
So ſhall you be ſure not to erre with any danger
of conſcience and ſalvation, although you be not
able to conceaue and vnfolde whatſoeuer you
deſire. Knowledge puffeth vp, but charitie edifieth.
            Firſt you muſt put a difference betweene providence

& predeſtination, a
                  •
                betweene the whole
and the part.I Difference betweene providēce & predeſtination. For Providence is the eternal, immutable,
and moſt excellent counſaile or decree of
God, whereby all things haue their event tēding
to the glory of the creatour, and ſalvation of the
elect. Predeſtination is the eternal purpoſe of God,
of beginning and perfiting the ſalvation of the elect,
& forſaking or vtter caſting of the reprobate
to eternall puniſhment: Wherefore it containeth
Election and Reprobation as partes of it ſelfe.
            Secondly,II Diſtinction betweene good & evil offence. diſtinguiſh betwixte Providence of
good 
               
                  •
               nd evill of offence (for the evill of puniſhmente
hath a reference to good, namely to iuſtice, and in
that reſpect is found in God:) God doeth provide
that is in his providēce, purpoſe, & wil perfourme
in purpoſed time, order, and manner: and in this
reſpect he is ſaid to be the cauſe, efficient, and author
of things. Theſe things are not only done according
to providence, but alſo by the providēce
of God. As for evill or ſin, that hee foreſeeth from
eternity, that is, hee decreeth or is willing to permit
it, or not to hinder others from doing it: but
him ſelfe i
                  •
                in no wiſe an agent, either in them or
by them. Wherfore himſelfe is not the cauſe of evill,
but in iuſtice excellency and depth of wiſedome
he ſuffereth others to be the cauſes therof▪
So that theſe things are done according to Gods
providence, but not by it becauſe God did not
decree to doe, but to ſuffer others to doe them.
now to permitt or ſuffer, is nothing elſe but not to
hinder ſinne in any action, or not to cauſe men

to be conformable to the law of God and nature.What it is to 
                     〈◊〉
                   or ſuffer.
And in this ſence God doth tolerate or ſuffer ſi
                  •
               ,
when he doth not either lighten our minds with
his holy ſpirite & knowledge of his will, or turne
our hearts to make this the principall ende of our
actions, that we doe the knowne wil of God, and
by this our obedience honor him. Which two
things except it pleaſe God to worke in vs, what
ere we doe, how good, iuſt, and holy ſo ever, it is
but ſinne and corruption in the ſight of God.
            Thirdly, make a diſtinction betweene God &
his creatures,III The difference bet
                     •••
                  ne the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈…〉
                   ſecond 
                     〈◊〉
                  . or ſecond cauſes, eſpecially 
                  •
               n matters
concerning the government of the worlde.
Firſt the creatures are bounde one to further the
ſafety, & hinder the deſtructiō of an other wherſoever
they can; becauſe God hath ſo commaunded
all, and themſelues may deſerue it one of an
 other: And being converted thy ſelfe, remember to cō
                  firme
thy brethren. God is bound to none, as not
to create them of nothing, ſo neither to preſer
                  •
               e
them, either in their being, or in that good, innocent,
and happie being wherin they were created
Becauſe whatſoeuer good wee all enioy we
haue it from him, neyther can he receaue any
good, fellcitie, and commoditie of any man, becauſe
of his infinite and moſt abſolute all-ſufficiencie
in himſelfe.
                  
                     〈…〉
                   11. Who hath giuen vnto him firſt,
that he ſhould be recompenſed?
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   20. 15. Is it not lawfull
for me to do with mine owne as pleaſeth me▪
               
               Secondlie Gods iuſtice requireth, that being himſelfe
the cheifeſt good and author, and end of all

thinges, he ſhould referre all to his owne glory,
and (if need were) rather ſuffer all the creatures
of the worlde to periſh, then any part of his glory
ſhould be left vnſatiſfied. As for the creatures,
they owe both themſelues and all they haue, not
to themſelues, nor to others, but to God. Therefore
Paule deſired euen to be accurſed from
Chriſt, if by the ſaluation and converſion of his
brethren he might aduance the glorie of Chriſt.Rom. 9. 3.
               Thirdely God may therefore moſt iuſtly permit & 
tolerate the ſinnes of his creatures, that is, not
hinder them, becauſe by his infi
                  ••
               te wiſdome,
power, iuſtice, and goodneſſe, he knoweth how
to vſe this toleration and permiſſion, to his owne
glory, and the ſaluation of his elect. This the creatures
can not do, and therefore they are ſubiect
to the law of hindering offences as much as in
them lieth. Fourthly God is the firſt cauſe and author 
of all good in the worlde: the creatures are
onely inſtruments of ſuch good thinges, as are
by them performed, whome God in the abſolute
freedom of his excellent will & pleaſure vſeth, &
by his prouidence preſerueth in that nature and
manner of doing which he hath preſcribed Fiftely
               
God alone is ſimply immutable (
                  ▪ I am God and
am not changed.) All creatures are mutable, ſome
of their owne nature, which worke onely by vncertaintie:

                  〈◊〉
                the vnſtable action of elements,
matter, and motion of creatures: or by vncertaintie
or contingency, and yet freely to, as the wils
of angelles an
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                are in deede of their

owne immutable, and therfore neceſſarie agents
in that which they doe, yet are as eaſie to be altered
by God as the reſt: ſo the motion of the ſonne
is naturally ſuch as we ſee: yet God at his pleaſure
can either ſtop or interrupt the courſe therof.

               Sixtly, God alone is ſimply & abſolutely free, that
is, of himſelfe moving all things, in himſelfe moved
and depending of none, hauing in himſelfe
the reaſon, & cauſe of al his purpoſes, with greateſt
power and authority of diſpoſing al things otherwiſe
from eternity, if ſo he had beene pleaſed,
impoſing neceſſity or contingence & vncertainety
vpon al things, himſelfe not tied to ſuch conditions
by any thing. Eph. 1. 9. According to his good
pleaſure which he had purpoſed in himſelfe. But the liberty
of reaſonable creatures is not abſolute, that
is, depending of no other; for although they moue
themſelues by ſome internal cauſe, vnderſtandinge
offering ſome obiect, and will of his owne accorde
without conſtraint choſing or refuſing it, yet are
they over-ruled by an other agent, namely God,
who both offereth obiects of what nature & quality,
howſoever & to whōſoeuer it pleaſeth him,
and alſo to them and by them affecteth, moveth,
inclineth, and boweth the wils of whomſoeuer,
whenſoeuer, and how far ſoever he will himſelfe.
That mans conceipt of God is too contumelious
which putteth no difference betweene the liberty
which is in God and his creatures. Wherefore
Gods providence and working in all things, doth
not deſtroy but vphold and encreaſe the libertie

of our wils. For the more God mooveth or forſaketh
them. the more violently, & conſequently
with more freedome and fervencie of deſire they
are carried eith
                  •
               r to good or evill. Wherefore thē
indeed we ſhall with greateſt freedome will that
which is good when God ſhall ſo be all in al, that
wee can will or wiſh nothing but what is good,
which ſhal be (with the favor and grace of God)
in the life to come.
            Fourthly,IV. The difference of effectes in reſpect of. we muſt diſtinguiſh the manner of
effects or things done. For the ſame effect proceeding
from divers cauſes, may in reſpect of thē bee
diverſly taken. For as it proceedeth from a good
cauſe ſo it is good, as from an evil ſo evill, as from
a cauſe contingent and mutable, or neceſſary &
immutable, ſo may it be accounted contingent &
mutable, or neceſſary and immutable. Wherfore
in reſpect of God, in whō we haue our being, life,
& motion, all things which were made are good,
as well bad as good, conſidering that God is abſolutely
& immutably good, and therefore can neither
will or do any thing but what is good, and agreeable
to his nature, and the law wherein hee
hath revealed vnto vs his nature and iuſ
                  •
               ice. In
reſpect of creatures, all good thinges as they are
good, are by God vpheld in their goodneſſe, al evill
things as they are evil, degenera
                  •
               e from that
goodnes wherein they were cre
                  •
               ted (God ſuffering
and forſaking them) and are not therevnto
reſtored by God. So in reſpect of the liberty and
freedome of God al things are done cont
                  ••
               gently

and by vncertainety, yea even thoſe thinges
which ſeeme to depende moſt neceſſarily on ſecond
cauſes, as the motion of the heavens: but in
reſpect of Gods immutable decree all events are
neceſſary, as when the ſouldiers crucifying Chriſt
did not breake his bones, but pierced his ſide with
a ſpeare, which in reſpect of ſecond cauſes were
meerely contingent.
            Fiftly we make diſtinction of ſinnes,V Difference of ſinnes. whereof
ſome in themſelues and in their owne nature are
ſins, namely ſuch things as are forbiddē by God,
not are by ſpecial law or exception commanded,
as the robbing of the Aegyptians, the offering of
Iſaac: others by occaſiō or accident, namely ſuch
thinges as are either commaunded or allowed by
God, but perverted by the creature, and not
perfourmed in ſuch ſort as they were commaunded,
as are the ſacrifices, praiers, and almes-deeds
of wicked men and hypocrites. Whether of theſe
two ſorts of ſinne a mā commit, either that which
is ſin in it ſelfe, or the other which is ſin by accidēt
and occaſion, certaine it is, that through his owne
fault & imperfection he committeth it. But that
which God intendeth in theſe actions of men is
ever good and iuſt.
            
               Laſtly, we muſt diſtinguiſh the neceſſity of cō
                  ſtraint
and immutability;
               VI Two ſortes of neceſſity 
               for it were too groſſe to
confounde them. For the former moveth violently
and by externall cauſe, the latter naturally,
ſome internall cauſe in the agent moving
and being moved, as by nature it is apt. Theſe

thinges when I perceiued, GOD opening my
eies, I did not reckon one 
                     •
                  ote of thoſe fooliſh
fables;
               Teſtimoni
                     •
                  s out of the New Teſtament. that GOD was made the cauſe of ſinne: that
contingence or caſualitie and libertie were taken awaie
And all this I learned out of infinite places of
ſcriptures: as Geneſis 20. Therefore haue I kepte
thee that thou ſhouldeſt not ſinne againſt mee, nor did
I ſuffer thee to touch her. Geneſis 45. GOD ſent
mee before you for your ſafety. And againe, I was not
ſent hither by your purpoſe but by the will of God, who
hath made me as it were a father vnto Pharaoh. Gen.
50. Feare not, can we reſiſt Gods will? You thought evil
againſt me, but God turned it to good, that hee mighte
exalte mee, as you novve ſee, and preſerue manie
people. Exodus 4. 7. 10. 11. 14. I vvilt harden
the heart of Pharaoh and of his ſervauntes, and I will
ſhew my wonders in the lande of Aegypt And in the
9. chap. Therefore haue I placed thee in the kingdome,
that I might ſhew my power in thee, and my name might
be declared in all the world. Exod. 12. God gaue his people
favour in the ſight of the Aegyptians, ſo that they
lent iewels vnto them, and they robbed the Aegyptians.
Exod. 21. If a man hath not laide waite for him
vvhome hee hath ſlaine, but God hath given him into
his handes: which he ſpeaketh of murder done by
miſfortune or chance. Exod. 22. Every man ſlay
his brother, his friend, and his neighbour. They
which did this are commended, who without
this commaundemente had done very evill: yet
had not God ſo cōmanded them, but vpon ſome
other occaſion provoked their minds therevnto,

he might as iuſtly haue puniſhed thoſe iſolaters
by ſinning inſtrument
                     •
                  , as he did by theſe iuſt executers
of his iudgement becauſe they were not
governed by 
                     •
                  ecret providēce, but by the manifeſt
and open will of God Exod. 33. I wil ſhew mercie
to whom I will ſhew mercy, and I will haue compaſſion on
whom I will haue compaſſiō, Num. 
                     •
                  3 God is not as mā
that he ſhould be, or as the ſon of man that he ſhould be
changed. Hath he therefore ſaid, and ſhall bee not doe it?

                  〈…〉
                he ſpoken and ſhal it not be fulfilled? I am ſent to

                  〈◊〉
               , I cannot forbid
                  •
               e a bleſſing. Deut. 5. O that there
were 
                  〈…〉
                ſuch an heart to feare me, & ever to keepe
all 
                  〈◊〉
                commandements, that 
                  •
               t might go well with them
and with their children for ever. By theſe & the like
p
                     •
                  aces God ſheweth what he liketh, wherein he is
delighted, and what ple
                     •
                  ſeth him. 
                     •
                  ut by Exod.
33. I will haue mercy on whom I will haue mercy: and
the like, he ſheweth what he wil effect or bring to
paſſe amongſt men and in whom. Deut. 13. If a
Prophet ſhall ſay, let vs go and fo
                  •
               low ſtrange Gods, tho
                  •
               
               
                  〈…〉
                to his vo
                  •
               ce, becauſe the Lord 
                  •
               empteth
you, that it may appeare whether you loue him or no.
And in the ſame place, Let the Prophet he ſlaine, becauſe
he hath ſpoken to turne you from the Lorde your
God. Deut. 29. And God gaue you not an vnderſtāding
hart, even vntil
                  •
                this day Ioſ. 11. 
                  〈◊〉
                pleaſed God to harden
then he 
                  〈◊〉
               , that they ſhould fight againſt Iſraell &
be overthrowen, and ſhould not finde mercy but periſh▪ as
God had commanded Moſes. Iudg 2 & 3. God forſooke
the nations which he cōmanded to be rooted out. 1. Sam. 2
They did not ha
                  •
               ken to the voice of their father, becauſe

God would ſlay them. And in the ſame booke the
10. cap.. Parte of the houſe wente with him, whoſe
heartes God had touched. And againe 10. The ſpirit
of the Lorde departed from Saule, and an evill ſpirite of
the Lord or from the Lord did vexe him. 2. of Sam.
12. Behould I will ſt
                  •
               rre vp evill againſt thee from thine
owne houſe, and I will take thy wiues before thy face, &
giue them to thy neighbour, and thy ſonne ſhall be with
thy wifes openlie. For thou diddeſt it ſecretlye, but
I will do this thing before all Iſrael, and in the ſight of
the ſunne. & ca. 17. The counſaile of Achitophel is overthrowne
by the Lordes countenance. & ca. 24. The
wrath of the Lord was kindled againſt Iſrael, and hee
mooued Dauid to ſay vnto Ioab. & 1. Chron. 21. Satan
roſe vp againſt Iſrael, and prouoked Dauid to nomber
the people. 2. Sam. 
                     •
                  2. And. 2. Chron. 10. Rehoboam
ſuffered not the people to be at reſt, for it was Gods
will. And 
                     •
                  . Chron. 11. This is don by my will▪ 1.
Kinges. 22. God gaue the ſp
                  •
               rite of lying. 2 Chron.
36. God ſtirred vp the heart of Cy
                  •••
               . Eſd
                     •
                  . 6 God had
tourned the kinges hearte vnto them Iob. 1. The Lord
hath giuen, & the Lord hath taken awaie. Iob. 12.
He bringeth counſailers to a fooliſh end. Iob. 14. Th
                  ••
               
haſt appointed the boundes thereof which cannot be paſſed.
Pſal. 105. He tourned their heartes to hate his
people. Pſa. 115. He hath do
                  •
                what ſoever he would. Pſ.
16. The Lord hath made al things for his owne ſake, 
                  〈◊〉
               
even the wicked for the day of evill ver. 
                     •
                  3. The 
                  〈◊〉
                is
caſt into the lap but the whol
                  •
                d
                  •
               ſpoſition herof is of the
Lord ca. 2
                     •
                  . The heart of the kinge is in the 
                  〈…〉
               
hand, he turneth it as rivers of waters whether 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
               Eccleſiaſtes the ſeventh. Conſider the vvorkes of
the Lord, that none can amend him whom he hath deſpoſed.
Wiſdom 8. W
                  •
               ſdome reacheth from one end to an
other, ſhee hath a spoſed all thinges mightely and orderly.
Read the 12. and 19. Chapters of the ſame
booke and S
                     •
                  rac. 17. They cannot make their hearts
of ſ
                  •
               onie to become fleſhlie. Eſai. 10. O A
                  •
               ſhur the
rod of my wra
                  •
               h &c. in his hand is mine indignatiō.
I will ſend him to a diſſembling nation, that ſhall take the

                  〈…〉
                of them. Reade the whole place,
which alone ſufficeth to refell that obiection of
the cauſe of ſinne. Like places are 
                     •
                  ound in the
13 cap. And Eſa. 14 The Lord of hoſtes hath decreed,
and who can al
                  •
               er it? Eſa. 43. Everie one that
calleth on the name of the Lord, him haue I created for
my glorie▪ him haue I faſhioned, him haue I made. And
in the ſame place, I will bring it to paſſe, and who ſhall
withstand it. Eſa. 45. I am the Lord making peace &
creating evill. And 46. Cap. My determination ſhall
ſtand &c: I haue ſpoken and I will bring it to paſſe, I
haue propoſed and will do it. Ierem. 13. If the Aethiopian
can chaunge his ſkinne, or the leoparde his ſpottes,
you alſo will be able to do well, hauing learned to do ill.
Ierem▪
                30. God hath opened his treaſurie, and brought
forth veſſelles of his wrath. Lament. 3. Who is he that
ſaith, and it cometh to paſſe, and the Lord commaundeth

                  〈◊〉
               ? Doth not evill and good proceede out of the
mouth of the 
                  〈◊〉
                high: Ezech. 12. I will ſpeake a word
and bring it to paſſe. Ezech. 14 When a Prophet hath
cried and spoken ought amiſſe, I the Lord haue deceaved

that Prophet. Ezec. 18 I will not the death of him
that dieth. Much like that Deu. 5. O that there were
to them &c. As aboue hath been ſaid. Ezech. 20. I
gaue them commaundements which were not good. Eze.
29. Nebuchadnezer my ſervant cauſed his armie to
ſerue a great ſervitude againſt Cyrus. Ezech. 36. And
I will giue you a new hearte, & put a new ſpirite in the
middeſt of you: and I will take awaie this ſtonie heart
from your fleſh. Compare the 17 of Sirach & Ier. 13.
& Ezech. 58 I will lead thee about, & put a bridle in
thy mouth, & bring thee forth. At that day ſhall many
thinges come to thy minde, & thou ſhalt thinke evill
thoughtes, & ſhalt ſay, I will goe vp to the land &c.
Compare this with Eſai. 10. Dan. 4 Hee worketh
according to his will, both in the armies of heauen & alſo
in the habitations of the earth; and there is none can
ſtaine his hande, or ſay vnto him, whi
                  ••
                haſt thou done
this? Amoſ. 3. There is no evill in the citie which the
Lord hath not done: which is ſpoken of the evill of
puniſhment, though often times it fall out by accident,
that there be alſo an evill of offence, which
God ſuffereth to concur, Micah. 4. Manie nations
are gathered togeather, but they know not the thoughtes
of the Lord.
            
               Mat. 7. A good tree cannot bringe forth evill fruit,Out of the New teſtament.
               & in the ſame chapter they which are built vpon a
rocke ſhall not fal. Read Melancthons commentarie
vpon that place Luc. 10. One ſparrow falleth not to
the ground. Math. 11. I thanke thee (father) for
that thou haſte hidden theſe thinges from the wiſe

               Mat. 13. To you it is given to know, but vnto others it is
not given. Mat. 16. & every where in the Evangeliſts,
That Chriſt ought to goe to Hieruſalem, and ſuffer
many things. Mat. 18. It is neceſſary that offences ſhould
come. Mat 20. Is it not lawfull for me to doe with mine
owne what I will? Many are called, but few bee choſen.
Mat. 24. All thinges muſt come to paſſe. And in the
ſame place, It is not poſſible that the elect ſhould 
                  •
               rre,
finally; Ioh. 6. Whatſoever my father hath given mee
ſhall come vnto me, and him that commeth to me I vvil
not caſt forth. And No man can come vnto me except
the father draw him. And This is the will of my father,
that of al whatſoever he hath given me I ſhould looſe nothing.
Ioh. 10. Other ſheepe alſo I haue, which I muſt
bring vnto my flocke. And My ſheepe no man taketh out
of my hand. Ioh. 11. Caiphas whē he was high Prieſt
did prophecy. Ioh. 12. Therefore they coulde not beleeue,
becauſe he had blinded their eies. Ioh. 13. I knowe
them whō I haue choſen. Ioh. 14. Which ſpirit the world
cannot receiue. Ioh. 15. You haue not choſen me, but I
you. Act. 1. The prophecies concerning Iudas ought to
haue beene fulfilled Act. 2. Him haue yee taken by the
hands of the wicked, being delivered by the determinate
counſell and foreknowledge of God, and haue crucified &
ſlaine. Act. 3. Through ignorance yee did it, but God ſo
fulfilled the things which he had foretolde. Act. 4. They
came togither to doe whatſoever thy hand and counſell
had before decreed to be done. Act. 13. They beleeved,
as manie as were ordained to eternal life. Act. 17. He giveth
life & motion vnto all things. And In him we liue,
mooue, and haue our being. Rom. 1. God delivered them

over to a reprobrate minde Rom 8 All thinges worke
for the good of thoſe that loue God Rom. He hath mercie
on whom he will, and hardeneth whom he will. Reade
Pa
                  ••
               s whole diſputation. Rom. 11. Election prevailed:
the reſt are hardned. And The graces of God are
without repentance. 1. Cor. 4. What haſt thou that thou
haſt not received. Eph. 1. He hath choſen vs in himſelfe
before the creatiō of the world, that we m
                  •
               y be 
                  〈◊〉
                
               And
Predeſtinated according to his purpoſe, who doth 
                  〈◊〉
               
the counſell of his owne will Read the chapter it ſelfe
Phil. 1. It is God which worketh in vs both to will and to
perfourme, of his meere good will. 2. Theſ. 2. H
                  •
               e c
                  •
               t
ſtrong errors amongſt them Pervſe the plac. 2. Tim▪
                2
The foundation of the Lorde ſtandeth ſure 1 Ioh. 2.
They went out from amongeſt vs, but were not of vs. 1.
Ioh. 4. Herein appeareth his loue, in that he loved vs
firſt. Revel. 17. God wil put into their heartes to do his
will. But I haue al
                     •
                  eadged too many places, purpoſing
to touch onely a f
                     •
                  w, for you may of your
ſelfe finde out infinit ſuch l
                     •
                  ke places of ſcriptu
                  •
               e.
            Herevnto may be added certaine arguments,
which no man ſhall ever be able to ref
                  •••
               .
            Gods omnipotencie ſuffereth nothing to b
                  •
               e
done which he doth not either ſimply or 
                  ••
               ſon
ſort will.
               Argumēts 
                     〈…〉
                  . For looke what ſimplie he will not, 
               
                  •
               hat 
by no meanes can be done.
            His infinite wiſedome doth not ſuffer
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
               
thinge in the world to be done without his advice
and counſ
                  •
               ll.
            Whileſt he willeth the end (which is 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
his purpoſe, moſt excellent, he alſo willeth 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
meanes leading to theſe ends: at the leaſt in ſome
reſpect, but not as they are ſinnes.
            
                All thinges in the worlde which are good and
poſitiue, haue their being from him, and are ruled
by his prouidence. And therfore al motiues or
motions tending to any end, as they are motins,
be ruled and directed by God.
            
                The counſels of God depend not on the works
of creatures, but contrarywiſe the actions & motions
of creatures depende vpon the counſell of
God.
            
                His foreknowledge even of thinges moſt mutable
is immutable. Wherefore it dependeth vpon
a cauſe immutable, that is, vpon his owne eternal
decree. All this confirmes a providence vniverſall
over all things particular.
            As much may be ſaid for Gods eternal and immutable
Election.
               A
                     •
                  ioms of eternal & immutable Election.
            
            There can be no good at al in any thing, which
 God from all eternity hath not decreed to effect
or bring to paſſe.
            
                Thoſe whom once he loveth, he loveth from al
eternity, and for all eternity: we cannot therefore
be aſſured of the preſent grace of God towarde
vs, excepte wee bee alſo aſſured of his eternall
grace and loue, vnleſſe we wil imagine God to be
mutable.
            
                We muſt beleeue eternal life.
            
                Our hope muſt be certaine.
            
                Wee muſt pray for eternall ſalvation without
condition or doubt.
            
               
Chriſts interceſſion for the elect is ever ſure.
            
            Theſe (amongſt a great many others) contente
me,Anſwere to obiections. & perhaps you. Now therfore after al this let
vs heare what it is that you obiect.
            
               Firſt (ſay you) this doctrine carrieth men away 
from Gods revealed will vnto his ſecret will,Election doth not lead vs frō the revealed to the hidden will of God. from
the word to impreſſions or perſwaſions wroughte
by faith, before credit or beliefe be given to the
word heard. What is this? If you haue at any time
ſeene this wrighten in our doctrine, why doe
you not produce or note the places? If you thinke
it a conſequent therevpon, why doe you not
frame your argumente, and drawe your conſequence?
what kind of Logique is this, or of whom
did you learne it, to raile deadly and damnably
againſt innocentes, without any ſhew of proofe?
but if you cā neither ſhew where we haue wrighten
it, nor by good & apparent cōſequence force
our doctrine to it (as out of doubt you cānot) why
then doe you ſo ſhamefully ſlander vs? we never
ſo much as thought of any ſuch matter. Nay, all
that we haue hitherto taught is quit cōtrary They
which perſwade you & others ſuch thinges of vs,
they lie as wickedly & as impudētly as the divel.
Away then with theſe monſtrous forgeries. It
is (good Sir) the expreſſe worde of God, that
they which with an earneſt and thankefull mind
in trew repentance embrace the benefit of Chriſt
offered in the Goſpell, ſhould certainly perſwade
themſelues that they are in fauour with God
through Chriſt, and m
                  •
               ſt aſſured heirs of 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
life, and that not for workes eyther don by themſelues
or fore ſeene by God, that by the meete
and free mercie of God, wherby he hath vouchſafed
from all eternitie to make choiſe of them
before others, which except he had don, they
had ſurely periſhed in the blindneſſe and impietie
with others. Wee make the worde of God the
maior of our ſyllogiſme; the teſtimonie of conſcience,
that we beleeue and repent, the minor: in
this manner: He that beleeueth in the ſonne hath eternall
life, But I beleeue in the ſonne: hence wee
draw this concluſion, which was in queſtion Ergo
I haue eternall life. Now I pray tell me; is this
to lead you from the worde, or to iudge of the
grace of God and our ſaluation otherwiſe then
out of the worde? Truely if your ſelfe will iudge
otherwiſe, you ſhall periſh everlaſtingely.
            You adde farther,Anſwere to the inſtaunce of Paule. that we wreſt and corrupt
the text of Paule, and ſearch too curiouſlie into
the ſecrets of God. And yet you neither do, nor
can aleadge any example; but in ſteed of proofes
you peſter vs with a fe
                  •
               w ſcurrile declamatorie
termes.Rom. 11. 33. If we did moue ſuch queſtions, whie God
hath rather choſen one man then another, Peter then
Iu
                     •
                  as, to eternall life? whether others be alſo elected?
What is the nomber of the elect? &c. Then had you

                  〈◊〉
                ſon to revile vs. For theſe are that vnſearchable
depth wherof Paul ſpeaketh, and the knowledge
of them is no way neceſſarie to our ſaluatiō.

                  〈◊〉
                the cheife cauſe of our ſalvation is Gods
free election, that this election is ſure and immurable,

that it is made known vnto vs by ſuch effects
as we find in our ſelues, nāely ſtirred vp by faith,
repentance, and hearing the worde of God, theſe
are things whereof God would not haue vs ignorant,
but hath in his worde a thouſand times repeated,
for his glory and out comfort. Wherfore
your acclamations concerne vs nothing, howſoever
you pleaſe your ſelfe in them.
            
               Secondly: you cannot abſtaine from the ſtale &
drie droſ
                  •
               e of the Manichees and Stoickes, for
want of better weapons to offend vs. We for our
parts deteſt that dotage of the Stoickes touching 
               neceſſitie inhaerent in things themſelues,
               Dotage of the Stoickes & Manichees falſly obiected. 
               which ſhoulde
binde and ſubiect to it ſelfe God and all thinges beſides.
Contrariwiſe we maintaine that God is the moſt
free and chiefe ruler of al things, which doth al
things according to his good pleaſure, whoſe hād
no man can withdraw, which is eternall, immutable,
ever the ſame. Why doe you vnder the name
of fatal lawes deride his moſt excellent, wiſe, free,
and immutable decree? A man might well laugh
at the folly of theſe toyes, but for that blaſphemous
impiety which you adde, that no Chriſtian
can endure to laugh at, but rather be vehemently
therewithall offended. Doe you thinke it abſurd,
that al things which are and ever ſhal be, were before
the fal known vnto God, & by him decreed?
Then belike you laugh at Paule, ſaying that before
the foundation of the world grace was given
vs in Chriſt,Eph. 1. 4. and at Saint Iames ſaying,2. Tim. 
                     •
                  . 9. that Gods

                  〈◊〉
                are knowne vnto him from the beginning▪
               Act. 15. 18.
               
that is fromal eternitie. But is it poſſible that you
hauing ben ſo long conuerſant in Philoſophie &
Diuinitie, ſhould in your phanſie frame vnto vs
a mutable God▪ Truelie if you ſpeake ſeriousely,
I except againſt your wiſedome, if you ieſt frendly,
I muſt preiudice your modeſty. Do you think
that God was mutable, in threatning, but ſp
                  •
               ring
the Ninevites? He had determined to ſpare them,
as well before as after his threats. But (you will
ſay) why then did he threaten them? for this verie
cauſe, that by threatning he might conuerte,
and hauing converted, might ſaue them. Therefore
God was not diuerſe, or altered his purpoſe
                  •
               
for even when he threatned thē, he vnderſtood
this condition, except they repented▪
                and this repē
               tāce
he did before all eternitie purpoſe by threatning
to worke in their mindes.
            Beſides, you obiect vnto vs a greivouſe crime,
in ſaying we ouerthrowe & take away Diſciplie
                     •
                  ,
prayer, magiſtrates, and lawes. Not to faſt (I pray)
for breaking your ſhinnes. If whatſoeuer God
hath decreed ſhal com to paſſe, as without doubt
immutablie, and neceſſarily it muſt, diſcipline (ſay
you) praier, magiſtrates, and lawes are to no purpoſe▪
it were trew, if he had decreed without thē
that his decrees ſhould come to paſſe. But if by
theſe meanes he would ſaue ſome, reſtraine others,
and make a thirde ſorte inexcuſable, and
hath therefore commaunded to vſe them, that
by this commaundement he might the rather
mooue vs to make vſe of thē, and by this meanes

attaine the good he hath decreed vnto vs, then
who a
                  •
                you that preſume to be a reformer of gods
counſels, and mutter that he hath decreed, ordained
and commanded things vaine and to no purpurpoſe?
God hath decreed to make da
                  •
               e to morrow;
vvill you therefore conclude that the ſunne
riſeth in vaine? Becauſe God every yeare bringeth
corne from out the earth, will you therefore conclude
that the benefit of heaven and husbandrie
might be taken away? what ſchoole ever taught
you f
                  •
               om admitting the firſt cauſe to conclude a
remoue of ſecond cauſes? when God decreed the
end, he likewiſe ordained & decreed means vnto
that end, & gaue vs charge to vſe thē: if we vſe thē,
it is at his pleaſure; if not, by his iudgement & our
fault it is at our owne perill.
            Your obiectiō of Manichae in blaſphemy toucheth
not vs but S. Paul, one vnſpotted with that hereſie.
All are created good by one good God, by
his moſt iuſt permiſſiō they fell corrupting & turning
away themſelues from God. Out of this periſhed
heape he elected & reprobated frō all eternity
whom he woulde. Manes acknowledgeth
none of all this. It is therefore a damnable ſlaunder
to ſay that GOD did reprobate any, contrarie
to thoſe ſayings, GOD will not the death
anie, but that all men ſhoulde bee ſaued. Hee would
not that any ſhoulde periſh, but all bee ſaved
in reſpect of his goodneſſe and l
                  •
               ue towardes
his creatures (which will not ſuffer him to reioice
in the deſtruction of his handy-vvoorke)

as may appeare by commanding, calling, and inviting
to repentance: although the force and efficacy
hereof prevaile not in all. For in his word he hath
oftē ſaid, that he reioiceth in no mās death, as it is
death, deſtruction, and torment, but calleth & inviteth
all men vnto himſelfe, though not all after
one ſort. But that hee would effect or bring to
paſſe that all without exception ſhould obey and
be ſaved, he not only ſaid it no where, but in many
places expreſly ſaid the contrary. So that the
Scripture is not contrary to it ſelfe, teaching that
God reioiceth in the ſalvation of all, and yet hath
left ſome to reprobation.
            
               
               Thirdly,
               Enthuſiaſmes or Revelations falſly obiected. I thinke that diſtruſting the waight of
your arguments, you meant to carry it away with
multitude, and did therefore vſe the ſame argument
both in firſt and alſo in the third place: vnleſſe
perhaps you will rather haue it an amplification
taken from the name of Enthuſiaſtes, that
you may not be thought to haue omitted this ornament.
But go to, what agreement betweene vs
and them? you ſay, that neglecting the word, we
expect raviſhments of the minde from the body;
but in which of our wrighters haue you heard or
red any ſuch thing? this is ſpoken of vs with as little
modeſtie, as that before, when you ſaid we departed
frō the revealed will of God. We ſay that
God doth worke in vs faith, and our converſion;
but by his word after his ordinarie māner of working,
where vnto he hath bound vs, reſerving to
himſelfe liberty of working extraordinarily when

ſoever he wil, as alſo of moving by his word, whō,
when, and how far it pleaſeth him.
            As inconſideratly you adde (and I know not
whether againſt your conſcience,The will of man is not 
                     ••
                  le. hauing bin ſo
long an auditor of our profeſſion) that according
to our doctrine the will of a man doth nothing.
In both arguments againe you diſpute from admitting
the firſt cauſe to the excluding of the ſecond.
The will of man is an agent, but being before
mooued, acted, inclined, ſoftened and renued
by God through his worde: I meane not
forced, as a ſtone, or a blocke, but alured and invited
by ſome obiect offered to the minde. The
will of Paul was Gods worke, in that he would
do thoſe thinges which the Lord woulde. It was
Gods iudgment and the Iewes offence, that they
would not be gathered to geather by Chriſt. It is
in vaine that grace goeth before, vnleſſe it do effect
the accompanying of our will. What ſay you
then of like māner of working? why rather harkē
you not to that doctor of the church which ſaith
It is God which worketh in vs both to will and performe.
               Phil. 22.
I will now tell you a great matter, but verie trew.
Wee can in no wiſe maintaine the puritie of the
article of free and certaine iuſtification, againſt
that ſorte of merit which the Papiſtes terme meritum
cōgrui, except that impious deviſe of Gods
generall grace, leaving the acceptaunce, vſe, or
refuſall of it ſelfe in our owne power, be cōdēned,
& the eternal & immutable loue of God towards
his elect be freed from obſcurity & ſophiſmes.
            
               
               
               Fourthlie, you vvould ſeeme to doe a thing ordinary
extraordinarily,God is not the cauſe of ſinne. placing the ſtrēgth of your
arguments in the maine battaile, filling your forward
and re
                  ••
               -vvard with pioners and baſe hang
bies, contrary to that cuſtome which you knowe
to be obſerued and commanded by Rhetoricians
in their ſchooles. Your chiefe argument is this,
which you ſet forth to the vtmoſt. If God haue decreed
to giue over ſome to blindnes, ſinne, & death▪ then
God by this meanes is made the cauſe of ſin. But this is
eaſily anſwered. Firſt here againe I finde your wāt
of cōmon ingenuity, wheras you ſay that theſe are
the words of many of our wrighters, that God doth
effectually worke ſin in the reprobate. You talke of many,
but do (& I am perſwaded cānot) produce one.
For we frō our harts deteſt this opiniō, as infinite
teſtimonies of our writers will eaſilie proue.
            But you wil ſay it followeth vpon our doctrine.
For he which decreed to ſuffer men to fin, is the
author of ſinne. See what an argument you haue
made, which (if it be turned the other way) is enough
to confute you in your own conceit. For he
which permitteth ſinne, not being bound to hinder
any man from ſinning, having beſides authority
and righte to puniſh vvith forſaking and caſting
of to eternal tormentes, he is neither author
nor favourer, but ſufferer and iudge of ſinne. But
in this ſorte GOD permitteth ſinne: therefore
God is not any vvaie the author of ſinne. If you
proceede and vrge; but that privation or withdravving
of grace vvhich he inflicteth inſteed of

a puniſhmente, is ſinne; you commit a fallacie
of accident. For the puniſhment of it ſelfe, as it is
inflicted by God, is moſt iuſt; by accident, as being
plucked by men on their owne heads by the
firſt ſinne of Adam, and the reſt enſuing, ſo
it is ſinne. Your argument had carried more colour,
if from Gods providence you had concluded
this effecting of ſin: although in deed it had
beene but the ſame fallacy For God did moſt effectualie
and vehemently will the crucifying of his
ſonne by them, who aftervvardes executed it: yet
did he not will, but ſuffer their murder (which hee
aftervvardes horriblye puniſhed) to concurre
with his moſt iuſt, moſt holy, and (beyonde
all others) moſt admirable and glorious worke,
vvhich by them hee perfourmed. Hee vvould
the warres of Nabuchadnezar, but hated his wickedneſſe.
His vvill it vvas that Abſolon ſhoulde
vvarre againſt his Father David, and defile his
vviues, but theſe thinges in reſpect of GODS
vvill, vvere moſt iuſt puniſhmentes vpon David,
but as Abſolon did them, onlie to vſurpe
the kingdome and oppreſſe his Father, not having
therein any commandement of God to follovv,
ſo they were treaſon, & inceſt. This wickednes
of Abſolo
                     •
                  
                by accident concurreth with Gods
iudgment, which he executeth by him. As much
you ſhall prevaile if you ſaie that God is thē made
the author of ſinne, when as men forlorne and
forſaken by him cannot chooſe but ſinne. For
you accuſe the ſcripture, and God himſelfe, often

ſaying as much as this, but without dāger of ſuch
blaſphemie. Becauſe mankind of their own free
wil did in Paradiſe pul on thēſelves this neceſſity
 of ſinninge.
            
               Fifth,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   no doc
                     •••
                  ne of r
                     ••
                  ſon but of the goſpell. you tell vs this is a doctrine of the law.
What then? is it therefore falſe? is not the law as
true as the Goſpell? furthermore, you ſay it is
drawne from reaſon it ſelfe. You had neede be
more eagle-ſighted in Plato & Ariſtotle his books,
then I and all men beſides haue bin, which could
never finde it there. But in a word, know that it
is learned out of the hidden myſteries of the goſpell.
Doe you thinke that Paules intent was in the
9. 10. 11. and 12. to the Romanes, and 1. to the Etheſians
to preach the Law? I doe not thinke you beleeue
it. And what doth neerer concerne the very
m
                  •
               rrow of the Goſpel, then the eternal, free, and
immutable loue of God towards his elect, which
Chriſt ſ
                  •
               ith was the cauſe why he
                  •
                gaue his onely
begotten ſon for vs, much more ſaved vs everlaſtinglie,
being once engraffed into him through
faith, and finiſhed in vs the worke which hee had
begun? I know not what may concerne the goſpell
if theſe things doe not. It may ſuffice againe
to admoniſh you (as before) of main
                  •
               taining the
purity of our article of iuſtificatiō. But thoſe words
of yours, (O bow that exclamation troubled mee, TO
WHOM DOTH GOD OWE ANY
THING
                  •
               ) filled 
                  〈◊〉
                partly with admiration,
partly with indignatiō & griefe. I was out of pat
                  •
               
               ence
when I read thē. Surely either you haue bin

little converſant in reading holy ſcriptures, or to
much poſſeſſed with affection & preiudice, whē
you ſo ſawcily condemne the words of ſcripture.
Is it not the exclamation of Paule, Rom. 11. 35.
Who hath firſt giuen vnto the Lord, that he may
recompence him? Truly nothing more comforteth
me, then this vnſpeakable loue of God towardes
me, that oweing no more to me then to
Iudas or Cain, yet for all that, of an enimie he hath
made me a ſon, by the death of his onely begotten.
For that which you aleadg of Gods binding
himſelfe vnto vs by promiſe, is nothing at all to
the purpoſe. What then (I pray) will you pretend,
before the applying of this promiſe? To
whom doth this promiſe bind God, but vnto him
that embraceth it by faith? But who embraceth
or receiueth it beſides thoſe, on whō God vouchſafeth
to beſtow this benefite? he obligeth himſelfe
to as manie as beleeue, and this very obligation
proceedeth of his free goodneſſe. But where
(
                  •
               el me) where in ſcripture do you read, that God
bindeth himſelfe by any promiſe to giue faith &
repentance vnto all? this you wil never be able to
ſhew vs. Leaue then to bee troubled with the
words of Chriſt proceeding from a moſt inwarde
feeling of piety & true humility before God, neither
dreame that by them Papiſticall doubts are
confirmed, whereas rather in deed without them
the certainety of faith cannot conſiſt.
            
               Sixtlie: they ſhould long ſince haue beene aſhamed 
of the argument they bring for vniverſal

promiſes.The promiſes are v
                     •
                  iuerſall vnto thoſe that beleiue. For themſelues are faultie in that which
they obiect vnto vs. You anſweare the argument,
and yet vſe it. Yf this vniuerſall promiſe did partaine
to all men, what a confuſion of impietie &
abſurditie would follow? But if it muſt be reſtained
vnto thoſe that beleeue (as indeed it muſt)
we alſo maintaine this vniuerſall truth and comforte,
hauing learned out of Gods worde, that all
and they alone which beleeue be heires of eternall
life, and ſo receiued into fauour by God, that
they ſhall for euer all continew thenn, and not
one periſh, according to thoſe ſcriptures: No man
ſhall take awaie my ſhe
                     •
                  pe from me: Of that which my
father hath giuen me I wil not looſe &c:
               Ioh 10. 28. &. 6. 39. 
               That, if it were
poſſible, the verie elect ſhould be ſeduced. Whom he hath
choſen,
               Ma
                     •
                  . 24. 
               them he hath called, iuſtified, & glorified. This
is the concluſion of Chriſtian faith and conſolation,24 Rom. 8. 30.
and this article is placed in the end of the
creed, that we might beleeue eternall life, and
with the Apoſtle ſing
                  •
                that triumphant ſong, who
ſhall ſeperate the elect, &c. They on the other ſide
do openly and greeuouſely wrong the maieſtie
of God, whileſt they imagine his loue to be mutable
as the loue of man: as for the goldy, them
they depriue of their comfort, they weaken, diſgrace,
and vilifie the force, vſe, and comfort of vniuerfall
promiſes, whileſt they feine, that ſome
truely beleeuing may finally fall aware & periſh:
that they which are new in fauor with God were
not ſo from all eternitie, nor ſhall be euerlaſtingly:
which being moſt abſurd, it followeth neceſſarily,

that becauſe they will not be certaine of
Gods future and eternall grace, therefore they
can not be certaine of the grace preſent. The
ſcripture teacheth, that as many as beleeue are to be
ſa
                     •
                  ed: they oppoſe the contradictory, that ſ
                     •
                  me
which beleeue are not to be ſaued. Where is now your
comfort, by which you may include your ſelfe in
the vniuerſall fall? Theſe are thoſe ſecret ſleights of
the
                  •
                devill, which muſt be obſerued & avoyded.
            
               Auguſtines expoſition vpō 
               Paules Epiſtle to Timothy,
               1. Tim 2. 4. of al ſorts of men,God will haue all men ſaued. fitteth that place properly
as may appeare by the drift and words of Saint
Paule. But to the cōtētious I vſe to yeeld thus far,
that it is ſpoken of al particular men, according to
the effect towards all, & vocation, but not according
to efficacie. As for our wrighters, none of them
would endure, much leſſe deſire that an indefinite
might be ſubſtituted in place of an vniverſall.
            
            Your coockow ſong of contradictory wils, is 
broken of by an anſwere of vniverſals.In God are not contradictorie
                     •
                   willes. For there
is no contradiction in this; God will that al which beleeue
ſhould bee ſaved, and that none which beleeue not
ſhould be ſaved. Againe, you do ill to confound the
commandement pertaining to all men (that all
ſhoulde come vnto Chriſt) with the promiſe: for
Chriſt wil eaſe, not al men, but al which come vnto
him. And therfore as the excludeth none, no not
the reprobate, & ſuch as periſh, from the commā
               dement:
ſo likewiſe he excludeth frō the promiſe
none which come vnto him, that is, which beleeue
in him.
            
               
At odious is your exprobation of respect of perſons.
               God is no reſpecter of perſons.
That may be committed when a thing is given
of debt or duty,Rom. 10. 12. not when it is given of free
mercy, as God giveth. He is rich to all, yet not giving
the ſame giftes and benefits to all, becauſe in
his moſt ſpacious pallace hee will haue variety of
furniture. But whereas the Apoſtle in this place
ſpeaketh principally of eternal riches, you ſpightfully
omit what he addeth: Calling vpon him.
            
            Wil you know vpon what ground we acknowledg
two ſortes of election?Two, nay three ſorts of election in ſcripture I will ſhew you three
ſortes in ſcripture. Firſt God choſe the people of
Iſrael to be his church. Secōdly Chriſt choſe the
twelue Apoſtles, to ſpread the Goſpell abroad in
the world, thirdly he choſe not al of either of theſe
to eternall life, becauſe amongſt the Iſraelits many
were called, but feaw choſen, amonſt the Apoſtles
one was a Deuil. But he knew whom he
had choſen, I meane to eternall life, and not only
to the Apoſtleſhip, wherevnto alſo he choſe Iudas.
So there are three ſorts of vocation or calling:
firſt to the viſible church,Three ſortes of vocation. whereof it is ſaide manie
are called: ſecondlie to the church of Saints, which
calling is internall and effectuall, which Paule nameth

               according vnto his purpoſe, vz. of ſaving thoſe
 which are called: thirdly, to ſome certaine charge
 or dutie in this life, ſo my vocation is to labour in
this ſchoole.
            The will of God,Voluntas ſigni & be
                  
                     ••
                   placi
                     •
                  i. named will of revelation and
good-pleaſure the Schoole-men haue well diſtinguiſhed,
not as contrary, or two wils but one wil, and

that partly manifeſted and partly cōcealed, partly
proving and partly efficient, which are thinges
agreeable to the nature of God.
            
               Eightly you conclude with a groſſe and peſtilent 
cavil,The doctrins of perſ
                     •
                  uerance doth not m
                     •
                  ke v
                     •
                  preſumptuous, but beleeue eternall life. that the doctrine of final perſeueran
                  •
               e
maketh men preſumptuous, but do you call it
preſumption to beleeue eternall life? You deale
too contumeliouſly with the holy ſpirit and too
heynous is this ingratitude for ſo great a benefi
                  •
               
which God through Chriſt in this life beſtowed
on vs, namely the certaintie of our ſaluation, purchaſed
for vs by Chriſt, which is the ſumme and
foundation of our comforte and religion. For
what comforte were it to know,Col 3. 3. that indeed
Chriſt did ones purchaſe ſaluation for vs,1. Pet. 1. 5. but everie
moment it is a thouſand waies ſubiect to be
loſt? we muſt therefore know, that our life is with
Chriſt in God, and there as ſafely kept, as is the
life of Chriſt him-ſelfe reigning in heauen. This
is a thouſand times ſaide in ſcripture. Read Melancthon
vpon the 7. ca. of Mat. in the place aboue
cited. Read the 5. and 8. chapt. to the Rom.
I ſee you doe not put difference betweene ſecuritie
of the ſpirit & of the fleſh, and that you ſtagger
even in the verie grounds of Chriſtianity, if in
heart you maintaine this tedious opinions. If it be
ſo, I am verie ſorrie for you, and doe exhorte you
to read the ſcriptures diligently.The elect may looſe the ſpirit of God, out not wholy no
                     •
                   finally.
            
            That alſo is a meere cavill, that we ſhould ſaie,
the elect cannot forgoe the holie ſpirit. Nay they
often looſe manie gi
                  •
               es of the ſame ſpirit, but recouer

them againe by repentance. For they do
not quite revolt from God, and become profeſſed
enimies of the truth, that is, they ſinne not againſt
the holy Ghoſt, nor ſo fal, that finally they
perſeuere in their errours againſt the foundatiō,
and in their ſinnes againſt conſcience. Neyther
doth this comforte make men ſecure, becauſe it
concerneth them onely, which haue a purpoſe to
beware of falling, abhor nothing more then offending
God. there is therefore a manifeſt contradiction
in that diueliſh ſcoffe of the wicked,
which ſay, If I be elected, I wil do what pleaſeth me, becauſe
it ſhal not hurt me. For God will haue vs be ſure
that we are elected, but this we can not do without
faith and repentance. All thinges worke for the
beſt, trew, vnto them that loue God: There is no
condemnation to them which walke according to the
ſpirit
                     •
                  . Theſe two ioyned togeather exclude ſecuritie,
& ſtirre vs vp to cheerefulneſſe and alacritie
to runne our race, according to the commaundement,
make your election certaine. On the
other ſide they ſleep ſecurely in their ſins, which
dreame that it is in their owne handes to take
and lay aſide repentance whenſoeuer and as often
as they liſt, and play with GOD at their
pleaſure. But (ſay you) I woulde faine ſhifte of
this triall, wherevnto the certainetie of ſaluation
doeth call. That is it the Divell woulde
haue.
            Thoſe ſayings, Matthew the two and twentith
and tenth, Hee vvhich continueth to the ende &c?

Revelations the ſecond and tenth, To him, that
overcommeth I vvill giue a crowne &c. Doe not derogate
from the certaintie of ſaluation, but are
exhortations wherby God vpholdeth vs in that
certainetie, ſtirring vp in vs a deſire of godlineſſe,
and hatred of ſinne.
            The like ſlaunder it is, when you ſay that
vvee teach men to iudge of election a priore or
by the cauſe. Eyther malitiouſly they diſſemble
our opinion, or elſe they vnderſtande neither
themſelues nor vs. VVee iudge by the
effect, that is by faith and repentaunce, of the
cauſe, that is of election. But to iudge thus is
to iudge a poſteriors, that is by the effect. That
wee ought not to determine of any before the
ende of his life whether hee ſhall bee ſaued or
no; if you meane it of others you ſay well, if
of our ſelues, or of euerie mans ovvne conſcience
and certainetie in himſelfe, it is a deteſtable,
wicked, diueliſh, and blaſphemous ſayings,
overthrowinge the whole foundation, and groūdworke
of ſaluation. Hee that taught you this,
taught you a doctrine of diuels, though he were
an angell from heauen. But I will tell you an other
leſſon, except you be certaine before the end
of this life whether you ſhall be heire of eternall
life, you ſhall neuer ſo be after this life. For faith
in this ve
                  ••
               e certainetie, which is the beginning
of eternall life, this all muſt haue in this life,
vvhich looke for that other life. If you haue
thought on the nature and definition of hope,

that it is a ſure and certaine expectation of eternall life,
you ſhould haue found no ſuch thing there. My
hart doth ſtand on end to think of your blaſphemy.
I would not for an hundred thouſand worlds
be ſo ſeperated from Chriſt, as to be vncertaine
whether I were his or noe. Theſe are heatheniſh
blaſphemes, the verie entrance of hell. Wherefore
you do well to confirme it with teſtimonies
of the heathen: for theſe thinges refarre wide of
the worde of God. Why doe you ſo co
                  •
               rupt the
wordes of ſcripture, wreſting them from a 
                  •
               onne.
like to a ſeruile feare? what myſtere, what blindneſſe
is it for a man to boaſt of vniuerſall promiſes,
and not to ſifte himſelfe, and trie whether he
be of their nomber, of whom the promiſes ſpeak▪
This is in deede to bring in amongſt men carnall
ſecurity, and a ſhadow of faith, which in the confl
                  •
               ct
driueth vs head-long into deſperation. I do
not th
                  •
               nke Luther & Melancthon taught any mā
ſo to babble and fome out theſe vniuerſall promiſes.
But the carrier calles for my letters, and I
haue to my great paines ſpent the whole night
in wrighting theſe lines. Farewell. Let me entreat
you to provoke me no more with ſuch diſputations.
            Fare-well hartily, 
                   this 2 of ſeptember 1573.
               
            
         
         
            
            OF THE CAVSE OF SINNE
Parte of a letter of Vrſinus to his friend, concerning
the cauſe of ſinne.
            
               ONe terrible bug-beare they haue,
of the cauſe of ſinne, all the reſt is
fooliſh, and not worthy the aunſwearing.
But even that alſo is a
childiſh fallacie of accident. For by
accident, that is, through defect,
fault, and error of the will of the Divel or man, ſin
commeth to bee that worke, which God by will
(moſt iuſt & moſt agreeable to his nature & the
Law) wil haue done, permitting in the mean time
the ſins of the creature, that is, not ſo correcting
& directing it, that it may do iuſtly togither with
God doing iuſtly: or els while he doth not enlighten
it with the knowledge of his will, or doth not
ſo turne it by his ſpirit, that it may doe that which
it doth, for obedience ſake to the revealed will of
God. So that God ever doth well, both by thoſe
that are good, and alſo by thoſe that are evill. But
the creature doth well togither with God, in that
goodnes wherein it is created, preſerved, or therevnto
againe reſtored by God. The good therfore
which it doth is the work of God, which himſelfe
doth will and effect; the evill which it doth is frō
               
it ſelfe. Now this euill is not done, but permitted
by God, whiles he doth not cauſe the will of the
creature to become good, and to do good togeather
with God doing good. For the ſame worke
in reſpect of diuerſe cauſes is both good & euil,
mutable & immutable, contingent & free, as the
cauſes them-ſelues are diuerſe which concu
                  ••
               e in
producing therof. Hee which ſees not this, ſees
nothing. But if I can I will one day anſweare you
in feawe wordes. For whether I can or no, & whē
I can I doe not yet knowe, beſides that it is tedious
to me to handle theſe ſtale ſophiſmes. Learne
in ſecret, & whē your thoughts are at leaſure, meditate
on this: that every man may trouble a true, but
God alone can quiet it. If you would not crie roſtmeat,
you might haue fared much better.
            
               
                  March.
10. An. 1573.
               
            
         
         
            
            THAT PROVIDENCE DOTH NOT DEROGATE
FROM PRAIER.
            Part of an other letter to the ſame friend;
wherein is debated this queſtion,
Whether the doctrine of Providence doe
derogate from praier.
            
               THe godly exerciſe of praier wel agreeth
with the doctrine of Providence;
and is confirmed & eſtabliſhed
thereby. For whoſoever beggeth
at Gods handes with an vpright
heart things neceſſary to ſalvation,
the ſame is verily perſwaded, that he forth
with receiveth them. The contrary opinion ſhaketh
& rooteth vp our faith & cōfidence in God,
and ſuffereth vs not ſtedfaſtly to beleeue the laſt
Article of the Creed. But praier when it ſueth for
things on which ſalvatiō depēdeth not, patiently
& humbly ſubmitteth it ſelfe vnto Gods will, not
deſiring to obtaine any other thing then that
which GOD in his ſecret counſell hath decreed
beſt, and moſt profitable for vs. Nothinge
more ſlacketh our obedience in this pointe; nothing
more diſturbeth our comforte and quiet of
minde herein, then that errant cōtingency whereby
the Academicks & Epicures beare the world
In hand that the events of thinges are not governed
and determined by Gods divine counſel. Recall

to minde that diſtinction of thinges to bee
praied for, often taught, and daily repeated vnto
children by our country-man Philip Melancthon,
and this whole controverſie of praier ſhalbe cleered
and put out of doubt. Herevvith meeteth our
opinion, but the contrary opinion ſwarveth wholie
from it; ſo that truth wel ſuteth with truth, but falſhoode
agreeth neither with truth, nor falſhoode. The
ſumme of all is; you muſt ground your cōfidence
on God, and craue all good things of him, and be
thankful vnto him for the ſame no otherwiſe thē
as if all thinges proceeded from him without any
your endeavour; and yet muſt you performe your
dutie with as great diligence and induſtrie, as if
you were able to procure and gaine all thinges of
your ſelfe, and by your ſelfe without him Whoſoeuer
directeth not the whole doctrine and diſputation
of Providence and Election vnto this end, he
waxeth vaine in his curioſitie, & intangleth himſelfe
in many ſnares, which himſelfe laieth for him
ſelfe. On whomſoever God hath decreed to heap
his bleſſings, to them he hath appointed the ſpirit
of praier. If then hee hath giuen thee a deſire to
praie, aſſure thy ſelfe this gift is not in vaine, but
thou ſhalt alwaies bee heard according to Gods
own promiſe. This is the Conſequent thou oughteſt
to deduce and gather on good ground & infallible
concluſion out of that precedent benefit.
Seeſt thou thē the cōtrary of this thy fear? For nothing
leſſe impeacheth, nothing more cōfirmeth
the deſire, cuſtome, and conſolation of prayer

then the doctrine of Providence. I much marueile
that you yet ſtill dreame of the ghoſtes & ſpirits
of particular men. Howe often haue you hearde
and reade the contrarie to be trew, howſoeuer
the miſerable Sophiſts of our time groping in the
thicke darkenes of their Academicall blockiſhneſſe
cavill hereat. For without the doctrine of
Election and certainety of ſalvation the vniverſalitie
of promiſed grace which appertaineth to al
the faithfull, and to them alone, can neither ſtand
or be mainetained, nor applyed to the comforte
and vſe of the godly. How often hath it beene reiterated
vnto you, that you muſt iudge of Election
a poſteriors from the ſubſequent ſigns & effects
it cauſeth. For you muſt repute and iudge your
ſelfe elected by that meaſur of faith which is required
in the elect. Yea this is true & liuely faith,
for a man to beleeue that he is elect vnto eternall
life for Chriſts ſake. Search then & ſift thine own
conſcience whether there be found in thee faith,
repentance, and & vnfeigned deſire of the grace
and fauour of God: & then pronounce thy ſelfe
one of Gods elect, al curious diſputatiōs ſet apart.
I proteſt before God that I
                  •
                ſee not by what meās
I could haue ſtood ſtedfaſt in many my priuate
greeuances, had I not held this one comfort impregnable.
No man ſhall take my ſheepe out of my
handes &c. What are all other comfortes if this be
not at hand with vs,Ioh. 10. that all thinges, good and evill
befall vs not caſually, but by the eternall decree & purpoſe
of God worke for our ſaluation. 9. Iun. 1575.
         
         
            
            A PREFACE OF AN ORATION
pronounced on Eaſter evē by a certaine ſtudent
of Divinity in the famous Vniverſity of Heidelberge
touching this queſtion.
            To whom the benefite of the Death and Reſurrection
of Chriſt appertaineth: and how Chriſt
died for all men.
            
               COncerning the ſtory &
benefite of our Lordes
Reſurrection I ſuppoſe
I haue hitherto ſufficiently
treated:You may referre this diſcourſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the fifte queſtion on that Article of the Creede He died.
                It followeth
that I proceede vnto
the laſt point propoſed, I
mean, to whom this benefite
appertaineth. Wherfore
directing our courſe as it were by the loadſtar
of ſcripture we pronounce by vertue and authoritie
thereof that ſo precious & ineſtimable a
benefite belongeth vnto all the faithfull, and to
them alone; and we exclude the wicked & vnbeleevers,
as long as they remaine ſuch, from hauing
any intereſt therein. For all the faithfull, &
they alone haue a taſte of the ſweetnes of thoſe
fruites (ſuppoſe,The fruites of Chriſts Reſurrection belong to all the faithfull & to them alone. 
               free iuſtification before God, a quickening
from the death of ſinne and of the body, & laſtly
immortall life and glory) theſe heauenly bleſſinges,
I ſay, all the faithfull and they alone partake and
enioy; becauſe they all, & they alone apply thē
vnto themſelues through faith. For theſe are they
who heare Chriſtes wordes, who beleeue, & haue eternal

life,
               Ioh. 3. 36. & 5. 24. 
               and come not into condemnation. Theſe are
they who are iuſtified by faith, are reconciled vnto
God,
               Rom. 5. 1. 
               and haue peace with him through our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt.
               1. Pet. 1. 3. Theſe are they who being regenerate by the
holy Ghoſt are raiſed with Chriſt vnto newenes of life,
               Act. 15. 9.
whoſe heartes are purified by faith,
               1. Theſſ. 4. 14. Finally theſe are
they which ſleepe in Ieſus whome one day God will
bring with him hauing raiſed them from the dead,1. Cor. 10. 5
that they may enioy for ever the glory of his heavenly
kingdome. Nowe the wicked being vtterly
voide and deſtitute of faith which iuſtifieth,
howe ſhould they, I pray you, partake in any of
theſe bleſſinges,Heb. 11. 6. 
               with whom God is not pleaſed, (for
without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God) who belong
not vnto Chriſt, neyther are heires of the
kingdome, who neither haue title nor right In
Chriſt Ieſus, nor To Chriſt Ieſus (as the lawiers vſe
to ſpeake) how ſhould Chriſt appertaine vnto
them? How ſhould the benefites be extēded vnto
them? Nay rather all theſe are by the mouth
of the ſonne of God himſelfe farre remooued &
debarred theſe tteaſures, and are adiudged vnto
eternal maledictiō & everlaſting death. For thus
ſaith he in the Goſpell;Ioh. 3. 18. 36 
               He that beleeueth not, is cō
                  demned
alreadie,
               Rom. 8. 9. 
               & the wrath of God abideth on him.
And Paul teſtifieth If any man hath not the ſpirit of
Chriſt, the ſāe is not his; which place of the apoſtle I
ſuppoſe to be very pertinēt to this preſēt purpoſe.
For if the vnfaithfull belōg not vnto Chriſt, neyther are
they of Chriſt; it may ſoūdly be argued, & well cō
               cluded
by the logiciās rule of Relatiues that Chriſt
               
with his benefites pertaineth not vnto them: and
as they are not Chriſts: ſo neither is Chriſt theirs.
For how, I pray, ſhould Chriſt pertaine vnto thē,
whom one day at the laſt iudgement he ſhall pronounce
before all the world aliants and ſtrangers
from him, his benefites, and his kingdome: of whō
he ſhall teſtifie that he never knew them: laſtly,
whom he ſhall caſt, as being the curſed workers of
iniquitie, into hell fire.
            Yea but,Chriiſt died for all men. ſaie you, Chriſt died for the ſinnes of all▪
Therefore he roſe againe for the iuſtification of all. The
anſwere herevnto is two-folde, either of which is
 true and ſóund.All that beleeue. Firſt, as often as the Goſpell extendeth
the fruit of Chriſts merites and benefites
vnto all, it muſt be vnderſtood (as ſaith Saint Ambroſe)
of the whole number of the faithfull and elect. For
this is the vſuall and common voice found everie
where throughout the whole courſe of the goſpel:
He which beleeveth ſhall be ſaved, and commeth not into
iudgement. He which beleeveth not, ſhall be damned,
and is iudged already, and the wrath of God abideth on
him. Wherefore the Goſpell diſpoſſeſſeth all vnbeleevers
of Chriſts benefites, not onlie by a flat excluſion,
but alſo by poſitiue vertue of that condition of
faith and repentaunce, by which he promiſeth expreſly
or covertlie his benefits vnto mē, & which
it appeareth is neuer found in the reprobate, that
is, ſuch as do perſiſt, and wil ſtil perſiſt in their impietie.
Chriſt therefore is thus ſaid to be dead for
all: that is, for all the faithfull and elect; for whom alone
he alſo praied, and in whom alone he findeth

the end and fruit of his death. But to extende the
benefites of Chriſts death vnto infidels, & reprobates,Ioh. 17. 9.
               for whom he neuer praied, whom he neuer knewe,
or tooke for his owne,
               Mat. 7. 23. and on whom the wrath of God abideth
for ever;
               Ioh. 3. 36. what els is this but againſt his expreſſe
commaundement to giue holy thinges vnto
dogges,
               Mat. 7. 6. 
               and caſt pearles before ſwine. This anſwere
may be ſtrongly maintained by the authoritie of
holy ſcripture, and teſtimonies of ſound fathers 
and is much available vnto Chriſtian conſolatiō.
                  For the vnbeleevers. only in reſpect of the ſufficiency of the price which he paied.
               
Howbeit there is an other anſwere no leſſe true,
wherwith we may ſatisfie the moſt contentious
wranglers; that Chriſt died for all men abſolutely and
without exception to wit, if you reſpect the ſufficiencie of
the merite, and the price which he paied. It is out of all
doubt and controverſie that the death of the Son
of God is of ſuch weight & worth that it may ſerue
to purge and cleanſe the ſinnes not of one world
only, but thouſands of worlds; if at leaſt all m
                  ••
               
would apprehend by faith this ſalue of ſin. But the
queſtion concerneth the efficacie and participation
it ſelfe of the fruits which we mainely deny to
be common to the beleeving, and vnbel
                  •••
               ing,
or to be generally promiſed or given in the 
                  〈…〉
               ;
and we hold it no ſound doctrine to 
                  〈…〉
               
in this reſpect Chriſt died alike for all 
                  〈…〉
               
and reprobate.
            But here ſome men poſſeſſed with an 
                  〈…〉
               ,
as if the Church had not other controve
                  •••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
               
                  •
               nough, ſpew out on vs their ſtinking 
                  〈…〉
               
open mouth, taking it grievouſly, that 
                  〈…〉
               
               
not thoſe heavenly treaſures and iewels equallie
to the godly, and vngodly; to the faithful, and vnfaithfull;
to the elect, and reprobate; to Chriſts
members, and the Divels vaſſals; to the ſheepe, &
to the ſwine. They make lowd out cries on vs for
denying that Chriſt died for al. They ſay this our
aſſertion is tainted with a more odious blaſphemy
then any of the Saracens, Turkes, and Pagans;
and that by it Chriſtian Religion is cleane overthrowne.
            It is not my purpoſe to encounter with theſe
monſters of men, only I muſt needs touch the ſlā
               der
they faſten on vs. For what ſlaunder is there, if
this be none. When we diſtinguiſh the worth of the
merue from the efficacie and participating of the benefites,
and reſtraine according to Scripture and the
iudgement of the ſoundeſt Fathers this participation
to the whole number of the faithful alone gathered
from amongſt the Iews & Gentiles; do
we then deny that Chriſt died for all?
            But that the truth of this controverſie may the
more appeare,Why we muſt diſtinguiſh betweene ſufficienc
                        •
                     
                   and the efficacie of Chriſts ſatisfactiō. and theſe buſie heads, if it be poſſible,
may by ſome ſatisfaction on our part be ſet at
reſt, let vs in briefe ſet downe the force of our
maine reaſons whereon wee ground this our diſtinction.
            
               And firſt the holy Scripture it ſelfe teacheth vs
plainely this kinde of diſtinction, and forceth vs
therevnto For you ſhall finde it in ſcripture ſomtimes
abſolutely ſpoken that Chriſt taſted of death
for all men:Heb. 29. 
               that he gaue himſelfe a ranſome for al men:1. Tim. 2. 6.
               
               that he is the recōciliatiō for the ſins of the whole world.1. Ioh. 2. 2.
               Againe you ſhal read that Chriſt praied,Ioh. 17▪ 9. not nor ſanctified
himſelfe,Ioh. 10. 15. 
               that is, offered vp himſelfe for the
world,Mat 20. 28. but for the elect which were giuen him:Iſai. 53. 11. 
               That hee
laid downe his life for his ſheepe. that hee gaue his life
for the ranſome of many:Mat. 26. 28. 
               that by his knowledge: he iuſtifieth
many:Rom. 8. 9. 
               that hee ſhed his bloud for many: that the
world cannot receiue the holy ſpirit, becauſe it ſeeth him
not, neither knoweth him: and becauſe it hath not the
ſpirite, therefore it is not CHRISTS. Theſe
places carry ſome ſhew of contrariety, were it not
that the former are vnderſtood by vs of the ſufficiency
of ſatiſfaction, and the latter of the efficacie
and working vertue thereof.
            
            Furthermore other places occure which ſeeme
to impart vnto the wicked the benefit of redemption;2. Pet. 2. 1.
as when Peter ſaith that they denie even the
Lord which hath bought them▪
               
               2. Pet. 1. 9. that they were purged
from their old ſins. And Paule alſo ſaith, that they
were ſanctified with the blood of the Teſtamēt:
               Heb. 10. 29. al which
the Scripture els where enforceth vs to interpret
either of the vaine glorying of Hypocrites of their redemption
and ſanctification: or els to vnderſtand thē
no otherwiſe then of the extent and ſufficiencie of
Chriſts ſatiſfaction: whereas it ſimply excludeth
the vnfaithfull and vnrepentant from the benefit
of Redemption, and conſtantly avereth that they
are yet held captiues in the ſnares of Devill,
               2 Tim. 2. 26. that they
are overſwayed by him and carried headlong to
worke wickednes; that the wrath of God abide. hon
them (he ſaith, is abideth, not it returneth, as if it had

at any time relinquiſhed them) laſtly that Chriſt
never knew them much leſſe redeemed them.
            Now if I were purpoſed to produce the opinions
of Fathers,The Authority of Fathers and Schoolemen. and the ſounder Schoole-mē who
thus interpret the Scripture with vs, I ſhould lead
you into a large field of diſcourſe. Notwithſtanding
it is not vnfitting my purpoſe to cite at the
leaſt ſome few of them for confirmation.
            
               Let vs heere Cyrill thus recōciling thoſe words
of Chriſt,
               Cyrill. in Ioh li. 11. cap. 19. I pray not for the world with that ſayinge
of Iohn. He is a propitiation for the ſinnes of the whole
worlde. Iohn (ſaith he) ſeemeth to diſſent from us
Sauiour. For our Sauiour heere refuſeth to pray for the
world; but Iohn affirmeth that he is the propitiation and
reconciliation not for our ſinnes onely, but for the ſinnes
of the whole worlde: But the bleſſed Euangeliſt S. Iohn
becauſe he was a Iewe, leaſt the Lord ſhould ſeeme to be
an aduocate with his father for the Iewes onely, & not
for other nations, which as ſoone as they were called
obeied, of neceſſirie added for the whole world. But
the Lord Ieſus ſeparating you from them which are none
of his, ſaith, I pray for them a loue who keepe my ſayings,
and haue takē my yoke. For whoſe mediatour and high
Prieſt he is, he doth for good cauſe imparte vnto them
alone the benefite of his mediation. Hitherto Cyrill.
            
               Let vs hear Proſper alſo in this anſweare to Vicentius
obiections clearly diſtinguiſhing on this
manner.
               Looke Auguſt. Tom. 7. As far forth (ſaith he in his anſwere
to the firſt obiection) as you respect the greatnes
and power of the price, Or as you respect the our
whole cauſe of mankinde, ſo the bloud of Chriſt is the

redemption of the whole world: but they who paſſe the
time of their life heere without faith and without the
Sacrament of regeneration, they haue no part in this
redemption. Wheras then in regard of the one whole
cauſe of mankinde truely vndertaken by our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt all are well ſaide to be redeemed, & yet all are
not freed from captiuitie; withovt doubt the appropriation
of redemption is theirs out of whome the
prince of this worlde is caſt & diſlodged: and are
nowe no longer 
                  •
               ims of the diuell, but mēbers of Chriſt:
whoſe death was not ſo cōmunicated vnto all mankind,
that it ſhould effect the Redemption of theſe who were
not to be regenerated and renewed in the ſpirit:
but ſo, as that, that which was by one example performed
in behalfe of all, might by the Sacrament be confirmed
in ſome particulars. For the potion of immortalitie
being a confect of our infirmitie and Gods truth, is of
force in it ſelfe to profite all, but if it be not dr
                  •
               nke it
ſalueth not.
            
               The ſame Proſper making anſwere to the demāds
of the Frēch-mē in plaine tearms alloweth of this
phraſe,
               Cap. 9. Chriſt died for the faithfull alone,Ioh. 11. 51. 52. 
               which theſe
men condēne as ſmelling of Turciſme: his wordes
are theſe; Wheras then our ſauiour is rightly ſaid. To
haue beene crucified for the redēption of the whole world
in regard of the true and reall taking vnto him mans
nature, and in regard of the common loſſe wee ſuſtained
in the perſon of the firſt man Adam: yet he may well be
ſaide to be crucified only for thoſe to whome his
death was availeable. For the evangeliſt ſaieth that
Ieſus ſhould die for the nation, and not for the nation

onely, but that he ſhould alſo gather togeather in one the
childrē of God which were ſcattered Thus far Proſper.
            
            Gregorie ſaith;
               On Ezech. lib. 1. hom. cap 2. Inn. li. 2. ca. 21. Myſt. myſ. The author of life gaue himſelfe over
vnto death for the life of the Elect. Innocentius. 3.
who liued a bont the 1200 yeere of our Lord thus
writeth; The bloud of Chriſt was ſhed FOR THE
PREDESTINATE ALONE as touching
the efficacy therof. For the ſhedding of the righteous
bloud for the vnrighteous was of ſo rich a price, that
if the whole world would beleeue in their Redeemer, the
ſnares of the Deuill ſhould take bold of none.
            Bernard ſaith;
               Serm. 10. de 9. verſ. in Pſal. 91. Chriſt according to the fulnes of time
indeed died for the wicked, but according to Gods decree
of Predeſtination for his brethren and friends.
            Thomas on the 5. of the Apoc. writteh on this mā
                  ner.
Of the redēptiō purchaſed by the paſſiō of Chriſt we
may ſpeak in a double ſence & ſignification, either reſpecting
the ſufficiency therof; & ſo his paſſiō redeemed all,
becauſe as cōcerning himſelf he deliuered al For his paſſiō
is ſufficient to ſerue & redeeme al, yea if there were a
thouſand worldes as ſaith Anſelme in his 2. booke and
14. Chapter Cur Deus homo &c: or els we ſpeake
therof respecting the efficacy, & in this ſence he redeemed
not all by his paſſion, becauſe all cleaue not faſt vnto
the Redeemer, and therefore feele not nor perceiue
the virtue of redemption.
            
               The ſame authour againe ſaleth;
               Serm. de verit. maie. 26 Quaeſt. 7. The merite of
Chriſt as concerning the ſufficiency thereof equally
belongeth vnto all, but not concerning the efficacy which
happeneth partely by reaſon of free-wil, & partly by reaſon
of Gods election, by whome the effectes and fruites

of Chriſts merits are mercifully beſtowed on ſome; and
by the iuſt iudgment of God are withheld frō other ſome.
            
               Lambard in his third book Diſtinct. 22. ca. Chriſt
offered himſelfe vp to God the Trinity for almē
                as touching
the ſufficiēcie of the price paid: but for the elect
alone, as touching the efficacy; becauſe he wrought
ſalvation only for the Predeſtinate. What ſhould I ſay
more, where as theſe preſent proofes declare ſufficiently
that this interpretation of holy Scripture
is not vpſtart or profane, but of ancient received
in the Church, and grounded on evident truth.
One only place of Peter Galatine a Monke indeed,
but yet a learned Divine and skilfull in the Hebrew
I intend to alleadge, that theſe clamorous
punies & novices in divinity may better ſee how
that whatſoever is either vnknowne vnto them,
or ſtandeth not with their monſtrous inventions
is not preſently new-fangled & heatheniſh. Thus
therefore he wel & truely commenteth on theſe
words of Eſay,Iſai. 53. 11. 
               My righteous ſervant ſhall iuſtifie many
&c. Although the paſſion of Chriſt ought to bee ſufficient
to waſh away the ſins of all men,
               De Br
                     •
                  anis Catholic
                     •
                   verit. li. 8. cap. 14. 
               yet it waſhed not
them all away, but their ſins only who ſhoulde beleeue in
him, & repēt. For this cauſe he ſaith, And himſelfe bare
the ſinnes of many.
            
            Now omitting authorities let vs bring forth the
reaſons▪ which this vpſtart Pelagian progeny by
their profane & abſurd opinion doth eſpeciallie
oppoſe againſt vs.
            
               They labour tooth and naile to prooue that
Chriſt died for all: why no man denieth it. For this

is the voice of Scripture.
               The Vbiquitarie Pelagian opiniō touching the reſtoring of all into favor and grace with God by the death of Chriſt, bee they reprobates, or dogs, and ſwine. 
               They adde heerevnto,
that he died for all, and everie particular man. We deny
not ſimply this their aſſertion, although wee
finde not where the ſcripture ſpeaketh on this mā
                  ner.
They farther vrge that he died for all and evr
                  •
               e
particular, both elect and reprobate for Cain & David,
for Iudas and Peter, for them which ſhall bee damned in
like ſorte as for them which ſhalbe ſaved, without all reſpect
either of their faith or infidelitie. This is a hard
ſaying. They run on ſtill, and ſay he died for all and
everie of theſe not onely in respect of the ſufficiency of
his ſacrifice and ſatisfaction, but alſo in regard of the efficacy
of the ſame. What meaneth this newe deviſe
I pray? That forſooth Chriſt by his death and bloudſheading
hath truely and effectually deliuered from
death, purged from ſi
                  •
               , ſanctified, reconciled vnto God,
and reſtored vnto his grace and fauour by his death &
bloudſheading all and euerie ſingle man, yea even thoſe
who are not ſaved, but haue beene everſince Caine, &
are at this day, and ſhall bee hereafter damned. This
is their abominable ſottiſh opiniō, on which they
build an other as falſe and fooliſh, that forſooth,
All the wicked as many as heretofore periſhed, or at
this day periſh, or hereafter ſhall periſh; they neyther
periſh
                  •
               d, ne periſh, nor ſhall periſh, for their ſinnes (wheras
they are waſhed away by the bloud of Chriſt Ioſus)
but for vnbeleife alone. They who are not vtterly
ignorant of this controverſie and queſtion wil eaſily
grant that we here coine nothing of our own,
nor ſpeake any thing with intent to ſlander & reproach
them: But oh how horrible a ſound is this
               
in Chriſtian eares?
            
               Theſe quaint and gay Procters of wicked imps
mainetaine that all vngodly and filthie dogs before &
after the death of Chriſt,The falſhood and impiety of the foreſaid opinion. are received into the grace &
favour of God. We ſay firſt that this is a falſe & dive
                     •
                  liſh
opiniō; becauſe it impugneth ſcripture, which
every where maketh open proclamation that the
wicked and vngodly as long as they remaine destitute of
faith and repentance, are not in the grace and favour of
God, but are, and continuallie remaine the children of
wrath and eternal malediction: neither are they delivered
from ſin and death, but are held captiues and enſnared
by the devill, alreadie condemned, and plagued with
the heavy wrath of God.
            Secondly,The abſurdity therof. we affirme that this their forgerie is
moſt abſurd & vaine; becauſe it ſhamefully overthroweth
both it ſelfe, and maine principles of the
Chriſtian faith. For let vs but propoſe vnto our
ſelues this Thefis or aſſertion; All mē without exception
faithfull and vnfaithfull, before and after the death
of Chriſt are truelie & vndoubtedly received into grace
and favor with God by the bloud of Chriſt; what, trow
yee, will be the iſ
                  •
               ue enſuing herevpon? verily a
huge heape of abſurdities.
            
               Firſt original ſin with the guilt thereof ſhall by
this their poſition be vtterly taken away; and it
will proue in their opinion 
                  •
               n open falſhoode to
ſay that all men are borne the children of wrath,
becauſe in their iudgment all are borne in the favour
and grace of God. But herein the Scripture
iointlie pronounceth on our ſide that we al are by

nature the children of wrath.
            
               Secondly all the children of Turkes, Saracens▪
Canibals who at excluded from the couenant &
Church of God, ſhall heerby be borne in the
grace and favour of God: and by force of Conſequence
there ſhall be ſaluation without the Covenant
of God, and without his Church. O thoſe
ſauage and cruel monſters of our age, who ſhame
not to ſeate the infantes of Turkes & Infidels
borne without the church in the boſome and fauour
of God: nor dread to plucke vnmercifully
the poore infants of Chriſtians dieng befor Baptiſme
out of the boſome of God, and plung them
head-long into hell fire. For who knoweth not
that they ſo fondly bind the ſaluation of infants
to the Sacrament of Baptiſme, that they expreſſely
depriue them of euerlaſting happines, and
violently hale them out of Gods grace & fauour
who die before Baptiſme, vnleſſe they haue ben
aſſoiled by the praiers either of their parents or
freindes But if it be trew that by baptiſme they
are againe receiued into the fauour of God, howe
then w
                  •
               l this peremptory diſputer maintaine that
long ſince all mankinde was accepted into the
ſame.
            
               Thirdly, therefore this their ſtraunge conceite
bruſeth and quaſheth in pieces an other opinion
of theirs concerning the infantes of the faith 
                  ••
               ll
borne out of grace, aſſailed by the Devill before
Baptiſme; and damned.
            
               Fourthly all the wicked which before the death

of Chriſt fell into hel fire, and were againe reconciled
vnto God by the death of 
                  •
               hriſt, & reſtored
into his grace and favour▪ how (if this your 
                  〈◊〉
               
goeth for truth) how then, I ſay, fel they thēce,
who were received into it being dead, whereas
they could no more offend through incredulity?
wherefore thoſe vngodly perſons ſhal either cō
               tinue
in Gods favour, and be ſaved without faith,
or ſhal, cōtrary to your poſition, be caſt headlong
again frō thēce without your crime of incredulity.
            
               Fiftlie, Incredulity either ſhal go for no ſinne; or
if it be a ſinne, then all ſinnes ſhall not be purged
by the death of Chriſt: or if all be cleanſed, at leaſt
the ſinne of incredulity ſhal be of more force and
vertue then the death of Chriſt. But to ſay either
of theſe were erroneous & impious: For incredulity
not only is it ſelfe a ſin, but the mother & nurce
alſo of al other offences: & cleaveth faſt togither
with other ſins even to the regenerate: howbeit it
is purged & forgivē to thē by the bloud of Chriſt.
            
               Sixtly, it is a ſhameful & groſſe he to affirme that
the wicked are dāned not for their vngodly ſins,
but for their incredulity. As if it were not regiſtred
& recorded in Scripture,1. Cor. 6. 10 
               Theeues, covetous perſons,
drunkards and ſuch like ſhall not inherite the kingdome
of God. As if Chriſt in his final iudgement ſhal not
ſay vnto thē, depart into hell fire, &c And as if forſooth
incredulity were not the chiefe of ſins. Nay
we argue the clea
                  •
               e contrary, that they are cōdē
               ned
for ſin, becauſe they are condēned for incredulity.
For tell mee what ſinne is more grievous

and he
                  •
               ous then incredulitie. Heere our Apoſtata
ſporteth and toreth ouer childiſhly. Incredulity,
ſaith he, is not now conſidered as it is
in it ſelfe a ſin: but only as it refuſeth the meanes
of ſaluation. For what is it, Sir, to refuſe the meāes
of ſaluation? Is not this a contempt of God? Is it
not a moſt deteſtable ſinne & offence? verely incredulitie
is therefore a ſinne, becauſe it refuſeth
ſaluation with the meanes therof.
            
               Seventhly this their monſtrous opinion beareth
the wicked in hande that howſoeuer the truth of
the Church doctrine touching originall ſinne, &
the guilt of the wicked ſtande immoueable, yet
it is at no time inherent in them, nor can truly be
attributed vnto them. For let vs take a Turkiſh
infant, or ſome barbarous ancient perſon, who
neuer heard one ſyllable of the death of Chriſt,
and therefore cannot be ſaide to haue deſpiſed it
through incredulity; now let theſe diſputers tell
vs at what time they wil account theſe to ſtand in
the grace and favor of God, to be reconciled vnto
him, iuſtified, and ſanctified, whether in their
mothers wombe, or ſoone after their birth, vvhether
in their childhood, or in their youth, whether
in their perfect age, or in their old yeares: laſtlie,
whether in their life time, or after death. Nay let
them tell vs if ever they are admitted into favour,
how they fall from it, whereas neither any ſinne,
nor actuall incredulity is able to deiect thē thēce.
For the latter of theſe is not incident vnto them:
and the former are ſatisfied for by Chriſt. Whatſoever

they here anſwere, the effect of all will
proue that either they wil auere that ſome pleaſe
God without faith: or that ſome are caſt out of
Gods ſight and fauor without actuall incredulitie;
both which are falſe and impious, and mutually
deſtroy one the other.
            
               Laſtly, what cā be ſpokē more blaſphemous, then
that God hath accepted into favor and lovingly
foſtereth and cheriſheth all the vnfaithful & wicked,
ſuch as were Cain, Saul, Iudas, Herod, Caligula,
& to conclude in a word al ſort of malefactors, &
filthy ſwine? what comfort can there be more cō
               tēptible,
then that thou art redeemed by Chriſts
death, reduced into amity & friendſhip with him;
wheras many thouſands of thoſe, which haue bin
in like ſort reſtored, notwithſtanding periſh everlaſtingly.
My very heart quaketh and trembleth
to proſecute theſe monſters any farther. Who is
there then that thinketh not this ſo falſe an opion,
impious, abſurd, and blaſphemous to be far remooved
and baniſhed quite out of the precincts
& bounds of the Church.
            Here me thinkes I here them cry themſelues even
hoarſe againe; The promiſes of the Goſpell are vniverſall:
they pertaine vnto All, they pertaine vnto Al.
We therefore firſt demand of them this queſtion,
what manner of Conſequence this is to ſay, The
promiſes are vniverſall; therefore reprobates and filthie
dogs and hogs are reſtored vnto the favour and grace of
God. Why is not the contrary rather inferred▪ 
               The
promiſes of the Goſpel haue all of them a conditiō of faith

and repentance annexed with them; therefore they pertaine
not at all to dogs and hogs. Then againe, as oftē
as they vrge vs with their. All, All: ſo often will
we reply vnto them our Beleeving, Beleeving. For
the promiſes indeed are vniverſall, but in regarde
of the repentant, and ſuch as beleeue the Goſpell.
And here we appeale before the whole world to
the very letter of the promiſe: Come vnto me all
ſaith Chriſt,Mat. 11. 28. but he addeth, which labour and are laiden:
that is, faint and ſinke vnder the burthen of
your ſins, which falleth out in thoſe which are repentant.
And againe, elſewhere in another place:
So God loved the worlde that hee gaue his onlie begotten
ſon that everie one which beleeveth ſhoulde not periſh,
               Ioh. 3. 16.
               but haue life everlaſting.
               Rom. 3. 22. And Paule ſaith; The righteouſnes
of God by the faith of Chriſt Ieſus vnto all and
vpon all that beleeue.Gal. 3. 22. And in another Epiſtle; The
Scripture hath concluded all vnder ſin, that the promiſe
by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt ſhould bee given to thē
that beleeue.Ioh. 3. 36. And Chriſt againe teacheth howe
that he which beleeueth on the ſon hath everlaſting life.
And Peter alſo,Act. 10. 43. 
               All the Prophets witnes that through
his name all that beleeue in him ſhall receiue remiſſion
of ſinnes. The like reaſon is to be yeelded of all other
promiſes of the Goſpell. For they haue a cō
               dition
of faith and repentaunce either expreſſed
or vnderſtood and cannot without blaſphemy be
vnderſtood of any other then of the whole number
of the faithfull.
            
               They except againſt this our doctrine: that by
this meanes the promiſes are made to be particular.

Let the Author of the bookes De Vocat. Gent.
of the calling of the Gentiles (whether this Autthor
be Ambroſe,Lib. 1. ca. 3. 
               whoſe title the books do beare,
or Proſper as it is ſuppoſed by ſome) anſwer for us,
The people of God ſaith he,
               A ſpeciall vniverſity of the faithful & elect. haue their fulneſſe, and although
a great number of mē neglect or caſt from them
the grace of their Saviour; yet there is a certaine ſpeciall
vniverſity of the elect, and foreknowne of God,
ſevered and diſcerned from the generality of all, to this
intent that a whole world might ſeems to be ſaved out of
a whole world: and all men might ſeeme to bee redeemed
from out of all men. Wherefore the promiſes the
Goſpell remaine Vniverſall to the faithful, howſoever
they appertaine not vnto dogs and ſwine.
The Maior alſo of this practicall Syllogiſme remaineth
Vniverſall;

                  The promiſes pertaine to all that beleeue.
                  But I beleeue.
                  Therefore they appertaine vnto mee.
               
               Againe,
               
                  Chriſt died and praied for al that beleeue.
                  But I beleeue.
                  
                     Therefore he praied, and died for me.
                  
               
            
             Nowe
they are colde comforters who teach afflicted cō
               ſciences
to reaſon on this manner;
                  Chriſt died for all men.
                  But I am a man.
                  
                     Therefore Chriſt died for me.
                  
               
            
            
               Againſt the ſ
                     ••
                  under of pure particulars. For why, may
not a Turke, dogge, or hogge wallowing in the
mire conclude on this maner. O notable comforters,
and proclaimers of the grace of God. The

ſtrength and very ſinews of Chriſtian comfort is,
not to be a man, but to bee in graffed in Chriſt by
faith.
            Farther they obiect out of the Apoſtle, that Al
men are quickened and made aliue in Chriſt,
               1. Cor. 15. 
                     •
                  2. 
               even as all
die in Adam. Where if they abſolutely define that
all are quickned in Chriſt, the Scripture & experience
ſhall 
                  ••
               fute and put them to ſilence. This i
                  •
               
it thē which the Apoſtle saith, that Chriſt beſtoweth
grace on all that are his: as Adam communicated
and ſhared death with all that are his. And the
one indeed, 
                  
                     •
                  eaning Chriſt, through grace which
is a worke of more moment; the other, meaning
Adam, by naturall propagation which is a thing
more eaſie. And that this is the ſcope & ſence of
S. Paule the wordes which followe next in order
plainely proue. For when hee had ſaid that all are
quickened in Chriſt, he forthwith add
                  •
               th: But everie
man in his owne order:
               Ibid. 23. 
               The firſt fruits is Chriſt; the
                     •
                  
they that are of Chriſt, that is to ſay, they which beleeue,
who alſo were giuen him by his Father, and
for whō he earneſtly praied vnto his Father. And
S. Auguſtine interpreteth this place not altogither
vnlike vnto vs, whereas he ſaith, that it was therefore
ſaid that all are quickned in Chriſt, 
                     〈◊〉
                   becauſe all,
who 
                     〈◊〉
                   Adam, are the members of Chriſt: but becauſe
as no man in the naturall body death but in Adā:
ſo no man is quickned in the ſpirituall bodie, but by
Chriſt.
            
            Neither is there any more place lefte for this
cavill, that by this 
                     〈◊〉
                   Adam is made ſtro
                     •
                  ger

then Chriſt, if he drawe headlonge with himſelfe into
deſtruction and the pitt and gulfe of death more then
Chriſt ſaueth and freeth from the very mouth of hell:
For the power of each party is not to be meaſured
& eſteemed according to the nomber of them which
die and are quickened; but rather according to the
manner wherby deſtruction & quickening is purchaſed
or effected, and alſo by the greatnes of
the benefites either loſt or regained. To hurte is a
matter of eaſe, but to heale a worke of much paine and
travell as ſaith the proverbe. You may ſooner and
with much more eaſe deſtroy whole hundreths,
thē preſerue & ſaue one; you may in ſhorter time
caſt a number from of the bridge into the ſtream,
then deliuer one only from the perill and danger
of drowning: In like manner it was a worke of
more eaſe to deſtroy all mankind: then to reſtore
one man out of that generall ruine and deſtruction.
That the Devill was able to doe, and Adam
alſo was able to doe it; this none but Chriſt could
perfourme. Wilde beaſtes, and calamities haue
power to hurt, and murther man: but it is in the
power of no creature to repaire mans loſſe of ſalvation
and life eternall; but this was reſerved to
the power of GOD alone creator of all thinges,
wherefore the death of Chriſt had beene of greater
force then the ſinne of Adam, yea though it
had reſtored but one only man vnto life. And
certaine it is and an vndoubted truth, that the
bleſſings recovered by Chriſt, ſo far ſurpaſſe thoſe
whoſe loſſe we ſuſtained by Adam, as heavenly

things, and things eternall excell earthly and corruptible
things. For Adam as the Apoſtle witneſſeth
is of the earth, earthlie: but Chriſt is heave
                     •
                  lie▪
Adam is a living ſoule, but Chriſt is ſpirituall: Adam
caſt vs out of an earthly paradiſe, but Chriſt
hath p
                  ••
               ced vs in an heavenly Paradiſe, and hath
given vs everlaſting happines.
            Thus 
                  〈◊〉
                haue thought it meete and convenient
to proceede 
                  〈◊〉
                ſetting downe the 
                  〈◊〉
                of
Chriſts death and reſurrection, which all appears
came to them all, and them alone who ſticke faſt
vnto Chriſt by faith; & in making anſwere to the
cavils and ſlaunders of Heretiques, &c.
         
         
            
            A SHORT INTRODVCTION TO
the Cōtrouerſie of the Sacramēt of the Lords
Supper, vnfolding the ſubſtaunce of
the cheifeſt queſtions cōtroverſed
or not controuerſed therin
b
                  •
               tweene the profeſſors
of the Goſpell.
            Compiled and written by D. Dauid Parry.
            
               Foure generall Premiſes.
               1 LEt our yong Diuines carry in memorye
that the queſtions touching the Ceremonies
and rites of the Supper are to bee diſtinguiſhed
from the doctrine, which is the promiſe
of the Goſpell annexed vnto the outward and
viſible rites.
               2 Let them alſo learne to put a difference betweene
the queſtions cōtroverſed, and not controuerſed,
aſwel concerning the rites, as concerninge
the doctrine.
               3 Let them knowe that the queſtione controverſed
about the rites and ceremonies are not ſo
principal, nor of ſuch circumſtance, as the other
which concerne the doctrine; and that for the
moſt part they may, and ought to be decided in
equitie according to the circumſtances of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
place, and perſon: yet with this caueat, that all
be done for edification.
               4 Let them know moreover, that the maine
queſtion▪ touching the doctrine of the Lordes

Supper not controverſed hitherto by any are
three: and againe on the other ſide the queſtions
controverſed are alſo three; wherunto all the reſt
may eaſily be refered. Touching both theſe I will
verie briefely inſtruct the yonger ſorte.
            
            
               The three queſtions touching the Lords Supper not
called into doubt or controverſy are theſe.
               
                  I. What the Supper of the Lord is?
                  
                     All the profeſſors of the Goſpell agree in this
pointe, that the Supper of the Lorde is a Sacrament
of the new Teſtament, inſtituted and ordeined by
Chriſt, wherin together with the taking of bread and
wine the true body and bloud of Chriſt is receiued, and
the communion or participation of Chriſt with all his
bleſſinges and benefites is ſealed vp in the heartes of the
faithfull beleeuers.
               
               
                  II. What are the endes or vſes of the
ſupper inſtituted by Chriſt.
                  Herein alſo all the profeſſours of the Goſpell
agree in one, that this receiuing of the Sacrament
confirmeth our faith of the promiſes of grace both becauſe
this 
                        〈◊〉
                      the generall and common vſe of all
Sacraments whatſoeuer; & alſo becauſe Chriſt
himſelfe hath ſaid of this Sacrament,Luc. 22. 19. 20. 
                     Doe this is
remembraunce of mee. And, This cuppe is the newe
Couenant in my bloud.
                  
               
               
                  III. What is giuen & receiued
i
                        •
                      the Lords Supper.
                  
                     
                     In this alſo there is a mutuall conſent of all;
that the bread and wine are giuen and receiued viſibly
& corporally by the hand and month of the miniſter &
communicants: but the body & bloud of our Lord with
all the benefits of his paſſion are inviſible and ſpiritually
giuen and receiued by them both.
                  In all theſe, I ſay, there is a ioynt agreement
betweene al diuines which profeſſe the Goſpell:
as for vaine brablers, whoſe brawles and iaries
may not be the meaſure wherby to iudge of the
conſent, or controverſes of the churches profeſſing
the Goſpell, they neyther agree in theſe, nor
in any other.
               
            
            
               The three queſtions called into doubt
or controuerſie are theſe.
               
                  The firſt queſtion.
                  What is the vnion of the Signe ſignifying or the Thing
ſignified in the Lordes ſupper: whether it be Tranſubſtantiation,
or Conſubſtantiation, or only a myſticall reference
or relation of the one to the other.
                  To this queſtion we make an anſwere conſonant
to the Catholicke faith in three ſeuerall propoſitions,
the two of which are Negatiue, and
third Affirmatiue.
                  
                  
                     1 Propoſition.
                     The Sig
                           •
                        es and the Things are not vnited by Tranſubſtantion,
that is, by ſuch a charge as in which the
ſubſtance of 
                           •
                        he Signe are tranſformed into the ſubſtāce
of the Thinges, the accidents onely remaining.
                  
                  
                     The reaſons of the firſt propoſition.
                     
                        
1 The firſt reaſon is becauſe as Ireneus saith
there are two thinges which haue a Sacramentary
proportiō in the Euchariſt, which the Accidents
of bread and wine, & the ſubſtance of the body
and bloud of Chriſt can by no meanes haue.
                     2 The ſecond reaſon is deduced out of the
wordes of Chriſt who ſaied. This is my body, not,
let this bee, or, bee made my body.
                     
                     3 The third reaſon is becauſe the bread is termed
bread both before the action of Conſec
                           ••
                        tion, in
the action, and after the action.
                     4 The fourth reaſon is becauſe the ſounder Fathers
reteine the name of bread in the Lords Supper;
and when they ſpeake by way of Hype
                              •
                           b
                              •
                           le
of chāging of the bread,
                        The chāge of the things in the Sacraments 
                              ••
                           s the cauſe of the change of the nāes 
                        they will be vnderſtood
to ſpeake Sacramentally As Theodore
                           •
                         
                        Diolog. 1.
witneſſeth ſaying; it was the will of Chriſt that they
who vſe the Sacraments ſhould not bend and ſet their
mindes on the nature of the thinges which are ſeene,
b
                           •
                        t ſhould beleeue that which was made through grace
by alteratiō of the names. Here in the ſame diologue
he teacheth that we muſt vnderſtand a ſacramentall
change in theſe wordes; Chriſt honoured the viſible
ſignes with the title and name of his body and bloud,
NOT BY CHANGING THE NAME,
but by adding grace to the nature.
                  
                  
                     The ſecond propoſition.
                     II. The Signes and things ſignified are not vnited
by Conſubſtantiation, that is, by a reall Exiſtence of two
bodies in the ſame place, or, by the cloſe conveiance of one
within the other, ſuch as we ſee is of the corne in a ſacke,

of 
                           〈◊〉
                         in a mans purſe, of an Infant in his cradell, or of

                           〈◊〉
                         in a roundler. For this is a likelihood of things
vnited in ſubſtance.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Reaſons of the ſecond propoſition.
                     1 The firſt reaſon is, becauſe the words of Chriſt,
This is my bodie doe ſignifie vnto vs, not vvhere
Chriſts body is, neither what it is IN, WITH▪
                         or
VNDER the bread: but what the bread it ſelfe
is▪ and ought to be vnto the godly in this vſe.
                     2 The ſecond Reaſon is, becauſe the body of
Chriſt is a true inſtrumentall, finite, & viſible body;
after his aſcenſion no longer preſent on the
earth or every where, but cōverſant and remaining
in heaven, even vntil his laſt comming.
                     3 The third Reaſon is, becauſe the ſounder Fathers
do teach that the body and bloud of Chriſt
is in the bread & wine, not as in a caue orden, but
as in a myſtery, and by a myſtery. Chryſoſtome opers
imperfecto Math. Homil 11. ſaith In holied and ſanctified
veſſels is conteined not the true body of Chriſt, but
the myſterie of Chriſts body.
                     
                  
                  
                     The third propoſition.
                     III. The Signes and Things haue their coherence
in the Lords Supper by a Sacramental vnion. Now this
vnion is of like quality with that vnion which is
commō to the whole kinde of Sacraments; otherwiſe
it ſhould not be a ſacramentall vnion, but by
a title of diſtinction ſhould be tearmed, The vnion
in the Lords Supper. But in al the other Sacraments
their is an vnion of Relation and reſpect, to wit. A

myſticall ſignification of the Thinge ſigned by the Signe,
a ſealing, exhibiting, & receiving thereof after a lawful
vſe, which is not without the faith and repentance of thē
which approach vnto it to vſe it.
                  
                  
                     The reaſon
                           •
                         of the third propoſition.
                     1 The firſt is drawne from the nature of the
whole kinde, in this ſort;

                           There is ſuch an vnion in all Sacraments;
                           Therefore in the Supper alſo.
                        
                     
                     The Antecedent or former propoſition
of this argumēt is manifeſt out of the
definition & principal end of the Sacraments.
                     2 The ſecond is framed on this manner;
                        
                           The bread is the body of Chriſt either in the
truth of the thing (as Auguſtine according
to Proſpers opinion ſpeaketh) or
in a myſterie ſignifying it.
                           But it is not the body of Chriſt eſſentially &

                                 〈◊〉
                               the truth of the thing▪ becauſe there is
no Tranſubſtantiation.
                           Therefore it is the body of Chriſt in a myſterie
ſo ſignifying.
                        
                     
                     3 The third reaſon is, becauſe al the arguments
by which the ſacramentall ſpeech in the wordes
of the Supper is proved are hithervnto belonging.
For a ſacramental vnion requireth ſacramentall
phraſes and termes.
                     4 The fourth is, becauſe we haue the teſtimonies
of the Fathers, that the bread is a ſigne, figure

and ſacrament of the body of Chriſt no longer
abſent, but preſent; and yet preſent not in the
outward and viſible elements of bread and wine,
but in the worde ioyned with them; preſent, I
ſay, not to the mouth, but to the heart; not locally
and in place, but myſtically, and ſpiritually.
                     The obiection of Papiſts for their Tranſubſtantiation
drawne out of the words
of the Supper.
                     
                        This which Chriſt gaue,Obiect. and the Preiſt conſecrateth
is the body of Chriſt;
                        Therefore it is not bread.
                     
                     The argument holdes from the rule of thinges
different; as if a man ſhould ſay, This is a man, therfore
it is not an Oxe.
                     
                     Wee deny that this argument is framed, as you
ſay,Aunſ. from the inducing of one ſpeciall by the remouing
of the contrarie of the ſame kinde: becauſe
it is rather a faulty proceſſe in argumentation
frō the inducing of a ſacramētal reſpect which
is but an Accident, to the diſplacing and deniall
of the ſubiect & ſubſtance; ſuch as this is, if I ſhould
ſay, This man is a Father; Therefore he is not a man.
For ſo they argue, This bread is the body of Chriſt
therefore it is not bread. There is therefore in this
argument a Fallacie of Accident no leſſe abſurd the
if you ſhould thus conclude▪ 
                        This thing is a table▪
therefore it is not wood. For although the body of
Chriſt bee not the forme or Accident of bread
                           •
                        
yet the Relation and reſpect which the bread

hath by vertue of the promiſe vnto the body of
Chriſt is the forme of a Sacrament: Whence it is
a weake kind of reaſoning to ſay; A doue is the
holy Ghoſt; therefore it is no longer a doue Circumciſion
is the couenant of God; therfore it is no longer Circumciſion.
The cupp is the New Teſtament; therfore it is
no longer a cuppe.
                     
                     The anſwere to all the teſtimonies of the Fathers
which the Papiſts alleadge for the change of
the ſignes is common; that they are all to hee vnderſtood
of the Sacramentall not of an eſſentiall
and reall mutat on, which is apparant out of the
conſent of foundeſt Fathers in this point of the
ſacrament.
                  
               
               
                  II. The ſecond queſtion.
                  Howe both the ſignes, & the heauenly things ſignified
are exhibited or receiued in the Lords Supper.
                  This queſtion is in controuerſie betweene vs
both with the Papiſts & the Vbiquitaries, becauſe
both of them are of opinion that the things being
preſent in their ſignes, or vnder the ſhewes of
the ſignes are covertly and miraculouſly caried
vp and downe in the hands of the miniſters, hādled
by them, and put into the mouthes of the
Communicants. We contrariwiſe teach, that the
thinges with their ſignes are both togither exhibited
and receiued with their ſignes in the lawful
vſe of the Supper, but in a diuers manner. For the

ſignes are handled by the Miniſters, and takē by
the mouth of the Communicants: But the things
themſelues are given by Chriſt our high Prieſt, &
received by faith. This point may in like ſort with
the former be expreſſed in three propoſitiōs; two
negatiue, and one affirmatiue.
                  
                  
                     1. The firſt propoſition.
                     The things ſignified, that is, the bodie and bloude of
Chriſt, are neither handled, nor reached out by the hand
of the Miniſters to be receaved corporallie in the ſignes.
                  
                  
                     The Reaſons of this firſt propoſition.
                     1 The firſt reaſon is collected negatiuelie from the
whole kinde of Sacraments, thus,
                           In no Sacrament the Miniſters handle or beſtowe
things ſpirituallie ſignified.
                           
                              Therefore neither in the Lords Supper doe they
handle the thing ſpiritually ſignified.
                        
                     
                     The Antecedent is proved both by an induction
or inſtance in every Sacrament, which is evident
by the adverſaries owne confeſſion; and alſo
the proportion betweene the Sacrament, and the
worde. Marc. 1. I am the voice crying &c. Ioh. 1. I
baptiſe with water; he which cōmeth after me ſhall baptiſe
with the holie Ghoſt, and with fire. 1. Cor. 3. 7.
Neither he that watereth, nor hee that planteth is anie
thing, but God which giveth the encreaſe. Therefore
it holdeth alike alſo in the Sacraments, which are
the viſible word.
                     2 The ſecond reaſon is this.
                     
                        
                        
                           The things ſignified are not corporally, IN,
WITH, or VNDER the ſignes, as hath
beene ſhewed.
                           
                           Therefore they are not handled, or diſtributed
by the hand of the Miniſter.
                        
                     
                     3 The third reaſon proceedeth thus,
                           The things ſignified in the Supper are spirituall,
which coupled with their ſignes are
offered in the promiſe of grace.
                           But the promiſe of grace is not handled
with hands &c.
                        
                     
                     4 The fourth reaſon is the teſtimonies of Fathers;
as Chryſoſt. Sermone de Euch. 
                           〈…〉
                        . Thinke not whē
yee come to theſe myſteries, that yee receiue the Lordes
body at the hands of a mā, that is to ſay the Miniſter;
with many other ſuch like places.
                     
                  
                  
                     II. The ſecond propoſition.
                     The things ſignified I meane, the body and bloude of
the Lord are not received WITH, IN, and VNDER
the bread and wine by the mouth of the body.
                  
                  
                     Reaſons of the ſecond propoſition.
                     1 The firſt is, becauſe they are not bodily preſent
with, in, and vnder the ſignes as hath beene
ſhewed queſt. 
                              •
                            propoſ 2.
                     2 The ſecōd i
                           •
                         becauſe they paſſe into the belly
which is the receptacle appointed for bodily
meates 1. Cor. 6. 13. For all which entereth in at
the mouth, goeth downe into the belly Mat. 13.
                     3. The third is becauſe the promiſe, wherin the
things are offered, is not receiued by the mouth.
                  
                  
                     III The third propoſition.
                     
                        
The thinges ſignified, ſuppoſe, The lordes bodie and
bloud are receiued ſpritually by faith.
                     1 The firſt reaſon is deriued from the conditiō
of the whole kinde; becauſe in Sacramēts the things
ſignified are receiued by faith: by which alone as
we are iustified; ſo we receiue all the benefites of
the new Teſtament.
                     2 The ſecond is, becauſe the promiſe of grace
is not apprehended but by faith. Nowe the communion
of the body and bloud of Chriſt is the
promiſe of grace. See Vrſin. Volum. 1. Pag. 103.
                  
                  
                     The argument of a certeine famous Disputant
framed in defence of the eatinge
Chriſts body with our mouth.
                     
                        
                           Ob. To whatſoeuer inſtrument the eating of one
thing in the Lords Supper appertaineth, to
the ſame the eating of the other ought to
appertaine.
                        But the eating of one body, that is the bread,
in the Lordes Supper appertaineth to the
mouth.
                        Therefore the eating of the other, which is
Chriſts body, appertaineth to the ſame.
                     
                     
                        Anſ. 1 The Maior is true in ſuch meates as are
naturally conioined, of containe one the other, of
the which ſort is a a Pye. Now the bread and the
body of Chriſt are not ſo ioined togither. In theſe
then it is falſe.
                     The Maior thus he proues;

                           
                           Whoſoeuer includeth in the ſame worde of
eating both bread and wine, & the body &
blood of Chriſt affirmeth alſo that they are
both receiued vvith the ſame inſtrument.
                           But Chriſt includeth both bread & wine, &
his body & bloud in one & the ſame worde
of eating.
                           Therefore CHRIST affirmeth that they
are both received with the ſame inſtrumēt
of eating.
                        
                     
                     
                        Anſ. 1. The proofe of the Maior faileth, becauſe
an vniuerſal affirmatiue ſhould be concluded
in Barbara.
                     
                     2 The Maior beggeth that which is in controverſie
and is denyed. The falſeneſſe thereof
appeareth Iohn the third, where CHRIST includeth
in the ſame worde of birth the ſpirit and
the fleſh: and yet it followeth not that they both
are borne after the ſame manner, or by the ſame
inſtrument.
                     3 The Minor alſo is falſe. For this worde of
eating is referred to the hollyed breade, not to
the bodie, but by way of conſequence. For it
properly pertaineth vnto that, which the Lord
tooke in his handes and brake, which was bread,
and not his body. This reaſon is vvorthy the
marking for that according to the Papiſtes and
ſuch as ſimplie mainetaine Conſubſtantiation the
bodie of CHRIST is not there before the
wordes of conſecration (as they call them) are

pronounced, but beginneth to bee there in the
very laſt inſtante of the pronouncing of theſe
wordes, This is my bodie. But according to the
Vbiquitaries, which are as it were chymicall conſubſtantiators,
it is there indeede, as in any other
breade, but it is not yet edible vntill after conſecration.
CHRIST then commaunded not
to eate that with our mouth in the breade, which
as yet was not in the breade, or as yet was not
edible.
                     Then againe he proues the Maior of his former
ſyllogiſme.
                     
                        
                           A word having but one ſignification is to be
taken but in one.
                           But eating both of the breade and of the body
of Chriſt hath but one ſignification, viz.
with the mouth.
                           It is then to bee taken in one ſignification of
both.
                        
                     
                     
                        Anſ. 1. Heere againe faileth the proofe of the
Maior, being an vniverſall affirmatiue, which
ſhould haue bin concluded in Barbara.
                     
                     2 The Minor is a begging of that which is in cō
                        troverſie.
                  
               
               
                  The third queſtion.
                  Vnto whom theſe things are offered, and of
wh
                        ••
                      they are receiued.
                  Heereunto is there made aunſwere in tvvo

Propoſitions, both being affirmatiue.
                  
                  
                     1. Propoſition.
                     The things ſignified are receiued by the faithful alōe
1 Reaſon. Becauſe only they that beleeue receiue
the promiſes by faith.
                     2 Reaſon. Becauſe they alone that beleeue haue
the ſpirit of Chriſt, from the which his life-giuing
fleſhe cannot be ſeparated.
                     3 Reaſon. Becauſe in them onely that beleeue,
Chriſt remaineth, and they in Chriſt Eph. 3 17.
                     4 Reaſon. Becauſe they alone that beleeue receiue
and haue life. Ioh 3 & 6.
                  
                  
                     2. Propoſition.
                     The vngodly comming without faith receiue the
ſignes without the things themſelues.
                     Looke the reaſons as they are ſet downe in the
Church pag 58
                           •
                        .
                     Looke the obiections for the eating of the vngod
                           •
                        y,
Ibid. pag. 5
                              •
                           2.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A BRIEFE EXPLICATION OF
the whole controverſie concerning the
Lordes ſupper betweene the Conſubſtantials,
and the true beleevers.
            The chiefe pointes of this explication.
            1 What errors the Conſubſtantials impute vnto vs.
            2 The arguments of the Conſubſtantials againſt our
doctrine of the ſupper.
            3 The ſhifts of the Conſubſtantials including ſome of
our obiections.
            4 Arguments againſt the preſence and corporall eating
of the body of Chriſt, IN, WITH, and VNDER
bread.
            5 The arguments wherby the opinion of the Vbiquitaries
is refelled, and the truth of ſound doctrine
confirmed.
            
               The errors which the Conſubſtantials
falſly impute vnto vs
with their refutation.
               
                  Ob. IN the doctrine of of the Lordes Supper there
are (ſay the Conſubſtantials) two extreams to
be avoided: for both every vertue, & every truth ſtandeth
betweene two extremes. The one is of the Papiſtes,
the other of the Sacramentaries: and on each
ſide it ſeemes to be fourfould. The errors of the Papiſtes
are. 1 Tranſſubſtantiation. 2 The worſhippe of bread. 3.
The ſacrifice of the maſſe. 4. A maiming of the ſacramēt
Anſ. They ſet downe indeede the errors of the
Papiſtes, but they cannot refute them: becauſe
their opinion agreeth more with the opinion of

the Papiſts, then ours doth.
               For firſt,The Conſubſtantials retaine the errors of the Tranſubſtantials. although they teach not Tranſubſtantiation,
yet they teach Conſubſtantiation, whereof
there is nothing delivered in the word of God.
               2 Whereas they teach the bodilie preſence of Chriſt, it
muſt needs be that they alſo worſhip Chriſt in the
bread, whom they ſuppoſe to bee bodily preſent
in, vnder, with, and to the bread; which is a thing no
leſſe idolatrous, then if they worſhipped the
bread. For whereſoever Chriſt is, whether in a
viſible or inviſible manner, there he is to be worſhipped.
               3 They eſtabliſh the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, becauſe,
as it hath bin already ſaid, whileſt they are bound
to worſhip Chriſt in the bread, they are enforced
to aske of God forgiuenes of their ſinnes for that
Chriſts ſake, whome they beare in their handes;
which is nought els but the Popiſh oblation of
Chriſt.
               4 They of force admit the mangling or abridging
one part of the Sacrament. For they reteine
the foundation, on which the Papiſtes builde this
errour. For wheras they hold a corporal preſence
of Chriſt in, with, vnder or to the bread, they muſt
neceſſarilie either withholde the cuppe from the
Communicantes, becauſe, in their doctrine and
opinion, the bloud of CHRIST is in his body:
or elſe they muſt ſeparate CHRISTES
bloud from his body; then which nothing can
be more abſurd.
               
                  Wee offend not, as they charge vs, in the defect,

but keepe the meane.The true catholique opinion keeping a iuſt meane betweene the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      & Conſubſtantials offending in the exceſſe; & the 
                        〈◊〉
                      offending in the defect.
                   
                  For wee teach the spirituall
preſence and participation; that is to ſay, that all
the faithfull which eate and drinke the breade and wine
are truelie made partakers of Chriſt himſelfe, and al his
benefites, and ſo made one with him, that they become
fleſh of his fleſh, & bone of his bones. But ther, as it hath
beene already demonſtrated, offende as doe the
Papiſts in the exceſſe.
               Yea but, ſay they, theſe are the errours of the
Sacramentaries, to ſay that
               
                  Obiect. 1. The Sacraments are only bare ſignes and
tokens.
               Anſ. We teach no ſuch doctrine: but we teach
that the Thinges ſignified are exhibited and received
togither with the Signes, although not corporallie, yet
in ſuch manner as fitteth Sacraments.
               
                  Obiect 2. CHRIST is preſent onlie according to
his working.
               
                  Anſ. Neyther is this our doctrine, but we teach
that Chriſt is preſent and vnited vnto vs by the holy
Ghoſt, howſoever his body be farre remooued and abſent
from vs; in like ſorte as he is wholy cōuerſant with
vs by his miniſtery, although it be otherwiſe in reſpect
of his other nature.
               
                  Obiect. 3. In the Sacrament is only an imaginarie,
figuratiue, and spirituall bodie of CHRIST, not an
eſſentiall bodie.
               Aunſw. Touching the imaginarie bodie obiected
wee neuer made mention thereof, but our whole
doctrine is concerning the true fleſh of CHRIST,
vvhich is preſente vvith vs, yea though hee remaine

ſtill in heaven. Father we ſay, that we receiue
the bread and the body, but both in their proper manner.
Ob. 4. The true body of Chriſt which hung on the croſſe,
and the true bloud which was ſhed for vs is diſtributed;
but ſpiritually: that, it is receiued of them only which are
worthy Cōmunicants; and the vnworthy receiue nothing
but the bare ſignes to their iudgement, and condē
                  
                     •
                  ation▪
                  Anſ. This obiection is indeed the very doctrine
we preach, and therfore we grant the whole, as being
conſonant and agreeable with the word of God,
the nature of the Sacramentes, the Analogie of
faith and the communion of the faithfull with
Chriſt.
            
            
               II. The arguments whereby the Conſubſtantials
labor to 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  hrow our doctrine touching
the Lords Supper, togither with their
Confutation and Anſweres.
               
                  Arg. 1. The words of Chriſts inſtitution are plaine &
evident, THIS is my bodie, THIS is my bloud.
               
                  Aunſ. The words they cite are ſwords to cut
their owne throats. For they ſay that 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      vnder, or
with the bread, Chriſts bodie is reallie receiued; whereas
Chriſt ſaith, that the bread it ſelfe is his bodie. Therfore
they do the Church a double wrong. One, in
that they thruſt on her their owne words inſteed
of Chriſts. Another, in that they think her ſo blind
that ſhee cānot ſee the diverſity of theſe two ſayings.
The bread is in the bodie; and, The bread is the body
Moreover they make Chriſt a lier. For they deny
that the bread is his body, and ſay, that his body

is in the bread. Let them looke what anſwere
they wil make vnto Chriſt in the laſt day of iudgment
concerning this deſpightfull and reproachfull
blaſphemy. The Papiſts themſelues rather reteine
Chriſts words then our Conſubſtantials. For
they teach that the bread is ſo the body of Chriſt,
that for ſooth it is chāged into the body of Chriſt.
But theſe men keepe not the word, but follow, as
they ſay the ſence and meaning. Wherefore wee
muſt ſearch diligētly whether of vs 
                     •
                  s in the truth.
Our doctrine ſhall be proved in the end.
               
                  Repl. In the ſame place this expoſitiō is added which
is given for you, and which is ſhed for you.
               
                  Anſ 1. Thu
                     •
                   to argue is to begge that which is
in controverſie. For they take this as granted, that
the bread to properly tearmed the body, which remaines
yet to be proved.
               Anſ. 2. We anſwere by retorting the argumēt, thus
That which we properlie call the bodie of Chriſt was
given for vs:
               But the bread was not giuen for vs.
               Ergo, &c.
               Aunſ. 3. As the bread is the bodie broken; ſo the breaking
of the bread is the breaking of the body:
               But the breaking of the bread is improperly and myſticallie
the breaking of the bodie of Chriſt. For
the breaking of the body is the crucifying ther of.
               Th
                     •
                  refore the bread brokē is in a myſtical ſence the
bodie broken.
               
                  Arg. 2. The ſecond argument is drawne from the author
Chriſt himſelfe, which is true.
               
                  
                  Anſ. This argument takes that for a groūd which
is in controuerſie: for they muſt proue that Chriſt
ſaid his body was in, vnder, or with the breade. Nay
one may ſpeake figuratiuely, & yet plainely to.
Replie. 1. He is omnipotent. Ergo he can be everie
where, yea even in the bread.
               
               
                  Anſ. 1. Though he could make two contradictories
at once true, yet he will not.
               2. God cannot do thinges contradictorie, becauſe
he is truth. But to will thinges contradictorie
is the part of a lier. We do not therfore deny
the truth and omnipotencie of God, but their
lyes; nay we defēd it, ſaying that God doth what
he ſpeaketh. But they oppugne it, by teachinge
that in God are contrarie willes.
               
                  Repl. 2. Chriſtes bodie hath manie prerogatiues
wherby it differeth frō our bodies, as namely, that it was
born of a virgin, walked on the ſea, was at one time in the
graue, in bell, and in paradiſe, paſſed through dores ſhut.
               
                  Aunſ. Theſe examples are partly improper or
vnlike, partely falſe. Vnlike
               
               1 Becauſe they may alſo be incident to treatures:
as walking on the water to Peter, paſſinge
through ſhut doores to ſpirites.
               2. Becauſe they imploy a contradiction, for
when he is ſaid to bee borne of a virgin, he is not at
the ſame time ſaid not to bee borne of a Virgin.
But at once to be finite and infinite implieth acontradiction.
Falſe
               
               1 For he paſſed not through cloſed doores,
wheras they might yeeld and giue backe to him.
               
                  
2 For neyther did he paſſe through the dore
of the ſepulcher, wheras that is ſaid to haue ben
opened by the Angell:
               3 For neyther was Chriſtes body at one and
the ſame inſtante in manie places,Auguſtine. ad Dardan. epiſt. 57. Read the place.
                   which they
ſeeme to haue taken from Auguſtin, But he ſaide,
that his body was in the graue, his ſoule in hel, his Deity
everie where.
               
               
                  Arg. 2. The third argument is taken from the circumſtance
of time, thus

                     No man Speaking ſeriouſly ſpeaketh figuratiuely,
                     Chriſt appointing his laſt Supper ſpake ſeriouſly:
                     Ergo he ſpeake was figuratiuelie.
                  
               
               
                  Anſ. 1. I deny the maior: for els it would follow,
that no man ſpeaking figuratiuely ſhould ſpeake
ſeriouſly, which is moſt falſe. For God in al the ſacraments,
though he ſpeake figuratiuelie, yet he
ſpeaketh ſeriouſelie, I haue earneſtely deſired (ſaith
Chriſt) to eate this paſſeover with you. I am the vine,
you are the branches. Let this cup paſſe from me. If it
be thus in the greene wood, what ſhal become of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
He alleadged the 22 pſ. Al this though he ſpeake
figuratiuelie, yet did he alſo ſpeake thē ſeriouſly.
               
                  Anſ. 2. To the maior I anſwere, that no man thē
vſeth reſting or obſcure ſigures. But this is a plaine
figure, becauſe cōmon: & his diſciples ſpeake this
to him, where wilt thou that we make ready the paſſeover
for thee? It is vſual in al ſacramēts. It is forcible,
becauſe it expreſſeth the likelihood between the
ſigne and the thinge ſignified, with the certainetie
of their coniunction in lawfull vſe.
               
                  
                  Anſ. We may thus 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Becauſe Chriſt ſpake
ſeriouſly, therefore he vſed a figure, liuely expreſſing
the thing.
               
                  Repl. Chriſt ſaid; his cup is the new Teſtament. Now
                  
                     In teſtaments we vſe to ſpe
                           •
                        ke properly.
                     Chriſt here ordained a Sacrament. Ergo &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Anſ. I deny the Maior. & retort it: becauſe whē
he would inſtitute the Sacrament, he ſpake figuratiuely,
calling his ſupper a teſtament, which is to be
vnderſtood figuratiuely.
               1 Becauſe otherwiſe there ſhould be two covenants,
one proper, the other the Lords ſupper.
               2 Becauſe otherwiſe all ſhould bee excluded
from the covenāt of God, which could not come
to the Lords ſupper, and al that received it ſhould
be in the covenant.
               2. Repl. IN MY BLOVD. Therfore the reall
bloud of Chriſt is in the ſupper & is drūke by our mouth.
Aunſ. We anſwere by retortiō, becauſe the new
Teſtamēt was made by the bloud of Chriſt that
was ſhed vpō the Croſſe, & which i
                     •
                   applied vnto
vs by faith, not receiued through the mouth.
For els they ſhould be excluded which cannot
come to this Sacrament.
               3. Repl. There is an Emphaſis in this worde Newe.
That which in the Olde Teſtament was done figuratiuely,
is in the Newe done really.
               1. Aunſ. If they adde, Chriſt body is eaten therfore
with the boddy mouth there is more in their concluſion,
then is conteined in their Propoſition becauſe
there was no figure in the old Teſtament, which

ſignified the bodily eating of Chriſt.
               2. Aunſ. We anſwere againe▪ thus by retortion,

                     The body of Chriſt is eaten no otherwiſe in the new
Teſtament then in the Olde.
                     But in the Olde it was eaten only ſpiritually.
                     Therefore it is ſo eaten alſo in the Newe.
                  
               
               
                  Repl. 3. The New teſtamēt differeth from the Olde;
becauſe in the Olde there are types and figures, but in
the Newe the body it ſelfe. Heb. 9. Cor. 2.
               
                  Anſ. 1. This difference of the Olde and New
Teſtament, That in the Olde Chriſt is not eaten bodily,
in the Newe he is, no where expreſſed in the
Scripture. In theſe ſayings of the Apoſtle which
they cite, A body ſignifieth that the ſhadowes of
the Olde Teſtament are fulfilled by Chriſt; becauſe
A body is there oppoſed to thoſe ſhadowes.
Againe becauſe he calleth it The body of Chriſt,
which phraſe ſheweth that theſe types are fulfiled
by Chriſt.
               
                  Anſ. 2. Againe we anſwere by conceſſion or graūt
of as much as they conclude▪ Although we haue
Chriſt exhibited in the Newe Teſtament, and he
be borne man; yet hence it therefore followeth
not that his body is in the bread, but only that it
is in the Newe Teſtament.
               
                  Arg. 4. From the conſent of the Evangeliſts, end of
Paule. Matthew (as Theophilact counteth) wrote his

                     〈…〉
                   the 8.) 
                     •
                  are after the aſcenſion: Marke in the
10 Luke the 15. Paule the 20. & they al vſe the ſan'
                     •
                  
wordes.
               
                  
                     
                     A speech often vttered in the ſame words is not figuratiue:
                     Such an one is that ſpeech of the Lords Supper,
                     Therefore it is not figuratiue.
                  
               
               
                  Anſ. 1. We deny the Maior, becauſe when any
figure is cleere, manifeſt, & Emphatical, as this is,
it is reteined.
               
                  Anſ. 2. The Evāgeliſts do allſo repeat the words
of Chriſt, which he ſpake figuratiuely. That ſame
though figuratiue is often repeated, Thou ſhalt
baptiſe with the holy Ghoſt, & with fire. Ioh. 1. Mat. 3.
               
                  Anſ. 3. Beſides it is a fallacy from mis;taking of the
Cauſe; becauſe a ſpeech is not therefore repeated
becauſe it is figuratiue or proper, but that it may be
the better rooted in the heartes.
               Anſ 4. Againe we deny the Mainor, 1. Becauſe
Mathewe & Marke ſay This is the bloud of the New
Teſtament▪ Luke ſaith, This cuppe is the Newe Teſtament
in my bloud. 2. Mathewe & Marke, ſay This
is my body: Luke & Paule adde, which is deliuered for
you. 3. Luke ſaith, which is deliuered for you: Paule,
which is broken for you. 4. Paule ſaith, The bread is
the communion of the body of Chriſt. For although in
this place he treateth not of purpoſe of the Supper,
yet he exhorteth thervnto.
               
               
                  Repl. 1. The meaning notwithſtāding is one & the ſā
                  
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  Anſ. Wee ſeeke not now after the meaning
                     •
                  
of the wordes, but whether the wordes are the
very ſelfe ſame.
               
                  Repl. 2. Ther is 
                     〈◊〉
                   mētion at all made of any figure.
Where there is no mention made of any figure, there

is no figure.
               
                  Heere there is no mention made of any figure.
                  Therfore here is no figure.
               
               
                  Anſ. 1. We deny the Maior, becauſe that were
fonde, and men ſhould ſeeme to boaſt of their
ſkill, if they ſhould ſay they had vſed ſome excellent
figure. The ſcripture alſo ſpeaketh often
figuratiuely; and yet it addeth not that it ſpake
figuratiuely.
               
                  Aunſ. 2. Wee deny the Maior, becauſe they
make mention of a figure, whileſt they expounde
it; which is manifeſt by the nature of the Subiect
& Predicat. The bodie was borne of the virgin, was
crucified, &c. Breade is made of meale.
               
                  Aunſ. 3. He commaundeth that this ſhould be
done in remembrance of him; therefore the bread is
termed his body as a memoriall.
               
               
                  Aunſ. 4. Mathewe & Marke ſay, This is the
bloud of the New Teſtament: Paule and Luke, This is
the Newe Teſtament in my bloud, Nowe the Newe
Teſtament is an obligation of God, for the receiving
into favour of ſuch as beleeue, and repent: &
of them, for the exhibiting of faith, and obedience
vnto him.
               Aunſ. 5. Paule ſaith that, The bread is the communion
of the body of Chriſt, which is no bodily eating.
1. The faithful are therby one body in Chriſt.
2. He compares it with the cōmuniō of the altar
in the olde Teſtamēt, which was not corporall.
3. It can be attributed to the faithfull alone, &
not to the vngodly.
               
                  
4 Iohn expoundeth this communion by remiſſiō
of ſinnes. If we walke in the light, we haue fellowſhipe
with him, and the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God
cle
                     •
                  eth us from all ſinne.
               
                  Repl. 3. Nay Paule vſeth three wordes which are
three demonſtrations.
               1. COMMVNION.
               
                  Anſ. But this Communiō
                   is an vnion with Chriſt,
and an enioying of all his benefites by faith. To
this belongeth the ſimilitude of the Body and the
Members; of the Vine, & the Branches; which hath
no reference to any corporall eating. This communion
both was & is common to all the godly
from the beginning of the world, to the end therof.
But they could not eate it bodily: That wee
may growe in him, of whome the whole body is coupled.
He that cleaueth to the Lord, is one spirit with him.
And wee are all baptiſed by one Spirit into one bodie.
But this wee knowe that wee dwell in him and he in vs,
in that he hath given vs of his Spirite. This vnion
then is that communion which is by the holy
Ghoſt, and therefore ſpirituall. For breade cānot
be this communion but only by a figuratiue ſpeech
called Metonymie.
               
               2 GVILTY OF THE BODY.
               
                  He that is guiltie of the body of Chriſt eateth it.
                  They that receiue veworthily are guiltie of the body
of Chriſt.
                  Therefore they eate it corporally. For spiritually
they can not: for if they ſhould ſo care, they
were not guiltie.
               
               
                  
                  Anſ. I doe deny the Maior. For he is guilty of
the bodie of Chriſt who by his ſins crucifieth it,
and deſpiſeth the benefite of Chriſt. Now vnto
this gu
                        •
                     lte there is no neede of anie bodily eating;
but not to receiue Chriſt by faith when he is offered
vnto vs. So the iniurie offered vnto the Arke
is ſaid to be offered vnto the Lord.
               3 Nor diſcerning the bodie of the Lord.
                     They that diſcerne not the bodie of the Lorde eat it▪
                     
                     The guiltie diſcerne it not:
                     Therefore they eate it.
                  
               
               
                  Anſ. We grant if the Maior be taken ſacramē
                  tally,
viz. of that bread which is named Chriſts bodie,
it is true: if properly, it is falſe. For not to diſcern
                        •
                     
is not to yeeld honor therevnto due, to contemne him,
and not to receiueth thing ſignified. So Heb. 10.
ver. 29 they are ſaid to treade vnder feete the Son of
God, and to account the bloud of the covenant an vnholy
thing, which contemne him.
               
                  Arg. 5. Drawne from the teſtimonies of the Fathers
and godlie antiquitie in the vncorrupt Church.
               
                  Anſ. The ſayings of the Fathers are to be taken
Sacrament allie, or of the ſpirituall Communion. They
ſaie often that the bodie and bloud of our Lord is
giuen vnto vs with the bread & wine. If thē they
allowe of Corporall preſence they allowe alſo of the
Papiſtes Concomitancie, or the ſeparation of the blouds
from the bodie.
               
               1. Auguſtine ſaith: Thou receiueſt that in the bread,
which hange on the Croſſe; that in the cuppe, which wa
                     •
                  
                  ſhed
from Chriſt his ſide.
               
                  
                  Anſ. In the bread as in a ſigne, that is, togither with
the Signe thou receiveſt the thing ſignified. Whē we
receiue the bread we are ſure that we haue Chriſt.
               2 Cyrillon Iohn ſaith: By a naturall participatiō, 
                     〈…〉
                  
ſpiritually, but alſo corporally: not only according to
the ſpirite, but alſo according to the fleſh: corporally, and
eſſentiallie.
               
                  Aunſ. Cyrill ſpeaketh not of the manner of eating,
but of the thing eaten: he ſheweth that we are made
partakers not only of the ſpirit, but alſo of the humane
nature of Chriſt. Now he meaneth the ſpirituall
communion.
               1 Vpon it he citeth the places of Ioh 6. 54. & 1.
Cor. 6. 15. where there is no mention made of any
corporall eating.
               2 He ſpeaketh of the preſence of Chriſt not in the
bread, but in vs.
               
               3 He proveth this abiding of Chriſt by the vſe
of the ſupper, not by the corporall eating of it.
               4 He ſo deſcribeth it, as that he faith it ſhall endure
in the life eternall.
               5 He ſpeaketh of that Cōmunion which is proper
to the Saints; now that is ſpirituall. For elſe it
ſhould alſo happen to the wicked.
            
            
               III. The Shiftes of th
                     •
                   Conſubſtantials in eluding
ſome (not al, for there are more obiected
againſt th
                     •••
                  ) of 
                     •
                  ur obiections.
               1 We doe not meane (ſay they) a naturall and 
                     〈◊〉
                   eating.
               
                  
                  Anſ. We obiect not this againſt them, but only
we aske, whether Chriſt be eatē bodilie, either
after a groſſe or ſub
                     ••
                  e manner. How ſo ever they
anſwere, there is too much idolatrie in their opinion.
For Chriſt refuting the Capernaites diſtinguiſheth
not the eating of himſelfe into a groſſe
& ſubtile manner, but he ſimply ſaith that his body
cannot be taken with a bodily mouth. For hee
ſaith that he ſhall aſcend, and that the words which he
ſpeaketh are ſpirit and life.
               
               
                  Ob. 2. We mainetaine not the vbiquitie. For thereof
is not one word mentioned.
               
                  Anſ. Here is to be noted the diſagreement of ou
                     •
                  
adverſaries about Vbiquitie. Neither is there one
word mentioned to this purpoſe, that the body of
Chriſt is at once in many places. For it is a properly
belonging only to his divine nature, to be 
                     〈◊〉
                  
once in many places. Moreouer vpon this opiniō
of theirs followeth the Vbiquitie, for hee which at
once is all in divers places, muſt needs be infinite,
& therefore neceſſarilie everie where.
               
                  Ob 3. We doe not deſtroy the article of Chriſts aſcenſion.
               
                  Aunſw. But they ſtumble at it. For whileſt
they avouch, that as often as the Lordes Supper
is celebrated. CHRIST is eaten corporally,
they muſt needes ſay that hee remayneth
inviſibly vpon earth, (whereas indeede hee
is ſaide to haue left the worlde, to haue aſcended
from▪ an inferior to a ſuperiour place, there to
remaine in heaven vntill he come to iudgment.)

or that he deſcendeth from heauen, as often as
the Lordes ſupper is celebrated. This is allready
refuted. How then is he in the breade?
               
                  Obiect 4. Wee take not awaie the doctrine of the
proprieties of his humane nature.
               
                  Anſ. Yes quite awaie. For they will haue his
humane nature to be ſuch, as is neither ſeene, felt,
nor circumſcribed.
               
                  Repl. But Chriſt layde a ſide theſe infirmities, and
reſerued his naturall proprieties.
               
                  Anſ. Nay theſe are his naturall proprieties,
which being taken awaie the truth of his humane
nature is alſo taken awaye. Auguſtine: take away
the ſpace & dimenſion of bodies, and they wil be
no where.
               
                  Obiect. 5. We do not aboliſh the doctrine of communicating
proprieties.
               
                  Aunſw. Yes they doe. For they applie the
properties of the divine nature (which are attributed
to the whole perſon in cōcrete) vnto both
natures: I will be with you vnto the end of the worlde:
this they take as ſpokē of both natures. Which is
as much as if ſaying Chriſt was circūciſed, I ſhould
thus vnderſtand it, Chriſt was circumciſed both
in his godhead, and alſo in the fleſh.
               
                  Repli. This onelie wee adde, that thoſe articles
concerne not this place.
               
                  Anſ. By this reaſon all ſectes might ſhift of
all teſtimonies of ſcripture. But by their leaue
they concerne this place for two reaſons.
               1 Becauſe.
               
                  
They are wrighten of the body of Chriſt.
               But the body of Chriſt concerneth the Lordes ſupper:
               Ergo theſe articles alſo concerne this place.
               For they teach vs how Chriſtes body is to be
eaten.
               2. Becauſe no one article of faith is contrarie
to an other, but everie one is a rule by which we
muſt interpret an other: ſo the doctrine of iuſtification
pertaineth to this, becauſe in the Lords
Supper muſt no other righteouſeneſſe be ſought,
then by the bloud of Chriſt.
               
                  Obiect. Wee muſt not ſette downe the manner
howe.
               
                  Anſ. Here is a double errour. 1. When they
ſay we muſt not define or ſet downe the manner,
and ſo they contradict ſcripture, which defineth
it, & teacheth vs that it is ſpirituall, & that
the vnion with Chriſt is made in faith by the holy
Ghoſt. 2. Themſelues ſet downe the manner,
as appeareth manyfeſtely by their wrightings.
               
                  Obiect. 7. It is trewe that Durandus ſayth: Wee
heare the wordes, perceaue the motion, beleeue the
preſence, and knowe not the manner.
               
                  Anſ 2. This neither helpeth you, nor hurteth
vs, becauſe Durandus was a Papiſt.
               
               
                  Aunſw. Wee may graunt this ſaying, ſo it bee
rightly vnderſtoode. VVee heare the worde this
is my bodie, not that in the breade wee doe

with our mouthes feede on the bodie of Chriſt. We
perceiue the motion, that is, that the breade entereth
into our mouth, not the body of Chriſt We know not
the manner, that is perfectly, namely how the holy
Ghoſt is everie where all in Chriſt, and in all the
god he, and how he doth vnite vs in Chriſt. We beleeue
the preſence, but ſuch a preſence as is the eating▪
and as is the vnion of the members and the
head.
               
                  Ob. 8. This 
                     〈…〉
                  , that the bodie and bloud
of Chriſt is given vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                  , cruelie, ſubſtantiallie, and 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  Anſ. We grant that wee eate the true bodie of

                     〈◊〉
                   then the whole diſputation is to no purpoſe.
1 Becauſe they coufeſſe that we are made
partakers of the true bodie of Chriſt, and that we

                     〈◊〉
                   of the manner▪ which alſo we grant.
2 Becauſe the reaſons o
                     •
                   refutations which they
bring are or no moment.
            
            
               4 ARGVMENTS, WHEREBY IT IS
proved, that the bodie of Chriſt is preſent neither
IN nor VNDER, nor TO the bread of the
Lords ſupper, nor is corporally eaten IN
it, VNDER it, WITH it, &c.
               1. BEcauſe he tooke on him very nature of mā.
Beſides, we cannot eate him otherwiſe then
did his diſciples in the firſt ſupper.
               2 Hee did truely aſcende from earth into heaven.
               
                  
3 Such is the eating of him, as is his aboad with
vs,
               4 Al the godlie of the Old and new Teſtament
haue the ſame aboad with Chriſt.
               
               5 Chriſt alone can offer himſelfe to his Father.
Nowe in the vſe of the Lordes ſupper wee muſt
needs craue of God remiſſion of ſins. If therefore
he be preſent with the bread, wee muſt deſire this
of him, & ſo we offer bread. In the new teſtamēt
it is not lawful to direct our praiers to any one certaine
place.
               6 Thoſe good gifts which are promiſed only to
the godly, are ſpiritual. To theſe and others aboue
cited, may be added the conſent of Fathers, as
Ambroſe, Athanaſius, Auguſtine, Baſill, Ba
                     •
                  e, Bertra
                     •
                  s,
Chryſoſtome, Clemens Alexandr
                     •••
                  , the Nicene
Counſell, Cyprian, Cyrill, Dionyſius, Gelaſius▪ Gregorie
the Greate, Gregorie Naz
                     ••
                  zen, He ſ
                     •
                  chius, Hierom,
Hilarie, Irenaeus, Iuſtin, Leo, Macarius, Orig
                     •
                  n, Procoplus,
Gaza, Tertullian, Theodoret, &c?
            
            
               5. Arguments whereby the opinion of the Vbiquitaries
is refe
                     ••
                  ed, and the truth of the right
doctrine confirmed.
               Arg. The Marcion
                        ••
                     es and Manichees fained that
Chriſt had no true & ſolid humane bodie,
but onlie an imaginarie or ſeeming bodie,
ſo that he did only ſeeme to haue fleſh &
bones, whereas indeed he had none. And
that the verie incarnation, and al motions

and operations of Chriſt did only appeare
in ſhew, wheras indeed there was no ſuch
thing.
               But this opinion of Vbiquitie, and real communication
of proprieties, revoketh from
hell that phantaſtique dotage of Marcion
and Manes.
               
               Wherefore this alſo, as the Man
                        •
                     chea
                        •
                     
                   hereſie,
is to be condemned & baniſhed from
Gods Church, vnto the very deepeſt pit
of hell.
               The Minor is thus proued, The Vbiquitaries
beleeue and teach, that all properties of
the Deity were at the inſtant of conception, really
tranſfuſed from the Deity of the Worde, into the
humane nature aſſumed by Chriſt. Hence
follow theſe abſurdities.
               1 Chriſt ſhall not be truelie borne of the Virgin, if according
to the nature of his humanity, hee were
truely & eſſentiallie without his mothers wombe
before he were borne, and after his birth were according
to his humane nature as truely and ſubſtantiallie
in his mothers wombe as before.
               2 In his humane nature Chriſt was not truly weak
and ſubiect to paſſions, if then alſo he were partaker
of divine maieſtie and omnipotencie.
               3 He was not truely dead, if in the verie inſtant of
death both in ſoule and bodie he were eſſentially
everie where preſent with his Deity. For his ſoule
everie-where-preſent with his everie-where-preſent
bodie could not reallie bee ſeparated by diſtance

of place, and therefore his body could not
die but imaginarily.
               4 He did not truelie aſcend into heavē, but we muſt
ſay it was onlie an imaginarie and phantaſtique
ſhew, if in bodie he were there ſubſtātially before
he aſcended thither, & after he aſcended, nevertheles
he remaine in the earth, nay in the very bodies
of the faithfull, by ſubſtantiall preſence of the
ſame bodie, as truely as before, if theſe things did
indeed ſo fall out, it will follow that the ſame bodie
of Chriſt was at once weake and yet omnipotent,
baſe and glorious, able to ſuffer and vnable,
dead and living, limited and vnlimited, which to
ſaie were blaſphemie.
               To avoide theſe prodigious and impious abſurdities,
they tell vs, that
               
                  Ob. Chriſt in reſpect of his bodie was in deed limited,
weake, paſſible, & mortall in the time of his humiliation:
becauſe he did empty himſelfe, & would not before his reſurrection
ſhew forth that maieſtie which hee imparted
to his bodie.
               
                  Anſ. They doe ill to interpret this emptying of
concealing all his glorie and maieſtie for the time
wherein he tooke our nature vpon him: whereas
indeed it is to be vnderſtood of the divine nature
of the worde, as it vouchſafed to take vpon it the
ſhape of a ſervant, that is, the Maſſe of our nature,
and would become man. Beſides, it would followe
that Chriſt did even then ſhew forth the power &
maieſtie communicated to his fleſh, when he was
truely ſubiect to infirmitie, and circumſcribed by

his body: as which weeping he raized Lazarus,
and beeing taken by the Iewes, healed Malchus
which was wounded by Peter. But what is it
to fetch backe the Marcionites from hell, or in
the greateſt myſtery of religion to ſpeak blaſphemie,
if this be not?
               
                  Argum. 2 This is the blaſphemie of Samoſ
                        •
                     te
                        •••
                     ,
Airtus, and the late Antitrinitaries▪
                   that the man
Chriſt is not properlie and naturally God, but only
by accidentall participation of the Divine proprieties,
maieſtie, honor, power, and vertue. In
like manner conceaue the Vbiquitaries of the deitie
of the man Ch
                        •
                     iſt, de
                     •
                  ining the perſonal vnion,
by this only cōmunicating of proprieties, wherby
the fleſh of Chriſt is made omnipotent & preſent
in every place. So that the ſame man is, and is called
God, not becauſe properly and naturally he
is ſo, but becauſe from God there is giuen vnto
him infinite power, maieſtie, glorie, and all giftes
of the holy Goſt without meaſure. But this accidentall
beſtowing of the deitie and all properties
therof, did not make Chriſt properly and naturally
God▪ but onely by divine grace, or God improperly
ſo called; becauſe he is not the naturall
deitie of the worde, but a certaine participation
thereof with force and efficacie. But therfore was
it obiected by trew Chriſtians againſt the Arrians
that they ouerthrew the trew and eternall Deitie
of Chriſt, becauſe they did not accoumpt him God
by nature but onely by participation of dignitie
and maieſtie through grace. Seeing therefore the

                  Vbiquitaries only of equaling our Immanuel to God
by participation of proprieties, do take awaie his
trewand eternall deity, we do with good reaſon
condemne and deteſt this doctrine of theirs as
blaſphemo
                     •
                  ie and hereticall. This their owne
wordes and ſentences do witneſſe, as Brentius in
Recognie. Pag 20. Iacob. Andr. Theſ. 20. disputation.
Tunigeus. Item. Theſ. 25 & 26. Et Apolog. Ingolſtad.
26. Where it is gathered, that the opinion of
the Vbiquitaries of the deitie of the man Chriſt, is all
one with that of the Arrians and Antitrinitaries,
that is, that by all theſe he is accoūpted not God
by nature, but onely by grace of participation, a
new, temporarie, created, and adoptiue God.
Which if it be trew, Chriſt ſhall not be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
God & mā, but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a Divine man; ſuch
as alſo he is accoūted by the Vbiquitaries, who (at
witneſſeth Seruetus in his firſt booke De Trimitate)
ſay that God may cōmunicate vnto man the fulneſſe
of his Deitie, & giue vnto him his Diuinitie,
maieſtie, power, and glorie. Which blaſphemie,
being the ſame both, we vtterly hate and deteſt.
Argum. 3. N
                        •
                     ſtorius taught that God (which is
the word) vvas vnited vnto man onlie by participation
of equalitie in maieſtie, honour, power,
vertue, and operation. And that the difference
of the wordes dwelling in man aſſumed by
it, and in other ſaintes, conſiſteth in nothing but
in the verie gifts and graces beſtowed on man by
God. This alſo the Vbiquitaries teach; becauſe
they ſay there is no differēce betweene the dwelling

of the Deitie in Peter and Chriſt, except ſuch
as is taken from communicating the giftes and
properties of the Deitie: maintaining that in this
reſpect the manhoode aſ
                     •
                  umed by Chriſt is God,
becauſe the Worde doth nothing without it, but al
things by it. And this is nothing els but to make
the mā 
                  Chriſt to be God onlie by accident. Wherfore
the opinion of the Vbiquitaries is al one with
that of the Neſtorians.
               
               Tertullianus. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ de Trin. pag. 610. If Chriſt be o
                     •
                  lie

                     ••
                  an, howe is hee preſent whereſoever hee is called vpon?
whereas to be preſent everie where, is not the nature of
man but of God? By this ſentence is
                        •
                      felled the Vbiquitie
of the humane nature in Chriſt.
               Obie▪ But the vnion of the divine and humane
nature in Chriſt is inſeparable:
               Therefore whereſoever his divine nature is,
there alſo is his humane nature.
               
                  Anſ. It is true that the vnion is inſeparable, for
the worde neuer forſaketh the nature once aſſumed.
But the vvord is not ſo in the humane nature
as a ſoule encloaſed in our bodies. For
whereſoever are our bodies, there alſo needes
muſt be our ſoules, and the ſoule once without
the bodie, is not preſent with it. But the word is
not ſo in the man Chriſt, but is ſo inſeperably and
perſonally in the humane nature, that withall it
is without the humane nature in all partes of the
worlde by 
                     
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     letion or filling everie place, and in
the godlie and Angels by ſpeciall preſence. For
the perſonal vnion of two natures overthroweth

not the generall action of the preſence of his maieſtie;
nor hindereth the ſpeciall action: becauſe
the word is effectuall in the faithfull and regene
                  
                     •
                  ate.
            
         
         
            
            RVLES AND AXIO MES OF CERTAINE
CHEIFE POINTS
of Chriſtianitie.
            Propoſed by Vrſmus to be disputed on publiquelie,
partly in the Vniverſitie of Heidelberg,
& partlie in Collegio Sapientia.
            
               OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHVRCH.
               1 THe doctrine of the church, or Chriſtian
religion, is a doctrine of Gods law
and the Goſpell of Chriſt, perfect and
incorrupt, as it is deliuered in the bookes of the
Prophets & Apoſtles, by which alone God leadeth
men to eternall life.
               2. The whole doctrine of Chriſtianitie is conteined
in theſe two partes, the lawe, and the Goſpell.
               
               3. The foundation of Chriſtian religion is the
Decalogue or ten commaundements, and the articles
of our faith rightly vnderſtoode.
               4. Which is all one, if we ſay the foundation is
the doctrine of Gods nature and will.
               5. Paule alſo meaneth the ſame 1. Cor. 3. Whē
that the foundation is Chriſt.
               6. The church muſt needes knowe difference
between the doctrine delivered vnto it by God,
and that which is deliuered to it by religion of other
nations▪
               
               
                  
7 The firſt difference is, that the goſpell of Chriſt
is only knowne in the church; other ſectes are altogither
ignorant thereof. All heretiques mainetaine
errors either touching the ſon of Chriſt, or
concerning his office.
               8 The ſecond, that the church retaineth the whole
doctrine of Gods law, other ſectes are ignorant of
the firſt table of the lawe, and in the ſecond obſerue
only ſome parte, touching externall diſcipline.
               9 The third, that the church learneth the knowledge
and worſhip of God, out of his whole word,
and out of that alone, neither taking ought from
it, nor adding to it: as for other religions, they
doe not only caſt away the greater parte of Gods
truth, but alſo vnto the final portiō of law, which
they retaine, adde idolatrie, granting and approving
manie thinges repugnante to the ſecond table
of the decalogue.
               10 Even the treweſt philoſophie muſt be diſcerned
from the doctrine of the church: for trew
philoſophie comprizeth onely that parte of this
doctrine which the ſecond table commaundeth▪
as for the whole & entire loue of our neighbor, of
that it teacheth vs nothing, & framing to it ſelfe
an idol inſteede of the true God, erreth much frō
the trew worſhip of the trew God.
            
            
               2 OF HOLIE SCIPTVRE.
               1. The ſumme of holy ſcripture is conteined in
the decalogue and creede.
               
                  
2. Which is alſo manifeſt, becauſe it is all conteined
in the lawe and the Goſpell.
               3. For what ſoeuer is there in conteined, eyther
it concerneth the nature, or will, or workes
of God, or the ſinne of deuills and men?
               4. The wil of God cōſiſteth in precepts, threats,
and promiſes.
               5. The workes of God are eyther his benefites,
as the creation, preſeruation, and gouerninge of
al things, the collecting & vphoulding his church
by the mediation of his ſonne: o
                     •
                   his iudgments,
as the punniſhments of offenders.
               6. Of all theſe we are taught, either in the law,
or in the Goſpell, or in both.
               7. The ſame is plaine by the diviſion of the
whole ſcripture into the new & olde Teſtament
or couenant.
               8. For this word couenant doth ſignifie that in
ſcripture we are taught that GOD promiſeth
or performeth vnto menne either before or
ſince the manifeſtation of Chriſt in the fleſh, and
what he requireth againe of them, and for what
cauſe.
               9. Which alſo the ſcripture intendeth, profeſſing
to teach Chriſt.
               
               10. For whatſoeuer is therin deliuered, eyther
it pertayneth to the trew knowledge of Chriſts
perſon, or his office.
               11. The differences betweene the doctrine
delivered in ſcripture and the religions of other
ſectes, are theſe. Firſt in the doctrine of the trew

church is taught the whole Goſpell of Chriſt, but
other religions either knowe it not at all, or to
their owne errours ioyne ſome part thereof, whoſe
vſe they neyther know nor conceaue.
               12. Secondly: in the doctrine of the Prophets &
Apoſtles is delivered the whole lawe of God, &
that rightely vnderſtoode: other religions cutt of
the cheife points therof, namely the trew knowledge
and worſhip of God, or the firſt table of
the commaundements, and the internall and ſpirituall
obedience of the ſecond table, retaininge
onelie a parte therof, namelie the precepts of
Diſciplines, or externall and civill duties towardes
men.
               13. But though even they alſo doe boaſt and
glorie of the trew God and his worſhip, yet doe
they erre from him for 3 cauſes. Firſt becauſe naturall
teſtimonies are not ſufficient to the knowledge
of the trew God. Secondly, becauſe vnto
thē men ioyne many errors of their owne. Thir
                        •
                     ly
becauſe for want of the light of Gods worde, they
vnderſtād not even thoſe thinges which in word
they truely profeſſe, but corrupt them with an evill
interpretation.
               14. Either they commaund onely ſo much
touching aff
                     •
                  ections and inclinations diſagreeing
with the ſecōd table as may ſerue to bridle them,
which is but a parte of this doctrine, or they doe
accuſe and condemne all, or els they doe not ſo
much accuſe and condemne them as doth the
doctrine of the church.
               
                  
15. Other ſectes admit & approue ſome things
againſt the externall obedience of the ſecond table,
God by his iuſt iudgment giuing them over
into a reprobate ſenſe.
               16 We pronoūce the doctrine of holy ſcripture to
be true, not for the authority of the church, but becauſe
we know it was delivered vnto vs by God.
               17▪ That it is from God, we know by teſtimonie
of the holy Ghoſt in the hearts of the godly: by
our deliuerance from ſinne and death, whereof
this only religion doth aſſure vs: by the puritie &
integritie of the lawe, which is founde onely in the
church: by the prophecies and the fulfilling therof:
by miracles proper only to the church: by the
antiquitie of this & late vpſtarte newneſſe of others:
by the conſent and agreement of everie
parte in this doctrine, and the diſagreement in others:
by the hatred of Satan and all the wicked
againſt this doctrine: by the miraculouſe preſeruation
& defence therof againſt the Diuell and
the worlde: by the punniſhmentes inflicted vpon
the enemies therof: by the conſtancie of martyrs
and confeſſors who had ſure comforte euen in
death by their holy life, by whom it was deliuered
and ſpread abroade.
               18. No opinion of God or his will and worſhip
muſt be receaued, which is not ſet downe in ſcripture:
& we muſt ſo fa
                     •
                   giue credit to other doctors
of the church, as they confirme their doctrine out
of the prophets and apoſtles▪
               
               19. This is not only proued by teſtimonie of

holie ſcripture, whereby we are commaunded in
caſes of religion to depende on it alone; but alſo
by the nature & definition of faith and the worſhip
of God, both which muſt needes be grounded
on Gods worde: alſo by the perfectiō of this
propheticall & apoſtolicall doctrine; and by the
diverſe callings of Prophets, apoſtles, & other
doctors & teachers of the church.
            
            
               3. OF THE CERTAINETIE AND
AVTHORITIE OF HOLIE
SCRIPTVRE.
               1. It is certaine that onely this doctrine of religion,
which is cōteined in the bookes of the prophets
& apoſtles, is deliuered by God himſelfe, &
doth not only nor principally relye vpon the authoritie
of the church, but moſt eſpecially vpon
the teſtimonie of God & the ſcripture it ſelfe.
               2. The firſt and principall argument wherby this
authoritie of holy ſcripture is eſtabliſhed amōgſt
vs, is the witneſſe of Gods holy ſpirit in the hearts
of the faithfull.
               3. This witnes as it is peculiar to the godly, ſo
it only cauſeth vs in true faith to embrace the doctrine
of the prophets & apoſtles: all the reſt may
be vnderſtood even of them which are not regenerate,
and do indeed conuince or forceablie perſwade
vs of the truth of this doctrine, but except
we haue alſo this witneſſe of the ſpirite, they can
neuer moue our mindes to embrace and giue credit
to them.
               4. The ſeconde argument is, becauſe this doctrine
only ſheweth men the cauſes of evill, & deliuerrance

from ſinne & death, agreeing with the perfect
iuſtice and goodnes of God, and alſo ſatisfying
our conſciences.
               5 The third, becauſe only the doctrine of the prophets
and Apoſtles retaineth Gods law entire &
pure; but all other Religions frame vnto thēſelues
Gods, and their worſhip, without any authoritie
from God, and approue many things contrary to
the law naturally knowne vnto vs.
               6 The fourth, becauſe hiſtory and experience
doth witneſſe, that the evēt hath anſwered thoſe
predictions which haue beene heere and there ſet
downe in ſcripture.
               7 The fift, is, the miracles added to this doctrine.
               8 The ſixt, antiquity, becauſe this religion vva
                     •
                  
the firſt, and hath continued the ſame, from the
beginning of the world vntill this day.
               9 The ſeventh, the conſent and agreement of all
parts of this doctrine betweene themſelues, which
is not in other religions.
               10 The eighth, is the hatred of Satan and all the
wicked againſt this doctrine.
               11 The ninth, is Gods preſervation and defence
of this doctrine againſt all his enemies.
               12 The tenth, the puniſhment of ſuch enemies as
perſecute or corrupt this doctrine.
               13 The eleventh, the conſtancy of Martyrs and
confeſſors. Tertullian. The bloud of Martyrs is the
ſeed of the church. The Martyrs of the church differ
from others
                     •
                   in multitude, 2 in alacrity & cheerefulneſſe
in vndergoing dangers & death it ſelfe,

3 the defenders of wicked doctrine ſuffer when
they are convicted of errors, but the godlie are by
tyrannicall force carried awaie to puniſhment.
               14 The twelfth, their holineſſe of life by whom it
was delivered and ſpread abroad, farre exceeding
the vertues of heathen men, and ſuch as followed
other religions.
               15 Seeing therefore this only doctrine of religion
is true and Divine, no opinion can binde our
conſciences to beliefe or obedience, which is not
eſtabliſhed by teſtimonies of holy ſcripture rightly
vnderſtood: but no opinion diſagreeing therewithall
is to be ſo much as receiued.
            
            
               OF GOD AND THE TRVE KNOWledge
of him.
               1 MAn being deſtitute of the true knowledge
of God, is moſt vnhappy.
               2 It is no true knowledge of God, which agreeeth
not with Gods own opening of himſelfe, nor
is ioined with true loue and feare of God.
               3 Of this opening & knowledge of God in mā
                  kinde
there are 3 degrees, 1 By Gods workes ſhining
in nature: 2 by the word of God delivered
to the church: 3 by the grace of the holy ſpirite
lightning the mindes of the regenerate through
conſideration of the workes and word of God.
               4 For that there is a God, theſe teſtimonies cō
                  pell
all reaſonable men though ignoraunt of the
doctrine of the church to confeſſe. 1 The moſt
wiſe order of things in nature: 2 The excellencie

of the minde of man: the knowledge of naturall
principles, and amongſt them of this, that there is
a God: 4 The feares of conſcience in the wicked:
5 The puniſhments of ſinne in this life: 6 The inſtituting
and preſervation of Civile order: 7 The
vertues and ſingular motions in heroike mindes:
8 The ſignifications of future things: 9 The deſtinating
and appointment of all thinges vnto certaine
ends: 10 The order of cauſes not proceeding
to infinitie.
               5 That there is but one true God, beſides the
teſtimonies of Gods word, theſe alſo proue. 1 The
revealing of one true God only: 2 The moſt high
and excellent maieſtie, perfection, and omnipotencie
of the true God. 3 Becauſe more then one
would be either idle or ſuperfluo
                     •
                  .
               6 Laſtly, they who doe not oppoſe themſelues
againſt reaſon, confeſſe that God is a nature ſpirituall,
intelligent, eternal, divers frō al other things,
incōprehenſible, in it ſelfe moſt perfect, immutable,
of infinite power, wiſdome, & goodnes, iuſt,
chaſte, true, merciful, bountifull, moſt free, angrie
for ſinne, governing the world.
               7 But without the light of Gods word men neither
vnderſtand theſe things which they confeſſe
of God, neither know anie of thoſe things, which
the voice of heavenly doctrine, that is, the ſcripture,
addeth to this knowledge of God, as of the
eternal father and ſon & holy Ghoſt, of the creatiō
of things, ſending his ſon, gathering his diſperſed
church, vniverſall iudgment, & eternall life.
               
                  
8 Wherefore the teſtimonies of God in nature
are to be conſidered, but whoſoeuer ſeeke GOD
without the doctrin of the church, they ſubſtitute
an idoll in ſteede of the true God.
               9 Moreover the true knowledge of God is not
to be learned out of the very word of God, without
the ſpeciall grace of the holy Spirit.
               10 And in the ende, all the knowledge of God
which mē haue in this life, is but ſlender, and begunne,
nor ſhal be perfited, but in the celeſtiall eternitie.
               11 The eternal Father,Three perſons of one God. Son, and holy Ghoſt are
three perſons
               12 Indeed diſtinct one from an other.
               13 Equall in all eſſentiall or naturall properties
of the Deitie.
               14 And of one eſſence or nature.
               15 By the divine eſſence church vnderſtādeth
that which the eternall father,What is meant by eſſence. ſon, & holy Ghoſt,
(every of them beeing abſolutely conſidered in
himſelfe,What a perſon is or his owne nature) are, & are called. But
by this word perſon they meane that which everie
of the three is, and is called, beeing conſidered as
he is compared with the other, or reſpectiuely, or
according to the manner of their exillence.
               16 That the ſonne is a divine ſubſiſtence or perſon,The Sonne 
                        〈◊〉
                      perſon of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , or a ſubſiſtence.
it is prooved, becauſe 1 He is named the proper
and only begotten Sonne of GOD, that
is, his naturall Sonne: 2 Hee is ſaide in ſcripture
to haue taken vpon him the nature of man, and
before that to haue beene the ſonne of GOD.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
3 He is called the word which by Iohn is deſcribed
to be a perſon ſubſiſtent and by Salomon wiſdome ſubſiſtent.
4 He is the mediatour betweene God and
man, who muſt needs haue beene from all eternitie.
5 He is named an Angell even before his incarnation.
6 Laſtly, he is deſcribed to be CHRIST
borne of the virgin, naturall and true God & the
ſonne of God.
               17 That the holie Ghoſt alſo is a ſubſiſtence or
perſon ſubſiſting it is plaine 1. Becauſe he appeared
in a viſible forme:The holy Ghoſt a perſon. 2. Becauſe in ſcripture hee is
called God, 3. Becauſe in his name we are baptiſed.
4. Becauſe to him are attributed thinges proper
to a perſon.
               18 But that theſe perſons are diſtinct one from
an other,That theſe perſons are diſtinguiſhed. hereby it is manifeſt, 1. Becauſe the Father,
Sonne, and holy Ghoſt are alſo called for
reference and reſpect which they haue one to an
other: and, 2. Becauſe the ſcripture ſaith that the
Sonne and holy Ghoſt are not one with the Father,
nor the holie Ghoſt with the Sonne: 3. Becauſe
they are ſaid to be more then one; and becauſe
properties are attributed to one, which agree
not to an other.
               19 The equalitie of godhead in theſe three perſons
is prooued by expreſſe teſtimonies of ſcripture,That the perſons be equall.
by their perſonall proprieties, becauſe
not ſome parte, but the whole divine eſſence is
communicated to the Sonne by the Father, and
to the holy Ghoſt by the Father and the Sonne:
2. By ſuch attributes or proprieties as are common

to the divine nature: 3. By the workes of
GOD; and by equalitie of honour due vnto
them.
               20 That they are conſubſtantiall it is certaine,That the perſons are conſubſtā
                     tiall.
1 Becauſe they are Iehovah which is one; 2 Becauſe
they are in ſcripture deſcribed as the true
GOD, which is onely one: 3. Becauſe there is
one ſpirite of the Father and of the Sonne: 4. Becauſe
the Father communicateth to the Sonne
and the holy Ghoſt, and the Sonne to the holie
Ghoſt, not an other, but his own proper eſſence,
and that whole and vndevided.
               21 The differences of theſe perſons in the Deity
are either internall,Two ſortes of differences in the perſons. from thoſe operations
which they exerciſe one towardes an other: or
externall, from thoſe operations which they exerciſe
towardes the creatures.
               22 The internall differences are,Internall. that the Father is
the firſt perſon of the Deity, neither borne nor
proceeding from any other, but being of it ſelfe,
which from all eternitie begate the ſonne, and
from whom the holy Ghoſt proceedeth: the Son
is the ſecond perſon of the Deity, begotten from
all eternitie of the Father, and from whom the
holy Ghoſt proceedeth: the holy Ghoſt is the
thirde perſon of the Deity proceeding from all eternity
from the Father and the ſonne.
               23 Theſe workes vvhich the Deity exerciſeth
towardes the creatures,Externall. although they bee common
to the three perſons, yet the order which the
three divine perſons obſerue in performing them

make their difference externall: as that the Father
doth all things of himſelfe, by the Sonne and holie
Ghoſt; the Son & holy Ghoſt not of thēſelues;
but the Sō of the father by the holy ghoſt; and the
holy GHOST of the father & the Son by himſelfe.
               24 And hence it is that ſome benefites are properly
ſaid to be gifts of the holy ghoſt, nor becauſe
the father hath no part in them, but becauſe hee
beſtoweth them vpon vs by the ſon or the holie
ghoſt, as when the ſon is called the wiſedom, the
word, counſellor, angell, apoſtle, image of the Father,
power of the father, vniting vnto him the humane
nature, and therefore incarnate, and man,
and mediatour, interceſſor, prieſt, redeemer, iuſtifier,
ſhepheard, head, and king of his church. Sitting
at the right hand of his father, iudge of quick
and dead &c. Alſo that the holy ghoſt is called a
ſanctifier, that is a perſon immediately lightning
vs, regenerating, vniting vs to God, comforting
and confirming vs.
            
            
               OF THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.
               1 THe order in nature, the minde of man, the
knowledge of principles, civill diſcipline,
final cauſes, the finite orderly chaine of cauſes, do
ſhew that it was created by ſome principall creating
ſpirite.
               2 Yet becauſe of the knowledge of God now
obſ
                     •
                  ured in men by ſin, for the continuall change

of corruption and generation, for the abſurditie
of imagining the creator to bee idle, and for loſſe
of the hiſtorie of the creation and originall of the
world, there is no truth & certainety to be found
concerning the creation of the worlde, but in the
doctrine of the church.
               3 Therefore the ſacred ſcripture teacheth vs
that al things begā to be, & to haue bin created by
the only true God, the eternall father, ſonne and
holy Ghoſt, according to the eternall purpoſe
and pleaſure of this true and eternall God.
               4 But this eternall father created all thinges of
nothing by his ſonne and the holy Ghoſt, moſt
freely, without any alteration or chaunge of himſelfe,
or any labour: ſo that all was verye
good.
               5 The ende of the creation of the worlde vvas
chiefly the glorie of God: other ends ſubordinate
vnto this are the manifeſtation and contemplation
of Gods wiſedome, power, and goodneſſe in
his workes; his providence, or preſervation, and
perpetuall governing of all things, eſpeciallie the
goodneſſe & bountie of God toward his church:
and to conclude, that al other things might ſeru
                     •
                  
for the life and ſafety of man.
            
            
               6. OF THE SAME.
               1 VVHatſoeuer is, is either the creatour, or
his creature.
               2 All other things which haue begun to be beſides

this one, onely, eternall, and trew God manifeſted
in his church, were created by the one
trew God.
               3. In that beginning of time wherein it pleaſed
God to haue it ſo:
               4. And that of the eternall father by the ſonne
and holy Ghoſt.
               5. By the moſt free purpoſe & decree of Gods
will.
               6. With out anie motion, change, or laboure of
the creator,
               7. And that of nothinge.
               8. And ſo that al things were moſt excellent in
their kind.
               9. Not that the creator might thereby be made
better or more perfect.
               10. But that in the creation he might impart his
goodneſſe and ioy to reaſonable creatures.
               11. And afterwardes preſeruinge, ruling, and
ſuſtaining by his providence al thinges which he
had created, he might for ever be beneficiall vnto
them, eſpecially to his church.
               12. And that being willing that other creatures
ſhould ſerue eſpecially for mans vſe and ſaftie,
               13. He might declare vnto them his wiſedome,
goodneſſe, power, and ioy.
               14. And being knowne by his workes, 
                     •
                  ee
might for euer be praiſed by reaſōable creatures,
for his wiſedome, bountie, power, and ioy.
            
            
               
               7. OF THE ANGELS.
               1 IT is certaine that there are angells both
good and bad.
               2. But both good and bad angelles are ſpirites,
that is, incorporall ſubſtances, not ſubiect to ſenſe,
liuing, intelligent, excellent in ſtrength and
wiſedome.
               3. Finite in nature and proprieties.
               4. Created by God of nothinge, then when other
things were created.
               5. In trew holineſſe, iuſtice, and bleſſedneſſe.
               6. Wherin the good Angells are by the ſingular
grace of the creator confirmed,
               7. That they may agnize and praiſe him for
ever.
               8. And be Gods miniſters to finiſh the ſaluatiō
of the elect, and repreſſe and puniſh the euill.
               9. But the evill angells by their proper and
free will, a
                     •
                  d by their owne fault fell from God,
and are made enemies of God, and the good angels
and mankind.
               10. And therefore through hatred againſt God
they force men to ſinne, & practize their deſtruction.
               11. And theſe are immutable evill, caſt of from
God into eternall puniſhment.
               12. But God ſuffered them to fall, and ſaueth
them being fallen, that he may ſhewe his anger
and iuſtice in their puniſhments, and by them
may puniſhe, chaſtize, and exerciſe the elect.
            
            
               
               9 OF GODS PROVIDENCE.
               1. Not onely the doctrine of the prophets and
apoſtles, but alſo the teſtimonies of God ſhininge
in nature doe proue, that the world is preſerued
& gouerned by Gods prouidence. As the order
which is ſeene in the principall partes of nature:
the minde or ſoule governing the actions of men
with her prouidence: the lawe of nature giuen
to men that it might be vnto them a rule of their
life: rewardes and puniſhments: conſcience; the
ordering of politique affaires: heroick motions &
vertues: the fore-tellinges of future eventes: the
ends whereunto things are ordained: and laſtely
the verie nature of the moſt omnipotēt, wiſe, iuſt,
and excellent God.
               2. Gods prouidēce is the eternall counſell of God,
moſt free and immutable, moſt wiſe & iuſt, according
to which God bringeth to paſſe all good in
all his creatures, & ſuffereth ſin to be committed:
and directeth all both good and evill to his glory
and the ſaluarion of the elect.
               3. This purpoſe or counſell in God is not onlie
a knowledge or ſcience in God, but alſo the forcible
decree and will of God, wherby he hath determined
from all eternitie both what he himſelfe will
doe, & what he will haue become of his workes;
& whatſoeuer he hath decreed, he alſo effecteth
in fit time & order.
               4. Good thinges are the ſubſtaunces of al things,
the properties & faculties giuen vnto thē by God
al motions, mutatiōs, actiōs, & events of al things,

as they are naturall motiōs, or obedience to Gods
wil, or benefites and bleſſinges of God, or punniſhments
of the evill.
               5. That all theſe thinges are done by the powerfull
will of God,That all things are done by th
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••••
                     
                     table providence of God. as manie moſt euident teſtimonies
of ſcripture, ſo alſo theſe reaſons do confirme.
1 Becauſe of Gods omnipotencie nothing
can be done in the worlde which God ſimplie wil
not haue done. And therfore what ſoever is done,
God muſt needes either ſimplie or in ſome ſorte
be willing that it ſhould be done. 2 Becauſe a
moſt wiſe governour, ſuch as God is, ſuffereth nothing
of al that is in his power, to come to paſſe beſides
his will and purpoſe. 3 Becauſe he which is
willing the ends of thinges ſhould come to paſſe,
is alſo willing either ſimplie or in ſorte, that all
thinges and events by which we compaſſe thoſe
ends ſhould come to paſſe. 4 Becauſe Gods purpoſes
& decrees depend not on the actions of ſecōd
cauſes. 5 Becauſe the immutable fore knowledge
of God cannot be groūded but on an immutable
cauſe, that is, gods wil & decree. 6 Becauſe God is
the firſt cauſe of al naturall good things, amongſt
which alſo are reckned the motiōs of each thing.
               6 Wheras evill is of two ſorts, one of offence, the
other of puniſhment, and that which is a puniſhment
is an execution of iuſtice, & therfore good,
it ought likewiſe to be referred vnto Gods will, as
the principall cauſe thereof.
               7 But the evil of offence or ſin,Evill of puniſhment & offence. as it is a motion, or
triall, or exerciſe, or chaſtiſement of the godly,

or a puniſhmēt of the evil, ſo it is from Gods prouidēce
effectiuely, that is, ſo that God is the author
of it: but as it is ſin, not effectiuely, but permiſſiuely.
               
               8. Now this permiſſion is not a ceaſinge of Gods
prouidence and working in the actions of evill
men, wherby it may come to paſſe that thoſe actions
may ſeeme not to depend of any other
cauſe then of the creatures which a
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  gents: but a
withdrawing of his heauenly grace, wherby God
executinge the decree of his will by reaſonable
creatures, eyther doth not reveale vnto the creature
his will, which will haue that action done, or
ells boweth not the will of the creature to obey
this diuine will in that action. Which ſo ſtanding,
the creature ſinneth neceſſarilie in deed, but with
all voluntarilie, and freely, & by Gods moſt iuſt
iudgment, whiles God by it bringeth to paſſe the
iuſt & good worke of his will & prouidence.
               9. God therfore will haue thoſe actions & motions
(which the Divells & men by ſinning doe
effect) to come to paſſe, as they are motions and
executions of Gods iuſt iudgment: but as they are
ſins he neither willeth, nor appoueth, nor effecteth
them: though he forbid, hate, & horiblie punniſh
them, yet notwithſtanding in Divels & men

                     •
                  e ſuffereth them to concur with his iuſt actions,
whileſt for verie good reaſons & moſt iuſt cauſes,
he doth not effect in them by his ſpirit the performance
of theſe actiōs iuſtely, that is, according to
the preſcript of Gods will.
               10 Neither is God therfore the author of confuſion,

which is in the actions of the evill, for what
they will & do inordinatlie, that is, againſt the cō
                  maundemēt
of God, that God will haue done in
excellent & moſt wiſe order. Laſtly, euen ſinnes
themſelues as they are ſins, be done by Gods providence,
though not effecting, yet permitting, &
preſcribing them boundes, & directing thē whither
it pleaſeth him.
               11 Neither is God by this doctrine made the author
of ſin, becauſe the ſin of the ſinfull creature
doth by accident concur with the good and iuſt
worke of God, which he in his owne coūſel determineth,
& by the ſinfull creature executeth. And
therefore in reſpect of Gods will thoſe actiōs are
iuſt and right, which in reſpect of the wicked by
whom they be done are ſinnes.
               12. And theſe things are manifeſt: firſt by the
vniverſall nature, cauſes & effects being ſuch of
thēſelues, & naturally or by accidēt. For whē the
ſame effect hath many cauſes, ſome good & ſome
badde, that ſame effect in reſpect of good cauſes
is good, in regard of bad cauſes is bad: & good
cauſes of thēſelues & naturally are the cauſes of
good effects, but by accidēt of euil effects or ſins:
which is foūd in the effect by ſome other euill or
ſinful cauſe: & cōtrarywiſe, euil cauſes are of thē
                  ſelues
the cauſes of evil, but by accidēt they may
be cauſes of that good whith is foūd in the effect.
               13. Secondly the truth of theſe matters appeareth
by the immutable nature of God the foūtaine
and author of all good. For Gods wokes are equaly

good, whether he effect thē by evil or good
inſtruments, neither are they battered by good, or
made worſe by evill inſtruments, ſeeing their iuſtice
and goodnes dependeth not on the nature
of the inſtruments, but of God which maketh vſe
of the inſtruments: but on the other ſide the creatures
can neither be nor continue good, nor do anie
thing that is good, except God make them
good, vphold thē in goodnes, & ſo governing thē
that they may work that which is good with God
who by thē worketh that good which he will.
               14 Yet hereby we do not attribute vnto God cō
                  trary
wils.Contrarie wils are not in God. For God wil & wil not the ſame actiōs
in divers reſpectes. Hee will as they are conformable
to his moſt iuſt iudgement and order: and
he will not, but rather hateth and deteſteth, yet
permitteth them to be done, as they are contrary
to his order and law, againſt which they are committed
by the wicked.
               15 Neither doth the neceſsity of conſequence,
which happeneth to the events by the immutable
decree of Gods providence, take away that contingēce
or caſuality which they haue frō the mutable
nature of ſecond cauſes, or from the power
& liberty of God, whereby he ſo decreed from al
eternity; if we diſtinguiſh rightly betweene both,
as that there is a reſpect betweene cauſes working
immutablie or mutablie. For thereby euerie
man may ſee, that the ſame effect proceeding frō
                  
                     •
                  auſes partly mutable & partly immutable, may
wel be called cōtingēt in reſpect of mutable cauſes,

and neceſſary in reſpect of cauſes immutable.
               16 Neither doth this immutable providence of
God derogate ought from the vſe of teaching &
our deſire of wel-doing,Providēce taketh no
                        •
                      away the vſe of meanes. as if theſe things were in
vaine or to no purpoſe: for admitting a firſt cauſe
it is not neceſſarie to denie the ſecond cauſes; nor
the firſt, admitting the ſecōd. And God hath promiſed
to ſaue vs, not without, but by theſe means,
and hath for this reaſon cōmanded vs to vſe thē,
expecting the good ſucceſſe of them from him.
               17 But when God in ſcripture is denied to will
the actions of Divels or ſinful men, that is to bee
vnderſtood as they are ſins, or to that end wherevnto
they are done by divels & mē: not as they are
actions, or done vnto that end which God in the
order of providence reſpecteth. For actions are diſtinguiſhed
by their endes.
               
               18 The church thus perſwaded her ſelfe and teaching
others of Gods providēce, doth vtterly cō
                  demne
& deteſt the furies & madnes of Epicures
and Academiques, with the deviſes of all others,
which wil haue gods providēce either to be none
at al, or not to extēd vnto all things in the world,
or els to be only a certain kinde of fore-knowledg
in God not any decree and execution.
               19 As much it condemneth the blaſphemies
and errours of the Manichees, Stoickes, Libertines
and others, which make GOD the authour
of ſinne, or take from him his libertye
whereby from all eternitie hee made his decrees,
or elſe aboliſh the operations and vſe, or

differences of ſecond cauſes, working either neceſſarily,
or contingently, or voluntarily & freely.
               20 This doctrine is to be retained in the Church
for Gods glory,The vſe of this doctrin of providence. that ſo it may appeare that God is
the governour of all things, yet not the author of
ſinne, but the moſt free and excellent effector &
giver of all good things. It is alſo ſo neceſſarie for
our inſtruction and comfort, that we may become
thankefull vnto God, as being the well ſpring of
all goodnes: and patiently ſuffer evils, as happening
vnto vs by his will, perſwading our ſelues
that all things ſhal ſerue for our ſalvation: that acknowledging
God to bee the author of puniſhments
we might amende, & not deſpaire of Gods
helpe, though we be left deſtitute by ſecond cauſes:
that we truſt not in our ſelues, but in feare of
God aske all good things of him: that wee may
know that God taketh eſpecial care of his church:
that we iudge not raſhly of the works & counſels
of God: that we contemne not others, becauſe
God of his free boūty hath beſtowed better giftes
vpon vs: that in all things wee follow the will and
order preſcribed vnto vs by God.
            
            
               10 OF SINNE.
               1 ONly the doctrine of the church ſheweth
entirely the nature, cauſes, and effects of
ſinne.
               2 Sinne is whatſoeuer diſagreeth with the lawe
of God; that is, any defect, or inclination, or actiō
                  
againſt the law of God, offending God, and making
the offender guiltie of temporall puniſhmēt
and eternal, except remiſſion be granted for our
meadiator the ſonne of God.
               3 Every ſinne is either actuall or originall.Diſt▪
                  
               
               4 Originall ſinne is the guilt of all mankinde for
the fall of our firſt parentes, and a privation of the
knowledge and will of God in our minds, and of
our inclination to obey God in will and hart, with
an inclinatiō in both to reſiſt the law of God, following
the fall of our firſt parents, and derived
from them to al poſterity ſo corrupting our whole
nature, that for this corruption we are all guilty of
Gods everlaſting wrath, and can doe nothing acceptable
to God, except remiſſion be granted for
the ſonne of God our mediator, & renuing of nature
by the holy ſpirit.
               5 Actuall ſinne is every action in minde, will, or
heart, or in externall partes and members erring
from God, or a leaving of thoſe things vndone,
which the law of God commandeth to be done.
               6 Every ſinne is either raigning or not raigning in
vs;
                  Diſtinct. 2. which ſome call mortall or veniall.
               
               7 Sinne raigning is that, againſt which the ſinner
doth not reſiſt by the grace of the holy ſpirit, renuing
him to eternall life, therefore he is endaungered
to eternall death, except he repent and obteine
remiſſion by Chriſt.
               8 Sinne not raigning is that againſt which the ſinner
doth reſiſt by grace of the holy ſpirit renuing
him vnto eternall life, and therefore he is not eudangered

to eternal death, becauſe he repenteth
and obteineth remiſſion by Chriſt.
               9 Everie ſinne in its own nature is mortal,
                  Diſtinct. 3. that is,
deſerueth eternal death, but it is made venial, that
is, it doth not bring eternall death in the regenerate,
by reaſon of grace for Chriſtes ſake.
               10. Everie ſinne is either againſt conſcience,Diſtinct. 4. or
not againſt conſcience.
               11. Sinne againſt conſcience is, when hee which
knoweth the will of God, of ſet purpoſe doth againſt
it.
               12. Sinne not againſt conſcience is that which is cō
                  mitted
by one ether not knowing the wil of god,
or elſe is acknowledged by the ſinner to be a ſin,
and is bewailled, yet cānot perfectly be avoided
in this life, as originall ſinne, and manie ſinnes of
ignorance and infirmitie.
               13. Every ſin is either vnpardonable & againſt
the holy Ghoſt,Diſtinct. 5. or pardonable & not againſt the
holy Ghoſt.
               14 Sin vnpardonable, or againſt the holy Ghoſt
is an oppugning or caſting away of Gods truth of
ſet purpoſe, after the mind by teſtimony of the holy
Ghoſt is inſtructed & confirmed in the truth,
which ſin they that cōmit, are puniſhed by God
with blindnes, ſo that they neuer repēt, & conſequently
neuer obtaine pardon.
               15. Sins pardōable or not againſt the holy Ghoſt,
are al other ſins, wherof ſome repēt and ſome doe
not.
               16. Al that are elected by God vnto eternall life

are ſo vpheald by him, that they neuer ſin againſt
the holy Ghoſt.
               17. There doe abide ſome reliques of ſinne in
all the regenerate, as long as they are in this life,
firſt original ſinne, ſecondlie manie actual ſinnes of
ignorance, omiſſion, and infirmitie, which notwithſtanding
they acknowledge, and bewaile, &
reſiſt them: and therfore they retaine a good conſcience,
& remiſſion of ſinnes: thirdly ſome runne
oftē times into errors croſſing the verie groūds, or
into ſins againſt conſcience, for which they looſe
their good conſcience, and conſolation, and gifts
of the holy Ghoſt, and ſhould be damned, if they
did perſeuere therein to their liues end: they periſh
not in them becauſe they repent in this
life.
               18. There is a threefold difference wherby ſinners
regenerate differ from the wicked:The difference betweene ſinners regenerate and not regenerate. firſt a perpetual
purpoſe which God hath to ſaue them: ſecondely
certaine and ſure repentance at the laſt: thirdely
ſome beginning of faith & cōverſiō ever in their
ſinnes, which at ſome times is greater, & of more
force, and ſo wraſtleth againſt ſin, that they ſlip
not into errors againſt the groundes, nor into ſins
againſt conſcience: at other times leſſer & more
feeble, & is for a time ouercome by temptations,
yet preuaileth ſo far; that they never quite revol
                     •
                  
frō God, which were once truely conuerted. And
therfore ſin in the regenerat, is either to be termed
only not raining, or els if errors againſt the foūdatiō
or ſins againſt cōſcience may be called raining ſins,
                  
as ſome tearme thē, this raigne of ſin muſt needes
be diligently diſtinguiſhed in thoſe that be regenerated,
and thoſe that be not, as that God is in
deed grievouſly angry even with the regenerate
when they ſinne, yet ever with a purpoſe of amē
                  ding
and ſaving them, and that in them all waies
remaineth ſome ſparkle of faith and converſion,
& ſome hatred of ſinne which is an enemy there
vnto, ſo that they do not ſimply without any reſiſtance
giue over themſelues vnto ſin, & delight
therein, as do the wicked which ſinne without any
reſiſtance, and with all their hearts.
               19 Every ſinne is either a ſinne of it ſelfe and in
its owne nature,Diſtinct. 6. or els by accident.
               20 Sinnes of themſelues or in their owne kinde and
nature, are all ſuch as are forbidden by the law of
God.
               21 Sinnes by accident are ſuch actions of men not
regenerate, as are indeede commanded by God,
yet diſpleaſe him, for many defects and ſins cō
                  curring
in the wicked: or actions indifferēt which
are done with ſcandal.
               22 God is the cauſe of no ſinne;The cauſe of ſinne. but the wil of divels
and men, of their own accord turning themſelues
from God, is the efficient cauſe of al ſinnes:
the efficient cauſe of originall ſinne in men, is the
fall of our firſt parents: but originall ſin is the precedent
cauſe of all actuall ſinnes, which followed
vpon the firſt fall.
               23 The effectes of ſinne are puniſhments temporal
and eternal:The effects 
                        •
                     f ſinne. and becauſe God puniſheth ſins with

ſinnes, therefore ſinnes following are effectes of
ſinnes precedent.
               24 But although all ſinnes deſerue eternal damnation,
yet all ſinnes are not equall: but as there
are degrees of puniſhments, ſo alſo there are degrees
of ſinnes in Gods iudgement.
            
            
               11 OF FREE WILL.
               1 FReedome of wil in God & reaſonable creatures,
is a faculty of chuſing or refuſing that
which reaſon perſwadeth to be choſen or refuſed,
of their owne proper motion, without any conſtraint.
               2 And that is called free, which is indued with
that facultie; the word arbitrium ſignifieth the wil
it ſelfe, but ſuch a will as followeth or refuſeth the
iudgement of the minde in chuſing: and therfore
comprehēdeth both faculties, that is to ſay of vnderſtanding
and will.
               3 Free-wil therfore is a facultie or power of willing
or nilling, chuſing or refuſing without conſtraint,
of its owne proper motion or aptneſſe to
either of both which the vnderſtanding telleth is
to be choſen or refuſed.
               4 Two things therfore there are, which are cō
                  mō
to that free wil which is in God, & that which
is in reaſonable creatures: the firſt, that they doe al
things with deliberation and counſel, or by helpe
of the vnderſtanding, ſhewing the obiect: the ſecond,
that the will of its owne accord and naturall

force without conſtraint, willeth or nilleth that
which the minde hath conceaved.
               5 But the differences betweene that freedome
which is in God, & that which is in the creatures
are three: the firſt is in the vnderſtāding, becauſe
God from al eternity doth moſt perfectly vnderſtand
and beholde all things, neither can be ever
be ignorant of any thing, or any way erre in iudgment:
the ſecond is in the will, becauſe Gods wil is
ruled, bowed, or dependeth of no other cauſe thē
of it ſelfe: but the wils of Angels and men, are in
ſuch ſort the cauſes of their owne actions and motions,
that nevertheleſſe by the ſecret counſell of
God, and his power and efficacie ever and everywhere
preſent, they are mooved to the choice or
refuſal of obiects, either immediately by God, or by
inſtruments and meanes ſometimes good, ſometimes
bad, ſuch as it beſt pleaſeth God to vſe: and
it is impoſſible for them to do any thing without
the eternall and immutable counſell of God. The
thirde is both in the vnderſtanding, and alſo in the
wil▪ becauſe God as he knoweth all things immutably,
ſo alſo he hath decreed from everlaſting, &
willeth immutably all thinges which are done as
they are good, and permitteth them as they are
ſins: but as in creatures the knowledg & iudgmēt
of things is mutable, ſo alſo is their will.
               6 This liberty in mē is loſt by ſin, but beginneth
to be renued in ou
                     •
                   regeneratiō, & ſhal be perfectly
reſtored in the life eternal. So that the 4. divers
eſtates of mē which are diſtinguiſhed in time, doe
make 4. degrees therof.
               
                  
7 The firſt degree of liberty was in our nature before
the fall,4. States of men. wherein our will was fit to perfourme her
whole obedience to Gods law, yet not ſo confirmed,
but that being tempted by the divell vvith
ſome ſhew of good, it might fall from that obedience
by its owne proper motion.
               8 Yet becauſe the creatures per
                     •
                  iſting in obedience
cannot be but by confirmation from God,
mans will did yeeld vnto temptation in deed willingly,
but withal neceſſarily, and being fallen into
ſinne, loſt that libertie vnto God, which it had
to make choiſe of evil or good, and being turned
from retained only liberty or freedome to evil.
               9 Therfore the ſecond degree of liberty is leaſt
of al, which is nature decaied but not as yet regenerat,
wherin though there be a wil fit to perform
the external diſcipline of the law, yet becauſe it
cannot ſo much as begin the internal & ſpirituall
obedience, without which al external works, evē
the beſt in ſhew are ſin, & condēned by God, the
wil leaveth not to chuſe freely, but yet it cā chuſe
nothing but ſin, becauſe of inherent corruption
and turning away from God.
               10 The third is in man renued but not as yet glorified,
in whom the will vſeth her libertie & freedome,
partly to wel doing, & partly to evil doing.
For becauſe it is regenerate by the holy Ghoſt, it
is againe inclined to obey God, but becauſe this
regeneration is not yet perfect, there remaine yet
ſome evil inclinatiōs: wherfore it begīneth indeed
ſpiritual obediēce pleaſing god, but cānot perfit it

in this life; but then and ſo farre it doth well, and
perſevereth in that which is good, when & as far
as it is guided and gouerned by the holy Ghoſt.
               11. The fourth degree is the chiefeſt and moſt
perfect in the life eternall, or after our glorification,
wherin our will ſhall be able to vſe her liberty
onely to that which is good, and not to chooſe
that which is evill, becauſe of our perfect knowledge
& feruent loue of God, & thorow inclinatiō
to righteouſeneſſe and hatred of ſinne, and perpetuall
direction of the holy Ghoſt.
               12. This doctrine of free will muſt needes bee
retained in the church, that ſo the cheifeſt & moſt
perfect libertie and immutabilitie, effectinge all
good in vs, may be attributed onely to God, as
the firſt cauſe: all excuſe may be taken from ſinners;
and to the end that being trewly humbled
before God by knowledge of our miſerie & corruption,
we may of him alone craue the preſeruation
and perfiting of our ſaluation, and being cō
                  victed
by teſtimonies from God himſelfe, may
the rather be mooued to faith and obedience to
his worde.
            
            
               12. OF FAITH.
               1. This worde faith taken in his largeſt ſignification,
doth implie a certaine and ſure knowledg,
by proofe of ſuch witneſſes, as are thought vnlikly
to deceaue.
               2. In the doctrine of the church there are foure
ſortes of faith mentioned, an hiſtoricall, a temporary,

a miraculous, and a iuſtifying faith.
               3. Hiſtoricall faith is a knowledge perſwaded of
the truth of ſuch thinges as are ſet downe by the
Prophets and Apoſtles.
               4. Temporarie faith is a knowledg of the doctrine
of the church, together with ioy conceaued vpon
knowledge of the truth, or other true or ſeeming
good things, without applying the promiſe of
grace to him that beleeueth, and therefore without
trew conuerſion or final perſeuerance.
               5. Miraculous faith, or a faith, wherby miracles
are wrought, is a ſure knowledge by ſpecial revelation
of Gods will, of working ſome miracle at
his requeſt or prediction, by whome it is to bee
wrought.
               6. Iuſtifying faith is that knowledge wherby a man
doth ſtrongly perſwade himſelfe of the truth of
all Gods word reuealed vnto him, aſſuring himſelfe
that the promiſe of Gods grace through
Chriſt pertaineth vnto him, and in confidence of
this fauour of God towardes him, overcommeth
all ſorrowe and feare.
               7. For this confidence of iuſtifying faith is a motion
of our will and heart, compoſed of ioy in the certaintie
of Gods preſent grace towards vs, & hope
of future deliverance from all evill.
               8. There is therfore no faith but that which is
grounded on the revealed will of God.
               9 The holy Ghoſt worketh all faith is vs, either
by the voice of heauenly doctrine, or by immediate
revelation.
               
                  
10. But wheras it is the wil of God, ordinarily to
kindle, cheriſh, & confirme faith in vs by the doctrine
of the church: all are bound to hearken &
meditate theron.
               11. Many hypocrites in the church haue hade
temporarie faith: hiſtoricall faith and faith of miracles
is common to the good and evill: iuſtifying
faith is in this life giuen onely to all theſe that are
elected to eternall life.
               12. Iuſtifying faith doth alwaies comprehend
in it hiſtoricall faith: but is not alwaies ioyned
with faith of miracles: as alſo faith of miracles
hath euer hiſtoricall or temporarie faith ioyned
with it, but not alwaies iuſtifying faith.
               13. Faith even in the moſt godly ſorte of men
is imperfect in this life, and feeble: yet whoſoever
feeleth in his hearte a ſerious purpoſe to beleeue,
and wraſtling with doubt, he may & muſt
ſurely perſwade himſelfe, that hee hath trewe
faith.
               14. Trewfaith once kindled in the hearte
though in ſome ſorte it often faint and be obſcured,
yet it is neuer wholy extinguiſhed.
               15. But after this life it is changed into a more
full and certaine knowledge of God & heauenly
thinges, namely a preſent feellinge and experience
of happineſſe with God, which knowledge
the ſcripture nameth a knowledge by ſeeinge face to
face.
               
               16. Faith which is only hiſtoricall cauſeth deſparation,
and heauineſſe of Gods iudgment,

though accidentally.
               17 Temporarie faith cauſeth a certaine ioy, but
not pacifying our conſciences, becauſe not proceeding
of a true cauſe; and worketh in vs confeſſion,
and ſome ſhew of good workes, but only for
a time.
               18 Faith of miracles obtaineth thoſe miracles,
whereof it is, from God.
               19 Wee obtaine righteouſnes before God, and
participation of Chriſt and all his benefits, onely
by that faith which applyeth to euerie particular
man the promiſes of grace.
               20 True converſion and beginning of new obedience
according to al the commandements as it
cannot goe before this faith, ſo it cannot but accompanie
it.
            
            
               OF THE OFFICE AND PERSON OF
Chriſt the onely Mediator.
               Diſputed by D. Zach. Vrſine in the Vniverſitie of Heidelberge
for his degree of Doctorſhip, an. 1562.
               
                  The Proeme.
                  WHereas God hath not only appointed in
his church a miniſterie of his word, and
cōmāded & approved this vocatiō to the office of
teaching, which is practiſed in the church; but alſo
hath cōmēded this moſt high & dāgerous functiō
of all others that are performed by men, to thoſe
which haue both the knowledge of heauenlie

doctrine, and alſo indifferent abilitie to deliuer
the ſame, and by innocencie of life giue vnto the
hearers examples, of that which they teach: and
doth by the mouth of S. Paule pronounce them
guiltie of others offence, which place or conſent
to them that place in this order men vnfit, that
is, ſuch as by life or evill doctrine giue offence to
the church. 2 Tim. 5. Lay not thy handes raſhly one anie,
& be not partaker of others offences: theſe things
I ſay being ſo, it is without doubt neceſſary, that
ſuch as in churches or ſchooles ſhall vndertake
parte of this labour of teaching, bee firſt heard
by ſuch as can iudg of the truth of doctrine, and
willinglie ſubmit themſelues to the triall & cenſure
of men. I therefore, although in cōfidence of
mine owne worthineſſe I may ſo little preſume
to preſent my ſelfe to this publique view of learned
men and young ſtudents, that I bring neither
learning, nor experience, nor iudgment, nor anie
thing at all to plead in my behalfe for the patient
preſence and attention of the learned, beſides
great trembling, and earneſt entreatie of Gods aſſiſtance
and your fauour: yet ſeeing they who
haue ben ſome times cōuerſant in ſcholes ſhould
not draw back from triall; and ſeeing it is a part of
ingenuity & faithful dealing, not to conceale euē
a mans owne weaknes: I haue thought it fit both
for diſcharg of my duty & my further learning,
not peremptorily to withſtand their commaund,
whoſe pleaſure it is that I ſhould come into this
place.
                  
                     
But becauſe the cuſtome and purpoſe of theſe
diſputations is to determine vpon ſome principal
pointes of Chriſtianity, I haue determined at this
time to repeate & diſcuſſe that argument of ſcripture,
which is touching the office and perſon of one onlie
mediatour betweene God and man, evē Chriſt Ieſus our
Lord: both becauſe it compriſeth a ſhort grounde
and ſumme of Chriſtianity; as alſo becauſe ever
our forreine and hom-bread contentions do moſt
concerne this point. I purpoſe therefore after my
manner to recite as breifely and plainly as I can,
the ſence and meaning of ſome propoſitions, togeather
which reaſons and teſtimonies taken out
of holy ſcripture.
               
               
                  1. Poſition
                  After man by ſin was ſeparated from God, the
moſt abſolute and perfect a iuſtice of God, would
not ſuffer him to be reconciled vnto God, except
ſome b very man, borne of that mankind which
had ſinned, yet himſelfe free c from al ſpot of ſin,
had endured ſufficient puniſhment for mans ſins,
and perfourmed the full obedience of Gods law.
                  
                     a. Gen. 2. 17. In the daie that thou eateſt therof thou
ſhalt die the death Deut. 27. 26. Curſed be he that cō
                     tinueth
not in all the wordes of this lawe to doe them,
Mat. 5. 26. Thou ſhalt not come out thence till thou
haſt paide the vtmoſt farthinge. Rom. 8▪ 3. God ſending
his own ſonne cōdēned ſinne in the fleſh, that we &c.
                  
                     b. Rom. 5. 12. 15. As by one man ſin entered into the
worlde, &c. Cor. 15. 21. For ſince by man came death,
by man alſo came the reſurrectiō of the dead. 1. Tim. 25.

Heb. 2. 14. 15. 16. Aug. de ver
                        •
                      relig. That nature was
to bee aſſumed which was to be delivered.
                  
                     c. 2. Cor. 5. 21. He made him which knew no ſin for vs
&c. Heb. 7. 26. For ſuch an high Prieſt it became vs to
haue, which is holy, innocent, vndefiled &c.
               
               
                  
                     II. But the merit of no perſō which was not God,
could be equall to the ſin of all man-kind, much
leſſe greater then it d. Act. 20. 28. God hath purchaſed
his church with his owne bloud. Rom. 18. 3. When it
was impoſſible to the law in as much as it was weake becauſe
of the fleſh, God &c.
               
               
                  III. Such a perſon alſo as had beene only a creature,
could not haue ben able to endure the
weight of Gods anger againſt the ſins of mākind,
and to deliver himſelfe out of it.
                  
                     e. Pſal. 30. Lord of thou marke what is do
                        •
                     e amiſſe,
who ſhall be able to endure it? Deut. 4. 24. The Lorde
thy God is a conſuming fire.
               
               
                  IV. Moreouer it ſtood him vpon by his deſert &
interceſſion to obteine, & by his power to reſtore
vnto vs that righteouſeneſſe & life which we had
loſt, & to free vs from ſin & death, & to defend &
ſaue vs vntill we were perfectly reſtored. f.
                  
                     f. 1. Cor. 15. 21. By man came the reſurrection of the
dead. Ioh. 10. 28. I giue vnto my ſheepe eternall life▪ Ioh.
6. 39. & 15. 26. Mat. 11. 27. Eph. 4, 8. 9. 1
                        •
                     . Heb. 7.
26. 1. Cor 15. 22. 23.
               
               
                  V▪ Laſtly it is neceſſarie that all which ſhould bee
ſaued, being engraffed into the body of this mediator,
ſhould be borne & caried by him for ever. g.
                  
                     g. Eph. 3. 17. That Chriſt by faith may dwell in our

hearts. Io. 15. 4. Abide in me, & I
                        •
                     n you. As the brāch
cānot beare fruit in it ſelfe except it abide in the vine: ſo
neither can you except ye abide in me. Rom. 8. 9. He that
hath not the spirit of Chriſt is none of his.
               
               
                  VI. For theſe cauſes therfore in the mediator
Chriſt is the divine nature, which is the ſecōd perſō
of the deity, & is called the word, & the onely

                        •
                     begottē ſōne of the eternal father, one God with
the father & the holy Ghoſt, cōſubſtātial & equal
to the father in all things. h.
                  
                     h. Ioh. 1. In the beginning was the word, & the word
was with God, & the word was God. Rom. 9. 5. Which is
God aboue all, to be praiſed for ever. Phil. 2. 6. Who being
in the forme of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
to God. &c. Cor. 2. 9. In him dwelleth all the fulneſſe of
the Godhead bodilie. 1. Tim. 5. 16. God was manifeſted in
the fleſh. Heb. 1. 8. But vnto the ſonne he ſaid▪ thy ſeat, ò
God, endureth for euer. 1. Ioh. 5. 20. And we are in him
that is true, that is in his ſōne Ieſus Chriſt: this ſame is
verie God and eternall life.
               
               
                  VII. There is alſo in him i an humane nature, true
& whole, cōſiſting of a ſoule & a body, formed by
nature of the holy Ghoſt of the ſubſtāce of the virgin
Mary his mother, & frō the very inſtāte of cō
                     ceptiō
perfectly ſāctified together with the ſoule.
                  1. Gen. 3. The ſeede of the woman. Gen. 1
                        •
                     . The ſeed
of Abraham. Ma
                        •
                     . 1. the ſōne of Abraham & Dauid
Rom. 1. Of the ſeed of David according to the fleſh. Luc.
1. The fruit of Maries wombe. Heb. 2. Partaker of fleſh
& bloud: he tooke vnto him the ſeed of Abraham. Mar.
26. My ſoule is heavie euen to the death.
               
               
                  
                     VIII. But this perſon of the Deitie alone, which is
called the word, did ſo aſ
                        •
                     ume vnto it ſelfe the nature
of mā, that both theſe natures from the time
of conception and after do inſeparably remaine
one perſon, and the maſſe of the humane nature
is carried and ſupported by the deitie. k.
                  
                     k. Ioh. 1. The worde was made fleſh. Col. 2. In him
dwelleth all the fulneſſe of the Godhead corporally Heb.
2. He tooke vnto him the ſeed of Abrahā. Act. 20. God
purchaſed vnto himſelfe the church by his owne bloud.
               
               
                  IX. Neither yet by this vnion is one nature chāged
into an other, but both do ſtill retaine their diſtinct
properties, whereby the creating nature is
diſtinguiſhed from the creature. l.
                  
                     l. Rom. 1. He was made of the ſeede of David according
to the fleſh. 1. Pet. 3. Mortified the fleſh, quickned
in the ſpirit. 1. Pet. 4. Hee tooke on him the ſhape of a
ſl
                        •
                     ue.
               
               
                  X. Hence is it that names ſignifying the office of
Chriſt are as well & truely attributed to both natures
ſeverallie, as to the whole perſon: but the
proprieties agreeing only to one nature, cannot
be truelie ſaid of the other nature by it ſelfe, but
may well be attributed to the whole perſon, by
that forme of ſpeech, which they cal a communicating
of proprieties. m.
                  
                     m. Leo ad Flavian. cap. 4. See Damaſ
                        •
                     en de fide orthodox
                        •
                     . lib. 3. cap. 4.
               
               
                  
                     XI. Therefore all Chriſt is everie where, although
his humane nature, ſince his aſcenſion vntill the
da
                        •
                     e of the laſt iudgment, be no where but in heaven.
n.
                  
                     n. Math. 28. 6. He is riſen, he is not here, Mat. 26.
11. Mee y
                        •
                     e haue not alwaies with you. Ioh. 16. 28. I
leaue the world & go vnto my father. Act. 3. 21. Whom
the heavens muſt containe, vntill the time of reſtoring of
all thinges.
               
               
                  XII. And the godlie in what place of heauen of
earth ſo ever they abide, are vnited to the humane
nature aſſumed by the ſon of God, as members to
their head, the ſame holy ſpirit dwelling in Chriſt
by vnitie of eſſence with the word, & in the godlie
by grace. o.
                  
                     o. 1. Cor. 12. 13. By one ſpirit we are all baptiſed into
one body. Eph. 4. 4. There is one bodie and one ſpirit. 1.
Ioh. 4. 13. By this we know that we abide in him and hee
in vs, becauſe he hath given vs of his ſpirit. Rom. 8. 11.
If the ſpirit of him who hath raiſed &c: dwell in you &c.
Iren. lib. 3. cap. 19. As of drie meale one lumpe cannot be
made, nor one bread: ſo neither could we which are many,
be made one in Chriſt Ieſus, without that water which is
from heaven.
               
               
                  A THANKES GIVING AFTER HIS
DISPVTATION.
                  OVt of queſtion there is no wiſe man which
can chuſe but thinke well and honorably of

ſcholaſtical exerciſes, if he vnderſtand the weightie
cauſes for which they are performed: namely
that the doctrine of God & other things whoſe
knowledg the life of man eſpecially needeth, may
be publiquely taught & vnfolded, the conſent of
many good men in the truth may be ſhewed &
mainteined, & true opiniōs may be illuſtrated &
confirmed in the minds of learners. It is a worthy
aunciēt ſaying recited by Plato, Neither gold not
diamond ſo gliſtereth to the eie, as the cōſent betweene
good men in opiniō. But much more louely
& acceptable to the good and vertuous in the
quiet conferences of good & well meaning men
is the vſe of that thing wherof this is ſpoken. For
therefore doth God preſerue ſchools & churches,
becauſe he would haue the doctrine of himſelfe
& his will, to be publiquelie profeſſed. And
that it is moſt true that cōference hath brought forth
artes & ſciences, the examples of many men ſhew,
who are not deſtitute of witt, but becauſe they
haue none to teach them beſides themſelues,
they are not only deceaued in many things, but
alſo ſ
                        •
                     eldom eſcape ſelf-pleaſing arrogancy, & other
faults which follow neglect of conference.
For which cauſes their good intent deſerueth cō
                     mendation,
which endeuour to encourage or
grace theſe meetings, with their diſcourſe, or
preſence, or paines, or authoritie, or approbation.
                  Firſt therefore wee giue thankes vnto the eternall
God our father, and his ſonne our Lord

Ieſus Chriſt, for preſeruing & maintaining ſchools
and other places of entertainement & releife, and
would haue the pure light of the Goſpell to ſhine
both in others & alſo in this our ſocietie, cheriſhing
and furthering it with the ſtudies of the beſt
arts. Alſo I thanke our Honorable Chancellor &
other right worſhipfull & reverend men, alſo the
learned maiſters and ſtudious young men, who
haue partely by their adviſe inſtructed me, partly
by their preſence graced my exerciſe, & declared
their good wil towards it. I beſeech God that he
would vouchſafe to encreaſe and continue vnto
all and everie of vs thoſe benefittes which hitherto
he hath beſtowed on vs to the aduancemēt of
his glorie, & the ſaluation of vs and many others
beſides, through IESVS CHRIST our Lord.
Amen.
                  
               
               
                  A THANKS GIVINGE AFTER
HIS DEGREE TAKEN.
                  THe greateſt benefits that God hath beſtowed,
and ſuch as are farre to be prefered before
all others of this life, are theſe, that he gathereth
and reſerueth to himſelfe an euerlaſting
Church, makinge vs citizens thereof: that
hee giueth peace to ſmall ſtates vvhich are retiringe
and reſtinge places of the Church: that
hee hath placed ouer them gouernours ſeruing
him in true religion, cheriſhinge the church and
all good learning: that hee vpholdeth ſchooles;

and giveth vnto them fit teachers, and inflameth
the mindes of ſome men with deſire of learning
the truth and delivering it to poſteritie, but eſpeciallie
that he ſendeth amongſt vs the light of the
goſpell, clenſing & refining it from idols, freeing
vs from Antichriſtian darkenes, ordaining ſtrength
out of the mouthes of infantes and ſucklings, at
whoſe voice alone the very gates of hell, though
terrible in themſelues, do tremble & fall to everlaſting
ruine. It is out of queſtion that al theſe benefits
doe not happen vnto vs by chance, or mās
wiſedome, but are given and continued to vs by
the ſingular providence and bountie of God, as
may appeare partly by their greatnes and excellencie,
and partly by this, that amongſt ſo greate
furies of the worlde and the devill, and ſo great
weakenes & infirmitie of thēſelues, they coulde
not otherwiſe be retained.
                  Firſt therefore wee giue eternall thankes vnto
almightie GOD, for vouchſafing to beſtow vpon
vs ſo great benefits. Secondly we giue them
alſo their due commendations, who by their
godlineſſe and vertue deſire to preſerue theſe benefites
to mankinde. VVherefore with all reverence
and duetie wee thanke the moſt mightye
Prince Elector our gracious Lorde,Fredericke the third. for encouraging
and gracing this ſchoole and all good artes
with exceeding loue and curteſie. Alſo vvee
thanke all other the noble and vertuous gentlemen,
eſpeciallie our worthy Chancellour. Laſtlie,
wee thanke the Right worſhipfull and learned

Doctors and Maiſters, our reverende and
very good Patrons, and all the reſt of the learned
and honeſt ſorte, who gracing this my publique
proceeding with their preſence, haue wit
                     
                        •
                     eſſed
their good will towards vs and our ſtudies,
and would haue our calling commended to God
in their publique praiers: And I hartely beſeech
GOD, that he woulde vouchſafe the encreaſe
& continuance of theſe his great benefits which
he hath beſtowed vpon v
                        •
                     , and woulde graunte
vs all grace to vſe them to his glory, and the
good of his Church, through IESVS CHRIST
our Lord, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               XIV.
               OF MANS CONVERSION.
               
                  I.
                  NO man ſhall ever enioye eternall happineſſe
in the life to come,Repentāce neceſſarie. which doeth not
repent in this life and turne awaie from his ſinnes
vnto God.
               
               
                  II.
                  True repentaunce or converſion is a change or
renuing of man wrought by the holy GHOST,What repentāce is.
whereby man vppon tiue acknowledgement of
GOD and his will (revealed in the Lawe and
the Goſpell) and his owne corruption, doth ſeriouſlye
feare GODS anger and iudgemente
againſt ſinne: and is ſorie that by his ſinnes he

hath heretofore and doth ſtill offend God: and
yet obeying the commādement of faith in Chriſt
and amendment of life, reſteth ſecure vpon the
mercy of God,Come vnto me all yee &c. and his promiſe of grace by confidence
in our mediator Chriſt: through whom, becauſe
he is perſwaded that God is pleaſed, he ſubmitteth
himſelfe vnto him, as a ſonne to a loving
father: and for this his receiving him into favor
ſtudieth to ſhew himſelfe thankefull vnto God
for ever.Heare yee him, &c. 
                     Eph. 4. 21. If ſo bee yee have heard him &
haue beene taught by him as the truth is in Ieſus, That
is that yee caſt of concerning the converſation in times
paſt the olde man, which is corrupt through deceiueable
luſtes. And be renued in the spirite of your minde, and
put on the newe man vvhich after God is created in
righteouſneſſe and true holineſſe. Tit. 3. 5. Hee ſaved
vs by the vvaſhing of the nevve birth, and the
renuing of the holie Ghoſt. Rom. 7. 18. I knowe that
in mee, that is in my fleſh, there dwelleth no goodneſſe,
&c.: to the ende of the chapter. Iſay 5. 16. vvaſh
and be cleane.
                  
               
               
                  III.
                  
                     This repentaunce conſiſteth of tvvo partes,
which the ſcripture calleth mortifying of the old
man, and quickning or raiſing againe of the
new man. Romanes 6. 6. Our olde man is crucified
with him. Galathians the ſeconde and nineteenth. By
the lawe I am deade to the lawe, that I may liue to
GOD: I am crucified with Chriſt, &c. Coloſſ. 3. 12.
Buried with him through baptiſme, in vvhom yee are
alſo raiſed vp together, through the faith of the operation

of God, &c. Coloſſ. 3. 5. Mortifie therefore your
earthly members, &c.
               
               
                  IV.
                  The olde man or vnrenued is he which is ignorant
or doubtfull of God, and is ſubiect and yeeldeth
to evill deſires. But the newe or renued
man is he which knowing GOD aright, ſerveth
him in true righteouſneſſe and holyneſſe. Epheſ.
4. 24.
               
               
                  V.
                  
                     The mortifying of the olde man is vpō knowledge
of our owne corruption, & Gods anger lying heavy
on vs therefore, to feare and ſorrow for our offences
to God, and therefore heartilie to hate and
avoide all ſinne.
               
               
                  VI.
                  But the quickning of the new man is vpon knowledge
of Gods mercie towardes vs in Chriſt, to
reioice and quiet our ſelues in God, and to haue
a fervent deſire to obey God in all his commandements.
Rom. 7. 22. I am delighted with the lawe of
God in my inwarde man.
                  
               
               
                  VII.
                  This renuing in infantes which are ſanctified
by the ſpirite of GOD,Renuing of infantes. is onelie a beginning,
that is a receauing of new qualities and inclinations:
and therefore may more fitlie bee called
regeneration or newe birth then repentaunce.
But in men of riper yeares it concerneth motions
and good actions, in the minde, will, and
hearte. Luke the firſt and fifteenth▪ Hee ſhall bee

filled with the holy Ghoſt from his mothers womb. Mat.
19. To ſuch belongeth the kingdome of heauen.
                  
               
               
                  VIII.
                  Nether yet is it perfited in thoſe of riper yeares
before the end of this life:Imperfect renewing. & therfore they which
are conuerted, haue in them part of the new, and
part as yet of the olde man: vntill ſuch time as
together with the life they lay aſide all the oldnes
or corruption of nature. Roman. 7. 23. I ſee another
law in my members. 1. Ioh 1. 10. If we ſay we haue
n
                           •
                         ſinne we lie or deceaue our ſelues.
                  
               
               
                  IX
                  Therfore the whole life of the godly is and muſt
be a certaine continuall repentance and conuerſion,Conuerſiō muſt be all our life.
wherin they muſt ſtrongly perſiſt and proceede,
fighting againſt the fleſh and the diuel vnto
the end of their life 1. Cor. 9. 24. So runne that
yee may abtaine. Phil. 3. 13. Brethren I coūt not my ſelfe
that I haue attained to it. Revel. 22. 11. He which is holy,
let him be more holy.
                  
               
               
                  X
                  The victorie in this combate is not doubtfull.Conuerſiō truely begon is not ex
                           •
                        inguiſhed.
For in them in whome trew converſiō is once begon
(although ſometimes they fal greeuouſly by
humaine infirmitie, and the reliques of the olde
man or ſinne, which in this life they beare about
them:) it is neuer ſo extinguiſhed, but that they
againe ſtruggle vp from their fall & are at length
ſaued. Math. 7. 24 They that are built on the rocke
do not fall. Phil. 1. 6. He which hath begon in you a good
worke will finiſh it. 1. Ioh. 2. 19. If they had ben of vs

they had remained with vs. 1. Ioh. 3. 9 He which is
borne of God ſinneth not, but his ſeede remaineth in him.
                  
               
               
                  XI.
                  But for al this it is not lawful for any mā frō this
will of God to take occaſion of ſinning the more
freelie,THE certaintie of perſeuerīg breedeth not carnal ſecuritie. or deferring and caſting of the time of his
repentance. For that promiſe of the preſent & eternall
grace of God pertaineth to ſuch as liue in
true repentance and feare of God, not in carnall
ſecuritie. For all ſuch as liue ſecurely are in danger
to be forſaken & hardened by the iuſt iudgment
of God, and dying without repentance, to periſh
euerlaſtingly, but becauſe of the vncertaine continuance
of this life, & eſpecially becauſe of Gods
anger againſt ſuch as with ſecuritie & againſt cō
                     ſcience
abuſe his mercy. Mat. 24. 28. If the evil ſervant
ſhall ſaie, my Lord delaieth his comming, &c. And
v. 24. Watch, becauſe yee kow not the daie & the houre
&c. Rom. 2. 4. Or despiſeſt thou the riches of his boū
                        tie
and patience? &c.
                  
               
               
                  XII
                  
                     The principal efficient cauſe of our converſion
is the holie Ghoſt,
                     Cauſes of cōuerſion. 
                     neither is any man converted
but by his ſpeciall favour. But he effecteth it in mē
of ripe yeares, eſpeciallie by knowledge of Gods
word and faith there vnto given: which is in all
that repent & in them alone: ſo that neither faith
is without converſion, nor converſion without
faith. Pſal. 51. 12. Create in me ô God a cleane heart.
And v. 13. I will teach the wicked thy waies. Ier. 3. 18.

                        〈◊〉
                      me 
                        〈◊〉
                      Lord and I ſhall be converted: becauſe after

thou diddeſt cōvert mee I repented. 1. Cor. 4. 15. I
haue begotten you through the gospell. Act. 15. 9. By
faith the heart is clenſed. Heb 4. 
                        •
                     . The word they hard
profited them not, becauſe it was mixed with faith in
them that heard it. Iames 2. 17. Faith without workes
is dead. Rom. 14. 23. That which is not of faith is ſinne.
               
               
                  XIII.
                  
                     As therefore vnto faith:
                     Diverſe me
                           •
                        nes of converſiō. 
                     ſo alſo to the effecting,
exerciſing, & furtherance of repentance in men,
God vſeth many means, or external helping cauſes:
as the good examples of others: the puniſhments
of the wicked, the rewardes of the godlie,
eſpecially croſſes and chaſtiſements. Mat. 5. 16.
Let your light &c. Rom. 11. 11. By their deſtruction came
ſalvation to the Gentiles, to provoke them to emulation.
Alſo ver 21. If God spared not the naturall branches,
beware leaſt hee spare not thee alſo. Pſal. 58. 12. And
men ſhal ſay verily there is fruit for the righteous; doubt
leſſe there is a God that iudgeth the earth. Pſ. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I haue beene in trouble that I may
learne thy ſtatutes. 1. Cor. 11. 37. When we are chaſtiſed,
we are inſtructed by the Lord.
               
               
                  XIV.
                  The proper and perpetuall effects of true repē
                     tance
are,Effectes of repentāce. confeſſion of our owne vnworthines &
of Gods mercy, and all good workes. But things
indifferent, as faſting, laying aſide our comely &
coſtly attire &c. are helps & ſignes of repentāce,
not alwaies or neceſſarily, but ſuch as may bee
vſed at the diſcretion & convenient occaſions of
the godly. But eternall life and other Gods good

giftes & benefites, are not effectes or deſerued revvards,
but conſequents & free requitals of repē
                     tance;
as alſo of faith & good works Pſ. 51. Againſt
thee only haue I ſinned; Dan. 9. 7. To thee O Lorde belongeth
righteouſnes, but vnto vs confuſion. Mat. 3. 9.
Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance 1. Tim. 4. 8. Bodily
exerciſe profiteth little. Luc. 17. 10. When yee haue
done all, ſay, we are vnprofitable ſervants.
                  
                  XV. As therfore al the elect are in this life cōverted,The reprobate never truely repent.
ſo none of the reprobate do truly repent: but
the more they are vexed with an evill cōſcience,
& feeling or fear of puniſhmēt, ſo much the more
falling into deſpaire they ſtorme againſt God &
his iudgements, turne themſelues away frō God,
ſin the more grievouſly, and blaſpheme openly:
or ſome time for feare of puniſhment, or deſire of
glory or other commodities of this life, they forſake
their errors, embrace and profeſſe the truth,
abſtaine from external offences, and make a ſhew
of holineſſe, being indeede hypocrites, without
faith, loue or feare of God, and therefore in the
end fall quite away. Examples are frequent, of
Caine, Eſa
                           •
                        , Iudas, Saul Ahab, Eſaie the fifty and ſeventh
and one and twentith. There is no peace with the
wicked. Matth. 21. 44. and Hebre. 66. They which
haue once bin lightned & after fall, are not any more renued
by repētance, & 2. Pet. 2. 20. For if they after they
haue eſcaped frō the filthines of the worlde, by the knowledge
of our Lord, &c. are yet entāgled againe therein &
overcome, their latter ende is worſe with them then the
beginn
                           •
                        ng.
                  
               
               
                  
                  XVI.
                  The Papiſtes opinion touching repentaunce i
                        •
                     
impious, that contrition may bee and is ſufficient
for our ſinnes, and that it is a merit of remiſſion of
ſins: that confeſſion or reckning vp al 
                        •
                      mans ſins
to the Miniſter is neceſſarie: that the workes or
rites cōmanded not by God, but by the Miniſters,
are neceſſary, and ſatiſfactions for the eternal puniſhments,
or thoſe of purgatory, due to our ſins.
Pſal. 90. 11. Who hath knowne the greatneſſe of thine anger
                           •
                        
Tit. 3. 5 He hath ſaved vs, not by thoſe iuſt workes
which we haue done, but of his mercy by the w
                           •
                        ſhing &c.
Pſal. 19. 13. Who can vnderſtande his faults? clenſe mee
from my ſecret faultes. Eſa. 29. 13. Math. 15. 8. In vaine
they worſhip me with traditions of men.
                  
               
            
            
               XV. OF THE LAW OF GOD.
               1 A Law in generall is a ſentence commanding
that which is honeſt, and binding the reaſonable
nature to obedience, with a promiſe of
reward if that obedience be performed, & threatning
of puniſhment, if it be violated.
               2 Of lawes ſome are divine, ſome humane.
               3 Humane lawes are either civill or eccleſiaſticall.
               4 The principall differences betweene divine
and humane lawes are theſe: that diuine laws do
partly concerne Angels and men, partly all, and
partly ſome men: humane lawes concerne onely
ſome men. Secondly divine lawes, beſides externall

actions, doe alſo require the internall qualities
and motions: humane lawes commaunde
only certaine externall actions. Thirdly, divine
lawes propoſe not only corporall and temporall,
but alſo ſpirituall and eternall puniſhments and
rewards
                     •
                   humane lawes promiſe and threaten rewards
and puniſhments only corporall and temporall.
Fourthly, obedience to divine lawes is the
end of humane laws: humane muſt ſerue to the obſervatiō
of divine laws. Fiftly, of divine laws ſome
are eternall, and ſome mutable; all humane lawes
are mutable. Laſtly, divine laws can be abrogated
by none but God; humane lawes for probable
cauſes many bee chaunged and abrogated by
men.
            
            
               XVI. OF THE PARTS OF GODS LAW.
               1 THere are in holy ſcripture found 3. partes
of Gods law. That is to ſay, Mora
                        •
                     , Ceremonial,
and Iudiciall.
               
               2 The morall law, whoſe ſumme is conteined in
the ten commaundements, is a doctrine agreeing
with the eternall and immutable wiſedome and
rule of iuſtice in God, diſcerning good and evill,
naturally knowne, and bread in reaſonable creatures,
in the creation, & many times after repeated
and declared by the mouth of God, teaching
vs that there is a God, and what manner of God
he is, binding all reaſonable creatures to perfect
obedience & conformity externall & internal to

that rule, promiſing the favour of God and life eternal
to all that performe perfect obedience, and
denouncing the anger of God & eternal puniſhment,
to all that are not perfectlie conformable
therevnto, vnleſſe there be granted remiſſion of
ſins & reconciliation through the ſon of God our
mediatour.
               3 The law of nature before the fal was altogether
the ſame with the moral law of god: but the knowlege
of God being after the fall obſcured in mans
minde, the lawe of nature is now become only a
part of the decalogue or ten commandements, being
obſcure and maimed eſpecially in the knowledge
and worſhip of God, for which cauſe alſo
God repeated and declared againe in his church
the whole body of his law.
               4 Ceremonial lawes are certaine precepts of ceremonies,
that is, of actions, and externall ſolemne
geſtures, or ſuch as muſt be performed in the publique
ſervice of God, with obſervation of the ſelfſame
circumſtances, ordained either to ſignifie
future things, or for orders ſake.
               5 Iudiciall lawes concerne the externall defence
of diſcipline, according to both tables of the decal
                        •
                     gue,
or concerning civil governmēt amongſt the
Iewes, that is, touching the order & duties of magiſtrates; iudgments, puniſhments, contracts, and
differences of being Lord or owner of ought.
               6 This diſtinction of divine lawes, muſt be obſerued,
both becauſe of the difference of theſe
laws, which being neglected their right force and

meaning cannot wel be vnderſtood, & alſo that
we may well iudge and inſtruct others in the abrogation
and vſe of the law.
               7 Theſe are the differences betweene the lawe
moral, and ceremonial and iudicial lawes. Firſt,
moral commandements or precepts are naturally
knowne: ceremonial and iudicial are not.
               8 Secondly, moral lawes binde al reaſonable creatures,
ceremonial and iudicial were only preſcribed
to the Iewes.
               9 Thirdly, moral lawes are ever in force, ceremoniall
and iudiciall are not.
               10 Fourthly, moral lawes commaund external &
internall obedience, ceremonial and iudicial cō
                  maund
only obedience external, which notwithſtanding
muſt be ioined with internal moral obedience.
               11 Fiftly, moral lawes are general, not limited
with certaine circumſtaunces, ceremonial and iudiciall
are ſpecial, that is, determined by certaine
circumſtances.
               12 Sixtly, ceremonial and iudicial laws are types
foreſhewing ſome thing; moral laws are not types
but ſignified by types.
               13 Seventhly, moral lawes are a principall vvorſhip
of God, or the ende of other lawes; ceremonial
and iudicial owe ſervice to the moral, that
by them theſe may the better be obſerued.
               14 Eighthlie, lawes ceremonial yeeld to the morall;
but morall lawes yeelde not to the ceremoniall.
            
            
               
               XVII. OF THE VSE AND ABROGATING
OF GODS LAW.
               1 THe ceremoniall and iudiciall lawes of Moſes
in reſpect of obedience due to them, are
abrogated by the comming of the Mesſias.
               
               2 The moral law is abrogated in reſpect of the
curſe, not in reſpect of obedience due to it.
               3 Vſes of the ceremoniall and iudicial lawes of
Moſes, partly were, & partly are theſe. Firſt a ſchooling
or leading vs vnto Chriſt, that is, a ſignifying,
or ſhadowing of ſpirituall and heavenly things in
the kingdome of Chriſt.
               4 Secondly, a diſtinction of Gods people from other
nations.
               5 Thirdly, an execution or putting in practiſe
the law moral, which requireth a limitatiō of many
circumſtances, both in church & cōmōweale.
               6 Fourthly, 
                  
                     •
                   teſtifi
                     •
                  ng of our obedience toward
                     •
                  
God.
               7 Fiftly, the ſealing of Gods covenant by ceremonies,
which were ſacramental ſignes.
               8 Sixtly▪
                   a preſervation of the Moſaicall policie,
til Chriſts comming, by iudicial lawes, which were
the ſinewes and forme of the common weale.
               9 Laſtly, a confirmation of the new teſtament,
by comparing the fulfilling of all things with the
types.
               10 The morall law, in time of our innocencie, had
other vſes, then now it hath, as, a perfect conforming
of the life of man to GODS will, a good

conſcience, and ſure confidence in Gods loue &
favour.
               11 In this our corrupt nature theſe vſes it hath▪
                  firſt a maintaining of diſcipline within and without
the church.
               12 Secondly, an acknowledgement of our ſinnes,
which two vſes pertaine vnto all men, and are
that p
                        •
                     dagogie or ſchooling of the law, wherby we
are led vnto Chriſt.
               13 Thirdly, an information to the true worſhip of
God, which vſe is peculiar to the renued or regetate.
               14 And theſe are the principal vſes; beſides which
there are alſo ſome others as namely, a teſtimony
that there is a God, & what maner of God he is.
               15 A note of the church, which is diſtinguiſhed by
integrity & purity of the law from all other ſects.
               16 A teſtimonie of that excellency of mans nature
which was before the fall, & which is reſtored vnto
vs by Chriſt.
               17 A teſtimony of eternal life, wherin the law ſhall
be fulfilled, ſeeing in this life it is not fulfilled, and
God made it not that it ſhoulde never attaine its
proper and principall end.
            
            
               OF THE EXPOSITION AND DIVIſion
of the Decalogue.
               1 THe Decalogue or ten commandements, cō
                  taining
a ſumme of the whole law of God,
are to be vnderſtood according to that expoſition,
which hath beene delivered by Moſes, the
Prophets, Chriſt and his Apoſtles.
               
               
                  
2 The law of god requireth perfect obediēce both▪
inward & outward, in the mind, wil, hart, & actiōs,
that is, in our words, deeds, and external geſtures.
               3 Our obedience to al the other commandemēts
muſt be referred vnto the firſt, becauſe the loue &
glory of God muſt be the impulſiue & final cauſe
of al our obedience.
               4 The interpretation of every law muſt be gathered
from the end for vvhich it was made.
               5 For divers ends one & the ſame vvorke may be
cōmanded or contained in divers cōmandemēts.
               6 Precepts affirmatiue & cōmanding do include
alſo the negatiue and prohibition: & contrarily.
               7 Some principal kind of thing being cōmanded
or prohibited, other kinds alſo which are neere &
like vnto that are vniverſally commanded or prohibited.
               8 Where the effect is commanded or forbidden,
there likewiſe we muſt vnderſtand that the cauſe
is alſo commanded or prohibited.
               9 With the relatiues their correlatiues alſo are cō
                  māded,
becaus the on cānot be without the other
               10 There are two tables of the decalogue, the firſt cō
                  priſeth
in 4. cōmādements certaine duties to bee
performed immediatly tovvards God: the ſecond
teacheth in 6 cōmandemēts what duties muſt be
performed towards our neighbour immediatlie,
but towards God mediatly, that is towardes our
neighbor for the cōmandement & glory of God.
               11 The precepts of the ſecond table yeeld place
vnto the precepts of the firſt.
               
                  
12 That is the truer diviſiō of the decalogue, which
reckneth the ſecond commandement of images,
the tenth of concupiſcence.
            
            
               OF THE FIRST COMMANDEMENT.
               1 The firſt table giueth precepts of duties toward
God; the ſecōd of duties toward our
neighbor, but ſo that the former immediatly, the
latter is mediatly referred to God.
               2 Whereas the firſt cōmandement chargeth vs to
haue for god only the true god manifeſted in the
church, it doth eſpecially cōpriſe the internal worſhip
of God, which cōſiſteth in mind, will, & hart.
               3 The principal parts or points of this worſhip are
theſe: true knowledge of God, faith, hope, & loue
of God, feare of God, humility before God, & patience.
               4 God may in ſome ſort bee knowne of the creatures,
namely as far forth as it pleaſeth him to reveale
himſelfe to every man.
               5 There be two ſorts of knowledge of God, one
ſimply & abſolutely perfect, whereby God onlie
knoweth himſelfe, that is, the eternal father, ſon,
& holy Ghoſt know themſelues, & one an other,
& vnderſtād wholy & moſt perfectly their whole
infinit eſſence & maner of being (for none but an
infinit vnderſtādīg cā perfectly know that which
is infinit) the other in the creaturs, wherby angels
& men do indeed vnderſtād the whole & entire
nature & maieſty of god as being moſt ſimple, but
not wholy; that is, they vnderſtand it only ſo far
as he revealeth it vnto them.
               
                  
6. That knowledge of God, which is in the creatures,
if it be compared with that, wherby God
vnderſtandeth and knoweth himſelfe, is to be accoumpted
imperfect, but if we reſpect degrees
therof, ſome of it is perfect, ſome imperfect, not
ſimplie but in compariſon, that is, in reſpect of the
inferior or ſuperior degree.
               7. That is perfect, wherby the bleſſed angels &
men in heauen know God by excellent viſion or
beholding of minde, as much as is ſufficiēt for cō
                  formitie
of the reaſonable creature with God.
Imperfect is that, whereby men knowe God in this
life leſſe then they might, and therfore by Gods
commaundement ought, by benefit of their creation.
               8. Imperfect knowledge is of two ſorts, Chriſtian
or theological, & philoſophical, Chriſtian knowledge
is that which is learned out of the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apoſtles: Philoſophical is that
which is gathered from principles naturally
knowne, and the beholding of Gods workes in
nature.
               9. Chriſtian knowledge is of two ſorts, Spiritual
or true, liuely, powerfull and ſauing: and Literal.
The spiritual is a knowledge of God and his will,
kindled in our mindes by the holy Ghoſt according
to the worde, and by the word, cauſinge in
our will and heart an inclnation and ſtudie to
knowe, beleeue & practize more and more thoſe
thinges, which God in his 
                     ••
                  rd commandeth vs
to know, beleeue, and do. The 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   is a knowledge

of God either reteined from the creation,
or afterwardes wrought in our mindes by the holy
Ghoſt through the worde of God, which is not
accompanied with a mans deſire of conforming
himſelfe therunto.
               10. Both ſpirituall & literal knowledge is either
immediate, wh
                     •
                  ch by inſtinct of the holy Ghoſt
without ordinarie meanes, or mediate, which is
wrought of the holy Ghoſt by hearinge, reading,
and meditating on the ſcripture.
               11. The ordinarie meanes of knowinge God,
and that which is preſci
                     •
                  bed vnto vs by God, is by
ſtudie and meditation of the ſcriptures, and therfore
we muſt by this meanes labour to come to
the knowledge of God, and therefore not deſire
and expect from God ſome extraordinarie & immediate
enlightning, except of his owne accord
he offer it vnto vs, and confirme it by ſure & certeine
teſtimonies.
               12. But although God hath declared in his
word how farre in this life he would be knowne
of vs, yet naturall teſtimonies of God are not ſuperfluous,
becauſe they condemne the impiety
of the reprobate, and confirme the ſaluatiō of the
elect, and are therfore everie where alledged by
God in ſcripture, and muſt be conſidered by vs.
               13. But withall, this we muſt be perſwaded of
them, that they are indeede true, and agree
                     •
                  ble
with Gods worde, but ye
                     •
                   they are not ſufficient
to the true knowledge of God.
               14. Beſides, although natural teſtimonies doe

not teach any thinge falſe of God, yet men without
the light of Gods word conceaue out of them
nothing but falſe opinions cōcerning God, both
becauſe thoſe teſtimonies do not ſhew ſo much as
is deliuered in the worde, as alſo becauſe men by
reaſon of their natiue blindeneſſe and corruption,
doe miſtake, miſinterpret, and manie waies corrupt
even theſe verie teſtimonies, which by natural
iudgment might be vnder-ſtoode.
               15. And therfore in the firſt commaundement
is forbid de and condemned all ignorance of ſuch
things as God hath propoſed vnto vs for to know
of him, in his worde, and in his workes, as well of
creation as redemption of the church: alſo all errors
of ſuch as imagine either that there is no God,
as the Epicures, or manie Gods, as the heathen, the
Manichees, the worſhipers of angels, dead men, other
creatures, the witches, the ſuperſtitious, thoſe
that put confidence in creatures, or thoſe which
imagine a God diverſe from him which hath manifeſted
himſelfe in the church, as philoſophers,
Iews, Mahometās, Sabelliās, Arriās, Samoſatēs, P
                        •
                     cumatomachians,
and the like, which do not acknowledge
that God which is the father eternal, with his
ſonne and holie ſpirit coeternal.
            
            
               XX. OF THE SIXE FIRST COMMAVNDEMENTS.
               IN the firſt precept is cōmaūded the immediate
internal worſhip of God, wherof the principall
parts are, true knowledg of God, faith, hope, loue
of God, feare of God, &c. as in the the 3 and

10 ſection of the title going next before, beſides
all this, herein is forbidden contemp of God, vnbeliefe,
doubtfulneſſe and diſtruſt in God, temporarie
faith, apoſtaſie, carnal ſecuritie, tempting
of God, deſperation, doubt of deliuerance from
ſin and eternall life, hatred of God, inordinate
loue of our ſelues and the creatures, ſervile feare,
pride, vainglorious hypocriſie, impatience, raſhneſſe.
               2. The ſecond precept is a rule of our whole worſhip
of God, that wee worſhip not God with any
kinde of worſhip, beſides that wherewith he cō
                  maunded
himſelfe to be worſhipped: wherfore it
commaundeth the true & forbiddeth al the fained
and falſe worſhip of God, eſpecially idols and
images made to repreſent and worſhip God: alſo
negligence of magiſtrates, whereby images or other
inſtrumentes, which either doe or may eaſily
ſerue to idolatrie, are tolerated in places ſubiect
to their authoritie, much more the worſhip of thē;
alſo hypocricie and prophaneſſe.
               3. The thirde precept requireth that externall
worſhip which everie man ought to performe,
that is, the furtherance of the true doctriue touching
God, lawfull ſwearinge, zeale for Gods glory:
if forbiddeth omitting, wearines, and corrupting
the doctrine concerning God, neglect of his glorie,
blaſphemie, denyal or diſſemblinge the truth,
vnſeaſonable confeſſion, abuſe of libertie in
things indifferent, ſcandals in life and members,
neglect of praier, prayer made after an evill

manner, or not the true God, or not lawfully: ingratitude,
denyal, neglect and abuſe of Gods benefites;
refuſall of neceſſarie ot
                     •
                  es pe
                     •
                  urie, idolatrous,
vnlawfull, raſh ſwearinge, vnconſtancie of
lightneſſe in defence of Gods▪ glorie, and erringe
zeale.
               4. The fourth precept containeth that externall
worſhip of God, which is publique in his church,
or the preſeruation and vſe of the miniſtrie, that
is, publique preaching and ſtudie of religion, adminiſtration
and vſe of the ſacraments: publique
praier: honor & obedience dew to the miniſterie,
that is, a mainteining of the miniſterie and ſpirituall
ſabbaoth, which is, obedience to this doct
                     •
                  ine.
It forbiddeth neglect of the duty of teaching, corrupting
and maiming of doctrine, neglect of
exhortation to vſe the ſacraments and their lawfull
adminiſtration: contempt of doctrine, and curioſitie
in ſearching things not neceſſarie: contēpt
and prophanation of ſacraments: neglect of publique
praier▪ hypocriticall preſence at them, ſuch
recital of thē as is vnprofitable to the church; with
drawing others frō the miniſterie: aboliſhing the
miniſterie, calling ther vnto men vnworthy, errors
about the vſe of the miniſterie, contēpt of miniſters,
diſobedience to the miniſterie, ingratitude or
harde dealing againſt the miniſters, neglect of
ſchooles and ſchollers.
               5. The fifte precept commaundeth civile orde
                     •
                  ,
or mutuall duties of men betweene ſuperiors and
inferiors; wherof ſome are peculiar to p
                     •
                  rents, as

nouriſhing, defenc, inſtruction, and domeſticall
education of their children: to teachers, as ſcholaſtical
diſcipline and inſtruction: to magiſtrates,
as commaunding the diſcipline of the whole decalogue,
and putting the precepts therof in executiō,
by defending the innocēt, punniſhing offenders,
ordeining and executing politique lawes in common
weales: of maiſters, as to commaund their families
that which is iuſt, to giue rewardes, and gouerne
by domiſticall diſcipline: of ſuch as are honorable
for age or authoritie, as to direct others both
by examples and adviſe: inferiors, as honor, that is
reuerence, loue, obedience, gratefulneſſe, mildneſſe
towards ſuperiors. Other ſome are commō
to all men, as vniverſal iuſtice, and iuſtice particular
diſtributiue, diligence, loue of parents, grauity,
modeſtie, gentleneſſe. Ther-fore it condemneth,
in parents neglect or looſeneſſe of education, neglect
of defence, or fooliſh zeale for children: In
parents and teachers, neglect of inſtructiō, corrupting,
too much indulgence or fauor, too much crueltie.
In magiſtrates, ſlouth and tirannie: in maiſters
granting too much libertie, vniuſt commaundes:
defrauding men of their dew hyre or rewarde, too
much roughneſſe: in men of authoritie fooliſh coū
                  ſell,
light and euill manners, neglect of yonger
ſort or others whom they may help or correct:
in inferiors defect of reuerence, loue, obedience,
gratification, mildneſſe, or exceſſe, when more
of theſe is attributed vnto them then the lawe of
God doth permit. But in all omitting of dutie, diſobedience,

eye-ſervice, error or reſpect of perſons
in diſtributing offices, honors, or rewardes,
ſlouth, buſie curioſity, want of loue to parents, vniuſt
indulgence towards children, ingratitude, vniuſt
gratification, lightneſſe, pride, immodeſty, arrogancie,
ſhew of modeſtie, too much rigor & ſeverity,
too much gentleneſſe.
               6 The ſixt precept provideth for the ſafety of our
owne and others life and body: & therefore commandeth
particular iuſtice, hurting no man gentleneſſe,
mildneſſe, quietneſſe, cōmutatiue iuſtice
in puniſhmēts, fortitude, humanity, mercy, friendſhip.
It forbiddeth vniuſt harming the life or body
of our ſelues or others, too much pitty, wrath, vniuſt
anger, deſire of revenge, ſtrife, cruelty, reſpect
of perſons, turbulency, vniuſt gratificatiō for quietneſſe
ſake, cavill vpon too ſtrict law, private revenge,
fearefulneſſe, inhumanity, hatred of our
neighbour, inordinate loue of our ſelues, reioicing
in other mens harmes, wāt of pitty in mens miſeries,
lightneſſe or inconſtancie in contracting or
diſſolving friendſhip, couſenage.
            
            
               OF THINGS INDIFFERENT.
               1. OF humaine actions ſome are in their
owne nature good or evill, ſome indifferent.
               2 Of their owne nature good are ſuch as be expreſſely
commaunded by God, which wee muſt
needes doe, according to the intente of the lawe

rightlie vnderſtoode.
               3. Evill in their owne kinde are ſuch as are expreſſely
forbidden in Gods lawe.
               4. Indifferent are ſuch as are neyther commaū
                  ded
nor exhibited by God.
               5. Theſe may either be done or omitted with
ſinne, or without ſinne.
               6. They are ſinnes when they are either done
by the vnregenerate, or of the regenerate, but
with ſcandall & offence of themſelues or others.
               7. They are no ſinnes when they are done of
the regenerate without ſcandal.
               8. They are neceſſarie to be done when they
cannot be omitted without ſcandal.
               9. Therfore of themſelues they are lawfull and
good, but yet indifferent and arbitrarie: by accident
they may be evil and vnlawful, or neceſſary.
            
            
               XXII. OF MANS IVSTIFICATION
BEFORE GOD.
               1. That righteouſeneſſe wherby we are iuſtified
before God, is the fulfilling of Gods lawe.
               2. Legal iuſtice is the fulfilling of the lawe, performed
by him, which is named iuſt.
               3. Evangelical iuſtice is the punniſhment of our
ſinnes, which Chriſt endured for vs, freely imputed
by God to them that beleeue.
               4. Since the fall of man no man beſides Chriſt
alone in this life is iuſtified before God by the
righteouſeneſſe of the lawe.
               5. Wee are iuſtified onely by faith in Chriſt.
               
                  
6 And yet the righteouſnes of the law muſt in
this life be begun in al that will be ſaved.
            
            
               XXIV. OF THE SACRAMENTS.
               Publiquely disputed at Heidelberg the 23. of Auguſt.
Anno. 1567.
               1 GOd from the beginning did ioine vnto his
promiſe of Grace certaine ſignes or rites,
which are in the church vſually called ſacramēts.
               
                  The proofe recited by the respondent afore diſputatiō,
after the ancient cuſtome of the vniverſity.
               From Adam there haue beene ſacrifices, which God
ordained becauſe they pleaſed him. Circumciſion vvas
commaunded vnto Abraham. By Moſes the ſorts &
rites of ſacrifices were encreaſed, and other ceremonies
added, vvhich endured vnto Chriſt; who ordained and
ſubſtituted in their ſteede, baptiſme and the myſticall
ſupper of the Lord.
               
               2 The ſacraments are ſignes of the eternall covenant
betweene God and the faithfull, that is,
they are rites commaunded vnto the church by
God, and added to the promiſe of grace, that by
them as by viſible and aſſured teſtimonies God
may ſignifie vnto vs and witneſſe, that according
to the promiſe of the goſpell, he doth communicate
Chriſt and al his benefits to them vvhich vſe
theſe ſignes in a liuely faith, that ſo hee may confirme
vnto them a confidence & aſſurance of this
promiſe, and the church by theſe viſible markes
may be diſtinguiſhed from al other ſectes, & publiquelie

profeſſe her faith & gratefulnes towards
God, continue & encreaſe the memory of Chriſts
benefits, and be bound and provoked to mutuall
loue and charitie vnder one head, Chriſt Ieſus.
               
               
                  The proofe. This definition is expreſlie ſet downe,
Gen. 17. 11. Exod. 20. 10. & 31. 14. Ezech. 20. 12. Ye
ſhall keepe my ſabbaths, &c. That rites were commanded
vnto the church by God, it appeareth by induction:
alſo the rites are added vnto the promiſe as viſible
ſignes thereof. Becauſe the rites of all ſacramens doe
not only ſignifie our duties toward God, but eſpecially &
principally Gods benefits towardes vs: as circumciſion
ſignifieth remiſſion and mortifying of ſinne. Deut. 30. 6.
Col. 2. 2. 11. ſacrifices and the Paſſeover, the killing and
eating of Chriſt, 1. Cor. 5. 7. Ioh. 1. 19. Heb. 8. 9. 10. Neither
doe we only ſignifie ſo much by confeſſing and ſolemnizing
them; but primarilie and principallie God ſignifieth
ſo much vnto vs, teſtifying and confirming by ceremonies
of the ſacraments. For the miniſters as well in
adminiſtration of ſacraments as preaching the word, repreſent
the perſon and office of God towardes his church.
Matthew the eighteenth, and twentie nine. Teach
and baptiſe all nations. Ioh. 1. 33. He that ſent mee
to baptiſe. Iohn 3. 22. and 4. 2. Ieſus is ſaid to baptiſe,
when not himſelfe, but his diſciples in his
name did baptiſe. So of the ſigne of inauguration to
the kingdome 1. Sam. 10. 1. The Lord hath annointed
thee, when yet Samul was ſent to annoint Saule.
               The ſacraments therefore doe ſtrengthen our faith,
becauſe the ſcripture witneſſeth that they are ſignes of
the mutual & eternal covenāt betwixt God & the faithfull:

                  becauſe by them God ſignifieth vnto vs the beſtowing
of ſuch benefites as are promiſed in the Gospell, and
we muſt as well beleeue God ſignifying vnto vs his will
by ſignes as by wordes;Sacramēts confirme our faith. 
                  becauſe in their lawfull vſe they
haue annexed vnto them a promiſe of grace, not onely as
they are ſacrifices, & ſhew our obedience, but alſo as they
are ſignes of grace deliuered vnto vs by God: as: Hee
that beleeueth and is baptiſed ſhall bee ſaued.
It ſhal be an acceptable ſacrifice to make attonement
for him.
                  Mar. 16. 16. Laſtely, becauſe the ſcripture, to confirme
the receauing or depriuing of the things ſignified,Leuit. 1. 4.
alleadgeth the receauinge or depriuing of the ſignes, as
Pſal. 51.Pſal. 51. 9. 
                  Thou ſhalt ſprinckle me with hyſop &
I ſhall be clenſed.
                  Deut. 3. 6. 
                  The L. ſhal circūciſe thine heart
&: Al we which are baptized into his death.
                  Rom. 6. 3. 
                  The
bread which we breake,
                  1. Cor 10. 16. 
                  is it not the communion
of Chriſts bodie?
               
               
                  Herevpon are annexed other final cauſes;
                  The ends of ſacraments in reſpect of vs. 
                  They diſtinguiſh
the church from other ſectes; this appeareth
by effect and by teſtimonies, as, A ſtranger ſhall
not eate therfore. What thē availeth circumciſiō?
verie much.Exo. 12. 45. For vnto them were committed the
wordes of God Yee gentiles, which in times paſt
were called the vncircumciſion,Rom. 3. 1. becauſe in that
time yee were without Chriſt,Eph. 2. 11. ſtrangers from the
covenant and common wealth of Iſrael,Gen. 17. hauinge
no hope of the promiſe, and without God in the
world. They are a confeſſion & publique thankeſgiuing
for Chriſtes benefites. It ſhall bee a ſigne of the covenant
betweene me and you; and it ſhall bee
my covenante in your fleſh. As often as yee

ſhall eate this bread, ſhewe yee the Lords death.1. Cor. 11. 26.
                  They continew the memory of Gods benefites. This day
ſhall be vnto you for a remembrance.Exod. 12. 14. It ſhall bee
aſigne vnto thee vpon thine hande,Exod. 13. 9. & a remembraunce
betweene thine eies.Luc. 22. 19. Doe this in remembrance
of me. They are a band of charitie: for
becauſe they which vſe them are in league with God,
they are alſo in league betweene thēſelues.
                  Epe. 4. 5. One Lord,
one faith,1. Cor. 10. 12. one baptiſme &c. We being manie are
one bread, one bodie. For we are all partakers of
one bread.
               3. Rites and ceremonies not commaunded by
God to be ſigns of the promiſe, are not ſacramēts.
               
                  The proofe. The ſignes can confirme nothinge but
by his conſent and promiſe, from whom the thinge promiſed
and ſignified is expected. Therfore no creature cā
ordaine and inſtitute teſtimonies of Gods will.
               4. Two things are to be conſidered in al Sacraments.
1. Viſible, earthly, and corporal ſignes,
which are rites or ceremonies, and viſible or corporal
things, which God exhibiteth or offereth
vnto vs by his miniſters, and we receaue corporally,
that is, by the partes and ſenſes of our bodie: 
                     •
                  
the things ſignifyed, which are inviſible, heauenly,
and ſpiritual, that is Chriſt himſelfe and all his
benefites, which are through faith communicated
vnto vs by God ſpiritually, that is by power and
vertue of the holy Ghoſt.
               
                  The proofe. The diſtinction is manifeſt, by an
induction. Alſo the receauing of the ſignes is
corporall and externall: but the thinges ſignifyed are

                   receaued spiritually or by faith: Becauſe they are promiſed
onely vnto ſuch as beleeue; but the ſignes are no
other wiſe ratified, then the promiſes whervnto they are
 annexed. Alſo becauſe the ſignes ſhew that vnto our
eies, which the promiſe declareth vnto our eares. As
therfore the promiſe is a vaine ſound: ſo alſo are the ceremonies
 vaine without faith. Laſtly, becauſe the thinges
ſignified, are the participating of Chriſt and all his benefits.
But this can noway be graunted to any man, either
in the vſe of ſacraments, or without it, but by faith alone.
               5. The ſignes or elements are not to be changed
in nature or ſubſtance, but only in reſpect of
their vſe.
               The proofe. This is cleere by induction and ſenſe. I
baptize you with water. The breade which wee
breake is the communion of Chriſtes bodie. Here
bread and water are named in the vſe.
               
               6 The cōiunction of the ſignes & the thing ſignified
is not phyſical, that is naturall and reall, but
relatiue, that is to ſay, this cōiunction is a diuine
ordinance, wherby things inuiſible and ſpirituall
are repreſented by thinges viſible and corporall,
as it were by certaine viſible wordes, and are in
the right vſe offered & receaued togeather with
the ſignes.
               
                  The proofe. Such is the cōnexion of all ſignes with
the things ſignified, that they repreſent the things ſignified,
and confirme the receauing of them, for they are as
it were teſtifying pleadges and ſeals, although they be not
in the ſame place with the ſigns. The reaſō
                   is, becauſe to

make ſomething a ſigne of an other thing, is not to include
or tie the ſame thinge to the ſigne; but to order the ſigne
to ſignifie the thing
                     •
                  , whether it be in the ſame place with
the ſigne, or in ſome other. Alſo the nature of the things
ſignified by ſacraments doth not admit this. For ſome of
them are ſpiritual ſubſtances, as the holie Ghoſt: ſome accidents,
not in the ſacramental ſignes and elements, but
in the heartes of men, as the giftes of the holy Ghoſt: ſome
are diuine actions, as remiſſion of ſinnes, ſome are corporall,
and locally in one only place, not whereſoeuer the ſacraments
are vſed: as the fleſh and bloud of Chriſt.
               The names and proprieties of the things ſignified
are attributed to the ſignes, and contrarie the
names and proprieties of the ſignes to the things,
becauſe of the ſimilitude and likeneſſe betweene
both, or for ſignificatiō of the things by the ſigns,
or for the ioyned offeringe and receauinge of the
thinges togeaher with the ſignes in the lawful vſe
of the ſacraments.
               
                  The proofe. The ſcripture ſpeaketh this of ſacraments:
Gen. 17. 10. Act. 7. 8. Circumciſiō is the league
or couenant. Exod. 12. 11. the eatinge of the lambe is
the Paſſouer. Exod. 31. 7. the ſabbaoth is the eternal couenant.
Exod. 24. 8. The bloud of the ſacrifice is the
bloud of the couenant. And Levit. 17. 5. The attonement
of our ſoules. Heb. 9. 5. Over the arke was a cover
ſhadowing the mercie-ſeat. Epheſ. 2. 26. The baptiſme
of water is the waſhinge that clenſeth vs from ſin,
Mat. 26. 26. 28. the bread & wine is the body & bloud
of Chriſt. And 1. Cor. 10. 16. It is called the communion
of the body and bloud of Chriſt. And ſo expoundeth

it ſelfe, Gen. 17. 11. Rom. 4. 12. Circumciſion is a
ſigne of the covenant. Exod. 12. 27. The paſchall lamb
                     •
                  
was a ſigne of the paſſeover. Exod. 31. 14. The ſabbaoth
a perpetuall ſigne of grace and ſanctification. Heb. 9.
24. Ceremonies are ſimilitudes & types of true things.
Marc. 16. 16. He that beleeveth and is baptiſed ſhal bee
ſaued, Luc. 22. 21. The bread of the Lords ſupper is commanded
to be eaten in remembrance of Chriſt.
               8 The lawfull vſe of ſacraments is, when ſuch
as are converted obſerue thoſe rites which God
hath commaunded, for ſuch ends as God ordained
the ſacraments.
               
                  The proofe. That onelie is the lawfull vſe vvhich
agreeth with Gods inſtitution: but the inſtitution comprehendeth
theſe circumſtances of perſons, rites, and
endes: therefore theſe once broken, the fignes are preſentlie
abuſed. Eſa. Ier. 7. Pſal. 50.
               9 In this vſe the things ſignified are alwaies taken
togither with the ſignes.
               
                  The proofe. For thus much the rites do ſignifie, &
the promiſe annexed to the rites doth containe: as Mar.
16. He which ſhall beleeue and be baptiſed, ſhall
bee ſaued: but God is true, speaking to vs as well by
ſignes as by wordes. Therefore the ſignes are not in vain
                     •
                  
though the things be taken in one ſorte, the ſignes in an
other.
               10 But without the vſe appointed by God,
which is not without converſion, neither the ceremonies
haue the nature of a ſacramēt, nor gods
benefits thereby ſignified are receiued with the
ſignes.
               
                  
                  The proofe. The ſignes of the covenant confirme nothing
to them which keepe not the covenant, or ſubſtitute
others in their places, or refer them to an other end: but
ſacraments are ſignes of the covenant, wherby God bindeth
himſelfe to grant vs freelie remiſſion of ſins, & eternal
life for Chriſt: ergo they confirme not them in the
grace of God which are without faith and repentance, or
vſe other rites, or to other purpoſe then God hath appointed.
Beſides, it is ſuperſtitious and idolatrous to
attribute the 
                     •
                  eſt
                     •
                  fying of Gods grace either to an externall
worke without promiſe, or to a worke deviſed by men.
Wherfore this abuſe of ſacraments hath not the grace of
God annexed vnto it, or confirmeth any man therin; as it
is ſaid, Rom. 2. 25. Circūciſiō availeth if thou keepe
the law, but if thou be a trāſgreſſor of the law, thy
circumciſion is made vncircumciſion.
               
               11 The Godly receiue theſe ſignes to their ſalvation,
the vvicked to their condemnation: but
onely the godly can receiue the things ſignified,
to their ſalvation.
               
                  The proofe. Vs ſaith Peter, vz. which beleeue,
amongeſt whome hee reckneth himſelfe, baptiſme ſaveth,
not the waſhing away of the filth of the
fleſh, but the requeſt of a good conſcience vnto
God. And Paule 1. Corinth. 10. 16. the breade
which wee breake is the communion of Chriſts
bodie. And whereas the Sacraments are an external
inſtrument, wherby the holy Ghoſt cheriſheth & preſerveth
our faith, is followeth that as the preaching of the
word, ſo they alſo further the ſaluatiō of the faithful. But
contrariwiſe the wicked, by abuſe of ſacramēts, cōtēpt of

and his benefites which are offered them in the worde &
ſacraments, and confeſſion of that doctrine, which with a
trewe faith they do not embrace, heape vnto themſelues
the anger of God and fearfull punniſhment, according to
theſe ſayings: He that offereth an oxe is as if he killed
a man, hee which offereth a ramme is as if hee
ſlew a dog. &c. Eſa. 66. 3. He which eateth and
drinketh vnworthily, eateth & drinketh his owne
damnation, not making any difference of the
Lordes bodie: for this cauſe manie amongſt you
are weake and ſicke, and many are fallen a ſleepe.
1. Cor. 11. 27. But the things ſignified, becauſe they are
receaued only by faith, and are either the true cauſes of
ſaluatiō, or ſaluatiō it ſelfe, namely Chriſt and his benefittes;
they neither can be receaued by the wicked, nor of
any but vnto ſaluation; as Chriſt ſaith, Ioh. 6.
               12. But in the elect, after they are converted,
the fruits of a ſacrament (though vnworthily receaued)
do in the end follow.
               
                  The proofe. The promiſe, and the ſignes of that promiſe,
which hath a cōdition of faith annexed vnto it, are
ratified and take effect, whenſoeuer the condition is performed;
but ſuch 
                     〈◊〉
                   the promiſe which is ſignified and
confirmed by the ſacraments: therfore if there be faith
beleeuinge the promiſe and ſignes, whether in the vſe or
after, the things promiſed and ſignified are then receaued.Eze. 16. 59.
                  I might deale with thee as thou haſt done;
when thou dideſt deſpiſe the oath in breakinge
the couenant, Nevertheles I will remēber my couenant
made with thee in the daies of thy youth,
& wil cōfirme vnto thee an euerlaſting couenant.
               
               
                  
13. Of ſacraments, ſome are once onely to be
receaued, ſome often-times; ſome are to be miniſtred
onely to thoſe of ripe yeares, others euen
to infants alſo, according as they are ordained for
once making a couenaunt with all thoſe that are
conuerted, and which are to be receaued into the
church; as circumciſion and baptiſme: or inſtituted
to renue the couenant and preſerue the vnitie
and fellowſhip of the church, after our fall &
cōflict againſt temptatiō: as the arke, the paſchal
lambe, with other ſacrifices, & the Lords ſupper.
               
                  The proofe. The iterating or renewing of baptiſme
is no where commaunded; the reaſon is manifeſted: becauſe
thoſe ſacraments are inſtituted to be an initiating,
or ſolemn receauing into the church which is euer firme
to him that repenteth or perſevereth. But the iteratiō of
the vſe of other ſacraments is commaunded: as in ſacrafices,
in the Paſchal lamb, in worſhiping before the arke,
in ſanctifying and clenſing it is apparent: Alſo of the
Lordes ſupper it is ſaid, As often as yee do this, yee
ſhall ſhew the Lords death. The reaſon is, becauſe
they are teſtimonies, that the couenant begunne
in circumciſion & baptiſme is ratified and firme to
him that repenteth. And this often exerciſing of
our faith is neceſſarie.
               
               14. The thinges common to the ſacramentes
of the new and olde teſtament are thoſe, which
are before ſet downe in the definition of a ſacrament.
The differences betweene both are
theſe, that the ſacraments of the olde teſtament
did prefigure Chriſt which was then to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
the ſacramentes of the newe teſtament repreſent
vnto vs Chriſt with all his benefits, being alreadie
come: the olde were others, and more rites, as
circumciſion, ſacrifices, waſhings, the Paſcall
lambe, the ſabbaoth, worſhipping before the arke
&c: the new are likewiſe others, and onlie tvvo,
baptiſme, & the ſupper of the Lord: the old were
obſcure; the new are more plaine & eaſie: the old
were commanded to Abrahams poſteritie & their
houſholds: the new to the whole church culled
and collected out of Iewes and Gentiles.
               
               
                  The proofe. That one definition ſerveth for the ſacraments
of both new and old teſtament, we haue alreadie
prooued before. That there is a difference in the number
and forme of rites, appeareth by an induction. For in
the new teſtament it is plaine there are but two; becauſe
no other ceremonies having a promiſe of grace annexed
are commanded by Chriſt. That ſacraments of the olde
teſtament ſhewe Chriſt to come, of the newe alreadie
come, it is manifeſt by their interpretation delivered in
ſcripture, whereof we spake in their definition. They differ
in plaineneſſe, becauſe in the new teſtament are fewer,NOTE. Abraham had a more excellent faith then any in the new teſtament: not for plaines but for ſtedfaſtnes.
and thoſe ſignifying things alreadie fulfilled, in the
olde there are more rites, and thoſe ſhaddowing future
thinges, all whoſe circumſtaunces were not yet knowne.
Laſtlie, by induction it appeareth, that the old were
commaunded onelie to Abraham and his poſteritie,
and their ſervauntes: the new to all even as manie
as will be members of the church: as Geneſis the
ſeventeenth. Everie man childe of eight daies olde amongeſt
you ſhall bee circumciſed in your generations▪ as

well hee that is borne in thine houſe, as he that is bought
with monie of anie ſtranger which is not thy ſeede. Exod.
12. No ſtranger ſhall eate thereof. Math. 8. Teach all
nations baptiſing them, &c.
               15 Both Sacraments and preching of the goſpel
are Gods worde, which hee exerciſeth tovvardes
his church by the Miniſters, becauſe they teach,
offer, & promiſe vnto vs the ſame communion of
Chriſt and his benefites, and are external inſtruments
of the holy Ghoſt, wherby he moveth our
hearts to beleeue, and therefore maketh vs partakers
of faith in reſpect of Chriſt and his benefits.
Neither yet is the working of the holy Ghoſt
tied vnto theſe ſacraments; nor doe they at al profit
but rather hurt ſuch as with faith do not apply
them to themſelues, as the very words & rites do
ſignifie.
               
                  The proofe. That the Miniſters do all in GODS
name in adminiſtration of ſacramentes, and that by the
ſacraments God doth ſignifie, that is, teach, offer, & promiſe
vnto vs the communion of Chriſt, we ſhewed before
in our ſecond proofe. Whereupon followeth this other conclusiō,
that the holie ghoſt therby moueth our harts to beliefe.
For becauſe ſacraments are a viſible promiſe, they
haue the ſame authoritie to confirme faith in vs, as hath
a promiſe made by word. Whence alſo followeth a third
cōcluſiō. For that which ſerveth to kindle & ſtir vp faith
in vs, the ſame alſo ſerveth to the receiving of the communion
of Chriſt: becauſe wee haue this communion
through faith. The breade is the communion of
Chriſt bodie. Baptiſme ſaveth vs, &c. And yet

the holy Ghoſt doeth not alwaies by them confirme our
faith: becauſe neither by the word doth it alwaies kindle
faith in vs; as the examples of Simon Magus and infinite
others doe ſhew. That the vſe of ſacraments without
faith is hurtfull, is alreadie prooved in the eleventh
propoſition.
               16 The word and the ſacraments differ, becauſe
the word ſignifieth gods wil towards vs by ſpeach,
the ſacraments, by geſture: by the worde faith is begun
and confirmed, by the ſacraments onlie faith
begun is confirmed: the word euen without the
ſacraments doth teach and confirme, which the ſacraments
doe not without the word: without the
knowledge of the word they that are of ripe years
cannot be ſaued; but without the vſe of ſacramēts
(if it be not by contempt) men may be both renued
and ſaued: the word is to be preached to the
vnbeleeuing and vvicked, the church muſt admit
to the ſacraments only ſuch as God will haue vs
account members of the church.
               
                  The proofe. Sacramentes without the worde going
before doe neither teach, nor confirme our faith: becauſe
their ſignification is not vnderſtood but by preaching or
expounding them by the word: neither can a ſigne confirme
any thing but what is before promiſed. This maie
be proved by example of the Iewes, who either did or die
obſerue thoſe ceremonies, aboliſhing or not vnderſtanding
the promiſe of grace and of Chriſts benefits.
               Men of yeares cannot bee ſaved, excepte they haue
knowledge of the word, either by teaching after the ordinarie
way, or by revelation after an extraordinary waie.

Becauſe Hee that beleeveth not in the ſonne is alreadie
iudged. Ioh 3. 18. Faith is by hearing, hearing by the
word of God. Rom. 10. 17. But without ſacraments they
maie be ſaued; becauſe though by ſome neceſſarie occaſion
they be hindred from them, yet may they beleeue, as
the theefe on the croſſe: or if they be infants, they may be
ſanctified according to the meaſure of their yeares, as
Iohn in the wombe of his mother, & manie other infants
which died before the daie of their circumciſion.
               The word alſo muſt be preached to the wicked,
becauſe it is ordained for their converſion.
               The ſacraments muſt be adminiſtred vnto thē,
which are to bee acknowledged for members of
the church: becauſe they are inſtituted only for
the vſe of the church. Act. 8. 17. If thou beleeveſt
thou maiſt be baptiſed.
               
               17 This is common to Sacrame
                     •
                  ts and ſacrificer,
that they are workes commanded of God to bee
done by vs in faith: but yet a ſacrament and a ſacrifice
do differ, becauſe by a ſacramēt God doth
ſignifie and witneſſe his benefits which he performeth
vnto vs: but by ſacrifice we perfourme and
offer our obedience vnto God.
               
                  The proofe. That ſacraments are workes commanded
of God to be done by vs in faith, wee haue ſhewed in
the 1. 2. 3. and 10. propoſition. Both are mentioned Heb.
11. 4. By faith Abel offered vnto God a greater ſacrifice
then Caine &c. That Sacraments are ſignes of
Gods will towards vs, it is prooved in the ſecond propoſ.
               18 And therefore the ſame ceremonie may haue
the nature of a ſacrament & of a ſacrifice; becauſe

thereby God giving vnto vs viſible ſignes, teſtifieth
his bleſſings and benefits towards vs; and wee
by receiving them doe likewiſe teſtifie our duty
towards him.
               
                  The proofe. This is manifeſt by the Paſcal lamb and
other ſacrifices; alſo by the ſabbaoth: which were an obedience
commanded by God, whereby the godlie did worſhip
him, and ſhew themſelues gratefull to him: & withall
were ſignes of Gods benefits which they receaved by
the Meſſias. So baptiſme is a profeſſion of Chriſtianiſme,
and a ſigne wherby Chriſt witneſſeth that we are waſhed
in his bloud. The Lords ſupper is a thankeſgiuing for the
death of Chriſt, and an admonition, that we are quickned
for and by his death, are made his members, and ſhall as
bide in him for ever.
            
            
               AN ANSWERE TO SOME ARGVMENTS
againſt the Sacraments.
               Certaine obiections againſt the afore-ſaid propoſiti
                     •
                  ns
of Sacraments, with ſhort anſweares of Vrſinus
therevnto, taken in a publique diſputation.
Anno. 1567.
               1 OBiection againſt that part of the ſeconde
propoſition; Sacraments are ſignes of the eternall
covenant.
               
               
                  The ſignes of an eternal covenant are eternal;
                  But theſe ſignes are not eternal:
                  
                     Ergo neither is the covenant eternall.
               
               
                  The proofe of the maier denied is; In relatiues one being
taken away, the other alſo is taken awaie.

                  Aunſwer to the rule, whereby the maior is prooved, by
diſtinguiſhinge. In relatiues hauing but one onely
correlatiue, as a father, a ſonnes one being taken awaie,
the other alſo is taken awaie: but this rule
houldeth not where are more correlatiues then one; as
to this couenant of God are correlatiues not onelie
the ſignes, but they alſo with whō this couenant
is made, who ſhal endure for euer, &c: But theſe ſignes
are correlatiues to the couenāt, not ſimplie as it is a
couenāt, but as it is a couenāt cōfirmed by ſignes.
               
                  Note, that in the ſecond parte of this propoſition, betweene
God and the faithfull, are included alſo the
poſteritie of the faithfull, as the part in the whole, though
actually they doe not yet beleeue, as infantes. Therefore
the definition is not more ſtricte or particular then the
things defined.
               
                  Obiect. 2. againſt that part of the ſecōd propoſition;
And ſo cōfirmeth in thē the cōfidence of this promiſe.
               That which is giuen to ſuch as haue no faith, cannot
confirme faith, becauſe there is none to be
confirmed.
               Baptiſme is giuen to infantes which haue no faith:
               Ergo baptiſme doth not cōfirme faith. And ſo conſequētly
al ſacramēts do not confirme the cōfidēce of this
promiſe.
               Anſ. 1 to the maior by a diſtinctiō. It cānot cōfirme faith
in them at that inſtāt whē it is giuen thē, & they haue no
faith yet may it cōfirme faith in thē, whē they are of ripe
yeares, and doe beleeue and haue faith.
               
                  Aunſ, 1 The minor alſo is verye doubtfull, whether
infantes, eſpeciallie of the renewed

and regenerate, be deſtitute of faith: ſeeinge that
vnto them al 
                        ••
                     ertaine theſe promiſes: I will be thy
God and the God of thy ſeede. To ſuch belongeth
the kingdome of God &c.
               3. Obiection againſt the ſixte propoſition.
               The truth of ſignes beinge once exhibited and fulfilled,
the ſignes themſelues do ceaſe;
               But in the newe teſtament the truth of the ſignes
is exhibited and fullfilled.
               Ergo the ſignes of the new teſtament are ceaſed.
               Aunſ. Wee graunt all, yf you by ſignes vnderſtand
ſuch ſignes, as ſignifie future things, & things hereafter
to be fulfilled, ſuch as were the ſignes of the olde teſtamēt:
but we deny the maior, if by ſignes you vnderſtand
ſuch as ſeale vnto vs things alreadie performed, ſuch
kinde of ſignes are the ſacraments of the new teſtament.
Obiect. 4. Againſt that part of the tenth propoſition,
which is not without converſion.
               
               The Papiſts ſacraments are celebrated without regeneration;
               Yet are they ſacraments.
               
                  Ergo ſacraments may be celebrated without converſion
               Aunſ. The minor may be denied in respect of ſuch as
are not converted. For to ſuch, ſacraments are no ſacraments,
that is, ſignes of grace: eſpecially ſeeinge they
turne them into meere idols. But they become ſacraments
vnto them, that is, ſignes of grace: when they are
converted: and if they never be converted, they lykewiſe
neuer become ſacraments to them.
               Repl. Enforceing an abſurditie.
               
                  
They who corrupt the wordes and forme of the
inſtitution of any ſacrament (as baptiſme) doe
alſo overthrowe the nature and ſubſtance of the
ſame.
               
               The Papiſtes do the former.
               Ergo they doe alſo the l
                     •
                  tter: And therfore their
baptiſme is not baptiſme; and ſo by conſequent
wee which were baptized in time of Poporie,
muſt be rebaptized.
               Aunſ. To the maior. They overthrowe the ſubſtance
of baptiſme; trew, to themſelues and ſuch as approoue
them, and be not cōuerted; but not to them that acknowledginge
their errors are conuerted, and adiorne themſelues
to the church of Chriſt.
               
                  Obiect. 5. Againſt that parte of the eleuenth; The
godlie receaue the ſignes to their ſaluation.
               That only can be receaued by the godly to their ſalvation,
which bringeth with it ſaluation, or is a
cauſe therof;
               But the things ſignified doe bringe alone ſaluation,
and are the cauſes therof:
               Ergo the things ſignified onely, (and not the
ſignes) are receaued by the godly to their ſaluation.
               Aunſ. To the maior by diſtinction. That only which
bringeth with it ſaluation can be receaued vnto ſaluation;
trew, to cauſe or beſtow ſaluation but that alſo which
bringeth not ſaluation, that is, which is neither the efficient,
nor forme, nor material cauſe of ſaeluation, may
be receiued vnto ſaluatiō, that is to confirme ſaluation. I
exp
                     •••
                  de my ſelfe thus. Both the thinges and the ſignes

are receaued vnto ſalvation: but the ſignes in one ſorte,
the things in an other. For the things are a cauſe of ſaluation,
and parte therof: but the ſignes haue in themſelues
no ſuch quickening force, but onely confirme our
ſaluation as they are ioined with the things.
               Obiect. 6. Againſt the twelfth propoſition.
               That which bringeth with it condemnation, bringeth
no fruits;
               The vnworthie vſe and receauing of ſacraments
bringeth condemnation, as it is prooued in the eleventh
propoſition:
               Ergo it bringeth no fruits.
               Aunſ. Wee graunt all, before the converſion, not after;
for then the vnworthie vſe and receauing is made
worthy.
               Repl. Condemnation doth not follow conuerſion;
               The fruit of vnworthy receauing the ſacraments is
condemnation:
               Ergo fruits followe not conuerſion.
               Aunſ. It is true of condēnation. But here we ſpeake
of the fruits of a ſacrament vnworthilie receaued, which
before the conuerſion for vnworthy receauinge was condemnation;
but after the converſion is chaunged into our
good and ſaluation &c.
               Obiection. 7. Againſt that parte of the thirteenth
Some ſacraments are vſed only once.
               
               That which maketh to the cōfirmation of our faith
muſt be often vſed;
               All Sacramentes make to the confirmation of our
faith:
               
                  Ergo all ſacramentes are to bee often vſed.
               
                  
And ſo by conſequent wee ſhoulde bee often
baptized.
               Aunſ. to the maior, which is true, if God haue
appointed that they ſhould be often vſed. But he wil not
haue the ſacramentes of our receauinge into the church,
and our regeneration to be 
                     •
                  terated: becauſe by them
hee doth once onelie begette vs, and enter league with
vs, as by circumciſion and baptiſme; but by the other
hee doth often confirme the league or couenant which
hee doth enter with vs, as by the Paſcall lambe, & the
Lords ſupper.
               Obiections. Againſt the ſecond difference of the
worde and ſacramente in the ſixteenth propoſition.
               They which are to be admitted to the more worthy,
ſhould not be forbidden the leſſe worthie;
               The wicked are to be admitted to the hearing of the
worde, which is more worthie thē the ſacramēts,
as is prooued 1. Cor. 1. 17. God ſent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospell:
               Therefore the wicked are not to bee forbidden the
ſacraments.
               Aunſ. We denie the maior if you take it vniuerſally;
becauſe it is neither euerie where nor alwaies trew.
               Repl. That ſhould not be forbidden wherof may follow
fruite;
               Of receauing the Lords ſupper euen by the wicked
may follow fruite:
               Ergo the wicked are not to be forbidde the Lordes
ſupper.
               Aunſ. to the maior. He ſhould not be forbiddē if God

forbad him not; but the church hath receiued this commandement
of God, That it muſt not doe evill that
good may come of it.
               
               9. Obiection againſt that part of the ſame propoſition.
The word muſt bee preached even to the vnbeleeuing.
               Chriſt forbiddeth vs to caſt pea
                     •
                  les to ſwine and
dogges;
               Therfore the wicked muſt not be admitted to the
hearing of the word preached.
               Anſ. To the antecedent: by dogs and ſwine are not
meant ſimplie he wicked, but ſuch enemies as mecke &
perſecute the doctrine: barking and impugning it like
dogs, and treading it vnder foote like ſwine. Againſt ſuch
this argument were of force.
            
            
               XXIV. OF BAPTISME.
               1. Baptiſme is a ſacrament of the new teſtamēt,
whereby Chriſt witneſſeth to the faithfull being
baptized with water in the name of the father, &
of the ſonne, and of the holy Ghoſt, that all their
ſinnes are forgiuen them, the holy Ghoſt giuen
vnto them, and themſelues ingraſſed into the
church and bodie of Chriſt: and they againe profeſſe
that they receaue theſe benefittes of God, &
therfore euer after will and muſt liue to him, and
ſerue him. And this ſame baptiſme was begun by
Iohn Baptiſt, and continued by the Apoſtles; this
only was the differēce, that he baptiſed men into
Chriſt which ſhould ſuffer and rize againe, but
theſe into Chriſt which had ſuffered, & was rizē.
               
                  
2. The firſt end of Gods inſtitutiō of baptiſme is,
that God herby might ſignifie & witneſſe, that
by the bloud and ſpirit of Chriſtl
                     •••
                   doth clenſe
thoſe that are baptized from their ſinnes, and engraffeth
them into the bodie of Chriſt, and maketh
them partakers of all his benefits.
               3. The ſecond is that baptiſme may be a ſolēne
receauinge or enroulinge of men into the viſible
church of Chriſt, and a diſtinction therof from al
other ſectes.
               4. The third, that it may be a publique & ſolēne
profeſſion of our faith in Chriſt, & of bindinge our
ſelues to faith in him, & obediēce towards him.
               5. The fourth, that it may be an admonition of
our plunging into afflictions, and our riſinge and
deliuerance out of them.
               6. Baptiſme hath by Gods commandement &
the promiſe of grace a certaine power to ſeale and
witnes, annexed by Chriſt vnto theſe rites rightlie
vſed. For Chriſt by the hand of his miniſters
bapt
                     •
                  zeth vs, as by their mouth he ſpeaketh to vs.
               7. There is therfore in baptiſme a 2 fold water one
external, viſible, & earthly, which is the elemētary
water: the other internal, uiſible, & heauēly which
is the bloud & ſpirit of Chriſt: there is alſo a twofold
waſhing, the on external, viſible, & ſignifying nāely
the ſprinckling or powring on of water, which
is corporal, that is receaued by our bodily parts &

                     〈◊〉
                   the other internal, inviſible, & ſignified, namely
remiſſiō of our ſins by Chriſts bloud ſhed for vs,
& our regeneration by his ſpirit, & our bei
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
grafted into his body which is ſpirituall, that is, is
received in ſpirit, & by faith. Laſtly, there is a two
fold miniſter of baptiſme one external of external
baptiſme, which is the miniſter of the church, baptiſing
vs in water with his hand: the other internall
of internal baptiſme, which is Chriſt himſelf, baptiſing
vs with his bloud and ſpirit.
               8 Neither is the water turned into the bloud or
ſpirit of Chriſt, neither is the bloud of Chriſt preſent
in the water or in the ſame place with the water,
neither are the bodies of ſuch as are baptized
ſprinkled inviſibly therewithal, neither is the holy
Ghoſt in ſubſtance or vertue more in this water
then elſewhere; but in the lawful vſe of baptiſme
he worketh in their heartes which are baptiſed,
and ſpiritually doth waſh and ſprinkle them with
the bloud of Chriſt, and vſeth this external ſigne
as an inſtrumēt, & as a viſible word & promiſe, to
vphold & ſtir vp the faith of ſuch as are baptiſed.
               9 Therfore when baptiſme is ſaid to be the waſhing
of regeneration, or to ſaue vs, or to waſh away
our ſins; it is meant; that externall baptiſme is
a ſigne of the internall baptiſme, that is, of regeneration;
ſalvation, and ſpirituall waſhing & that
this internall waſhing is ioined with the external,
whenſoever baptiſme is lawfully vſed.
               10 Yet is ſinne an baptiſme ſo aboliſhed, that
we are freed from the guilte of GODS anger
and eternall puniſhment, and regeneration is begunne
in vs by the holy Ghoſt, & the reliques of
ſin remaine in vs to the end of this life.
               
                  
11 But all and only the renued, or the regenerate
baptiſed to thoſe endes for which baptiſme
was inſtituted by Chriſt, do lawfully receiue baptiſme.
               12 The church lawfully miniſtreth baptiſme to
all and onelie thoſe, whom it ought to recken in
the number of ſuch as be renued, and members of
Chriſt.
               13 Whereas alſo infants of Chriſtians are of the
church, whereinto Chriſt would haue al that pertaine
to him bee receiued and regiſtred by baptiſme,
and therefore baptiſme is now in ſteede of
circumciſion, whereby iuſtification and regeneration,
and receiving into the church, were ſealed
by & for Chriſt as yet to come, as in baptiſme
by and for the ſame Chriſt already come, as well
to infantes as to thoſe of riper yeares pertaining
to the ſeed of Abraham: and whereas no man can
forbidde water, that they ſhould not be baptized
which haue receiued the holy Ghoſt clenſing &
purifying their heartes, truely thoſe infantes muſt
needs bee baptiſed which either are borne in the
church, or together with their parents come over
to the church.
               14 As the promiſe of the goſpell, ſo baptiſme
alſo receiued vnworthily, that is before converſion,
is firme and procureth ſalvation to ſuch as repent,
and the vſe thereof, before vnlawful is now
made vnto them lawfull.
               15 Neither doth the wickednes of the Miniſter
make the baptiſme vaine & of no force, if it bee

done into the faith and promiſe of Chriſt: & therfore
the church ought not to rebaptiſe evē thoſe
that haue bin baptiſed by heretiks, but to informe
them in the true doctrine of Chriſt and baptiſme.
               16 And as the covenant once begun with God
remaineth perpetually ſtedfaſt to ſuch as repent,
even after their ſinnes from that time committed;
ſo alſo baptiſme once receaved, confirmeth thoſe
that repent in remiſſion of ſinnes for all their life,
and therefore ought neither to be 
                     •
                  terated, nor
deferred to the end of life, as if on that condition
onlie it did clenſe vs from our ſinnes, if we cōmitted
no more after we were once baptized.
               17 But all that are baptiſed with water, vvhether
infantes or aged, are not made partakers of
the grace of Chriſt. For Gods eternal election and
calling to the kingdome of Chriſt is free.
               18 Neither are all excluded from the grace of
Chriſt which are not baptiſed vvith water. For
not the want but contēpt of baptiſme excludeth
from the convenant made by God with the faithful
and their children.
               19 And whereas the adminiſtration of Sacraments
is a part of the eccleſiaſtical miniſtery, they
which are not called thervnto and eſpecially women,
muſt not preſume to take vnto themſelues
authoritie of baptiſing.
            
            
               OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
               Diſputed in the Coll. of Wiſdome the 2. of May, Ann. 1575.
               1 ONe of the Sacramentes of the new teſtamēt
is called the Lords ſupper, not becauſe

it muſt needs be ſolemniſed onlie in the evening
or at ſupper time, but becauſe it was inſtituted by
Chriſt in the laſt ſupper that he made with his diſciples
before his death. The Lords table it is called,
becauſe therin the Lord feedeth vs. The ſacramēt
of the bodie and bloud of Chriſt, becauſe therein are
theſe thing
                     •
                   communicated vnto vs. The Euchariſt,
becauſe therein are ſolemne thanks giuen vnto
Chriſt for his death and benefits towardes vs.
Synaxis or aſſemb
                        ••
                     
                   becauſe it muſt be celebrated
in aſſemblies and meetings of the church. It is alſo
amongſt ancient wrighters named a ſacrifice,
becauſe it is a repreſentation of that propitiatorie
ſacrifice which Chriſt perfourmed on the croſſe,
with an Euchariſticall ſacrifice or ſacrifice of thākſgiuing
therefore.
               2 The Lords ſupper is a ſacrament of the newe
teſtament wherein by commandement of Chriſt
the bread and wine is in companie of the faithful
diſtributed and receiued in remebrance of Chriſt,
                  The defnition or nature.
that is, that Chriſt maie witneſſe vnto vs, that hee
feedeth vs vnto etern
                     •
                  ll life, with his bodie and
bloud giuen and ſhed for vs: and we render vnto
him ſolemne thankes for theſe benefits.
               3 The firſt & principal end & vſe of the Lords
ſupper is that Chriſt may thereby witneſſe vnto vs 
that he died for vs and with his body and bloude
feedeth vs vnto eternal life,The endes. that by this witneſſing
he may cheriſh and increaſe in vs our faith, &
by conſequent this ſpiritual feeding The ſecond is 
a thankſ-giving for theſe benefit of Chriſt, with a

publique & ſolemne profeſſion of them, and our
 duty towards Chriſt. The thirde is a diſtinction of
 the Church from other ſectes. The fourth, that it
may be a bond of mutuall charitie amongſt Chriſtians:
ſeeing they are all made members of one
 bodie. The fite, that it may bee a bonde and occaſion
of frequent aſſemblies of the church, ſeeing
Chriſt would haue one bread, and one cup to
be diſtributed amongſt many.
               4 Hence hath the Lordes ſupper that firſt vſe,
which is,How the Lords ſupper confirmeth our faith. a confirmation of our faith in CHRIST,
becauſe CHRIST himſelfe by the hand of his
Miniſters reacheth & dealeth vnto vs this bread
and cuppe in remembraunce of himſelfe, that is,
that by this token and ſigne, as by a viſible word,
hee may admoniſh vs, that he died for vs, and
that he is vnto vs the meate of eternal life, whileſt
hee maketh vs his members, and becauſe he annexeth
a promiſe vnto this rite, that he will feede
with his owne bodie and bloud ſuch as eate this
bread in remembrāce of him: when he ſaid, This
is my bodie: and becauſe the holy Ghoſt by this viſible
teſtimony moueth our minds and harts with
more certainety to beleeue the promiſe of the
goſpell.
               5 There is then in the Lords ſupper a twofold
kinde of food and drinke: one externall, viſible,
and earthly, namely the bread and wine: the other
internall, inviſible & heavenly, namely the
body and bloud of Chriſt: there is alſo a twofolde
eating and receiving, the one externall, viſible,

and ſignifying, which is the corporall receiving
of bread & wine, that is ſuch a receiving as is perfourmed
by the handes, mouth, and corporall
ſenſes; the other internall, inviſible, and ſignified,
which is the fruition of the death of Chriſt,
and a ſpirituall engraffing vs into the bodie of
Chriſt; that is, ſuch an eating as is not performed
with the hands and mouth of the bodie, but by
ſpirit and faith. Laſtly, there is a twofold miniſter
of this foode and cup; one externall of the externall
foode and cup, which is the miniſter of the
church deliuering to vs with his hand the bread &
wine; the other an internal miniſter of the internal
food and cup, which is Chriſt himſelfe feeding vs
with his owne body and bloud.
               6 The ſignes and elements ſerving for cōfirmatiō
of our faith,The ſignes of the Lords ſupper. are not the body & bloud of Chriſt,
but the bread and wine: for the body & bloud of
Chriſt are receiued that we may liue for euer, but
the bread and wine are receiued, that we may bee
confirmed in the certaintie of that celeſtiall food,
and more and more enioy it.
               7 Neither is the bread changed into the body
and the wine into the bloud of Chriſt,The māner of Chriſts preſence in the Lordes ſupper. neither are
the bread and wine aboliſhed, that ſo the bodie &
bloud of Chriſt may ſucceede in their places, neither
is the very body of Chriſt ſubſtantially preſent
in the bread, or vnder the bread, or where the
bread is: but in the lawfull vſe of the LORDS
ſupper the holy Ghoſt vſeth this ſigne and Sacrament
as an inſtrumente to ſtirre vppe faith

in vs; whereby he dwelleth in vs more and more,
and ingraffeth vs into Chriſt, making vs become
iuſt for him, and by him to gaine everlaſting life.
               8 But when Chriſt ſaith: This, that is this bread,
is my bodie:
                  Sacramental ſpeech. 
                  and this cup is my bloud, it is a ſacramental
or metonymicall kinde of ſpeech, whereby is attributed
to the ſigne the name of the thing ſignified,
that is, we are taught that the bread is the Sacrament
or ſigne of Chriſts bodie that is, doth repreſent
and witneſſe that Chriſts body was offered
for vs on the croſſe, and giuen to vs for foode
of eternal life, and is therefore an inſtrument of
the holy Ghoſt to continue & increaſe this foode
in vs, as Paule ſaith, The bread is the communion of
Chriſts body,
                  1. Cor. 10. 16. that is, that thing whereby we are
made partakers of Chriſts body: and elſe where:
We haue al dr
                        •
                     nke of one drinke into one ſpirit.
                  1. Cor. 12. 18. The ſame
is meant whē it is ſaid that the bread is called the
body of Chriſt by ſimilitude which is betweene
the thing ſignified and the ſigne, namely becauſe
the body of Chriſt nouriſheth our ſpirituall life, as
the bread the corporall life: and becauſe of the
ſure connexion of receiving the thing and the
ſigne, in the lawfull vſe of a ſacrament. And this
is that ſacramentall vnion of the bread, & the body
of Chriſt, which is expreſſed by the ſacramentall
ſpeech:Sacramentall vnion. not that local coniunction, which by
ſome is deviſed.
               9 As therefore there is one body of Chriſt,
                  A twofolde feeding on the body of Chriſt. properly
ſo called, and an other ſacramental, which
is the bread in the Euchariſt or Lordes ſupper: ſo

alſo the feeding on Chriſts body is of two ſortes;
the firſt ſacramentall, which is an external & corporal
receiving of the ſigne, namely the bread &
wine; the ſecond real, or ſpirituall, which is the receiving
of the body of Chriſt:
                  Ioh. 6. and it is to beleeue
in Chriſt, and by faith dwelling in vs by his ſpirit,
to be engraffed into his body, as members ioyned
to the head, and branches to the vine, & ſo to be
made partakers of the life & death of Chriſt. Wherby
it appeareth that they which teach thus are
falſely accuſed, as if in the Lords ſupper they did
admit nothing beſides the bare and naked ſignes,
or participation of the death of Chriſt, or his benefits,
or the holy Ghoſt alone, excluding the true,
reall, and ſpirituall communion of the bodie it
ſelfe of Chriſt.
               
               10 The lawfull vſe of the Lords ſupper is,The lawful vſe. when
the faithfull obſerue this rite inſtituted by Chriſt,
in remēbrance of him: that is to ſtir vp their faith
and thankefulneſſe.
               11 As in this vſe the body of Chriſt is eaten ſacramentally
and really;How the wicked ear. ſo without this vſe, as by
infidels and hypocrites it is indeede eaten Sacramentallie,
but not reallie: that is, the ſacramental
ſignes, as bread and wine, are indeede receaued,
but not the things themſelues ſignified by the
ſignes, namely the bodie and bloud of Chriſt.
               12. The doctrine of the Lords ſupper is grounded
vpon manie & thoſe very forcible argumēts.The co
                        ••••
                     
                     mation.
All places of ſcripture, which mention the Lords
ſupper, do cōfirme it. And Chriſt doth not cal any 
                  
                   inviſible thinge in the bread his bodie giuen or
brokē for vs, but that verie viſible bread which he
brake: which becauſe properlie it could not be ſo
meant, himſelfe addeth an expoſition, that hee
woulde haue that bread receaued in remēbrance
of him, which is as much as if hee had ſaide, that
this bread was a ſacrament of his bodie. Alſo he
 ſaith that the ſupper is the new teſtament, which
is ſpiritual, one, and eternall. And Paule ſaith
that it is a communion of the bodie and bloud of
Chriſt, becauſe all the faithfull are one bodie in
Chriſt, which can haue no fellowſhippe with the
 divell. Alſo he maketh the ſame engraffinge into
Chriſtes bodie, by one ſpirit in baptiſme, and the
 holy ſupper. The whole doctrine and nature of
ſacraments doth confirme it, which repreſent vnto
 our eies the ſame ſpiritual cōmunion of Chriſt
to be receaued by faith, which the worde or promiſe
of the Goſpell declareth to our eares: and
therfore they are called by the nāes of the things
ſignified, and haue not (except in the lawful vſe)
the receauing of the verie thinge annexed vnto
 them. The articles of our faith cofirme it, which
teach that Chriſtes body is true humane, not preſent
in manie places at once: and that now it is receaued
vp into heauen, and ſhall there remaine,
vntill the Lord returne to iudgment: that the cō
                  munion
of the godlie with Chriſt is wrought by
 the holie Ghoſt, not by enterance of Chriſts body
into the bodies of men: & therefore al the purer
antiquitie of the church with verie great and

open conſent profeſſed the ſame doctrine.
               13 The Lords ſupper differeth from baptiſme,
1 In rite and manner of ſignifying, becauſe the waſhing 
ſignifieth remiſſion and clenſing of our ſins,Differēces of baptiſme and of the Lords ſupper.
by the bloud and ſpirit of Chriſt, and ſocietie of
the afflictions and glorification of Chriſt. But the
diſtribution of breade and wine, ſignifieth the
death of Chriſt imputed vnto vs for remiſſion of
ſinnes, and that wee beeing nowe ingraffed into
Chriſt are become his members. 2 In special vſe,
                  
becauſe baptiſme is a teſtimony of our regeneration,
or covenant betweene God and vs, and of
our admiſſion or being receiued into the church:
but the Lords ſupper witneſſeth, that we are perpetually
to be nouriſhed by Chriſt abiding in vs,
and that the covenant which we haue once made
with God ſhall ever endure ſteadfaſt, and that
we ſhall for ever abide in the church and bodie
of Chriſt. 3 By the perſons to vvhom they muſt bee
                  
                  miniſtred. Baptiſme is due to all which are to be
accounted for members of the church, vvhether
aged or infantes: the Lords ſupper to them
onely which can vnderſtande and celebrate the
benefites of Chriſt, and examine themſelues.
4 In often vſe. Baptiſme muſt only once be received,
becauſe the covenant of God once begun,
is ever firme and ſteadfaſt to them that repent,
But the Lords ſupper muſt be often receiued, becauſe
the renuing of that league, and often remē
                  brance
thereof, is neceſſary for the ſtrengthning
of our faith. 5 In the order of vſing; becauſe baptiſme 
                  
muſt be miniſtred before, the Lordes ſupper
never but after baptiſme.
               14 They come worthily to the Lords table which
examine themſelues,Who may not come to the Lords ſupper. that is, which are endued
with true faith and repentance. Which who ſo do
not finde in themſelues, they muſt neither preſume
to approach without them, leaſt they eate
and drinke iudgement to themſelues, nor deferre
repentaunce whereby they may approach, leaſt
they pull vpon themſelues hardneſſe of hart and
eternall puniſhments.
               15 The church ought to admit to the Lords ſupper
all that profeſſe that they embrace the foūdation
of Chriſtian doctrine,Who may be admitted. & purpoſe to obey it:
and to prohibit all ſuch as being admoniſhed by
the church and convicted of their errors, will not
for all that deſiſt from their errors, blaſphemies,
or manifeſt ſinnes againſt conſcience.
               16 The Pope hath done wickedly in taking the
breaking of bread from amongſt the rites of the
the Lords ſupper, as alſo in barring the people the
vſe of the cup. He hath alſo done wickedly in adding
ſo many ceremonies, never commanded by
the Apoſtles. Hee hath fowly tranſformed the
Lords ſupper into a theatricall maſſe, that is, into
a fooliſh imitation of Iudaical traditions, & ſtage-like
geſtures. But moſt impious & idolatrous are
thoſe deviſes, to perſwade that the maſſe is a propitiatorie
ſacrifice, wherein by the Maſſe-Prieſts
Chriſt himſelfe is offered vp to his father for the
quicke and dead: and by vertue of conſecration

is ſubſtantially preſent, and ſo abideth as long as
the bread and wine remaine vncorrupt: and beſtoweth
the grace of God and other benefits on
them for whom he is offered, and by whom he is
eaten with the bodily mouth, without any good
motion of their owne: and alſo that he is to be adored
& worſhipped, as he is included and borne
about vnder thoſe two kindes, namely bread and
wine. For theſe damnable and abominable idols
it is very neceſſary that the maſſe bee baniſhed
from the Chriſtian church.
            
         
         
            
            A FVNERALL ORATION OF
D. FRANCES JVNIVS, Profeſſor of Divinity
in the famous Schoole of Neuſtade; vpon
the death of D. ZACHARY VRSINE,
a moſt worthy man and vigilant Doctor
and Profeſsor of Divinity
in the ſaide Schoole of
Neuſtade.
            
               WE haue lately loſt (noble
and worthy auditors) the
moſt faithfull ſervaunt of
God Zacharie Vrſine, a reverende
vvitneſſe of our
Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, a right
vertuous man, my ſweete
fellow-profeſſor, and one
moſt beneficiall to Gods
church: of this man are we deprived, and this our
orphan-ſchoole left deſtitute of her parent. The
greatneſſe of which loſſe if I woulde amplifie, I
ſhoulde but giue occaſion of more heavineſſe to

your mindes, that are already in this caſe too tenderly
affected, and faile exceedingly of that excellency
of diſcourſe, which in ſo excellent a ſubiect
may iuſtly be expected. For though faine I
would, and could hartily wiſh that I might ſpeak
much to this purpoſe, yet I neither thinke it fit,
conſidering I ſhould but miniſter fuell to the fire
of your affection; nor accompt my ſelfe able, as
well for divers defects which I feele in my ſelfe of
wit, learning, exerciſe, & continuance of converſing
with that man of happy memorie, whereby I
am much diſabled; as alſo becauſe if I were furniſhed
with gifts of vtterance (which in my ſelfe
I acknowledge to be very ſlender) yet nowe the
waight of this vvorke, the ſcantneſſe of time,
and vehemencie of my griefe haue debarred me
all vſe and practiſe of them. Wherefore I would
indeede haue perſwaded ſome others of our colledge
to take ſome paines in this matter thereby
to eaſe mine owne ſtudy and ſorrow; but they excuſed
themſelues vvith the publique griefe and
their owne moſt affectionate heavineſſe. And
muſt wee then needes neglect the commendation
of that ſacred ſoule, if in this publique calamitie
of the Church and our ſchoole, wee giue our
ſelues wholy to mourning and lamentation? But
that perhaps wil ſeeme an vndutiful nicenes & tē
               dernes
to ſuch as know not the vehemēcie of our
griefe. Beſides (to vſe the words of S. Amb.) though
it do but increaſe our griefe to wright of that which grieveth
vs, yet becauſe cōmonly we content our ſelues with

the remembrance of him whoſe loſſe we lament, for th
                     ••
                  
in wrighting a whileſt that our mindes by meditation are
wholy fixed on him, wee imagine him to liue in our diſcourſe;
it is a thinge that muſt be done, except we will be
thought to haue buried in ſilence the memorie of a pledg
ſo well deſeruing, and to haue vouchſafed him no honor,
or els to haue avoided all incitemēts to greife, wher as for
the moſt part, to greiue is the especial comfort of ſuch as
are greiued. Shall we then differ this commendation
any longer? no truelie; but rather let vs ſtirre
vp your mindes to maintaine his memorie both
now & to al poſteritie hereafter: for (as Nazianzen
ſaith) good men ought to be especially remembred, and
they whoſe memorie is godlie and p
                     •
                  offitable. But ſtay
then: am I the boldeſt of this companie of profeſſors?
not ſo. But perhappes I am the moſt officious
and forward to ſhew my dutie? truelie neither
am I ſo greed
                  •
               e of the glorie of this actiō that
I could finde in my heart to ſnatch it from others
by prevention. How then? am I belyke the moſt
vnwiſe of all others? truelie I do not arrogate to
my ſelfe any great wiſedome, onely I hope this
my dutie ſhal be without off
                  •
               ces & with thought
hereof I am much comforted. But what mooued
mee aboue others to take vpon me the penninge
and pronouncing of this oration? Becauſe of
dutie one of vs muſt needes haue done it; & that
which was a dutie in all, greife excuſed in other,
and might as well haue done in me, had not very
neceſſitie not onelie required, but alſo euen exacted
it at my handes. For firſt I owe as much to

the memorie of that iuſt man my good fellow-profeſſor,
as others doe, namelie an honorable remembrance
of him. Moreouer I owe ſo much dutie
and more to this our Schoole, which may iuſtly
callenge my diligence, as well in this as in other
cauſes. Laſtelie I ſhall hereby provide both
for the publique good, and alſo for mine owne
credit: for otherwiſe who would not be readie to
obiect againſt me that ſayinge of Sophocles?
            
            
               Alaſſe! how ſoone thankleſſe poſteritie
               Leaues to retaine a dead freindes memorie?
            
            But theſe learned and iudicial men herepreſēt,
may in the common heauineſſe make this benefit,
that they perſwade themſelues they may ſhift
of the burden of this exerciſe without preiudice of
their credit: as for me, the neceſſitie of my place
enforceth either to prouide ſome other who will
and may better diſcharg it then my ſelfe, or els to
ſubmit my ſelfe to the hazard of your cenſures.
The waight of my other affaires do ouermuch diſtract
me, the conſcience of mine owne weaknes
doth amaze mee, the worth and greatnes of the
thinge it ſelfe deters me. All this notwithſtāding,
the authoritie of this ſchoole preuaileth ouer mine
affaires, good enſample and publique paterne of
the church forceth my conſcience, and neceſſitie
it ſelfe doth thruſt me forward ſetting aſide reſpect
of the worthe and maieſtie of this ſubiect, to
ſay ſome thinge therof in this aſſemblie. Truſting
therfore to your courteſie and indifferencie (worſhipfull
and worthie auditors) firſt I deſire & entreate

you to heare favorably this my oration, no
way matching (I confeſſe) that matchleſſe mans
deſertes, or your expectation, or mine owne duty,
but onely fitting my poore mediocritie: then that
you woulde vouchſafe lovingly to excuſe mee
(plucking onelie ſome few fruites from that moſt
rare and ſacred tree (if I neither flouriſh out this
picture with thoſe curious colours, nor furniſh out
this table with thoſe diuers and daine
                  •
               i
                  •
                diſhes
which that rich ſtore houſe might afforde, but rather
ſupplie what mine ignorance hath omitted,
and pardon both for ſhortneſſe of time and vehemencie
of griefe, whatſoever I ſhall happen to
ſpeake vnadviſedly. For in that man I purpoſe
not to ſpeake of that wee admired whilſt it vvas
preſent, and now want being abſent (for I neither
know nor can reckon al) nor of many ſuch things
as I know, and haue much thought of (for even
that alſo were almoſt infinite, and would ſeeme
incredible to manie) but I intend in few words to
lay downe a briefe of thoſe vertues and good
giftes which heretofore wee haue all ſeene, and
whoſe loſſe wee now lament, and to ſhaddowe
out vnto you the damage redounding to vs all
by the vntimely death of that man of fame, that
by this fi
                  •
               e wee may bee inflamed to ſtrong faith
and ſerious repentaunce, and more and more
frame our ſelues to imitation of this worthy witneſſe
and valiant champion of CHRIST IESVS.
            
               Zacharie Vrſine was borne at Preſ
                     •
                  aw of honeſt

parentage by diſcent, in the yeare of our Lorde,
1536. Hee was naturallie for conſtitution of bodie
ſtrong; but more ſtrong of minde and courage,
eſpeciallie after there had beene ioyned to
the goodneſſe of his nature, artes, and ſciences,
and other moſt excellent and heavenlie giftes &
qualities. But touching the giftes of his body we
ſhal not neede to ſpeake much, conſidering that
ſome of them are indifferentlie common to all
men, others beſides men, are alſo incident vnto
beaſtes. For although in themſelues they be cō
               modious,
and ſuch as every man may wel wiſh to
further him in laudable attemptes, yet they make
nothing to the true glorie and commendation of
thoſe in whom they are found: wherefore I am reſolved
to giue vnto him his deſerued commendation,
not as he was man, but a moſt abſolute Divine.
But touching the vertues of his mind, which
by conſent of al good men deſerue of themſelues
to be deſired, and poſſeſſe the perpetual fruit of
true glorie, what ſhal I ſaie? whence ſhoulde I beginne,
or when ſhould I end, if I ſhould endevour
to ſpeake all that might be ſaid of this moſt holie
& choice veſſell, ordained to the glorie of his maker?
I ſhould ſooner want time then matter in ſo
iuſt a cauſe. Nowe then I ſee well what I haue to
do. I muſt preſcribe vnto my ſelfe certaine limites
& bounds, beyōd which (would I never ſo faine)
I may nor ſtray: that ſo, both I may promiſe to my
ſelfe the things wherof I meane to ſpeake, & you
before hād may cōceiue what you are like to hear.
            
               
Firſt thē I giue you to vnderſtand, that this our
deare Vrſine was a man abſolutely furniſhed with
manie and thoſe exceeding greate and ſingular
giftes of wit and vnderſtanding. Alſo this I ſaie,
that with theſe moſt ſingular, exquiſite, and incredible
giftes of witte vvas ioyned a moſt ſtricte
courſe of life, reſpecting the publique good of the
Church. Laſtly, I tell you, that his godly death
is vnto vs a moſt ſure argument both of his eleganeie
of vvitte and ſtrictneſſe of life. VVithin
theſe boundes I doe of purpoſe empale my ſelfe,
that ſo you remembring this may the more eaſily
recall to memory all the reſt, and with authoritie
call me homewardes, if I offer to wander beyond
theſe liſtes.
            Concerning that wit whereof we ſpake, I am
verily perſwaded that this worthy man was moſt
aboundantly ſtored with many and thoſe verie
heauenlie giftes thereof: which I deſire may bee
ſpoken without offence, and taken without envy
of any man. For vvaying vvith my ſelfe that
ſtrength of wit which is naturall, I ſee not vvhat
was wanting in him that might be founde in any
man: but when I thinke of thoſe vertues whereby
our wits & mindes are adorned and ſtrengthned
to the ſtudies of humanitie and religion, then
me thinke I remember how by the finger of God
almoſt all were heaped vpon this one man. And
that this which I ſpeake is true, al men can witnes
who but once conuerſing vvith him haue had
experience of his ſingular vertues, vvitneſſe his

familiar acquaintance, witneſſe his friends, witneſſe
innumerable multitudes of thoſe vvhich
haue vſed his adviſe, witneſſe many greate and
principall men, which haue preferred him before
al men to bee the oracle of their counſels, &
th
                  •
                cenſurer of their wrightings: vvitneſſe innumerable
peoples, nations, churches, and laſtlie
bookes of his, by whoſe varietie of learning
CHRISTS people hath alreadie a long time
beene fedde and recreated, albeit they like modeſt
children, obeying the modeſt will of their
natural Father, diſſemble and conceale his name.
VVhich beeing ſo, vvhat neede I any farther
blazon the worth of ſo incomparable a wit? For
if I conſider with my ſelfe his naturall wiſedome
ioyned vnto this witte, beholde immediatelie
there are preſented to my viewe vvhole troopes
of conferences, Letters, Lectures, Sermons,
wrightings, bookes, beeing as it vvere vvhole
ſhoppes and ſtore-houſes of his wiſedome. If
at any time I bethinke my ſelfe of his invention,
vvhat could a man conceiue of ſharper edge?
(as the Poēt ſaid) more forwarde and ſwift? more
diligent & induſtrious, then was that force, wherwith
it pleaſed almightie GOD to endue this
veſſell of holineſſe? If I reſpect that magnanimity
and quickneſſe of conceipt vvhereby all humaine
things he conceaved & skorned, what mā
on the earth did more eaſily, & in the twinckling
of an eie, (as vvee vſe to ſaye) overpaſse all
thoſe thinges, vvhich to thoſe celeſtiall ſpirites

ſeeme vile & baſe, then he did? If tenacite of memorie
which is the continual companion of good
wittes, I finde in this man a memorie immortally
good. But after this fruitful and happie witte was
once manured & husbanded by ingenuous artes
and ſciences, then indeede began he to aduance
the ſingularitie of his nature vnto a perfection far
exceedinge all others. For he trulie was ſo skilled
in all artes and ſciences, that he might worthilie
bee thought poſſeſſed with that famous circle of
ſciences, ſo much commended by auncient philoſophers.
He was as well ſeene as any man in the
arte of pure, plaine, elegant, and true ſpeech. He
had ſo diligently and artificially vſed each part of
philoſophy, that you ſhould not take him to haue
beene a ſcholler to philoſophie, but rather philoſophie
to haue bin a ſcholler to him. He was moſt
skilful in the Mathematiques, he knew exquiſitly
al that pertained to Naturall philoſophie, and was ſo
excellently cunning in Moral and politique affaires,
that he might worthilie be accoumpted a ſingular
miracle of the worlde.
            Moreouer (to the intente that learninge this,
wee may proceede yet farther) how manie and
greate men did hee to his greate coſt viſite, that
he might throughly informe himſelf in the knowledge
of theſe thinges, and perfite himſelfe by
diligent imitation. For hee viſited, hearde, &
ſwallowed not onelie with eyes and eares, but
allſo with inſatiable thirſt of mynde thoſe moſt
cleere and eminent lightes of all Europe, which

then ſhined in Wittemberge, Leipſich, Paris, and
Zurich, gathered from them all the ſweete hony
of learninge, whoſe combes are nowe extant,
delicious and wholeſome to vs for this ſchoole,
to Germanie his deare countrie, and to the whole
church of God, which is the common mother
of vs all, but bitter and pernicious to all wicked
men and heretiques. What ſhould I heare
ſpeake of exerciſe, wherein this greate ſervant of
God and miniſter of the church did ſo greatlie
delight, that with too ſevere and ſtrict meditation
and exerciſe, wherevnto hee was wholie addicted,
hee neglected all care of his bodilie
health. And this hee did then eſpecially, when
hee had ſatiſfied his minde with the knowledge
of humaine artes, leaſt perhappes that might
befall him which often befall vnſkilful fencers,
whoe a longe time flouriſh & beate the aire without
once touching the body, & after much paines
takē to no purpoſe, whē they come indeed to the
ſharp, are ſoone over come in fight: for it is indeed
a great matter and ever cōmendable to excell all
others in naturall gifts & ſtrēgth of witt, but greater,
to grace that ſolid natural iuice of wit with the
floriſhinge pleaſinge coloure of humaine arts, but
greateſt, & that which exceedeth all the reſt is,
when both iuyce & colour are ſteeped & purified
in the ſacred foūtaines of this diuine & heauenlie
doctrine: not that our minds might anie more be
coloured as in times paſt with pure purple, but
that every one in the ſpirite of his minde may
bee renewed after the image of his creator.

And if any man in our memorie, without doubt
this valiant champion of Chriſt hath performed,
laboured, and carefully perfited it. For firſt he perceaued,
and verie wiſely, that thoſe daintie ornaments
of humanitie ought to be hand-maides vnto
the word of God and holy ſcripture. Then this
he laid downe for a ground, that he was not at his
owne, but others diſpoſing. Alſo he vnderſtood
that as many as addicte themſelues to the ſervice
of God, obtaine of him ſaluatiō, but ſuch as withdraw
themſelues from vnder his hand, doe fayle
therof. But then (good Lord!) how feruēt a ſtudie
did the meditation of theſe things breede in
the ſanctified ſoule of this Chriſtian champion?
what feare? what deſire? what zeale? Hēce ſprōg
his faith in Chriſt, his hope, and (that which is the
bond of all perfection) his charitie: all heauenlie
vertues, which whē once they were rooted in him
by God the father, they could neuer be rooted
out, or corrupted by any temptation, violēt fraud,
proſperitie, or adverſitie. What ſhall wee farther
ſay, if all this was not enough, but that the innocent
man muſt daily punniſh himſelfe? for he did
ſeuerely chaſtize his bodie to bring it to ſubiectiō
vnto Chriſt. It is incredible how carefull and religious
hee was not to be wiſer thē in ſobrietie was
fit for him: he did ever captivate vnto Chriſt that
naturall wiſedome wherin he excelled; he neuer
durſt determine anie thinge but out of the plaine
and knowne worde of God, he would avouch nothinge
but what he had receaved by moſt ſure

faith of the holy Ghoſt; laſtely he was alwaies of
this minde, that nothinge was to be altered from
the common receaued cuſtomes and opinions,
except the vnreſiſtable veritie of Gods worde did
both commaund and force. But that he might
with more certaintie compaſſe all theſe things, he
was exactelie skilled in the tongues, a moſt neceſſarie
inſtrument amongſt others for a true diuine:
and theſe he had alwaies readie, and vſed them
whereſoeuer was neede with paſſinge dexteritie
and wiſedome. A man for iudgment moſt profūd,
for prouidence wiſe, cunning to deviſe, quicke to
invent, laborious to ſearch, ſharpe to diſcuſſe,
readie to perceaue, in deliueringe a truth moſt
faithfull, in refellinge a falſhoode moſt powerfull,
farre from uanitie, diligent in all he vndertooke,
armed at all points with the complete harneſſe of
a true Diuine, a ſtronge repeller of falſhoode, &
an invincible fortreſſe of defence for veritie. This
man (worthy audience) by profeſſion a diuine,
indeed a champion of Chriſt, haue we loſt, wee
haue (I ſay) loſt by the will of God this earneſt
maintainer of Gods truth, this victorious aduerſarie
of Satan; this faithfull touchſtone aud rebuke
of the fraudes and ſophiſmes which he vſeth to
plot and deviſe, this valorous vanquiſher and
deſtroyer of hereſies we haue ſeene taken from amonge
vs: and we all lament this moſt heavie
plague and greivous wounde inflicted on vs and
the whole church of Chriſt. But whether do I wā
               der?
Doe you not now perceaue (noble and excellēt

auditors) that by degrees I am fallen to the
ſecond point whereof I purpoſed to ſpeake? For
hitherto I haue giuen you to vnderſtand that this
our Doctor was a rare man for excellencie of wit,
learninge, truſt, and skill in matters of religion,
the learnedſt among divines, and moſt divine amonge
the learned. Now it followeth neceſſarily
that I ſpeake ſomwhat of that ſecond parte which
I propoſed, that ſo to this theorie and knowledge
I may ioyne his vertuous life and practize.
            The manner hereof was this: he was an other
iuſt Zacharie before God, and laboured with all
his might to ioyne innocencie of life to thoſe excellent
giftes of witt beſtowed on him by nature,
arte, ane the heauenlie grace of God: I call you to
witneſſe that haue conuerſed with the man openly
and familiarlie. Whatſoeuer he had of nature,
did hee not (after he had faithfully bettered it by
liberall artes, and profited it by grace infuſed from
heauen) imploy it wholie to the ſtudie and dutie
of pietie, charitie, and humanitie? Some perchaunce
will thinke it incredible, ſome enuiouſelie
ſpoken; yet I muſt needes ſay it. I thinke this
age hath bred verie few, whoſe ſtudious part and
dutiful minde might be compared with this mans
hearte and minde. Which I ſpeake not becauſe
I woulde flatter him: for whie ſhould I flatter the
dead? nor that I yeeld too much to our freindſhip
and familiaritie, for it was a greife to me that I was
almoſt alwaies abſent from ſo worthie a man; and
now to be cutt of from all hope of acquaintance

with him which I haue ſo much wiſhed, this is that
which grieueth me moſt of all. I ſpeake the truth,
& that which in cōſcience I thinke; I haue obſerued
in this mā ſo much diligence of ſtudie, and ſo
much gratiouſnes of curteſie & faire behavior, as
can very hardly be matched, muſt leſſe bettered
by any mā. And how might this be known? beeaus
in pietie, charitie, and curteſie he ſatiſfied al other
men, but never could ſatiſfie himſelfe. But who, I
pray, is there that can witnes thus much? nay who
is there that cannot witnes it, if he haue but heard
the name of Vrſinus? heard it, ſay I? nay I call thē to
witneſſe which know not ſo much as his name.
There haue beene manie in our memorie, which
haue moſt greedilie gathered the moſt ſweete &
wholſome fruite of his labours, as from a tree vnknowne,
& haue togeather with vs thirſted after
the water poured from his river and bowells by
Chriſt. It were to long to confirme theſe thinges
by examples, teſtimonies, and arguments: & perhappes
to ſome of you vnprofitable, to others teadious.
But out of manie I will make choice only
of ſom feaw, & frō his plentifull panterie & ſtorhouſe,
furniſh you out a frugal & thriftie bāquet.
His firſt rudimēts of religion he had learned of a
child; which is a great matter. In proces of time he
encreaſed & furthered thē moſt aboūdātly: which
is more. But the greatſt matter & moſt memorable
of al the reſt, is that whē he was aged (if a man of
years may be termed aged, at which years it pleaſed
God to take away and extinuiſh that light,

ſhining to the teſtimonie of that true light) but
being, I ſay, aged, he as much confirmed that his
ſtudie of godlineſſe and religion, as when he did
moſt.
            Laſtly, at all times (that I may, if it be poſſible,
conclude al in a word) without meaſure or end he
was ſo carried away with deſire of godlineſſe and
reverence of his maker, and did ſo burie himſelfe
therein, that from the principles of wiſdome proceeding
every daie very much forvvard, he in the
end attained that perfection, wherwith the moſt
righteous God hath now crowned him. And
though himſelfe procured & vſed no other ſufficient
witneſſes of theſe his moſt holy endevours
(which God very well knew and approued) beſides
that great ſearcher of harts, God, & our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt whom he ſerued in ſpirit: yet am I able
to alleadge two moſt evident proofes thereof,
namely his faithful praiers, & ſacred meditations.
But then (will ſome man ſay) did this Vrſinus, whō
you cōmend, vſe to cal witneſſes about him when
he wēt to praier? did he offer himſelfe to the view
& hearing of others as if he had beene on a theater
and not in his cloſet? no truely. That moſt ſimple
man, one far from al ſhew of this humaine vanitie
& affectiō of vaine glory, thought it alwaies
ſufficient to be ſeene in ſecret by his father▪ which
ſeeth in ſecret, vvas verie warie in beeing ſeene of
others, confirmed himſelfe by Chriſtiā praier, did
not vaunt himſelfe by phariſaicall boaſting. Do I
then gueſſe and ſpeake by coniecture? nor ſo, but

avouch it vpon certaine knowledge. For ſuch indeede
was this man of God, moſt carefull of the
truth, the church, the afflicted brethren, & al mē,
wholie bent to faithful praier, whereby like another
Ioſue converſing night & day in the light of
heavenlie things, he did with feruent praier ſaue
and defend the people of his charge, & with the
ſword of Gods word chaſed and put to flight the
enemies of the faith. But what ſhould I ſpeake of
his meditations? We founde (ô deere Vrſine) that
thou didſt truely obſerue, what Demoſthenes had
before in word & deed approued, That eaſie things
were harde to bee conceived by the negligent, and harde
things eaſie to the diligent. So certaine was it that
thou thoughteſt nothing vnworthy thy meditation.
For what eaſie thing did eſcape him? What
difficult thing was there wherevnto he did not attaine?
Whatſoever the eternall ſpirit of God delivered
in the bookes of the Prophets & Apoſtles,
all that he beleeued faithfully, ſearched diligently,
and attained by med
                  ••
               ating theron miraculouſly.
For thoſe he accoumpted the worthieſt
paines, which were beſtowed in thoſe divine ſtudies.
As often as I thinke on the greate, laborious,
and peremptorie deſire of meditation which
was in this man, (and I cannot but thinke of it
verie much and often) I ſtill call to minde that
elegāt ſentēce of Ba
                     •••
                  us the Great, ſeeing the truth
is harde to finde, wee muſt euerie where ſeeke after it.
For if the conceiuing, as of arts, ſo alſo of true 
                  〈◊〉
               
and religion, be made greate by that continuall

encreaſe vvhich by little and little is gathered
together, there is not that thing ſo meane & ſimple,
which they that enter into that kind of know
ledge may or ought to deſpiſe. But what thinke
you of this, that there was nothing delivered by
thoſe great men & principall philoſophers which
this my buſie fellow profeſſor did not by meditation
attaine, were it neuer ſo crabbed, deepe, and
obſcure? was he not well ſeene in the moral wrightings
of Ariſtotle and other wrighters? was not
natural philoſophie plaine, open, and eaſie vnto him?
did hee not abſolutelie conceiue the drift and nature
of Ariſtotles Organon? the ſubtiltie of vvhich
worke ſome flie, as deſpairing of the vnderſtanding
thereof, others with raſh iudgement cōdēne
it, as the fatal and pernicious Scylla or Charybdis of
youth: the ſubtiltie and commoditie of vvhich
vvorke Vrſine ſharpelie and ſpeedilie perceaued,
and preſented it as it were in a table to be perceived
and peruſed by others. What ſhould I heere
ſpeake of the Mathematiques, vvhoſe foundations
are commonlie grounded on ſerious meditatiō of
mind, whoſe principles are cōtained in axioms or
petitions as they cal thē? Their difficult preceptes
were not vnknowne to Vrſinus, vvho by ſerious
meditatiō, not fleeting & ſlender inſight, throughly
pervſed thē all. Well then, let vs now ſee what
witneſſes we can produce for this matter. After I
haue vſed his own teſtimony, I wil then thinke of
others. Vrſine himſelf in the whole race of theſe his
too ſhorte daies, is a moſt ſubſtantial witnes of his

owne meditatiōs, & al thoſe vertues which before
I haue recited. For what duties of piety, or Chriſtiā
               
charity, or cōmō curteſie did he omit? his religious
duty toward God, God himſelfe did ſee, acknowledg
& ſeal, & hath now at the laſt rewarded. But
becauſe the beſt vvay to knowe the tree is by the
fruit, let me (with your patience) a litle turne your
thoughts to the fruits of his godlineſſe & religion.
Truly I thinke that in holy ſcripture they are the
greateſt fruits of godlines, which cōcerne the advancemēt
of Gods glory. And whē was this ſacred
ſoule at al wāting herevnto? whē did it not endevor
& labor vehemently to giue light everie day
more thē other to the truth, & therwith to lightē
others with whō it did cōverſe, that ſo it might diſpel
the foggy clouds of error? But thoſe duties of
piety are moſt neerely linked vnto charity, which
concerne both edifying of the church, & the ſalvatiō
of our neighbors. Wherfore now I wil ſpeak
iointly of both ſorts of duties, & demōſtrate how
painful this couragious ſoldier of Chriſt did labour
by his ſpeech, his wrightings, & his whole minde,
that he might not in the leaſt maner trip or wāder
frō his duty. As therfore the duties of piety & charity
ar between thēſelues agreeable, & vnited: ſo
alſo they liued, encreaſed, & altogither ſhōe forth
of this mā when he lived. For if we reſpect the exerciſes
hee vndertooke in regarde of theſe duties,
good Lord, how great was his faith? his diligence?
his faſting? his watching? for not onelie the fruits
enſuing heereon can witneſſe thus much vnto vs,

but alſo that macerating and pullinge downe his
bodie, that taminge of his fleſh, that outwarde
man worne and ſpent with sore paſſed labours,
ſo that hee died an vntimelie death. I woulde
to God (my deare Vrſine) thou haſt not ſo weekned
thy ſelfe with vnmeaſurable 
                  〈◊〉
               , that
thou mighteſt longer tyme haue 
                  〈◊〉
                vs, 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſchoole, & Gods church For thou diddeſt ſo far
reſpect god, that thou diddeſt no way reſpect thy
ſelfe. Alaſſe, alaſſe, deere Vrſine the light of Germanie,
the pillar of the church, the father of this
our ſchoole, and the immortall glorie of this coū
               tie
Palatine, I woulde thou couldeſt haue been
perſwaded, to haue taken thy-ſelfe a little from
thy-ſelfe, and reſpited thy-ſelfe a little from thy
continuall cares, that ſo wee, this ſchoole, & the
whole church might a little longer haue enioyed
thee? when I in times paſt admoniſhed thee ſomwhat
to this purpoſe thou madeſt mee aunſwer,
that bodilie exerciſe did little profit: where vnto
I replied that it was profitable, and that by
entercourſe it was to bee ioyned with the exercise
of the mynde, and that it was elegantly
proved by Chryſoſtom to the people of Antioch:
all this I tryed with him, but to no purpoſe.
But what meane I? the Lordes will hath been
done, it is better to bee ſilent, then to reply.
Who then is there which can ſhew, that the duty
of this worthy and laborious man was ever wanting
either in ſpeech or wrightinge, as long as hee
was any way able to ſhew it? for mine owne part I

know not whether the remembrance of his invincible
paines, which hee vnceſſantly vſed in
perfourmance of theſe duties, did more greiue
me, or the conceipt of that fruite, whith without
care of him ſelfe hee dealte vnto all poſteritie
doth delight mee: although tyme may were awaie
greife, but this fruit ſhall continue beyonde
all tyme. Yf I reſpect private conference, thy
mynde was an wholeſome and well ſured treaſure:
if thy publique ſpeeches, it was the oracle of
God, at leaſt for that meaſure that may be found
in mortalitie: if both togeather, that thy divine
diſpoſinge and diſpenſinge of the myſteries of
God, doth not the brighteneſſe therof dazel
and blinde the eyes of my mynde and vnderſtandinge?
Thou man of God, thou well furniſhed
Divine with all the holie complete armoure
of divinitie, thou excellent amongeſt all
divines, when diddeſt thou at anie time ceaſe
from preaching and profeſſing of the truth? when
diddeſt thou cōceale thoſe myſteries which were
ſtored vp in thy armoury, that is, in thy mind? whē
wert thou at any time idle? it is ſtrāge that I wil tel
you, yet very certainly true, there neuer came in
my preſēce idle word out of his mouth: all things
did ſtreāe frō him ſo exquiſit, levelled, weighed, &
premeditated. What ſhould I ſpeake of his publique
diſcourſes? his excellēt ſermōs firſt preached
by him at Heidelberg were in admiration with all
men; the variety & multiplicity of learning, which
he vſed in his lectures did refine, adorne, better &

make fruitfull the wits of many, vvhich now in all
parts of the Chriſtian vvorld plant, ſovv, & water
the garden and fielde of God, which build vp the
houſe of the liuing God, and laſtlie which by their
labours of imitatiō do repreſent this their faithfull
maiſter, as it vvere reviued by them & recalled frō
death. Nay his ordinary table which he vſed in the
houſe of wiſdome, vvas ſo ſpread vvith varietie of
flowers & ſweet fruits of that more ſacred ſort of
philoſophie, ſo ſtored with proviſion new & old,
that it might wel ſeeme, not a table of vulgar philoſophie,
but a ſāctuarie of celeſtial wiſdōe. There
the voice of ſcripture reſounded, which is the only
meſſenger and interpreter of vviſdome, there
vvere her foſter-children, honeſty and modeſtie,
and (to vſe the words of Euſtathius in Macrobius)
with ſobriety, godlines. There was variety of hiſtorie,
natural and morall; there ſate by all the ſciences,
and one after an other interpoſing did by
entercourſe breath louely & liuely freſhnes into
the whole aſſembly. If any mā wil reckon theſe among
his diſcourſes, he may for me; but I knovve
theſe were ful & iuſt lectures, adorned with notes
of al ſciences, & beautified with admirable graces.
And theſe ar the great vertues of his diſcourſes. But
who wil not marvel that al theſe vertues ſhoulde
dailie be poliſhed & adorned by wrighting, that
moſt excellēt & ready maker & maſter of eloquēt
diſcourſe? For this mirror of mē tooke pleaſure to
feed the fluencie not only of his tōgue, but alſo of
his wit by wrighting: which is a thing that Tullie
cōmādeth & cōmēdeth to as many as deſire to excel

in ſpeakīg & teaching. Therfore al his lectures,
cōmētaties, obſervatiōs, & notes were wrightē: ſo
that frō his own writings he had cōtinuall helpes,
both for his owne memory, & alſo for others directiō.
But amōgſt all theſe writings I maruell at nothing
more, thē that he could ſteale ſo much vacāt
time frō thē, as to anſwere to many & thoſe verie
weighty queſtions. He opened the vnderſtāding
of things, & freely gaue coūſaile to ſuch as requeſted
his adviſe, & thē was he moſt dutiful, whē he
was ſuppoſed to think of nothing leſſe thē dutie.
This the learned & vnlearned, the poore & rich,
neighbors & ſtrāgers, friends & enemies cā verie
wel witnes: none of al which cā iuſtly complaine,
that he was either not regarded of him, or not ſatisfied
by him. He endevored ſo curteouſly, gētlie
& faithfully to doe good to all, that he might win
al, & ioine thē to his L. Chriſt. But ſome mā wil ſay
theſe are priuate matters: where are thoſe publike
proofes of his piety & charity? theſe thinges are ſo
opēly witneſſed & proued, that they are indeede
cleerer thē the cleere ſun-ſhine at noone-day. For
thoſe elegāt wrightings heretofore we haue ſeene
at Heidelberg, came moſt out of this ſtore houſe: &
thoſe which here, I ſay here 5. yeares ſince vvere
ſpred amōgſt vs, were al wrightē by the ſame hād;
and that hand which here hee guided by his skill,
God hath now poſſeſſed there with vndoubted
reſt. Tell mee (thou vpſtarte Eutyches) what didſt
thou ever feele more heavy then this hand, except
the hand of God, which doth vex, perſecute,

excruciate, torment, & purſue them? What Belleraphon
did more ſtrongly beate downe thy Chimaera?
what Hercules thy Hydra? Who did ever more
couragiouſlie confound that thy Cerberian monſter
of Vbiquitie? But that I may not long dwell
on a matter vulgar and trivial, thou Sarmatian Arius
ſhalt not eſcape the hand of this heroike chā
               pion,
though iſſuing from vs. This ſame is he that
hath provided, filed, poliſhed, ſharpned and fitted
vnto vs armour, prepared for the deſtructiō of
thy impious opiniō: of whoſe force I haue thought
good to fore-warne thee, that thou maieſt now at
length begin to looke backe to God & reverētly
feare the eternal ſon of the eternal God which is,
was, and ſhal be one together with the father for
ever and ever: which if thou wilt not doe, vnderſtand
then that there is denounced from this mā
eviction of thy blaſphemie, and from God, thy
downefall, ruine, and deſtruction. What truſt thē,
vvhat diligence ſhall we thinke was in this ſweet
and ſacred ſoule, who ſuffred no hower, no moment
of the day to paſſe without ſome profit? The
proofes of pietie & charitie conſiſt eſpeciallie in
theſe 2. cauſes; firſt in maintaining true doctrine,
ſecondlie in aſſailing and ſuppreſſing that which
is falſe. Who thē is there that can addict himſelfe
more religiouſlie, learnedlie, fitlie, preſſelie, vehementlie,
faithfullie, diligentlie & ſtoutlie to true
and ſound doctrine then he hath done? To ſpeak
ſomwhat of his curteſie, what greater favor could
he do, then that whereof before I ſpake, vvhich

was his diligence in vnfolding queſtions, and giving
adviſe? Which in this man was ever ſo elaborate,
that he cleered all doubts moſt evidently,
diſcouered all ſophiſmes moſt ſubtilly, readilie, &
with paſſing dexterity and agility, not with the
words of humane wiſedome, but by the power of
the holy ſpirit. Why thē ſhould any heere obiect,
that he was a man of churliſh and ſurly diſpoſition?
In deed as they which are paineful in their ſtudies
are ſomewhat ſurly to ſuch idle and ſlouthful
children as delight more in childiſh ſportes then
manly ſtudies: ſo they that are moſt diligent are
ſomewhat way warde to men of vanity. For to
my ſelfe and other good men that knew him, no
man was more curteous and affable. And if at any
time he made it a religiō to ſtir from any matter
which he buſily intended, I likewiſe made it
as great a religion to cal him away frō it: becauſe
I would preſuppoſe, that either he was very buſie
or not very wel. In my occaſions of buſines (ſaith
Tullie) I am very doubtful, when having begunne
any thing I am called to ſome other matter: neither
can I ſo eaſilie conioine things interrupted,
as finiſh them once purpoſed. Touching health
there is none ſo fooliſh but (if he doe not beleeue
me) may learne as much by nature & experience.
Wherefore he is but a drone, that will be troubleſome
to a buſie bee; and he too vnciuil, fooliſh, &
importune, vvhich takes ſuch harmeful diligence
for a duty. Of this ſort there are many ſo fooliſh,
and iniurious to good men, that they ſcarce accōpt

them men, vnleſſe they will every waie be as fooliſh
as themſelues. What ſhall I here ſhew that, I
often ſee verie greate men complaine of this matter,
that they are ſodainlie called awaie frō thoſe
ſtudies that are ſacred, weightie, and required of
their place, and compelled againſt their willes to
ſpend moſt of their time in trifles, & idle diſcourſes,
and ſo almoſt to nothing, to their owne great
greife, and the publique damage of the church.
How often, and how grieuouſly doe Nazianzen,
Auſtin, and Ambroſe confeſſe that they haue takē
theſe withdrawings and callings awaie from their
ſtudies? They truely deale more wiſely, ſo they
be not over ſtricte, which imitate that ſame Baſilius
the Greate, and Chryſoſtom, For they ſo cloſely
betooke themſelues to their function, that they
preuented all ſuch withdrawings, as are wont, eyther
raſhly or without reſpect of dutie to be impoſed
vpon learned men. They ſaw well that if you
admit theſe importune ſaluters at the firſt, they
will afterward challenge it as a right to be trobleſome
to good men, & by their example provoke
other men to the ſame importunitie: but that you
ſhoulde provide for beſt, if at the firſt you tooke
ſome care, & prevented theſe vncourteous curteſies
In this ſort therfore did this good ſoule do ſeruice
to God, and the church, or elſe tender his
owne health. Thou rather art churliſh (ô thou importune
mā whoſoeuer thou art!) which vncurteouſly
deſireſt that, which Vrſinus of curteſie might
& of duty ought to deny. It is folly not to excuſe

him that is buſied in affaires of the church; but
not pardon him that tendereth the health of his
owne bodie is in humanitie: & both contrarie to
the lawe of charity. Although (to come to the laſt
part of my ſpeech) this our deere brother was not
ſo hindered, but that whē he was vnable to lift his
handes, his tongue ſtambering, & his iawes almoſt
cloſed vp, almoſt panting & gaſpinge for breath
did yet attend to theſe ſtudies & duties. For whē
his ſtrength failed, & the iuice & bold in his body
was decaied, how often did hee thinke of this our
Schoole? How often did he cōplaine that he was
idle amidſt that painfull buiſineſſe of his infirmitie
& ſickneſſe? How reaſonablie did he perſiſt in
thoſe wrightings he had vndertaken, vntill that
ſoule which coulde bee conquered & tamed by
no afflictiōs, begā to fleete & flie out of his brokē,
cōquered, & tamed corps? ô bleſſed is that faithfull
and wiſe ſeruant, whom his Lord when hee
commeth ſhal finde ſo doing? happie is that man,
whoſe God is the Lord?
            And that this man of famous memorie, our beloued
freind, is now in that hill of Sion, in the citie
of the liuing God, in the heauenlie Hieruſalem,
amongſt myriads of Angels, in the companie
& church of thoſe firſt▪ begottē which are gathered
into a heuēly armie, with the iudge of al fleſh,
with God & the ſpirit of the iuſt that are now
perfited, with the mediator of the New teſtamēt
Ieſus Chriſt, & the ſprinkling of the bloud of our
ſaluatiō, both thoſe argumēts which before I vſed,

namely thoſe heauēly gifts of wir, faith, hope, ſtudy
of pietie, charitie, humanitie, and all other duties
and curteſies do evidently confirme, as alſo
that moſt happy ende which hee made doth certainly
demonſtrate. For, not to ſpeake of this, that
his ſoule long ſince lived vnto God, & was dead
vnto this wretched and miſerable world, (for ſo I
ſpeake holilie with Chriſtes Apoſtle of an holy
thing) when mention was made vnto him of faith,
hope, charity, reſurrection, life, glory, and eternall
happineſſe, Lord how did he aſſent, applaude, &
ſweetelie ſmile at it! how did he caſt vp his eies to
our Redeemer! to whom as he had long before cō
               mended
himſelfe, ſo alſo he did at length ſurrender
his ſoule moſt peaceably, & ſo was wafted out
of the deepe ſea of this world, into a moſt pleaſāt
harbour of ſalvation and reſt, euen the boſome &
embracings of our heauenlie father. Who is there
heere (I beſeech you) amongſt vs, that wil not religiouſlie
crie out for ioy, and wiſh together with
me! O let my ſoule die the death of the iuſt, and let my
ende be like vnto his. For he truely ſaw, he ſaw by
liuelie faith heauen open vnto him, & Chriſt the
Prince and perfiter of our faith ſitting at the right
hand of maieſtie in the heauens, incomparable
glory provided for him, the whole companie of
that heauenly church welcomming him, laſtly all
making to ſaluation, ſince he did ſo quietly yeeld
vp his ſoule vuto God the Creator and Father of
ſpirits, that ſo hee might liue with him eternallie.
This then is that ſoule (noble and worthy auditors)

this is that ſanctified ſoule and acceptable to
God, which to our great loſſe is of late daies takē
from vs: although (as ſometimes Cyprian and Ambroſe
ſaide) wee haue not loſt it, but ſent it before,
purpoſing our ſelues in good time to follow. We
haue not loſt but repaied him, as Epictetus warneth
vs. For he which gaue him hath required & receiued
him backe againe. Why then do we mourne
for him whom we haue not loſt? We lament that
ſo ſweet and fit an inſtrument of Gods glorie is
receiued backe from vs: we lament this foreſhewing
of euil hanging ouer vs, and now ready to befall
vs: we lament the preſent ouer-flowing of wickednes,
iniuſtice, and al perfidious dealing, which
commonly preuaileth ſo much the more, as it perceiueth
theſe meanes of protection and ſaluation
to be taken from vs. For haue we not reaſon to lament
the loſſe of that inſtrumēt, of whom it is ſin
to conceale any thing that may worthily be ſpoken
in commendation? I know right well (noble
auditors) that many here preſent are able to ſpeak
more to this purpoſe then I either haue done or
can do. For that dailie familiarity which you had
with our Vrſine, hath enriched you with ſtore of
matter, and variety of learning with eloquence.
But ſeeing of duty & deſerte I haue yeelded you
the firſt place in this matter, and you haue vouchſafed
me the ſecond; you wil alſo (I hope) willingly
pardon me, for ſubſtituting in my roome a Diuine
to ſpeake of a Diuine, and attribute vnto this
man that which himſelfe ſpake ſometimes of Athanaſius
               
the ſtoute mainetainer of the truth, and
Antagoniſt of errors. He was the Lords faithful laborer,
a man of God, the reconciler of men, the trompet of
truth, the pillar of the church, Gods true champion, conſtant
in the faith of Chriſt, moſt fit for defence againſt
poiſenous hereſies: who though he were peaceable & moderate
in all things, yet could hee neuer patiently endure,
that for quietneſſe ſake God ſhould be betraied but was a
vehement warrier and an invincible Herioicke spirit in
this caſe: cōmending ſome, moderately chaſtiſing others;
correcting ſome mens coldneſſe, bridling others heate:
providing for ſome that they fall not, labouring that others
which were fallen might be raiſed againe; ſimple of
maners, divers in diſcharge of many duties; wiſe of talke,
wiſer in vnderſtanding; wherefore he ſo liued, was ſo inſtructed,
and ſo inſtructed others, that as his life & manners
might be a liſt & limit to vpright diſchardge of the
like dutie: ſo alſo his opinions may bee examples as it
were authenticke lawes of faith and religion. All this I
may wel ſpeake in commendation of this our Divine,
which the ſame Divine ſpake ſometimes in
cōmendatiō of Athanaſius. And would God haue
taken from vs and the church ſuch an inſtrumēt,
except he had bin angry for our ſins? did not God
condemne the wickednes of the world, when hee
tooke Enoch vnto himſelfe? vvas not all Iſrael on
fire after Eliſaeus was dead? was not Iuda miſerably
perſecuted & put to the worſt after the death of
Ioſias? haue not we read that Coūt Stilico ſaid deſtruction
attended on Italie when ſo worthy a man as
Ambroſe was dead? was not Africke, Germanie, and

lād ſorely vexed, after they had loſt Auſtē, Luther,
& Bucer? And I am of opinion that God doth but
reveale vnto vs ſome great & preſent anger of his,
and fore-ſhew ſome ſeuere iudgemēt againſt this
vngratefull generation, by the death of other famous
men, & of this choice inſtrument by name.
But what if God not by worde onely but alſo indeed
haue oftē ſtirred vp our vnrepētant harts to
a profitable meditatiō & terrour of theſe thinges?
Wee truely haue read, ſeene, & obſerued howe
great and manifold ſignes and tokens God vſeth
to ſhew both in heauen and earth, before hee taketh
away thoſe ſacred lights from amongſt mankind:
How vehementlie he doth as it were clothe
heauen and earth with mourning and lamentation,
how fearfully he threatneth to ſet all on fire.
All which he doth to no other end but by many
teſtimonies of his anger to call vs to repentance,
and may giue vs to vnderſtand that hee chooſeth
rather to diſburden his anger vpon al things
then to ſtrike mankinde: and in the end when
hee is ſo neere, that for often offending his
patience hee is readie to directe the arrowes
of his anger againſt our verie heades; that
then hee may ſhewe that thoſe good men in
whome hee taketh moſt delight, are deliuered
from danger of this generall fire and fearfull
diluge of diſtruction. Wherefore (noble
audience) this is the thinge for which wee
mourne and ſorrow, this is that wherwith we
are moued and ſo neerelye touched: and

and truely we ſhew our ſelues iron & flintie harted,
if we ſhould nor be broken with theſe heauy
and feuere tokens and fore-runners of Gods puniſhments,
and ſubmitte our ſelues by obedience
vnder the hand of the almightie. I ſee alſo an other
thinge to be much bewailed and lamented.
But what is that? Whie this, that if iudgment doe
not immediatly enſue on theſe threats, the world
growes inſolent vpon the death of ſuch men, invaideth
the truth by open and ſecret practizes,
raizeth vp hereſies, hardeneth it ſelfe in all miſchiefe,
and encourageth it ſelfe to ſee thoſe men
takē awaie whith are aduerſaries to his opinions,
and ſpoileth and waſteth the church, beinge laſt
deſtitute of her vigilant and faithfull paſtors, doctors,
and guardians. Theſe fearfull dangers, theſe
ſore diſcommodities, theſe ſhamfull miſcheiues,
do beare, racke, and kill, the hearts of all good
men: the feare of theſe thinges (that I may ſay
ſomewhat concerning my ſelfe) doth not ſo much
enforce me to bewaile the loſſe of this my ſweete
deere and meere fellow-profeſſor, that powerfull
teacher and bleſſed ſoule, as the leauinge of vs all
deſtitut of ſuch a one, & the preſaging of of thoſe
evils, which I beſeech God of his mercy to turne
awaie from vs.
            And thus (worthie and learned auditors) you
haue ſeene ſhadowed by my pencil the life of our
deere VRSINE, whoſe memorie ſhall be bleſſed
for ever. I know we muſt not long either lament
him, or pittie his memorie. Yf by my words

I haue againe renued anie mās heauineſſe, let him
togeather with me call to minde how much good
we reaped by him in his life time. What good ſoeuer
we receaued of him, we did not therfore receaue
it that we ſhould envie his good. Let vs rather
everie of vs looke to this, that as he was good
to all, ſo we alſo may in ſuch ſorte follow ſpiritual
good things, that by them we alſo may become
good. He gaue himſelfe painfully to good ſtudies,
let vs alſo do the like. He frankelie dealte vnto
all men that rich treaſure, which he had by his ſtudie
ſtored, and God by his heauenlie grace had infuſed;
let vs alſo followinge his example beſtowe
vſe & fruitiō of thoſe good gifts which by Gods
grace are grounded in us, on our fellow-ſeruants:
let vs further pietie, charitie, courteſie, quietnes,
and the common good; and let vs in the ſight of
God, and in this ſchoole, as in a moſt choiſe theater
bring vp ſtudious youth both for life and
learninge to the ſame ende, and ſtrengthen both
our ſelues and others in the faith of Chriſt. And
thou beloued youth, thou ſvveete aſſemblie,
which couldeſt haue wiſhed that thine inſtructor
to haue liued longer for thine ovvne ſake, for our
ſake, for this ſchoole, for the church, & the whole
world; bemoane no longer his abſence, vvhome
thou reioyceſt to haue hade preſent with thee
ſometimes by example of life, & whome yet thou
makeſt vſe of in thoſe his ever-memorable wrightings.
Endeuour rather to ſtirre vp more Vrſines
about thee. He hath one heir of his bodie, vvho,

wee hope will alſo bee heir of his vertues. But the
way is open to you all to bee partakers of his inheritance.
Goe to, now you are well growen, enter
then, & ſet foote in poſſeſſion of this inheritance.
You want neither wit, nor helpes of ſtudie, not
yet the waie; one thinge onely remaineth, that
yee wante not will, and bee not wanting to your
ſelues. Applie then diligently your will and your
ſelues to theſe ſtudies; applie your ſelues verie
faithfully & painfully to all duties of pietie, charitie
and humanitie; toile and laboure herein, & be
vnto vs another VRSINE euery man in his
place. And though every one of you cannot bring
to the building of this tabernacle the golde, ſilver,
and iewels of VRSINE, yet deſpaire not
preſently; iron, braſſe, woode, Goates haire,
and ſtones are alſo acceptable vnto God. You
that cannot bee Captaines, or in the firſt rancke;
bee not therefore diſcouraged: there is alſo need
of ſome to bee in the ſecond, third, fourth, tenth,
and twentieth rancke: and Chriſt witneſſeth,
that even ſuch alſo haue an order and place in his
Fathers houſe. It ſhall be no diſgrace to bee euen
a doore-keeper in the houſe of the liuinge God.
For of this euen David, (a man after Gods owne
hearte) was not aſhamed; neither be you nowe
aſhamed, neither ſhall it euer repent you, to deſcend
into theſe liſtes, to enter into theſe ſtudies,
to attend theſe duties, or to follow theſe examples.
They ſhall (ſaith Fabius) carrie themſelues
farre higher, which endevour to come to the top,

then ſuch as before deſpairing of comming ſo
high as they would, do ſtraight ſet vp their reſt about
the bottome. But what of that? neither I
my ſelfe which now ſpeake to you am any thing
neere this noble patterne, (I ſpeake only of my
ſelfe, as for the giftes of my fellow profeſſors, I
admire, and in duty reverence them) neither
can you attaine therevnto by your owne induſtry.
But alaſſe that VRSINE, that man of remembrance
of God (for ſo his name doth ſignifie
in Hebrew) is taken from vs: now there remaineth
to vs only the remembrance of ſo excellent a mā.
What then ſhal we do? That Iah, that ſtrong God,
who remembring his ſervant Zacharie, advanced
him to ſo high a top of faith godlineſſe, and learning,
Chriſt that prophet and our only king, is very
preſent with vs, both by his external maieſtie,
& alſo by cōmunicating vnto vs the holy Ghoſt.
Let vs repaire to this teacher, adviſe with this maſter,
and follow this guide: let vs in confidence of
his grace and aſſiſtance conſtantly goe through
with thoſe ſtudies and duties wherevnto wee are
c
                  •
               lled. Let not the impiety of heretiques boaſt
it ſelfe, nor the adverſaries heart ſwell and waxe
inſolent or prowde, becauſe the rodde of him
that chaſtiſed them is broken: for there ſhall ſooner
come a viper out of the roote of the ſerpent,
& the fruit therof ſhal ſoner become a flying dragon
(as Eſaie in times paſt did prophecie) then we
ſhall bee forſaken of our God, & expoſed to the

raging violence of the furious, or fooliſh dreames
of the mad ſorte of men, vvherewith (alaſſe?) the
church often times is to much afflicted.
            Omnipotent eternall God, mercifull father of
onr Lord Ieſus Chriſt, vvhoſe good vvill and pleaſure
it hath ben to informe youth vvith the wholſome
doctrine both of that thy ſervant, and alſo
of others vvhom thou haſt appointed to gouerne
this ſchoole, and to ſeale everie of our mindes
with the ſpirite of thy promiſe and truth: now frō
our hearts wee acknowledge that by takinge frō
amongſt vs this thy ſeruant thou art not alittle offended
with vs, and that worthily. Wee confeſſe
it (ô God!) and accuſe & condemne our ſelues
and our ſinnes, for which it pleaſed thee both the
laſt yeare to ſend thy ſword of peſtilence amōgſt
vs, and alſo this laſt followinge to extinguiſh that
bright-ſhininge light, which thou haſt placed in
the eminēt candle-ſticke of this famous ſchoole.
Wee beſeech thee (ô GOD and father of mercies)
not to ſuffer thy wrath to proceede any farther
againſt this poore floocke, neither call vs &
our ſinnes to accoumpt, leaſt thy wrath kindle
more againſt vs, and ſo we periſh from this waie.
But rather (becauſe here thou haſt placed thy
ſtandard, and haſt giuen thy worde and promiſe
that they ſhal be bleſſed which retire themſelues
vnto thee; gouerne vs (ô Lorde) by thy ſpirite,
that we may kiſſe thy beloued ſonne, and looke
for all ſaluation from him. Deſtroy the plottes &
purpoſes of Satan, preſerue thy people, giue vnto

this church, this ſchoole, and this whole countrie
good & faithfull paſtors, Doctors, & miniſters:
Defend thoſe whom thou haſt giuen, and bleſſe
them aboudantly with all manner of bleſſinges,
keepe the commons & ſtudents in iuſt dutie, holines,
charitie, & peaceableneſſe; Laſtly we humblie
beſeech thee as beinge our omnipotent and
gratious Father, to finiſh & perfit in vs al things,
which ſhall anie way perteine to the glory of thy
holy name, the cōmon edifying of this people, &
our owne ſoules health, in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord,
who liueth and rayneth with thee in the vnitie of
the ſpirit, one God eternall, for ever and ever.
Amen,
            
            He ſlept ſweetlie in Chriſt at Ne
                  •
               ſtade the ſixt
day of March, as ſix of the clocke in the evening,
in the yeare of our Lord, 1583. after hee had leued
48. years, 6 moneths, 22 howers, & was buried
the 8. of March, in the quiet of the Church.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Faultes eſcaped.
            Pag. liu.
            `93. 15. never neither 95 marg. evill offence, evil of offence.
98. 1 owne immutable, owne nature immutable. 98. marg.
in reſpect of, in reſpect of their cauſes wheron they depend.
105. 17. ſtaine, reſtraine. 110. 2. that by, but by. 113. 27, anie,
of any. 126. 3. my hart, my haire. 16. 12. myſtery, miſery. 132
1. A PREFACE, A PART. 201. 8. Tunigeus, Tubingenſ. 204.
21. When, When he ſaith. 205. 4. ſonne of Chriſt, perſon of
Chriſt. 206. 19. that God, what God. 219. 24. immutable immutably.
222. 14. this divine, his divine. 233. 13. from, from
God. 242. 3. him which, him to be finne for vs which. 254. 4.
mixed not mixed 265. 7 which by inſtinct, which is wrought
by &c. 268. 1 or not the, or not to the. 274. 21. not eate therfore,
not eate thereof. 293. 24. viſible, inviſible.
            
         
      
   