
      
         
            
            
            ¶A Dyalogue defenſyue
for women / 
agaynſt malycyous
detractoures.
            
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶The Prologue.
            
               ¶To the ryght worſhypfull and his ſynguler
good mayſtres Arthur Hardberde▪
Robert Vaghane ſendeth
moſte harty gretynge.
            
            
               TO you mayſtres Arthur, my ſeruyce premyſed
               As reaſon of ryght, requyreth to recompence
               Your gentle herte, whiche hath nat deſpyſed
               Afore this tyme, to take with beneuolence
               My wrytynges vnworthye, full of vayne ſentence
               whiche kyndnes conſydered, good cauſe doth conſtrayne
               And dewty me dryueth▪ to do my dylygence
               with ſome ſmall gyfte, for to requyte agayne.
            
            
               ¶Your bownteous benygnytie, imboldeth my rudenes
               This treatyſe folowynge, vnto you to dedycate
               whiche to myne handes, occurryde doubtles
               As I on my Iourney, was rydynge but late
               By a frende of myne, with whom I was aſſocyate
               As by chaunce I aſyghted, at a certayne place
               whiche wylled me than, that I wolde algate
               So forth and talke with hym, a lytell ſpace.
            
            
               ¶Than ſecretly, he dyd vnto me cōmyt
               Agaynſt detraction, this dyalogue defenſyue
               For the woman ſakes, both neceſſary and fyt
               whan preuye reprehendeth, agaynſt them lyſt to ſtryue
               Of whoſe vyce the circumſtance, he playnely doth dyſcryue
               That throughe auaryce, the ſyn inſacyable
               Detractours ſwarme, as bees aboute an hyue
               where felonous flatery, to them is profytable.
            
            
               
                  
¶I toke the volume, and rede therin apaſe
               And well perceyued at the fyrſte ſyght
               It was fayned in fauour, of one in your caſe
               Howebeit I wolde nat aſke hym, what ſhe hyght
               But vnto hym, I ſayde anone full ryght
               what is your mynde, that I herin do ſhall
               For fayne I wolde, yf it lay in my myght
               Your mynde accomplyſſhe, what ſoeuer befall.
            
            
               ¶I wolde ſayde he, yf it your pleaſure were
               That you wolde vouchſaue, at my hande to take
               This lytell ſmale volume, your name for to bere
               whoſe fantaſye with faynynge, is ſet for to make
               Lest ſlaunder perchaunce, his ſharpe ſowne out ſhake
               To moue me malyce, whiche onely meane reſt
               Your name may cauſe, ſuche noyſes to aſſlake
               Therefore preſent it, where as you thynke beſt.
            
            
               ¶Than in my mynde, I thought that you were
               Your cauſe conſydered, and alſo your eſtate
               Moſte worthy to whom, I myght ſende or bere
               It to preſent, or els to dedycate
               And becauſe it declareth, howe the Pyes do prate
               And what them cauſeth, ſuche pratynge to vſe
               I truſt in God, it ſhall your mynde recreate
               Throughe to rede it, yf you wyll nat refuſe.
            
            
               ¶And of your thankes, to me I requyre
               No parte at all, ſens myne is nat the payne
               But of your gentylnes, I humbly you deſyre
               That he may haue thankes, that labours doth ſuſtayne
               And as to my ſelfe, no thake I wyll clayme
               Sens thanke to payne, is euer conſequent
               Yet natwithſtandynge, whyle lyfe doth remayne
               Myne herte and ſeruyce, ſhall be at your cōmaundement.
            
            
               
                  
¶This Dyalogue, as Dyamonde derely dyght
               And as a (weke) moſte worthely wrought
               Shynynge with eloquence, as ſtarre doth of lyght
               Me thynkes that you, of reaſon moſte ought
               As ſhe that with payne, experyence hath bought
               Haue in your cuſtodye, as anſwere for your cauſe
               As the free Fawcon, hath you herin taught
               Your ſelfe to defende, agaynſt pyes and dawſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶Robert Vaghane to the reader.
            
               REde gentyll Reader, all rygour ſet aparte
               Onely with indyfferencye, ponder this argument
               Be nat weyde with wylfulnes, yt ofte doth trewth ſubuarte
               Enterlet no parcyallytye in iudgement
               Remembre this rule, that Iuſtyce in election
               Taketh no place in wyll nor affection.
            
            
               ¶Bende nat then in Iudgement, althoughe parchaunce
               Vnto the hath be extended, a auncyent occaſyon
               Requyrynge agaynſt women, to haue thy defyaunce
               Do nat conſent, to ſuche a lyght parſwaſyon
               Euer conſyder, it is a made affection
               To iudge all vnparfyte, thoughe one lacke parfection.
            
            
               ¶Raylynge without reaſon, voyde of humanytye
               Outragynge and lewde, for lacke of intellygence
               Blynded throughe ygnoraunce, with myſtes of ſenſualytye
               Euermore the Pye, ſetteth out her ſentence
               Relatynge her malyce, by vniuſt accuſacyon
               This ſhall ye perceyue, by the Fawcons declaracyon.
            
            
               ¶Beſtowe nat then thy laboure, to prate with the Pye
               Vniuſtly accuſynge, thy nowryſſhe and mother
               Rede and recorde, howe the Fawcon doth replye
               Defendynge the femalles, with Aucthours one and other
               Euermore aledged, and noted in the mergent
               The gentyll reader, to ſatyſfye and content.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               ¶The Aucthour ſpeaketh.
               
                  IN the moneth of Decēbre, whē phebus ye bright
               with his mocyon had entered in to ye fyrſt degre
               Of Capricorne, whan longe is the nyght
               And the day tyme, moſte in breuytie
               Than ſnowes lyeth depe, vpon the hylles hye
               waters congyled, in to yſe harde and thycke
               Trees, Plantes, and Herbes, ſeme than to dye
               Fewe thynges growynge, appere to be quycke
               The wether moſte bytter, with wyndes ſharpe and colde
               Cauſeth great company, togyther to reſorte
               Vnto the fyre ſyde, where ale good and olde
               Merely they drynke, theyr hertes to comforte
               Early in a mornynge, in this moneth of Decembre
               From ſlepe I aroſe, and to my ſtudye went
               Before all thynges than, I dyd remembre
               That tyme of euery man, ſhuld frutefully be ſpent
               At the fyrſte by chaunce, I red an oracyon
               Moſte pleaſauntly ſet forth, with flowers rethorycall
               Deſcrybynge the monſtruous vyce of detraction
               The dowghter of eunye, the furye infernall
               whoſe peſtylent poyſon, as cankar doth crepe
               Amonge all people, in Cytie, Tower, and Towne
               Bryngynge Innocentes, in to paynes depe
               And from theyr good names, it doth them caſt downe
               By readynge this Aucthour, I was penſyfe in my harte
               As one that had proued, his wordes to be trewe
               Sorowes conſtrayned me, to lay this boke aparte
               The remembraunce therof, my paynes dyd renewe
               Anone I eſpyed in the Oryent
               That dame Aurora, to me dyd apeare
               And the Sōne with his beames, as golde reſplendent
               To our Orizont, began to drawe neare
               with ſpede than my ſtudye, and bokes, I dyd forſake
               Intendynge all thoughtes, from my mynde to expell
               And towarde a Foreſt, the way dyd I take
               
                  
Nat far from the partyes, where I dyd dwell
               In this Foreſt fayre, as I walked a whyle
               Beholdynge hye trees, with armes longe and wyde
               Sodaynly within the ſpace of a myle
               An Arbour moſte pleaſaunt, there I eſpyde
               To that place of pleaſure, for my recreacyon
               with ſpede I approched, it made my herte lyght
               Anone I was taken, with great admyracyon
               Of all the fayre pleaſures, when I had a ſyght
               This place was enuyroned, with Hedgyes thre
               Of Hauthorne thycke, thre dyches depe caſt
               Thre waters there were, whiche I dyd ſe
               In to the Arbour by them, as I paſt
               Okes that were olde, in the fyrſte hedge were growynge
               And Elines in the ſeconde, that large were and longe
               In the thyrde Hedge, with bowes downe bowynge
               Many trees togyther, were thruſte in a thronge
               The Aſhe and the Aſpe, with his leaues that do quake
               The Boxe and the Beyche, togyther dyd ſtande
               The Corke cauſynge ſlyppers, to cracke and to crake
               with the Ewe tre, a defence to this lande
               The Plane and the Poplar, there I dyd ſe
               The Salowe, the Pyne, and the Maple rownde
               The holy with his pryckes, and the walnut tre
               with the Fyr and the Haſyll, hangynge to the grownde
               In the myddes a Cypreſſe, I dyd eſpye
               Borderyd with Olyues, in cyrcle rownde
               And vnder the Cypreſſe, downe dyd I lye
               where benches on eche ſyde, were made aboue the grownde
               Theſe trees to beholde, in my mynde I dyd muſe
               Of all kyndes there growynge, and in order ſet
               All pleaſures worldly, I wolde refuſe
               To haue ſuche an Arbour, yf I myght it get
               Suche flagraunt ſauours, ſuche odours ſwete
               I neuer felt in the moneth of May
               Agaynſt all dolour, a medycyne moſte ſwete
               
                  
Is to this Arbour, to take the redy way
               As in this place pleaſaunt, my ſelfe I dyd comforte
               with ſauours ſoueraygne, and colours good for ſyght
               A Fawcon and a Pye, to the ſame dyd reſorte
               And ouer my heade, in the Cypreſſe they dyd lyght
               Great ſtryfe was betwene them, with argumentacyon
               Theyr opynyons contrary ſemed vnto me
               The Pye prated faſt, with moche contencyon
               And ſayde that her ſentence, nedes trewe muſt be.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶The Fawcon moſte gentyll, with ſober behauour
               Sayde ianglynge wordes, the trouth do nat trye
               And fewe wyſe men, I thynke do fauour
               The lyghtnes of a pratynge Pye.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶The Pye than anſwered, with wordes full of yar
               And ſayde, my ſayinges I wyll neuer denye
               Of women I loke, to haue no hyar
               Nought is theyr nature, theyr wyttes nat worth a flye.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶All thynges ſayde the fawcon,Deut. 32. of Goddes creacyon
               As ſcrypture recordeth,Gen. 10. be perfyt in theyr kynde
               woman was create, by dyuyne operacyon
               Perfyt in body, in reaſon, wyll, and mynde.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Perfyt? who there ſayde the Pye I the pray
               Perfection in woman, ſhall neuer take place
               Vnperfyt ſhe is, and rude alway
               In body, and in ſoule, voyde of all grace.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶In the olde lawe, thou mayſt playnly ſe
               Sayde the Fawcon, that Goddes creatures all
               Be ſownde and perfyt, without deformitie
               A bongler or a botcher, thou cāneſt nat God call
               But yf thou wylt ſcrypture, leaue and forſake
               And flye vnto reaſon, with me to contende
               
                  
In what thynge tell me, dyd God woman make
               So vnperfyte, that thou canſt nat her nature cōmende.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶In her bodye ſayde the Pye, ſhe lacketh perfection
               Both faynt and feble, labours to ſuſtayne
               Harted as an hen, ſhe nedeth protection
               She can nother ſuffre the wynde, nor the rayne.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶If ſtrength of body, with houge and great quantyte
               Preemynence quod the Fawcon, do proue and infer
               Amonge all creatures, than man in dygnytie
               To dyuers brute beaſtes ſhulde far be vnder
               In Lyon, Elephant, Bear, Bull, and Bore
               Quantyte in bodye, boldnes, ſtrength, and myght
               In plenty and abundaunce, be ſene euermore
               No man hath lyke, thou mayſt ſe with thy ſyght
               Yet theſe beaſtes all, be ſubiect to man
               For all theyr hougenes, he is hyeſt in degre
               wherfore gyftes bodely, nother may nor can
               Preemynence in nature, proue where they be
               If ſhape of body, that ſemely is in ſyght
               If countenaunce comely, yf bewty gyue perfection
               Than muſt thou nedes graunt, that woman of ryght
               Ought before man, be taken in election
               But corporall qualyties, as bewtye, ſtrength, or ſhappe
               Boldnes or greatnes, no proffe can make
               Of nobylytie in man, in hym thoughe thou them lappe
               Sens brute beaſtes of nature, theſe qualyties take
               And lyke as theyr preſence, no dygnytie can brynge
               Vnto man nor perfection, ſo on the other ſyde
               Theyr lacke and abſence of imperfection nothynge
               Can proue in woman, in whom they do nat byde.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               Yet humayne perfection, then ſayde the Pye
               In gyftes of the ſoule, doth chyefly conſyſt
               As reaſon and knowledge, thou cāneſt nat denye
               
                  
Nor agaynſt this verytye, thou cāneſt not reſſt
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶I graunt ſayde the Fawcon, that the power intellectyue
               Of the ſoule, with reaſon and lyberty of wyll
               Set man in perfection, as his gyftes prymytyue
               By helpe wherof, Goddes lawes he doth fulfyll.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Than proue ſhall I lyghtly, that woman is
               Vnperfyt ſayde the Pye, and beſtyall of kynde
               Sens theſe powers ſpyrytuall, by nature ſhe doth mys
               And none of them all, in her thou mayſt fynde
               Of knowledge ſhe hath, no more than a Calfe
               In Iudgement as wyſe, as a Capon or a Gander
               And the trouth of her to ſpeake, in this behalfe
               Her wyt is apyſſhe, and in lewdnes doth wander
               To rayle and to ſkolde, no tongue ſhe doth lacke
               To inuent myſchyfe, ſhe is nat to ſeke
               Of crafte and deſceyte, ſhe hath a great packe
               But in goodnes, her wyt is nat worth a leke.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶That woman hath theſe powers reherſed aboue
               Of the ſoule ſayde the Fawcon, that adde ſuche perfection
               Vnto mankynde, by reaſon I ſhall proue
               That in this matter, ſhall be her protection
               Theffect without the cauſe, can neuer be founde
               For betwene them, there is mutuall relacyon
               Let this be of my reaſonynge the grounde
               And harke what ſhall folowe, in trewe declaracyon
               Knowledge in lernynge, as in the artes ſeauen
               In naturall Phyloſophye, and morall alſo
               To make dyſputacyon, of the bodyes of heauen
               And of earthly creatures, in theyr places lyinge ſo
               Facultyes and craftes, to inuent and fynde out
               And chaunſes to tell, are they come a longe ſeaſon
               All theſe to be theffectes, no man doth doubte
               Of the intellectyue power, the wyll and the reaſon.
            
            
               
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶what woman, I pray the than ſayde the Pye
               Theſe gyftes haue had, that effectes thou doſt call
               Except thou be doubtles, dyſpoſed to lye
               Thou cāneſt reherſe none, nother great nor ſmall.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶I can ſayde the Fawcon, reherſall to the make
               Of mo ſuche women, than thou haſt in the
               Condycyons gentle, wherfore good hede take
               And thou ſhalt here named, mo than two or thre
               Carmentes the mayde, fyrſte dyd inuent
               Our latyne letters, as wryters do tell
               Her induſtrye and labour, with wyll and intent
               In memorye perpetuall, do cauſe her to dwell
               The .ix. virgynes pure, that muſyes we call
               The .vii. artes lyberall, dyd fyrſte to vs fynde
               And pleaſaunt Poetrye, conteynynge matter morall
               Vnder Fables fayned, theſe maydes dyd combynde
               Mynerua, whiche alſo Pallas was named
               As goodes was taken, of arte and ſapyence
               Becauſe that in Grecia, ſhe fyrſte ſet and framed
               Plantes, ſhrubbes, and trees, as Aucthours gyue euydence
               The vſe of armour, the helmet, and breſt plate
               with Ingynes wonderfull, and fortreſſeys ſtronge
               For warres with her policie, ſhe dyd fyrſte excogytate
               The reherſall of her actes, requyreth tyme longe
               Diotima a mayden, hyghe knowledge had
               In Phyloſophye, throughe whoſe fame and reporte
               Socrates the Phyloſopher, moſte graue and ſad
               To her cōmyne Lecture, dyd come and reſorte
               Leontium alſo, a woman moſte wyſe
               Agaynſt Theophraſt, with oracyons dyd contende
               And workes moſte excellent, ſhe dyd deuyſe
               Agaynſt detractours, women to defende
               Paula and Euſtochium, were lerned ryght well
               Vnto whom Hierome, of hyghe eſtymacyon
               
                  
Epyſtles and workes, the trouth for to tell
               Dyuers dyd wryte, for theyr recreacyon
               In our countrey natyue, women thou mayſt ſe
               In both tongues experte, the Latyne and the Greke
               In Rethorycke and Poetrye, excellent they be
               And with pen to endyte, they be nat to ſeke
               If women in youth, had ſuche educacyon
               In knowledge and lernynge, as men vſe to haue
               Theyr workes of theyr wyttes, wolde make full probacyon
               And that of men counceyll, they nede nat to craue.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Theſe Examples excell, yf they be vnfayned
               Sayde the Pye, for women to the ſtarres they extoll
               In naturall knowledge, nowe am I conſtrayned
               To graunt that woman hath, moche in her noll.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶I ſhall proue ſayde the Fawcon, that ſupernaturall
               Knowledge in woman, may well take place
               Prophecye I meane, the gyfte celeſtyall
               In to the ſoule infuſed, by eſpecyall grace
               Caſſandra doughter, to Pryamus the kynge
               A lady moſte fayre, dyd ſhewe the deſtruction
               Of noble Troye, whan it was moſte floryſſhynge
               That by Parys actes, it ſhulde come to confuſyon
               The .x. Maydens gentylles, that Varro doth call
               The Sybylles, this gyfte of Prophecye receyued
               Of meruayles they dyd ſpeake, before they dyd fall
               Suche as truſted theyr ſayinges, were nat deceyued
               Sybylla Tyburtyna,Lactant. q̄ gētiles dyd wryte in her boke
               That Meſſyas in Betheleem, of a mayde ſhulde be borne
               And that in Nazareth, mānes nature he toke
               Man to redeme, that by ſynne was forlorne
               Sybylla Erythrca, as Lactancyus doth recorde
               The proceſſe of the Paſſyon, moſte playnly doth expreſſe
               Howe the Iewes vniuſtly, theyr ſoueraygne Lorde
               Oppreſſed with paynes, and deadly dyſtreſſe
               
                  
His buffyttes, his ſcourgynge with whyppes that dyd cut
               His crowne of throne, with pryckes ſharpe and longe
               The eyſell and gall, that to his mouth were put
               Theſe thynges ſhe deſcrybed, and all his other wronge
               The Eclypſe of the Sōne, that made men to quake
               with workes that were wonderfull, ſene at that ſeaſon
               His dolorous death, that amendeds dyd make
               For mānes myſdede, and for his hyghe treaſon
               All theſe ſhe deſcrybed, by dyuyne reuelacyon
               Longe tyme before they came to effect
               And as ſaynt Auſtayne maketh recytacyon
               Of domes day,De ciuit. Dei. li. 18. ſect. 110. the fearfull ſygnes ſhe dyd detect
               In the actes of the Apoſtles, Luke doth recyteAct. 110.
               
               Howe Phylyp the Euangelyſt, had dowghters foure
               All virgyns cleane, with whom was the ſpryte
               Of Prophecye, as they Sybylles had before
               wherfore ſens women, ſuche knowledge haue had
               Both naturall pure, and nature excedynge
               who doubteth in this, except he be mad
               whyther they haue reaſon, with ye power of vnderſtandynge
               But theſe two powers, ſet man in perfection
               And from brute beaſtes, they do hym exclude
               women haue the ſame, as I haue made induction
               Ergo they be perfyt, I may well conclude.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Althoughe I muſt graunt, that they of nature be
               Perfyt ſayde the Pye,Eſa. 14. made by Goddes creacyon
               So is the Deuyll, yet in Hell lyeth he
               By dyuyne ſentence, in endles dampnacyon.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶What meaneſt thou, that murderer to mynde
               Sayde the Fawcon, that man dyd take in his ſnare
               Our dyſputacyon, is of woman kynde
               whiche vnto the Deuyll, thou mayſt nat compare.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Betwene two extremes,Aryſtot. that in qualytyes agre
               
                  
Comparyſon may be made, than ſayde the Pye
               The Deuyll and woman, be lyke in degre
               Theyr ende is to haue, an euyll deſtenye.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶why women ſayde the Fawcon, make me relacyon
               More than men, ſuche fortune ſhulde haue
               Sens man and woman, be of Goddes creacyonMat. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               He denyeth no mercye, to them that do it craue.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶where vyce is raygnynge,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      come 
                        •
                     os. 
                        •
                     0 than ſayde the Pye
               Punyſſhement muſt folowe, thou knoweſt ryght well
               All vyce raygneth in women, this is no lye
               Therfore in paynes, they muſt nedes dwell.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶The Fawcon than anſwered, mylde in his mode
               Sayinge Pye from thy raylynge, thy ſelfe remoue
               Chryſte that ſuffered death, racked on a rode
               Forbyd that euer, thou ſhulde this proue.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Proue ſayde the Pye, what mayſtry is this?
               who put man I pray the, in his fyrſte creacyon
               From Paradyſe, that place of pleaſure and blys
               But woman, throughe the Deuylles temptacyon?
               And therfore doubtles, I may her well call
               The fontayne and welſprynge, of all calamytie
               For throughe her pryde, ſynne orygynall
               Dyd yſſhewe with death, to all her poſterytie
               And lyke as the fyrſte woman, Eue I do meane
               Dyd ſowe the ſede, of all iniquytie
               So ſyth her tyme, women maynteyne
               All ſynne and vyce, in moſte enormytie
               wauerynge they be, and lyght as the wynde
               Crewellas Tygres, than Lucyfer more prowde
               And truſt in them, no man can fynde
               She is no woman, that can lye lowde
               Of carnall pleaſures, they be inſacyable
               
                  
In battyll, bluddy bolde Barones for them dye
               woman to man, was neuer profyttable
               But full of coſt, who can this denye?
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶A prouerbe proued ſayde the Fawcon, I fynde
               The barkynge of a Curre, no Kynge can reſtrayne
               So no man can cauſe, the malycyous mynde
               Of the pratynge Pye, from raylynge to refrayne.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶A prater I am called, becauſe I hyt the nayle
               Euen vpon the heade, than ſayde the Pye
               whan I ſay the trouth, thou ſayſt I rayle
               Yet my trewe ſayinges, thou cāneſt nat denye.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Nothynge ſayde the Fawcon, is more repugnant
               Vnto the trouth, than thy ſayinges all
               And that may be proued, by reaſones abundant
               Deduced of pryncyples Theologycall
               From Parydyſe pleaſaunt, as thou doſt ſay
               Adam was expulſed,Gen. 
                        •
                     0. with his poſterytie
               That Eue was full cauſe, I do ſay nay
               whom thou doſt call, the mother of myſerie
               As Eue Goddes cōmaundement, there dyd tranſgreſſe
               So dyd Adam, as the ſtorye doth tell
               The Sone of a mayde, theyr offence dyd redreſſe
               whoſe death dyd breake, the braſones durres of hell
               Nowe for as moche,Pſal. 14. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . as dyſobedyence
               Of both our fyrſte parentes, Goddes rat dyd prouoke
               It was nat all onely, the womans offence
               wherby mankynde, dyd ſuffer Goddes ſtroke
               And as Dyuynes make declaracyon
               If Adam had neuer,21. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . diſtinct. 
                        •
                     2. conſented to ſynne
               In Paradyſe mankynde, ſhulde haue had habytacyon
               Althoughe Eue before, to offende dyd begynne
               wherfore thou Ianglar, nowe mayſt thou well ſe
               Agaynſt our fyrſte mother, thy vniuſt accuſacyon
               
                  
Seynge that man is proued, cauſe for to be
               As well as the woman, of all trybulacyon.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Than chattered the Pye, and ſayde with hyghe voyce
               Thoughe it be ſo, as thou telleſt to me
               Beware yet in women, leſt thou reioyce
               They wyll deceyue the, by mutabylytye.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶who is ſayde the Fawcon, all tymes at one ſtay
               Throughe this worlde wyde,Eccle. 1. and neuer mutable
               Man is ſubiecte, to paſſyons alway
               His lyfe in this worlde, muſt nedes be varyable.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶I graunt ſayde the Pye, but this is my mynde
               All women of promyſſe, be euer vnſtable
               Theyr fantaſyes chaunge, and tourne as the wynde
               And dowble be theyr dedes, this is no fable.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶In reuoluynge of ſtoryes, ſayde the Fawcon then
               Of women ſtedfaſtnes, moche mayſt thou rede
               On the contrary parte, thou ſhaft fynde of men
               That they haue ben falſe, in worde and in dede
               what kyngdomes noble? what Cyties of pryce
               By treaſon haue peryſſhed, as Cronycles tell
               Contryued throughe the falſe deuyce
               Of cowharde Captaynes, that there dyd dwell
               who betrayde the hyghe kynge, our ſauyour Ieſu
               Paynes for to ſuffre, with extreme paſſyon
               But Iudas vniuſt, and treatour vntrewe
               whiche hanged hym ſelfe, throughe deſperacyon
               Aeneas with Anthenor, Troye dyd betray
               And gaue it to the Grekes, that were voyde of compaſſyon
               Than peryſſhed that Cytie, as the ſtorye doth ſay
               The treaſon of thoſe Traytours, cauſed great lamentacyon
               Fewe feldes be foughten, without treaſon I dare ſay
               Of one parte or other, fewe kyngdomes be wonne
               
                  
without preuy packynge, for treaſon doth decay
               Mo cyties and countryes, than battyll axe or gonne
               If ſtedfaſtnes were ſtablyſſhed, ſubſtancyally in men
               And grauytie were groued, in rulers that be lyght
               If promys were performed, yf the cōmaundementes ten
               Of man were well obſerued, both by day and nyght
               Then conſtant I myght call hym, but ſynce ye fayth fayleth
               And treaſon with all vyce, in hym hath taken place
               Therfore hym to prayſe, ſyttell it auayleth
               For mutable he is, and tourneth in ſmall ſpace
               That women be conſtant, and trewe as fyne ſtele
               Examples we rede, of Penoclope
               And Lucrecya, that ſorowes dyd felt
               Both matrones noble, as ſtoryes do ſay
               Heſter the quene,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . fayre Iudyth moſte chaſt
               As ſcrypture doth ſay, theyr people dyd ſaue
               From crewell death, whan all hope was paſt
               Amonge the men, ſuche grace God them gaue
               who can deſcrybe, with pen or with tonge
               The conſtant vertue, of Suſan moſte kynde
               Vnto her huſbande, the ſtorye is longe
               In Danyell the Prophet,Dan. 
                        〈…〉
                     . thou mayſt it fynde
               The mother of the Machabeis, that .vii. were in nombre
               Exhorted her chyldren, marterdom to take
               Her ſtedfaſtnes cauſed, all men to wondre
               No payne coulde cauſe her, the fayth to forſake
               The woman of Chananee,Ma. 150. of Chryſt was cōmended
               For her fayth vnfayned, and ſtedfaſt belefe
               By her prayer deuoute, her doughter was amended
               That by vexacyon of a Deuyll, ſuffered moche grefe
               Of virgynes moſte chaſte, what nede I to ſpeke
               As Katheryne, Margaret, and many thouſandes mo
               No Tyrayne coulde cauſe them, theyr vowes to breke
               Theyr thaſtyte to ſaue, they ſuffred moche wo
               At Chryſtes death,Marci. 140. whan the Apoſtles all
               Theyr mayſter dyd leaue, throughe mutabylytie
               
                  
Men were founde lyght, and trundlynge as a ball
               In them was no fayth, but infydelytye
               In one woman than, all fayth dyd remayne
               when men dyd ſhrynke, and tourne as the wynde
               Mary Chryſtes mother, it is that I meane
               No ſorowe coulde cauſe, her fayth to vntwynde
               Examples for this matter, almoſte innumerable
               I coulde here recyte, yf tyme wolde permyt
               That women of dede and worde, be ryght ſtable
               But here be ynowe, for them that haue wyt.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Yet women ſayde the Pye, be great confuſyon
               Vnto all men, for in batteyll bolde
               Of blode they haue cauſed, oft great effuſyon
               Of theyr myſchyfe, moche in ſtoryes is tolde.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Thy fables fayned, make ſmall probacyon
               Vnto thy purpoſe, the Fawcon dyd ſay
               whan dyddeſt thou rede, in trewe declaracyon
               That women cauſe batteyll, by nyght or by day.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Dyd nat fayre Helene, than ſayde the Pye
               Of Troye the cytie, cauſe the deſtruction
               when the ſtronge walles, with towers and towrrettes hye
               By the Grekes dyd fall, and had there ſubuerſyon.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶where malyce is raygnynge, there falſe accuſacyon
               Doth folowe ſayde the Fawcon, in felde and in towne
               Therfore of Troy, thou ſayſt the deſolacyon
               was cauſed by Helene, the woman of renowne
               Dyd nat Alyxaunder, his luſt to fulfyll
               Sone to kynge Pryame, by ſtrength ſteale away
               Fayre Helene from the Grekes, agaynſt her owne wyll
               whan ſhe her handes wronge, howe cāneſt thou ſay nay
               If wepynge teares, yf ſygtes ſore and ſad
               If lamentacyon, myght then haue preuayled
               
                  
Fayre Helene had eſcaped, Parys moſte mad
               From Grecye in to Troye, with her whan he feaſed
               And thoughe battyll bloddye, with murder moſte myſerable
               Betwene theſe two nacyons, enſhewed to theyr payne
               The adulterat it cauſed, by dede deteſtable
               whiche coulde not from luſt, his body reſtrayne
               what mountayne myghty, what ſees roughe and depe
               Haue men paſſed throughe, as beaſtes without wyt
               Theyr raygynge hath cauſed, good women to wepe
               with vyolence conſtrayned, theyr luſt to admyt
               Suche myſchyfes many men, oft haue precured
               And yet they ceſſe nat, the ſame to ſupport
               As to wchynge this matter, I am full aſſured
               All theyr madnes fully, I can nat report.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶I can report than, ſayde the Pye
               That women be crewell, and loue to be in ſtryfe
               Curſed no Cayn, thou canſt nat denye
               Angry as the waſpe, wedowe, mayde, and wyfe.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶The fayre Fawcon anſwered, with wordes yt were wyſe
               Sayinge Pye thou arte peuyſſhe, and blynde as a blocke
               No man with reaſon may the ſuffyſe
               Thy malyce is meruaylous, and ſtyffe as a ſtocke
               Thou rayleſt agaynſt reaſon, whan thou doſt impute
               Yar vnto women, with crewell condycyon
               For vnto the contrarye, I ſhall dyſpute
               Theyr pacyence and pytye, in perfyt dyleccyon
               Heate cauſeth yar,Aryſtotle in man and in beaſte
               Of yarfull herte, crewelnes doth ſprynge
               where crewelty doth dwell, compaſſyon hath no reſt
               For contraryes togyther,Aryſtotle can haue no bydynge
               what cauſeth fearſnes, in Lyon, wolfe, and beare
               In Bores that be brym, and maſtyffes moche of myght
               whiche all in theyr raygynge, in peces rent and teare
               Theyr prayſe that they take, by day or els by nyght
               
                  
what moueth man, ſo fearſe for to be
               And crewell of dede, as beaſt wod and wylde
               But heat cauſynge yar, whan he without pytie
               In war doth deſtroy, the mother with the chylde
               And lyke as heate feruent, yar doth inflame
               In man and in beaſte, and crewell them doth make
               So colones contrary, crewelnes doth tame
               Cauſynge man and beaſt, to ſhyuer and to quake
               women in theyr nature, be colde as a kay
               In reſpect of men, wherfore inclynacyon
               To be yarfull or crewell, from them is a way
               And petye moſte tendre, in them hath habytacyon
               who is ſo ſad, of crewelnes to here
               In ſpoylynge or murdre, as theſe women be
               For frayes and for feyghtynges, they make heuy chere
               Vpon euery mānes hynderaunce, they take great petye
               what wepynge teares?Luce. 2
                        •
                     
                   what ſore lamentacyon
               Dyd women make, in Hieruſalem
               Vyon the lambes death, takynge compaſſyon
               That borne was of mother,Mat. 10. and mayde in Bethleem
               But men at that tyme, as beaſtes raygynge mad
               Theyr hyghe kynge and maker, dyd nayle to a tre
               At that ſeaſon tell me, whyther men had
               Lyke vnto women, compaſſyon and petie.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Admyt that thy reaſones, dyd fully conclude
               For women ſayde the Pye, as thou doſt infer
               Yet profyte from them, thou muſt nedes exclude
               Theyr huſbandes they brynge, in det and daunger
               Eaſe they loue all, to labour they dyſdayne
               wafters they be of money, meate, and cloth
               And from the blacke boll, they can nat refrayne
               To ſpeake all I knowe by them, I am loth.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶I am full loth, the Fawcon dyd ſay
               Vnto the Pye, ſuche raylynge to here
               
                  
Nothynge is trewe, thou ſpeakeſt here this day
               Thy fables be fayned, and falſe this is clere
               A womans offyce, as Aryſtotle tought
               In his Econymyckes,primſeco noca. 
                        •
                     0. is redy for to make
               Suche thynges for ſuſtynaunce, as to her be brought
               Her famylye to fede, that paynes and labours take
               All rycheſſe procured, by nyght or els by day
               Throughe the mānes trauayle, in felde or in towne
               The wyfe with her wyſdom, muſt kepe from decay
               And ſuffer no proffyte, in loſſe to fall downe
               By practes I proue, in places as I paſſe
               The prudent polycye, in ſuche gubernacyon
               Of women that wyſely, the worlde do compaſſe
               In moſte honeſt maner, to theyr cōmendacyon
               what labour of bodye, do they oft ſuſtayne
               what breke of ſlepe, whan they ſhulde reſt take
               with honeſtye theyr huſbandes, and houſe to mayntayne
               Theſe thynges to fulfyll, no paynes they forſake
               Men dyuers I haue knowe, to waſt, ſpyll, and ſpende
               At drynkynges and games, ſuche rycheſſe as they had
               whan women full buſylye, dyd labour to amende
               Theyr huſbandes lewdnes, that made them full ſad
               wherfore ſens women, theyr dewtyes do fulfyll
               As I haue declared, without fayned fable
               They rayle without reaſon, and ſpeake all at wyll
               That ſay vnto men, they be nat profyttable
               Cryinge in his cradell, at his fyrſte begynnynge
               whan man doth lye rocked, nat able to ſtande
               who doth hym than fede, with meates nurryſſhynge
               But woman that to helpe hym, doth put to her hande
               who can women lacke, in ſyckenes or in helth
               To waſſhe and to wrynge, and meates to prepare
               A comforte they be, in pouertie and welth
               Vnto all men, to whom they repare
               And therfore Scrypture,Gen. 10. doth woman call
               An helper to man, in euery dyſtreſſe
               
                  
whan fortune fayleth, and cauſeth hym to fall
               Chyfe remedye ſhe is, of all his heuyneſſe
               And thoughe thou Pye pratynge, by vniuſt accuſacyon
               All kyndes of vyce, to women haſt obiect
               Yet in all vertues, they haue delectacyon
               And therefore of God, I thynke them efect
               Humble they be, and lowly in harte
               Pytefull and pacyent, with ſobre behauour
               And contynence from them, doth neuer departe
               with dylygence for vertues, they do euer labour.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Howe canſt thou them vertuous, and chaſt of lyfe call
               Sayde the Pye, that men by ſubtyle prouocacyon
               Moue vnto vyce, and cauſe them to fall
               No deuyll vnto woman, is lyke in temptacyon
               Meandre the flude, that maketh men to muſe
               And laboryous labyrynth, that Dedalus deuyſed
               Suche wyndynges and tournynges, neuer dyd vſe
               As women in temptacyon, for men haue contryued
               All gyftes of nature, they inclyne to prouoke
               Man vnto pleaſure, and his reaſon to blynde
               And with Cupydes darte, to gyue hym a ſtroke
               Thus cleane and freſſhe men, in bondage they bynde
               Theyr countenaunce ſmylynge, as the meſſenger of loue
               Theyr eyes moſte wantonly, euer roll and turne
               Vpon ſyghtes ſemely, and all thynges aboue
               Becauſe loue them burneth, they deſyre to burne
               Theyr handes and fyngers, for this they kepe whyte
               Daſſhed full of rynges with many a precyous ſtone
               To ſhewe theyr prety fete, they haue great delyte
               On theyr toes howe they tryppe, to ſe it is alone
               They laught, they ſpeake, they ſynge, they daunce
               The luſtes of loue, in youth, to inflame
               Theyr garmentꝭ be garnyſſhed, after the guyſe of Fraunce
               And to vſe paynted wordes, theyr tongues be nat lame
               They breſtes they lay forth, as a Boucher doth his fleſſhe
               
                  
To be ſolde in the ſhambles, and ouer them they lay
               A fyne laſe of ſylke, with an owche that is freſſhe
               Or els a ſmall chayne, that was gotten in theyr play
               And as an horſe mayſter, that to a fayre doth brynge
               His Horſes all platted, the mane and the tayle
               So women theyr hear, as golde wyre ſhynynge
               They wrappe, plete, and plat, yonge louers to aſſayle
               But Paule vnto Tymothe,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Timoth. 20. a document doth gyue
               Vnto all women, ſuche fyghtnes to deſpyſe
               And ſo doth Peter,1. Pe. 
                        •
                     0. whiche ſayth they ſhulde lyue
               Nat in wanton apparell, but in ſad and ſobre wyſe
               I dare nat nowe ſpeake, howe ſome do counterfet
               The colours of theyr faces, as they were naturall
               Straunge hear alſo, for theyr heades they do get
               Of their muſkes, poſyes, & pōmanders, I make no reherſall
               All theſe prety tryckes, theſe prety dames do vſe
               In to Venus daunce, yonge Rufflers to aſſure
               Howe canſt thou Fawcon ſay, but theyr gyftes they abuſe
               Defende them in this matter, thou canſt nat I am ſure.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Stop there ſayde the Fawcon, and harke to me a ſeaſon
               For thy braggynge boſtes, lyghtly I ſhall make baſe
               And declare vnto the, by inuyncyble reaſon
               That delyberate dyſcrecyon, in the doth take no place
               Shameles thou arte ſurely, thus ſhamefully to ſpeake
               That man to vyce is moued, by womans prouocacyon
               For women of cleane lyuynge, be oft moued to breake
               Theyr chaſtytie by churles, that chafe them by temptacyon
               what paynted wordes, womans loue to allure
               what tokens that be trycke, do theſe men vſe
               what rynges, what hertes of golde fyne and pure
               whiche women do vtterly contemne and refuſe
               And whan by ſuche tokens, men can nat obtayne
               Theyr purpoſe and wyll, than they do inuent
               Letters of loue, expreſſynge theyr payne
               And preuely by meſſengers, they be forth ſent
               
                  
If letters be contemned, yf wrytynges take no place
               Than labours do louers, in theyr owne perſons take
               They ryde and they ronne, many myles in ſmall ſpace
               And moue honeſt women, chaſt lyfe to forſake
               with ſyghes ſemynge ſorowfull, theyr foly they expreſſe
               with wepynges theyr wordes, be myxed for to moue
               Pytefully complaynynge, of deadly dyſtreſſe
               Thus women to deceyue, all wyles they do proue
               But yf all theyr gloſynges, theyr matters can nat ſpede
               If theyr tokens with theyr trynkettes, & letters be deſpyſed
               Than oft conſtant women, they brynge in great drede
               whan by vyolent oppreſſyon, they haue them defylled
               Dyna that to Iacob the Patryarke,Gen. 34. was doughter
               By Sychem was oppreſſed, as ſcrypture doth tell
               In punyſhmēt of his vyolēce, there folowed great ſlaughter
               Amonge all the people, that in his cytie dyd dwell
               In the cytie of Gabaa,Iud
                        ••
                     . what abhomynacyon
               Dyd men cōmyt, agaynſt the Leuytes wyfe
               The wyde worlde may wondre, of theyr beſtyall faſſhyon
               For amonge them by oppreſſyon, the woman loſt her lyfe
               Dyd nat Annon,11. Reg
                        •
                      130. that ſone was to Dauyd the kynge
               Chaſt Thamar oppreſſe, his ſyſter naturall
               After whiche acte, he had nat longe lykynge
               For abſolon his brother, gaue hym woundes mortall
               Lucrecya the Romayne a matrone ryght famous
               Defyled by oppreſſyon, of Tarquimus ſone
               After the dede, both ſhamefull and vyldynous
               On a ſwerde that was ſharpe and kene, ſhe dyd rone
               Suche dolour deadly, his herte dyd oppreſſe
               Throughe the dede moſte deteſtable, by vyolence commytted
               That death moſte dredefull, to ende her dyſtreſſe
               Before lyfe in efection, ſhe thought to be admytted
               Many thouſandes mo of maydes, wedowes, and wyues
               Moſte tyrānous tourmentes, as wryters do tell
               Haue ſuffred, and alſo haue loſt theyr lyues
               Theyr chaſtyte to ſaue, and Tyrānes to repell
               
                  
They be receyued, ergo I may conclude
               Vpon thy wordes, that aucthorytie they brynge
               And from my ſayinges, all fables the exclude
               As touchynge the examples, of womens good lyuynge
               But nowe to retourne, after longe dygreſſyon
               To our matter intended, myne examples declare
               That men moche haue vſed, crafty inſtygacyon
               women to wrappe, in the deuylled net and ſnare
               And as prouocacyon, hath ben in tymes paſt
               Of men moche vſed, the clēnes to ſubuert
               Of women contynent, ſo ſuche as lyue chaſt
               Be nowe prouoked, from elēnes to auert
               They be nat women, that theyr gyftes do abuſe
               Of nature and of grace, and to vyce them applye
               But men moſte ſenſuall, that ſtudye and muſe
               Dayly theyr luſt to fulfyll in lecherye
               Nowe I pray the Pye playnly, as it is in thy thought
               Speake here thy mynde, whyther more doth prouoke
               The mn that doth ſeke, or the woman that is ſought
               The trouth herof ſhulde cauſe the, thy raylynge to reuoke
               Doſt thou nat dayly, with thyne eyes ſe
               Howe men maſed with loue, to women make ſhute
               And on the other parte, fewe or none they be
               Of women to whom ſuche vyce, thou mayſt impute.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Now am I conſtraynted, to graunt ſayde the Pye
               By reaſon and experyence, that all prouocacyon
               Of man cōmeth cōmenly, for I can nat denye
               Of thy ſayinges and examples, the ſuffycyent probacyon
               But yet for theyr rayment, all gorgyous and gay
               Reprehended of the Apoſtles, both Peter and Paule
               In excuſe of the werars, what canſt thou nowe ſay
               If this matter thou defende, than wyſe I the call.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Full ſharpe be the ſayinges, ſayde the Fawcon in dede
               Of theſe two Apoſtles, that rayment reprehende
               And deckynge of women, yet yf thou take good hede
               
                  
Thou ſhalt fynde that women, they lyttell byſcōmende
               Saynt Auſten to theſe ſayinges,Auguſt
                        •
                     . anſwere doth make
               Of both theſe Apoſtles, and ſayth that none offence
               Ryſeth of rayment, whan women do take
               Vnto dyſcrecyon, dylygent aduertence
               If after the cuſtome, of theyr countrey they vſe
               Rayment ryght royall, and accordynge to theyr ſtate
               Secludynge vayne glorye, yf they do refuſe
               All purpoſe in louers, luſt carnall to inſtygate
               Than ſynne is auoyded, for who ſo decked was
               In garmentes moſte gorgyous, as Heſter the quene
               As the beames of the Sōne, ſhynynge throughe the glas
               with golde and perles, to glyſter ſhe was ſene
               Euen ſo dyd Iudyth, herbewtye augment
               with apparell of great pryce, that cauſed admyracyon
               Yet theſe women both, for theyr good intent
               Of ſcrypture deſerued prayſe, and cōmendacyon.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Thou ſemeſt ſayde the Pye, all maner to cōmende
               And vſe of rayment, be it neuer ſo vayne
               Yet Paule vnto Tymothe, dyd vtterly intende
               All women from vanytie, in rayment to reſtrayne.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Nothynge I thynke leſſe, ſayde the Fawcon I the tell
               Than agaynſt the ſayinges, of Paule for to ſpeake
               All vanytie in rayment, the Apoſtle doth repell
               All vanytie in the ſame, my mynde is to breake.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Be playne in thy termes, ſayde the Pye I the pray
               And dyſtynctly declare, what thy meanynge is
               By vanytie of rayment, for nothynge can I ſay
               To the yf thy mynde herin, I do myſſe.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶So oft ſayde the Fawcon, as women rayment vſe
               Agaynſt the guyſe of theyr countrey, or aboue theyr degre
               And power be decked, ſo oft they take and chuſe
               
                  
In werynge theyr apparell, follyſſhe vanytie
               Vanytie in rayment, alſo I do call
               whan for prayſe or vayne glorye, rayment is worne
               Or els to prouoke, and cauſe men to fall
               In to luſt of the body, whan reaſon is forlorne.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Do nat women ſayde the Pye, theyr rayment abuſe
               All theſe foure wayes, whiche thou doſt expreſſe
               In moſte vayne maner, thou canſt nat excuſe
               Herein the femyne ſexe, nor theyr lyghtnes redreſſe.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶I knowe nat ſayde the Fawcon, the ſurety to ſay
               That any ſo lyue, but yf thou ſuche fynde
               what canſt thou infer, nowe in the way
               Of reaſonnynge, agaynſt the whole kynde.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶If one be nought, ſo be all the reſt
               I ſay ſayde the Pye, of the femyne gendre
               For amonge them all, ſhe that is beſt
               wolde be loth of her lyfe, a reckenynge to rendre.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶In rayſynge vnreaſonable, thou rageſt agaynſt ryght
               Sayde the Fawcon, whan thou doſt of fewe womens vyce
               Infer all the reſt, in theyr lyuynge to be lyght
               If thou harken thy blynde erre, ſhall be open at a tryce
               Some men be murderers, ſhulde I therfore call
               All mankynde murderers, ſome theues and traytours be
               Shulde I therfore ſay, all men do fall
               In to the ſame vyce? no that were madnes playnlye
               Becauſe Cayn dyd murdre,Gen. 40. therfore dyd his brother
               Abell the ſame,Mala. 1. Eſau was reiect
               And forſaken of God, in the wombe of his mother
               was therfore Iacob refuſed of God,ad 
                        •
                     0. 90. and alſo neglect
               Horryble hereſyes theſe blynde ſayinges be
               If they be defended, and by ſcrypture confounded
               And who is ſo blynde, but he may well ſe
               
                  
That theſe ſaying? agaynſt womē of reaſon, be nat groūded
               For what raylynge heretycke, ſo ſhameles canſt thou fynde
               To ſay that our Lady, the virgyne moſte pure
               was lyght in her lyuynge, or corrupte in her mynde
               Becauſe pleaſure ſome women, to luſt dyd allure
               Ceſſe therfore thy ſayinges, and raylynge moſte rude
               Condemne nat a multytude, that innocent is
               As thoughe from all goodnes, thou woldeſt them exclude
               Becauſe that a fewe, be founde to do amys
               Becauſe that a fewe, be both lyght and vayne
               In rayment and apparell, agaynſt the Apoſtles rule
               Thou mayſt nat therfore, of the whole flocke complayne
               As thoughe euery woman, from vertue dyd recule
               But many therebe, to ſayinges euyll ſo prone
               And dayly in the ſame, accuſtomed to ſlepe
               That ſlaunders canſynge many, to ſyghe and to grone
               As paſtymes they take, whan Innocentes do wepe.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Yet the mayſter ſayde the Pye, may lawfully ſpeake
               Of his ſeruaunt his pleaſure, be it falſe or trewe
               Lyke maner the huſbande, doth nat Goddes precept breake
               whan he is wyfes ſorowes, with ſlaunder doth renewe.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Blynde was the fyrſte erre, and euery naked nought
               But this is moche worſe, ſayde the Fawcon in very dede
               Chryſte that mānes ſoule, with his death derely bought
               Forbyd that this erre, come in chryſten mānes crede
               Doſt thou nat fynde, daclared in Scrypture
               That Chryſt is the fountayne,Iohānes 140. of trouth and verytie
               That man hath by grace, he hath by his nature
               This trouth is the way, to the celeſtyall cytie
               As trouth man to heauen, doth condyth and guyde
               So by falſenes and lyes, that nocyuous be
               Slaunderers ſodaynly, to hell ſlyp and ſlyde
               where euer they ſhall reſt, in carefull calamytie
               For Dauyd the prophet,Pſal. 14. in his Pſalme doth recorde
               
                  
That ſclaunderars and lyars, to endles perdycyon
               Shall fall by iuſt ſentence, of the heuenly lorde
               whan ſynne ſhall be rewarded, with ryght retrybucyon
               The wyſe man alſo,Sapt. 1. beareth wytnes to this matter
               And ſayth that the mouth, the ſoule doth ſley and kyll
               Of that man whiche delyteth, of ſclaunders to clatter
               And the names of good people, with detraction to ſpyll
               Nowe for as moche, as deedly detraction
               To all people is dampnable, no ſtate or degre
               Excepted at all, therfore dredefull dampnacyon
               All men deſerue, that of theyr wyues ſclaunderars be
               And it is cōmonly ſayde, that on the deuyll to lye
               Offence and ſynne it is, is it nat than offence
               Agaynſt cryſten women, with ſclaundars out to crye
               Of whoſe gentyll nature, man ſhulde ſpeake in defence
               Paule ſayth that man,Ad eph. 5 ſhuld loue his wedded wyfe
               As his owne body, and cheryſſhe her alway
               Agaynſt Paule they do playnly, that loue to be in ſtryfe
               with theyr wyues, whoſe names with ſclaunder they decay
               Peace therfore Pye, and this opynyon peuyſhe
               That men may rayle theyr pleaſure, ſpeake thou no more
               For ſclaunder is a matter, of all other moſte theuyſhe
               The offence therof doubtles, deſerueth ſorowes ſore
               And yf blynde affections, thou woldeſt ſet aſyde
               And eluyſhe enuye, from thy herte cleane expell
               Than woldeſt thou ſay, that reaſon in men doth nat byde
               That with raylynge, the fame of women hurte and quell
               For in caſe that any, be founde lewde or lyght
               In ſo great a nombre of women, as there is
               Thou mayſt nat at theyr vyce, geaſt or tayle by ryght
               But be heuye and ſorye, for ſuche as do amys
               And in this behalfe to ſay, I dare be bolde
               That none, the hole kynde of women doth ſclaunder
               Excepte he be ſuche, as was nought yonge and olde
               And blyndly by vyce, lyueth in the deuylles daunger.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               
                  
¶I graunt ſayde the Pye, that ſclaunder is nought
               And lyghtnes in iudgement, that cauſeth moche wo
               But yf mene lyues & womens, were to the bothom ſought
               Of men than of women good, thou ſhuldeſt fynde mo.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶This doubte to dyſcuſe, to no man it pertayneth
               Sayde the Fawcon, for God this matter muſt trye
               But experyence, and alſo ſcrypture me conſtrayneth
               The rather to women, in this behalfe to wrye
               For ſcrypture me teacheth, that all kyndes of ſynne
               More by man than woman, had rote and begynnynge
               And practyſe doth proue, that contynuaunce therin
               Of men moſte chefely, hath eade and mayntaynynge
               The fyrſte murdre by croked Cayn,Gen. 40. was cōmytted
               whan innocent Abell, to death he dyd dryue
               Incontynent Lamech,Ibidem. began admytted
               For agaynſt ſtymulacyons, he wolde nat ſtryue
               Noe fyrſte dronkarde,Gen. 90. whoſe fylthynes his chylde
               Chain dyd dyſcouer, his bretherne it perceyuynge
               Abhorred that dede, wylfull and wylde
               And couered the preuyties, cauſe of theyr conceyuynge
               Fyrſte tryan was Nemrath,Gentſis. 10. &. 11. fyrſte ydolater was he
               He ſet nought by God, by his lyghtnynge, nor his thondre
               The tower of Babell he buylded, that all men myght ſe
               Than deuyded were the tongues, that made men to wondre
               The ſynne agaynſt nature, both brute and beſtyall
               Men fyrſte dyd cōmyt,Gen. 19. as ſcrypture doth recorde
               Of .v. Cyties the people peryſſhed, great and ſmall
               In punyſſhement of that ſynne, by the hyghe kynge & lorde
               Pharao of Egypt,Exodi. 1. that Tyran ſtyfe and flowte
               Fyrſt Innocentes dyd murdre, and to death dyd them dreſſe
               For the murdre of thoſe chyldren,Exo. 14. he dyed without doubte
               The red ſee hym ſwalowed, with his people more and leſſe
               And lyke as theſe offences, had fyrſte orygynall
               Begynnynge of men, ſo contynuaunce they haue
               Of men moſte chyfely, whiche dayly to them fall
               
                  
From enormyties they labour nat, theyr ſoules for to ſaue
               For who doth kyll and murdre, in batteyll that is bolde
               who robbeth and ſpoleth, both by ſee and by lande
               who Tyrāny doth vſe, that maketh hertes colde
               who Innocentes doth kyll, with a bloddy hande
               who? but man ſet on myſchyfe this vyce doth cōmyt
               As lewdnes were lawfull, all vyce he doth take
               In the ſnare he lyeth ſlepynge, the knot is faſt knyt
               No kynde of cryme croked, he wyll forſake
               In Seſſyons and in Lyes, who is periured but he
               Great othes that be odyous, no man refuſeth
               And lecherye is laudable, in euery degre
               Both ſymonye ſynfull, and vſurye man vſeth
               And althoughe ſome women, to theſe ſynnes do fall
               Aboue reherſed, yet in reſpect of men
               Theyr nombre is nothynge, or els very ſmall
               For agaynſt one of them offendynge, of ye tother there be ten▪
               
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶I thynke ſayde the Pye, that thy ſayinges nowe be
               Indyfferent agaynſt men, for practyes doth expreſſe
               That fewe of theſe vyces, in women we may ſe
               whiche thou haſt reherſed, but in men they be doubtles
               For murdre and robrye, that openly is done
               Symonye, vſurye, and treaſon vntrewe
               Brybrye that chaungeth, that iudge as the mone
               Hereſyes and ſcyſmes, that dyſſencyon do renewe
               Periurye and rybawdrye, with pollynge and oppreſſyon
               All theſe ſynnes ſenſuall, that fowle and fylthy be
               Of man be moche vſed, I muſt nedes make confeſſyon
               Moche more than of woman, that from theſe ſemeth fre.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Yet man at his daunger, as thoughe well he were
               Doth laughe ſayde the fawcon, ſo ſynne doth hym blynde
               If his ſynne he dyd ſe, than chaunge wolde his chere
               Perceyuynge to his maker, howe he is vnkynde
               His breaſt he wolde beate, for mercye he wolde call
               
                  
For his dedes of dampnacyon, he wolde knele on his kne
               And many ſalt teares, from his chekes than ſhulde fall
               If he his workes wycked, dyd ponder as they be.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶As it ought to be ſayde the Pye, thou doſt ſpeake
               But as thou doſt ſpeake, ſo ſhall it nat be
               whyſe man is here lyuynge, Goddes lawes he wyll breake
               Ceaſe therfore thy ſayinges, by the counceyll of me.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Than ſhall I retourne, to make repetycyon
               Of our matter fyrſte moued, ſayd the Fawcon in this place
               Thou ſaydeſt that all women, do lacke perfection
               Of body and theyr ſoules, be voyde of all grace
               A pertlye I haue proued, that as perfyte they be
               In body as man, and theyr ſoules haue creacyon
               Vnto the ymage, of the hyghe Trynyte
               Thuo perfyt they were create, by dyuyne operacyon
               That depenes of wyt, with reaſon profounde
               In women take place, myne examples expreſſe
               For the .vii. Aries lyberall, had theyr fyrſte grounde
               And inuercyon by women, this is doubtleſſe
               Aptnes alſo, and pronytie they haue
               Vnto all kyndes of vertue moſte pure
               with dylygent endeuour, they haue laboured to ſaue
               Theyr ſoules from all vyce, and grace to procure
               And furthermore Pye, I haue made declaracyon
               That women in lyuynge, the men do excell
               Confounded I haue, thy falſe accuſacyon
               And reaſones I haue vſed, thy raylynges to repell
               Of ſcrypture ſomtyme, the ſayinges I haue ſought
               Hyſtoryes profane, and experyence moſte ſure
               The documentes of Doctours, forth I haue brought
               For the femynyne ſakes, theyr ryght to recure.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶By thy proceſſe ſayde the Pye, as I can perceyue
               Thou concludeſt all women, vertuous to be
               
                  
Becauſe that a fewe, vertues dyd receyue
               wherof examples, thou dydes recyte to me
               At the length thou doſt take for fynall concluſyon
               That women in theyr lyuynge, far men do excell
               As thoughe they alonely, of grace had infuſyon
               This vtterly from men, grace thou wylt repell.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Nat ſo ſayde the Fawcon, for that is nat my mynde
               Grace from all men, vtterly to exclude
               Nor by myne examples, thou canſt nat fynde
               That all women vertuous, I entende to conclude
               But this concluſyon, of all my ſayinges take
               That to knowledge and vertue, women apt be
               And yf of theyr lyues, comparyſon thou make
               More godly than men, they ſeme vnto me.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Theyr proctour thou arte made, ſayd the Pye I perceyue
               A rewarde to receyue, theyr parte thou doſt take
               But whan they with doblenes, ſhall the deceyue
               I thynke than this offyce, thou wylt forſake.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶The trouth to defende, why ſhulde I refuſe
               A proctour to be, the Fawcon dyd ſay
               Innocentes to helpe, we ſhulde our wyttes vſe
               In theyr cauſes iuſt, and helpe them alway
               None other rewarde, to receyue I deſyre
               But trouth to trye forth, and malyce to ſubdue
               This brought to paſſe, than haue I my hyre
               For than ſhall be knowen, the falſe from the true
               And where as by doubtenes, I ſhall be deceyued
               (As thou ſayſt of women) that can nat ſo be
               For doubtenes of thoſe, is neuer conceyued
               In whoſe hertes is playnes, and ſymplycytie.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶I ſe ſayde the Pye, with the to contende
               Agaynſt the femyne gendre, I am moche vnable
               
                  
As one ouercome, therfore I make an ende
               For lytell it auayleth, before the to fable.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Yet one thynge of the, or thou from hens flye
               I demaunde ſayde the Fawcon, what moued thy mynde
               In all thy ſore ſayinges, ſo ſhamefully to lye
               with raylynge outragyous, agaynſt woman kynde
               whyther theyr nature, theyr wordes, or theyr lyuynge
               Thy tongue haue prouoked, to deadly detraction
               Or rather by raſhnes, of enuye procedynge
               Theyr fame to defaulke, thou haſt delectacyon.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶Theyr nature is good, than ſayde the Pye
               And ſo be theyr dedes, the trouth for to tell
               Malyce me moued, of women to lye
               Syſter to Megera, the ragynge fende of hell.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶why doſt thou than women, more than men ſclaunder
               The Fawcon dyd ſay, with thy wordes that be wylde
               Sens men by dedes deadly, lyue in more daunger
               Of ſoule than women, whiche ſeme vndefylde.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶The loweſt parte of the hedge, is troden downe
               Vnder fore ſayde the Pye, whan the hyeſt is forborne
               womans power is ſmall, in felde and in towne
               Therfore I them ſclaunder, therfore I them ſkorne
               Men rule and gouerne, by ſee and by lande
               Promocyons and profytes, by them I may haue
               Therfore to catche ſomwhat, in to my hande▪
               
               I laude them, I flatter them, whan I begyn to craue
               He that wylleth with welth, in this worlde leade his lyfe
               Placebo he muſt play, his kne both bowe and bende
               Flaterars fare of the beſt, and lyue without ſtryfe
               whan playnes with trouth, great men do offende
               Theyr appetytes to pleaſe, my mynde I applye
               As they ſay I ſay, be it wronge or ryght
               
                  
Somtyme I graunt, ſomtyme I denye
               Yonge Rufflers to pleaſe, whole wyttes be full ryght.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶Than yf thou ſhuldes playnly, and as the trouth is
               Thy mynde agaynſt men, ſayde the Fawcon expreſſe
               Rebuke they ſhulde haue, of prayſe they ſhulde mys
               And thy ſtyle agaynſt women, than woldes thou redreſſe.
            
            
               ¶The Pye.
               ¶I graunt ſayde the Pye, but yet adulacyon
               Nedes muſt I vſe, great men to content
               And agaynſt women, my cōmon detraction
               Theſe two to contynewe, is my full intent
               Auaryce of mynde, that is inſacyable
               Adulacyon to vſe, hath gyuen me occaſyon
               And ſo hath enuye, the vyce deteſtable
               Prouoked detraction, with falſe accuſacyon.
            
            
               ¶The Fawcon.
               ¶The Fawcon moſte fayre, moche moued in his mynde
               Agaynſt the Pyes wordes, and open confeſſyon
               with ſyghes ſore, aſcendynge from his herte kynde
               In lamentynge maner, made this exclamacyon
               O worlde moſte wretched, O tyme infortunate
               O blyndnes moſte beaſtlye, O lyfe without lyght
               O vertue, O grace, from mans ſoule ſeperate
               The dedes of darknes, haue put forth his ſyght
               Nowe reaſon is blynded, by ſynne ſenſuall
               And iudgement corrupte, by offence cuſtomable
               wyll wandereth wyldly, by appetyte carnall
               All powers of mans ſoule, be founde reprouable
               Flaterars moſte falſe, that fables can fayne
               Great men accept, and to counceyll take
               Playnes and Iuſtyce, be exyled cleane
               And oppreſſyon cauſeth, Innocentes to quake
               Extorſyon is extolled, and rygour doth rule
               Detraction and deryſyon, with nobles do dwell
               Verytie and petie, from theſe men recule
               
                  
And falſenes with flatery, trewe plannes do quell
               All theſe ſeme lawfull, to men that be of myght
               Theyr wylles and pleaſures, they take for a lawe
               with ragynge and raylynge, they ronne agaynſt ryght
               For ſmal is theyr lernyng, theyr wyttes nat worth an hawe
               O Pye moſte peuyſſhe, howe canſt thou ſuche prayſe
               And Innocentes condemne, whoſe dedes deſerue lawde
               The hertes of playne people, thou doſt dyſeaſe
               whiche couet in trouth, to lyue without frawde
               But ſeynge my ſayinges, can take no place
               In hertes that be harde, congelyd with vyce
               No remedye I fynde, but prayer for grace
               That many from his ſynne, may wake and aryce.
            
            
               ¶The Aucthour.
               ¶Whan theſe wordes were ſpoken, the Fawcon toke flyght
               The Pye for to punyſſhe, that fled faſt away
               Of them both ſhortly, I loſt there the ſyght
               And whomwarde I walked, from that Arbour gay
               Anone I drewe forth, the argumentacyon
               Of theſe two byrdes, the Fawcon and the Pye
               As you haue harde me make recytacyon
               Nothynge from theyr ſayinges, my ſtyle I dyd wrye
               The people to profyte, my purpoſe is playne
               No man to dyſpleaſe, with worde or with wyll
               But deadly detraction, I wolde reſtrayne
               That cauſeth many men, theyr ſoules for to ſpyll
               The prynce of peace pearles, the lambe immaculate
               That ſuffered ſorowes ſharpe, ſynne to ſuppreſſe
               And with his blode,Apoc. 1. waſſhed out ſoules cōcamynate
               On the Aulter of the Croſſe, the deuyll to depreſſe
               He graunt by his grace, that charytie may ſprynge
               In euery mans herte, as flowres ſprynge in May
               Than God ſhall we loue, our heauenly kynge
               And enuye expell, that our ſoules doth decay
               Than reaſon ſhall rule our dedes with dyſcrecyon
               Betwene man and man, loue ſhall be vnfayned
               
                  
¶Therfore, whan thou ſhalt come to her ſyght
               whiche wyll be ſhortely, as far as I geſſe
               Say thou arte ſende, to pleade in her ryght
               As in the quarell, of thyne owne mayſtreſſe
               Than ſhall ſhe ſe, what thou canſt expreſſe
               For her defence her ryght to recure
               And from detractours, that wolde the ſuppreſſe
               In her Cypreſſe cofer, ſhe wyll kepe the ſure.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Thus endeth the Fawcon and
the Pye. Anno dn̄i. 1542.
            
            ¶Imprynted by me Robert Wyer / 
for Rycharde Banckes.
            ¶Cum priuilegio regali / 
ad imprimendū ſolū.
per ſeptem annum.
            
               Robert wyer.
               The prynter.
            
            
         
      
   