
      
         
            
            
            TRVE NEVVES
From one of Sir Fraunces Veres
Companie.
            
            Concerning Delftes-Isle, and
sundry other townes in the Lowe
Countries, yeelded to the Generall
since May last.
            
               Of the great armie, nowe comminge
out of Germanie for the aide of
the French King, and their hope for
the speedye winninge of
Antwerpe.
            With the bloody persecution
and Marterdome which sundry cheefe
persons of account did lately suffer
in Spaine for the profession
of Christ Iesus.
            
            Translated out of Dutch.
            Seene and allowed.
            Imprinted at London for Thomas Nelson,
and are to be sold at his shop, ouer against
the great South doore of
Paules. 1591.
         
         
            
            
            The coppie of a Letter written
by a Gentleman of account, sent to a Ladie
in England, concerning the present state
of the Lowe Countries.
            
               RIght Honourable Ladye
to whom I am in all duety
bound: the dispatch of my
last letter sent away with
such great speede concerning
the yeelding vp of the
Sconce and towne of Zutphen,
made me ouerslip to acquainte your Ladiship
with one peece of seruice don at that instant
by a straunger in our Campe, a thinge
worthy to bee remembred, which was as followeth.
After we had obtained the Sconce of
Zutphen, we set forward towardes the town,
against which hauing placed our ordenaunce,
with full resolution by force to enter it: there
issued foorth of the said towne of Zutphen an Italian
hauing so sterne a countenaunce, and
beeing so mighty a man of person, yt he seemed
more like a monster then a man: this Italian
carryinge a countenaunce as it had beene a
young Giant, vaunted him selfe, and made a

proud challenge before our General the Graue
van Maurice, offering to combate hand to hand
with any Gentleman hee had in all his armie,
for the estate of the whole towne. But the Generall
made slight accounte of his challenge,
and was very vnwilling that any one shoulde
fight with him, the rather for that he seemed to
bee so mightie a man at armes.
            Hereupon a young youth (borne in the Low
Countries) stepte before the Generall beeing
scarce 19. yeeres of age hauing no haire on his
face, and vpon his knee besought the General
that hee might be permitted to Combate and
fight with this mightie Champion, whereunto
the Generall woulde hardlye condecend
by reason of the youngnes of his yeares, neuerthelesse
at the importunate sute of the
young man whose name was Rihouen, the
Generall gaue his consent, commaundinge
him to be mounted vpon a great horse who being
well armed and prouided for that purpose,
set vpon this challenger, they beeing bothe
singled foorth in the plaine fielde, began to assault
and run at eache other with their Launces,
which beeing broken, Rihouen suddainly
began to drawe foorth his Cutlace wherwith
he entending to haue smitten the Italian (from
whom he also looked to receiue the like curtesie)
suddainely espied this challenger to haue a
dagge charged which he was discharging at
Rihouen, wherupon Riechouen fiercely stroke
a him and at the first blowe cut of his right
arme, so that the arme, dagge and all fell to the

ground. Whereupon Riehouen tooke him prisoner
and brought him before the Generall,
who not onely commended him but bountifullie
rewarded him for his honourable seruice.
            Thus much I thought good to certifie vnto
your good Ladiship the thing beeing trueth, &
besides here withall to signify vnto you, our
good successe and affaires happened since that
time. May it therefore please your Ladiship
to vnderstand, that so soone as wee had obtained
Zutphen, wee marched with our forces to
Deuenter, wher hauing planted our ordinance
before the weakest part of the towne, we plaied
vpon it with the Cannon, so yt on the first
night, our Souldiers were lodged vnder the
walles thereof.
            On the next morning early, the enemy perceiuing
our great preparation and whot assault,
and that we were resolued to enter the
towne by force, craued a parley being no way
able to withstand vs, whereupon the Lord of
Fama being General of ye ordinance with some
of the cheefe commanders of our army, asked
them if their demaund were in good earnest or
not, which they affirmed by a great oath to be
don in earnest.
            Wherupon we presently appointed two captaines
the one called Vandernots, and the other
Lennits, these two we appointed to go into the
Citty accompanied with some few souldiers.
On the Enemies side, two of their Captaines
came into our campe as pledges the one being
a Spaniard, the other a Wallonne, with whō
               
when his excellency had cōferred, he granted
vnto them after a ripe deliberation with his
councell at war, the same conditions that he
had graunted before vnto the towne of Zutphen,
the coppie wherof was as followeth.
            
               The agreement of his excellencie with those
of Deuenter.
               
                  MAurice Prince of Orange, Earle of Nassawe
Catzelenboghen, Vianden, dieth &c. Gouernour
and Captaine Generall of the dukedome
of Gelderland and the counties of Holland, Zealand,
West-frieseland, Zutphen, Virich and Ouerrisell,
Admirall Generall, &c. Promise by
these presentes and vpon our honour to the gouernour,
Captaines, officers and souldiers, as
also to the Cittizens and inhabitantes of the
Citty of Deuenter, of what quallitie or condition
soeuer, that they maye with their wiues,
Children, mooueables, furniture, and withall
other appurtenances, freely departe out of
the said citty either to Nimweghen, or any other
place wheresoeuer it shall please them.
               And if it happen that some of the said Captaines,
Officers, and soldiers spirituall or temporall
or any of the cittizens be not able to dispatch
their affaires so soone, we then graunt
vnto them moreouer the space of three daies
free, wherein to dispatch all their busines: and
that it shall be lawful for them to depart when
so euer they please. And those that shall bee
willing to remaine where they are, whether
they are spirituall or temporall shal be vsed as
the other inhabitants of the vnited prouinces.
               
                  
And to the ende that they may bee the more
assured hereof, we graunt vnto them a certain
Conuoy and sixe horses, vpon condition notwithstanding:
that their Liefetenant Collonel
shall promise and binde him selfe to see them
safely deliuered againe in Deuenter, so soone as
they shall be arriued at the place appointed.
               These conditions beeing ratified and confirmed,
vnder the hande and seale of his excellencie,
on the tenth day of Iune, the said towne
was immediatelye yeelded vp vnto the sayde
Lord Generall to the vse of the States.
               After wee had thus obtained the towne of
Deuenter, we gaue some small assault against
the towne of Nimmingham where we made
no tariaunce. Then we passed toward Grunningen,
and in our way we assaulted a town of
great strength called Delits Ile: beeinge eight
English mile from Giunningen, which towne
was strongly fortified and entrenched: neuerthelesse
wee had not lien before it aboue two
daies, but the towne was constrained by force
to yeelde vnto vs, for wee entered the Sconce,
where we had a fierce battaile: but in the end
wee put many of the Enemies to
the sword, without the
losse of any store of
men.
               
                  
THe towne of Delftes Isle, (after we had obtained
it,) wee fortified it and sent our army
immediatly towards Stenwick, before which
town we nowlie, hauing daily some small skirmishes: In this towne it is supposed that the
Prince of Parma abideth, whose strongest
power at this present is not aboue three thousand.
We receiued certaine newes from Cullen
that the Lord Uiconte of Turyn, accompanied
with some of the nobilitie of Germany, is
comminge downe into the Lowe Countries
with thirty thousand footemen, and ten thousand
horse-men, these purpose to haue passage
into Fraunce for thereleefe & aide of the french
King, and our general meeteth them the twenteth
of this month to welcome them into the
countrie: they are very valiant soldiours and
wonderfully well prouided both for horse and
foote, I trust verye shortly to aduertise you of
some attempte to bee perfourmed against Antwerpe:
which forthwith we meane to put in
practise, for hauing gotten the Castell of Tuernout
which we now enioy, wee may plainlye
come to the walles of the Cittye: Wee heere
good newes God be thanked out of all partes
especiallye out of Brittany, where a Gentleman
of Captaine Salamon Wolfes companye
writeth that he is in good hope, very shortly to
send word of one of the most brauest and commendablest
battels that euer was fought this
hundreth yeere, well God and S. George for
England, God blesse them and our Generall
with S. Frauncis Vere vnder whose commandement

I still abide, our Generall deserueth
great honour for his skill and curradge, and so
dooth S. Frauncis who is in good health, hee
sheweth that he is decended of an honourable
house: yea his very name is feared in all the emies
forces. The thundring shot of the Cannon
calleth me to my place, and therefore am
constrained to cut short, leauing your good Ladieship
to the consideration of all heerein expressed
which is no more but what I
my selfe haue seene and
know for truth.
               The towne of Groninghen is somewhat distressed,
by reason the passage is hindered thorough
the taking of Delftes Isle.
               
               The towne of Huelft in the land of wast is
lately yeelded.
               And the greatest part of Artoyes is now in
yeelding.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The bloodie persecution and
marterdome which sundrye cheefe persons of
account, did latelie suffer in Spaine,
for the profession of Christ
Iesus.
            
               THe Inquisitors of Spaine
hauinge practised a longe
time to entrappe and ouerthrowe
all the secreet professors
of Christe Iesus
which might bee founde in
that Land, procured their
officers and ministers to attache and apprehend
such as did any way deale contrary to the
lawes of their holy house, or varrie in religion
from the ordinaunces and detestable decrees
of the Church of Rome: For wee are to note
and may easilye coniecture that although the
people of Spaine, are for the most parte giuen
to imbrace Idolatrie and superstition, yea
and to be aduersaries and sworne enemies to
gods truth and to the fauourers thereof: yet
may we be assured that among so many, there
is doubtlesse some that are of the contrary opinion,
such as not onely feareth God, but also
are secret imbracers of his truth, yea and such

as shunneth not to teach and instruct otherssecretly,
in the principles of Christian religion.
Among whom one Doctor Cacalla a very learned
man, who sometime had beene Chaplin
vnto the Emperour Charles he fifte, beeing
heereof greatly suspected, was suddainely attached
and openly accused to be a Lutheran,
Heriticke, and thereby an vtter enemie to the
Church of Rome: whereupon he with sundry
others his fauourers were sent to prison who
remained there a longe space while in the
meanetime, the whole house, stocke and linnage
of Madam de biuero, were all also attached
and sent to prison for the said cause, who
would not shunne in prison openly to saye and
offer to prooue with the losse of their liues,
That the religion of Spaine was false, abhominable,
full of superstition and idolatry, and
that God blessed England for professing of his
truth. The names of which persons, the
Popes ministers there neuer ceased till they
had giuen ouer vnto the Inquisitors who soone
after being openly denounced for Heretickes,
were brought to Veledolid, the place where
for the most part the King of Spaine commonly
kept his Court, there was the sentences published
against those Godly professors, where
according to the tenour thereof the prissoners
were to bee executed for example to others,
with many circumstaunces and seremonies
hereafter insuing.
            Whereupon as well for the proceedinge to
iudgement, as also for the due execution of

their sharpe and bitter lawes continually put
in execution in those causes, there was erected
a large Skaffold in the middest of the greate
market place of the said Citty of Valedoled, between
S. Frauncis Church and the holy house.
Whereupon was placed a chaire of sixe steps
high, for euery man to behold, right against ye
face of the towne house, vnder which was
seates very broad and so large steps that many
people might thereupon sit and be placed.
            At the one side of the scaffolde there was
made a gallery leading from the towne house,
aswel to auoide the preace of people, as also for
the cheefe states & Princes of the blood, to haue
free recourse too and fro, in which Gallery was
placed a ritch seate towards the market place,
onely appointed for the Princes and Kinges
sister and Regent of Spaine, the kings bastard
sonne, and for diuers other Princes and courtiers,
to heere the sentence and to see the law efectually
prosecuted.
            The appointed day beeing come, there was
such a multitude of people assembled to heere
the sentence and so see the execution of the prisoners,
(because the prisoners were of great
account,) that not onely al windows and houses
were full of beholders, but also al the market
place & streets ther about were stored with
such great prease, that hardly might the traine
haue passage to the place skaffold.
            Whereupon about tenne of the clocke of the
same day, there arriued the princes Lady Iane
sister to King Phillip, beeing first Regent of the

Kingdome of Spaine beeing accompanied with
the Kinges great stewarde and sundrye other
Lords and nobles and attended on with a cō
               pany
of knights, the guard, the Archers, bowmen
and Halberders, issuing forth of the kings
Pallace, who marched on horsebacke directly
to the towne house, with foure Harraldes of
Armes going before her and the Earle of Beudia
carried the naked sword.
            When these Princes and nobles were come
to the place and set in degrees one nexte vnto
an other, vpon the aforesaid scaffold: presently
the Archbishop of Ciuill, the cheefe Iudges of
the spirituall court, and the counsell of the Inquisitors
togeather with the Bishop of Valencia
rid through the towne vnto a scaffolde for
them appointed, but the whole traine of the
rest of the spirituall courte and those of the holie
house went all vpon an other scaffolde thorowe
the gallery.
            The prissoners beeing in number thirtye,
were brought foorth and led, as it had beene in
a triumph, one carying in the middle of them
the picture of a deceased gentle-woman: These
prisoners did all seuerally weare the Sambenito
as the Spaniards call it, which is a yellowe
coate made like a fooles coate full of red
crosses before and behinde with vglye faces
painted vpon the coates, all carrying in theyr
handes waxen lightes, or wax candels.
            Nowe the cheefest malifactors as they tearmed
them, namely those that before were secretlie
appointed to bee burned, had on their

heads Miters or crownes of paper, called in Spanish
Crocas, vppon the which was also painted deuils
and vglie faces, before thē was carried a crosse
couered ouer with black lining, in token of mourning,
& after them issued a bundance of people, crying
out, and reuiling them in most clamarous & foolish
manner.
            Immediatly after that, the Iudges and chiefe
Inquisitors were placed vpon the Skaffold, the prisoners
were placed also in order, beeing brought in
euery one led between two false brothers, Officers
to the Inquisition, called Familiars, such as to a
mans face will speake him fayre, and seeke to cutte
his throte behind his backe. Nowe were the prisoners
sette vpon the sixe steps before the Chayre, and
as a principall partie, Doctor Cacalla aforesaid, was
set upon the first step, and so euery one in order, according
to the quallity of his offence. Then was
there a Friar of S. Dominicks order called Melchior
Cano, thys Fryar made a sermon to the companie
and prysoners, which continued ye space of an houre,
which being ended the L. chiefe Iustice, went from
his first place to another Chayre, purposely made
ready for him. The Archbishoppe of Ciuile went also
from hys Skaffold, vnto that Skaffold where the
Princes sate, and aduised them to sweare, (hauing
theyr fingers layd vpon a crosse, which stoode pictured
in a Masse-booke) namely, that they should vpon
theyr honors, support, maintaine, fauour and defend
the holy Inquisition, and thereunto to shewe
daily theyr good affection towardes it, neuer to hinder
theyr intentions, but to gyue them full power
heereafter, to burne all those, that (departing frō the
Romish Church) should followe the doctrine of the

               Lutheran Hereticks, without exception of person, of
what age, state, qualitie or calling so euer. Secondly,
that they should force and commaunde theyr subiects,
to submit themselues to the Romish Church,
and to obserue theyr Lawes without force or any
violence. The Princes tooke thys oath, and therevpon
the Archbishop gaue thē with his forefingers
hys benediction or blessing, saying, God sende long
lyfe to your Highnesses. Which being dooue, the seuerall
sentences and iudgements of the prysoners,
were them read before them, and afterwarde publiquely
pronounced by the Official, who called vnto
him Doctor Augustine Cacalla, priest in Valedolid,
who being come from his seate, was set vpon another
by the sayd Officiall, to heare the sentence of
Condemnation, namely, for that it was known vnto
them, that the said Cacalla, was the chiefest preacher
of that new secte & eronious doctrine, (as they
termed it) to those that were of that Conuenticle,
that therfore hee was first to be disgraduated, & after
to be burned, and hys goods confiscated to the
benefite of the Iustice.
            After his sentence was read & pronounced, Francis
de biuero, Priest of Valedolid, and brother to the aboue
named Cacalla, receiued like iudgement, and to
the end he should speake nothing against the horrible
abuses of the Spanish Inquisition, and theyr
detestable doctrine, as he had before very constantly
doone, as well without as within the prison, the
said Frauncis biuero (beeing very well beloued of
the Common people) had his mouth gagged, by
meanes wherof he could not speake one word. The
next was Mistris Blanch de biuero, called & condemned
as her brother was before. The fourth was

               Iohn de biuero, brother to the rest, and hee was condemned
to perpetuall imprisonment, and there to
weare the Sambenito or fooles coate as is aforesayd,
all the dayes of his lyfe. The next was Madame
Constance de biuero, sister to the aforesaide Gentleman,
being the widdowe of Ferdinando Ortis, dwelling
before in Valedolid, she followed the rest in lyke
iudgement, and was condemned to be burned. The
sixt sentence was denounced against Madame Leonore
de biuero, mother to those persons, aforesaide,
who beeing dead and buried long since in Valedolid,
yet forasmuch as in her life time she had greatly fauoured
all true professors of the Gospell of Iesus
Christ, & had suffered many godly assemblies and
Sermons to be made in her house, as appeared by
the confessions of sundry, examined to that purpose,
her bones were commaunded to be digged foorth of
the graue, and beeing brought thether in a Coffin,
were condemned to be burnt, for that (as they sayd)
they were the reliques of a Lutheran Hereticke, and
that all her goods should be confiscated to the benefite
of the Magistrate: and finally, that the house
wherein she dwelt in her life time, shoulde bee raced
downe to the ground and left vacant. And that the
occasion of racing the said house, might be commonly
knowne to all persons, it was ordained at that
present, that a pyller of stone should be erected in the
same place, and the occasion thereof to be engrauen
in the sayd pyllar: which thing was presently put
in execution and performed forthwith▪ so yt the stone
pyllar standeth still in memory heereof. The next
was, Alphous Pieres, Priest of Valentia, he was condemned,
first to be disgraduated, and afterwarde to
be burned, and his goods confiscated.
            
               
After these 7. had receiued their sentence of condemnation,
the Bishop of Valencia put on his episcopall
ornaments, and clothed Doctor Cacalla, Frauncis
his brother, and Alphonse Pierze, with the vestments
appertaining to Priests, each of thē holding a challice
in their hands, but he presently vnclothed them
againe. When they were now disgraduated, & that
all the holy Oyle was cleane scrapt off from the
crownes of theyr heads & their fingers endes, then
was the Sambenitoes, namely the coates of shame and
dishonor cast againe ouer theyr shoulders, and their
Miters of paper in scorning manner set again vpon
their heads. This doone Cacalla, opened his mouth,
desiring the Princes and other Nobles there present,
to giue him audience, but hee might not obtaine
that fauour. Neuerthelesse, he openly protested before
the whole assembly, that his fayth, for which he
was so rigorously handled, was not false, but true,
agreeing with the worde of God, for the which hee
was ready to dye as a true Christian, and not as a
seminary Hereticke, as they reputed him to be.
            The eyght man condemned, was Don Piero Sarmenta
Knight, of the order of Alcantera, sonne to the
Marquesse of Poza, who after he was declared to be
an Hereticke, was condemned to were the coate of
dishonor all the dayes of his lyfe, and so to remaine
prisoner, besides, to be displaced of his estate of
knight-hood, and forbidden for euer, to weare anie
gold, siluer, pearle or precious stones whatsoeuer.
Next to him his owne Lady was declared to be an
Heretick, and therfore condemed with her husband,
and in the like sorte adiudged to sustaine imprisonment.
Next after them was called Don Lowys de
Royas, heyre to the Marquesse De Poza, who beeing

declared an heretick, was condemned to weare the
Sambenito perpetually, yet at the importunate sute of
his friendes and Allies, he wore the coate but from
the Skaffold to the Towne-house, neuerthelesse, he
had all his goods confiscated, and so was released.
            After him was called the Lady Anne Hentiques,
dwelling in Toro, daughter to the Marquesse Dalcauizes,
and mother to the aforesaid Marquesse De Poza,
shee also was condemed to were the Sambenito to
the Towne-house, and had her goods confiscated.
Next after was called Christofell del Campo, Cittizen
of Zamora, he was condemned to be burned, and
his goods confiscated. Christophell Padilla receiued
the same sentence. Alphonso de Huesuuelo dwelling
in Toro and being a batcheler, was declared to be an
hereticke, wherefore his goods was confiscated and
he condemned to be burned. And forasmuch as hee
did speake his conscience to the Nobilitie, and offered
to speake a fewe words to the people, he had an
yron violently thrust through his lyps, onely to hynder
his speech. Katherin Roma was next called and
condemned to be burned, & her goods confiscated.
After whom Isabella de strado, and Iane Valasques,
receiued the like sentence. There was also a Smith
condemned to be burned, for keeping watch for the
Congregation while they were at prayer. And a
Turke condemned to the fyre for reuolting to hys
Turkish opinions, after he had beene christened.
            To conclude, the wife of Iohn de Biuera was also
condemned to perpetuall imprisonment. Leonora
de Lisneros, Martin de Saranedra, and Daniell Quadra,
were all condemded to perpetuall prison in like sort.
The Lady Mary de Royas, sister to the Marquesse of
Royas, because she had beene in a Monasterie, & come

of great kindred, she was fauoured by wearing the
coate from the stage to the Towne-house, & awarded
to doo pennance all the dayes of her life. At the
same time there was Anthony Dominick a Skots
man, and Anthony Baser an Englishman, both condemned
together, the Skots man had three yeeres
imprisonment, and in that space to weare the coate
of dishonor, but the Englishman was conueied into
a Monastery, to be instructed in the Romish Religion.
Then Trumpets sounded, and ye Princes with
the Iudges departed, but the prisoners immediatly
were layd hands on by the executioners who forthwith
did set them vpon Asses backs, garded by many
Souldiours, who did beate and misuse them
greeuously in the way to ye place of execution, which
was about a quarter of a myle without he sayde
Cittie, where 14. wodden stakes were sette vp, of
equall distance one from another, euery one hauing
a seate with three steps, to goe vp and downe to thē
all, hauing on the tops of those stakes a peece crossing
ouerthwart, whereunto they bound the armes
of the prysoners. Some of them they strangled for
curtesie, and burned them afterwardes. Making a
very soft fyre vnder some of them, especially to those
whose mouthes were pinned vp, who continued in
great payne many howers.
            Thus these true Christians suffered death, for
professing of the Gospell, betrayed and innocentlie
slain, euen as sheepe led to the slaughter, yet comforted
one another, while the beholders and standers
by, meruailed greatly at their inuincible constancie
and stedfastnes.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   