
      
         
            
            
            THE FOVRE
bookes of Flauius Vegetius
Renatus, briefelye contayninge a
plaine forme, and perfect knowledge
of Martiall policye, feates of Chiualrie,
and vvhatsoeuer pertayneth
to warre.
            Translated out af lattine, into
Englishe, by Iohn Sadler. Anno. 1572.
            ¶Seene and allovved, accordinge to
the order appointed.
            Imprinted at London in
Fletestreate, neare to Saint
Dunstones Churche by Thomas
Marshe.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HOnourable
and his singuler good Lord, the
Lorde Russell, Earle of Bedforde, one of the
Queenes maiestyes most honourable priuye counsell,
and Knighte of the honourable order of
the Garter. Iohn Sadler wysheth perfecte
felicitye.
            
               AFter I had first taken
in hande (righte honourable
and my singular good Lorde)
the translation of this worthy
and famous writer Flauiꝰ Vegetius,
at the request of the
right worshipfull sir Edmōde
Brudenell knight: I thought I should haue had no
further labour, but that the sayd translatiō beinge
so diligently and plainlye handled according to the
authors meaning, as my simple wit and knowledge
could do it, should haue contented and satisfyed the
sayde sir Edmonde onelye for his owne priuate vse
and readinge. But he beinge a man alwayes studious,
not so muche to pleasure himselfe, as to benefite
his countrye, and also desyrous to make all men partakers
of such commoditye, as he himselfe alone, or
a fewe besides him, mighte take by readinge of the
same: did afterwarde purpose to cause the sayde

worke to be printed. And althoughe the rude and
simple translation thereof, mighte worthelye haue
withdrawen him from his sayde intente: yet neuerthelesse
consideringe what profitable thinges are
therein contayned: how wyse and prudent counsels
for all gouernours and Captaynes are there declared:
how expedient and necessary the knowledge of
these thinges may be for all times and seasons, and
especially for this our time wherein we now do liue:
he thoughte it better to cause the sayde worke to be
openlye set forth and published, although in a very
base and homelye stile, then that this worthye author,
whom not onlye the Italians, Almaines and
Frenchmē, but also many other Nations, haue most
diligentlye translated in their owne peculiar languages,
should any longer be hidde and kepte from
all his natiue countrye men: Geuinge thereby occasion
to such as shall thinke the sayd worke to homelye
and baselye handled, being yet, as it were, but hewen
out of the rough, to plane and polishe the same,
if they will be disposed more curiouslye, and to set it
forth with finer and purer eloquence. VVhiche
thinge so much the better may be done, that the Ise
is now cut vp before, and the way made open, which
at the first might seeme more harde and daūgerous
to passe. The weaker that any thing doth appeare,
the more expedient and necessarye it is to seeke for

helpe and succour for the same: the more simple
that this translation is, the more neede it hath of
sure protection and defence. VVherefore when
as sir Edmonde Brudenell, the chiefe causer and
doer in settinge forth of this worke, had conferred
together with me as cōcerning the publishing hereof,
and had not yet determined to whom chiefelye it
might most conueniently be dedicated: your honour
amongest al others came to our remembraunce, for
manye and sundry causes, as most worthye of so excellent
and passinge knowledge therein contained:
Not that these thinges maye seeme vnknowen to
your honour, but beinge ouerseene perused and allowed
of the same, might more safely come abroade
and therby deserue the better fauour and acceptation
of all the Readers thereof: as allowed of him,
whose noble actes as wel within the Realme as with
out on euerye syde, haue alwayes from time to time
so well appeared. Pleaseth it your honour therefore
to accept in good parte this homelye and simple
worke, offered by vs of verye true and hartye
loue: on sir Edmondes behalfe, as a declaration of
the inwarde and vnfayned good will that he doth
beare towardes your honour: and on my behalfe as
a testimoniall both of like good will, and also of my
verye bounden dutye: which nowe manye yeares
latelye passed, haue receiued a liberall annuitye or

stipende of your honoure, whereby I haue bene the
better able to expresse suche poore knowledge as
I had, or at least my good will, not onelye in setting
forth of this present worke, but also in that trade,
which I haue professed a long time, as I trust to the
honour of Almightye God, and also to the benefite
and profit of my country. And wheras here I haue
communicated the settinge forth of this treatyse wt
him that hath beene the only and chiefe occasion of
first takinge the same in hand, I thinke he maye of
verye righte chalenge the greatest commendation
thereof (if anye be) who ayded mee not onlye wyth
his good aduyce, but also wyth Bookes, which els
where I could not haue had for the accomplishmēt
of the saide translation. And to speake vnfaynedlye
my owne labour and trauayle can loke for no
manner of prayse at all, excepte peraduenture the
onlye commendation of painfull and faythfull dilligence,
whiche as Vegetius sayth himselfe, is h
                  •
               re
more requisite, then elegancye and finenes of wordes▪
not addinge therevnto anye thinge of myne
owne, after the maner of a Paraphrast to dilate the
matter more at large wyth a curious and eloquent
stile: but vsinge onlye the office of a translatour,
plainlye and compendiouslye expressing so neare as
I could, the true sense and meaning of the Author.
Wherefore if this my endeuour maye be accepted

of your honour, I thincke it a greater commendation,
then eyther I can deserue or iustlye looke for:
as thereby muche boldned and encouraged to take
like paynes hereafter, if good and meete occasion
may serue thereunto.
            
               From Oundell the first daye of October 1571.
               
               Your honours most humble, faythfull,
and continuall Oratoure:
Iohn Sadler.
            
         
         
            
            A Preface to the Reader.
            
               THe difference of peace and warre is apparant
to all men. Howe much the one is to be
desired, the other to be eschewed (excepte in
some respectes hereafter declared, no man I
thincke is ignoraunt. It I should but touch
the gaynes & commodityes of peace:The commodityes of peace. how quietlye
& pleasantly men do liue together: howe
al thinges on the earth do encrease and multiplie:
howe wealth and riches do abounde: how all maner of sciences
and good learninge do flourish, with other innumerable effectes there
of toiling here now to be recyted: it would requyre a large and a great
volume;The calamytyes of Warre not a shorte and compendious preface. Againe, howe great-calamities and destructions through warres haue happened, not onelye
to Cittyes, townes and fortresses, but also to mighty Princes with
their armyes, greate multitudes of people, and whole nations & countryes:
a man might spende a good part of his time to reade throughe
the bookes that hath beene written thereof. But the more commodious,
precious and necessarye that pleasaunt and ioyfull name of peace
is to be accompted, so much more earnestlye it ought to be sought for,
obtayned and preserued: the greater daūgers harmes and losses that
are by warres sustay
                  •
               ed, the greater heede foresighte and pollicye to
withstande the same, is to be vsed. Neyther hath there beene, that I
haue hearde or reade of, anye common wealthe or Realme fo fortunate
and blessed, that it hath enioyned continual peace and quietnes any long
time, excepte the Prince of peace, euen God himselfe, which also is the
Lord of Hostes, haue taken in hand the defence thereof. Which thing
no doubt of his aboundant goodnes he sheeweth vpon certaine people
and countryes, when as he 
                  •
               endes them good and gracious Princes,
wyse and godly gouernours. Which ruled by the spirite of God, may
so order & keepe the whole common wealth and state of their Realme,
throughe their great wysedome learninge and pollicye, that no disobedience
of subiectes to theyr Prince may be founde vncorrected, no disquietnes
or trouble amongest them vnappeased, no force of forraine
ennemyes vnforeseene, vnwithstoode, vnrepelled. In which happye
estate that this our Realme of England at this present is,The happye estate of Englande,
vnder 
                     〈◊〉
                   Elizabeth. and hath also
continued euen from the first beginning of this our most noble and
gracious Queenes maiestyes raigne: All true and faythfull English
hartes to their great ioye must needes acknowledge, yeldinge to God
the onlye Author thereof, most manifoulde and hartye thankes for the
same: moste humblye besechinge his eternall goodnes longe to preserue
her excellente maiestye to rule ouer vs: whose most noble raig
                  •
               e

being not onlye most happye throughe the lightsome shyninge of gods
most holye word, the zelous setting forth thereof, and prosperous successe
of the same: but also fortunate and blessed, as well with great aboundance
and plentye of all kindes of frutes of the earth, as the continuall
quiet and safe enioyinge of them, maye be to all good Englishe
men a sure & euiden
                  •
               e token of Gods highe fauour and especiall grace
declared ouer this Realme: and to all the worlde a spectacle of moste
wyse and polliticke gouernmente. Whereas contrariwyse it is not
vnknowen howe that a greate parte of the worlde nighe vnto vs, hath
these yeares late passed, eyther beene cruellye afflicted with greuous
warres, or not altogether free and cleare from great vexations & tro
                  •
               
               bles.
And although some of la
                  •
               e here in this Realme hath gone about
by rebellion to impayre this state:Rebellion neuer prospered yet as neyther they whiche haue attempted
such enterprises in former tymes haue bene knowen or harde
tell of at anye time to haue preuayled: so neyther these, nor whosoeuer
hereafter wilbe so madde to treade in such like steppes, can escape eyther
like successe as they haue had, or rather worse, to speake more trulye,
which they seeme iustlye to haue deserued. Seinge therefore that
the good pleasure and prouidence of God hath so prepared for vs, and
bestowed vppon vs such a pearelesse Prince, so noble and worthy coū
               sellers,
that except men will be wilfullye blinde, they all maye see wyth
their eyes the goodnes of their gouernmente: let all vs Englishem
                  •
               n
as true and faythfull subiectes applye oure selues by all meanes
possible to obeye her maiestye▪ to keepe her lawes, to be ready alwayes
at her commaundement. Who ceaseth not to prouide, foresee, and care
for our safegarde, wealth and quietnes, as well in time of peace as in
warre. Which thinges partlye I touched before, and nowe occasion
s
                  •
               rueth to speake more of the same againe. For although the one seeme
more to be wyshed for then the other, yet be they both, by the wil & pleasure
of God, lefte in the handes of princes to be vsed as time and other
cyrcumstances shall requyre. And for that Pax,
               Pax deriued A pactione. seemeth to be deriued
a Pactione, as some do write: what time as Princes haue agreed and
concluded of good and holsome conditions of peace, so longe doth the
league of peace endure, as such conditions are well obserued & kept:
but if the same be ones violate and broken, then commonly do warres
ensue: whiche althoughe they seeme neuer so troublesome and full of
daunger, yet must they needes be taken in hand, not only with strength
and manhoode, but also wyth skill and pollicye. For as after calme &
pleasant weather when sodainly a tempestuous storme doth ryse,Peace resembled to fayre weather, w
                     ••
                   to foule weather. then
by profe doth appeare what the gouernour of the shippe is able to do:
if hee lacke skill & knowledge, the shippe and all therein is like to perishe:
if he be cunning and expert, he may deliuer it from shipwracke:

euen so when after longe continual peace, greuous warres do fortune,
then do valiante Captaynes shewe their worthye manhoode, not with
hardines alone but with pollicy and knowledge. Seing therefore that
as fayre weather manye times is altered with stormes and tempest, so
peace oftentimes is chaūged wt warres: what thing can be more expedient
& necessarye to the cōmon wealth, then to haue in readines, pollitike
and valiante Captaynes, experte and manlye souldiours? which
with their skilfull experience and tryed knowledge, maye in daungerous
times of warres do highe seruice to God, their Prince, and their
countrye, while they fighte not onlye for their owne liues, their wyues
and children, but also for the common libertye and wealth of al, the honoure
of their Prince, the defence and sauegarde of the whole estate.
            For which intente and purpose the readinge not onlye of the best historicall
writers both in Greke and latine,The reading of historyes & other writers of Warre not v
                     ••
                  eete for Captaynes. wherin most noble actes of
famous Captaynes are liuely set forth as notable examples to be followed:
but also of such worthye Authors as haue with great studye &
trauaile, gathered out of the best historyes the chiefest pointes and deuices
of warres: and beinge dispersed farre abroade in manye diuers
and sundrye bookes, haue brought the same into a certayne forme and
knowledge of the feates of armes: may seeme to all men of warre, and
namelye to such, to whom the charge of great multitudes oftentimes
is committed, neyther vnworthye the reading, nor altogether vnprofitable.
Wherein in myne opinion this our Author Flauius Vegetius
obteyneth the chiefest prayse:Uegetius the chiefest writer of warre. who beinge commaunded by Valentinianus
Augustus, to put in wryting the practises and deuises of Martiall
pollicye, hath framed & compacte together such a worke, which he calleth
Institutiōs, that it may be accompted, as it were a very methode
or most ready & compendious waye to the right knowledge and science
of the feates of warre. And althoughe the warres in these oure
dayes seeme much unlike to the Romaine warres before Vegetius
time,An obiection answered. by reason of a greate nomber of engines and other feates
then vsed, whereof now many are out of vse, and many mo now inuented
which then were vnknowen: yet maye this worke appeare not altogether
vnworthye to be knowen of our men of warre, wherein as it
were in a glasse they may most clearelye see, not onlye how that the Romaynes
throughe suche skill and k
                  •
               owledge, and continuall exercise
therof as is herein declared, haue vanquished and ouercome so manye
barbarous and straunge Nations, subdued so manye prouinces, and
become Lordes and rulers of the most part of the world: but also may
gather and choose out the best a and chiefest pointes of all their knowledge,
which neuerthelesse may be vsed so farre forth as shall seeme expedient,The conten
                  
                     •
                  es of the .iiii. bookes of U
                     •
                  
                  getius.
and as occasion may serue & time requyre. Wherefore wheras
the whole woorke of Vegetiu
                     •
                  
                is deuided into foure Bookes, I

thinke it not vnmeete to shewe briefelye what is chiefelye intreated in
euery one of the same.
            In the first booke he setteth forth two thinges principallye.The. 1. booke First
the musteringe, chosinge, and appointinge of yonge souldiours: wher
in he requireth of the choosers, most faythfull and painfull dilligence,
that they do cyrcumspectly consider and vewe, not onlye the countryes
and places where they were bred and brought vp, their age, their staure,
their behauiour, the good making & proportion of their bodyes,
the quickenes of their eyes and countenaunce: but also the trades and
sciences wherein they haue beene most occupyed & vsed, their strength,
swiftnes, nimblenes & actiuitye: by which likelyhoodes and tokens it
might well appeare which would be most meete for so greate a worke.
And in the well choosing of these doth consist the chiefest hope, not onlye
for the strength of the armye, but also for acchieuing the victorye.
            Secondly he setteth forth the trayninge vppe of the yonge souldiours
well chosen,An armye in latine called Exercitus ab Exercitio.
                with dailye vse and exercise: wherevpon it came to passe y•
an armye in latine was called Exercitus, to the intent it should be euer
in labour & practise, and neuer forget to what ende it was so named.
            Wherein he first sheweth that they must learne and exercise to march
in battell raye, to runne, to leape, to swimme, to strike hansomely, cunninglye
to vse al kinde of weapons, to shoote, to cast dartes, to cast stones
with slinges, or with hande, to mount on horses, to carrye weight,
to fortefye the Campe, to caste and scoure trenches, with other kindes
of exercises to long here at this time to be recyted.
            In the seconde booke he deuideth the feates of warre into certaine
kindes,The .2. booke he describeth the partes of an army, which amonge diuers nations
were diuerslye named: but the Romaines called them Legions,
Ab eligendo,
               Legio ab eligendo. which word he sayth requyreth their fayth and diligence,
by whom ye souldiours are to be allowed or refused. He sheweth how
many cohortes or bandes of souldiours should be in one Legion, how
manye or how fewe Legions the Romaines vsed to leade in one army,
he setteth forth the names and degrees of the principall men of ye host,
he declareth the offices of all the Captaynes and gouernours, ye lieuetenaunt,
the Martiall, the Centurions, peticaptaines, and all other
rulers and officers of the whole armye: he describeth the troupes of ye
horsemen, and as well the names, as the offices of the Captaines of euerye
bande. Manye other thinges also hee toucheth concerninge the
Standerds, banners, ensignes and flagges, yea and the offices of the
Trumpetters, by whose sound it is knowē when ye souldiours should
set forward to anye worke, when they should fighte or staye, when they
should followe the chase, or when they should retyre. Thus with many
other notable thinges to be knowen, and partlye with a vehement exhortation

to the diligent exercise of ye feates of warre, and partly with
a briefe rehersal of certaine tooles and engines, vsed to be caryed with
the armye, he concludeth the seconde booke.
            In the thirde hee teacheth howe an armye well appointed and enstructed,The 3. booke
as is aforesayd, maye nowe be brought to the fielde and ioyne
wyth the aduersaryes. But first hee sheeweth howe the health of the
hoast should be preserued: what regarde should be had that graine forage
and victualles should be prouided for and kepte: howe the chiefe
Captaines should keepe the souldiours in quiet from sedition and vprore:
howe warelye and cyrcumspectlye the armye shoulde be ledde,
when at any time it remoueth: howe to passe ryuers, and other daungerous
places. How greate consideration oughte to be whether they
should fight in skirmishe, or set battel? ye chiefe Captaynes great carefulnesse
before they ioyne battell, in tryinge the courage of his souldiours,
in chosinge ameete place for to fighte in, in settinge them in suche
order and araye that they be not easelye ouercome. Which thinges for
that they cannot be comprehended in fewe wordes, and the Author discourseth
of them at large in many Chapters, I referre the Readers to
the selfe same Author, who doth so perfectlye set forth such notable deuises
and pollicyes, such skilfulnes and knowledge, such prouidence &
warenes, as ought to be in such a man, to whom the worthye honours
of so greate power and authoritie are ascribed, that vnto his fidelitye,
vertue, and manhoode (that I maye here vse the very wordes of Vegetius)
the defence of Cittyes, the lyues of the souldiours, the renowne
of the common wealth, may safely be committed. After these, he declareth
certaine generall rules of warre, and so endeth his third booke.
            In the fourth booke he treateth of the besieginge and defendinge of
Cittyes:The 4. booke wherein he first speaketh of the buildinge and fortefyinge of
the same: and what foresight should be if a Cittye be besieged, that it
suffer not famyne: what pollicy may be vsed, if water, salt, strings, or
cordes and suche like shoulde fayle in the Cittye. He reherseth also a
nomber of engines and much ordinaunce vsed in those dayes in the besieginge
of Cittyes: the description whereof who so list to know more
at large, let him reade the tenth and eleuenth booke of Robertus Valturius.
Also he geueth certaine preceptes and rules of warres vppon
the sea: in which he sheweth what kinde of shippes were most necessarye
and commodious for the purpose: and how dilligentlye the same
were made: in what monethes and seasons of the yeare timber should
be felled: he nameth and nombreth the windes: he sheweth when it is
good to sayle, & when not: he speaketh of certayne signes and tokens,
whereby mariners maye foreknowe fayre weather or foule, calme or

tempest: then describing certaine armour and ordinaunce for shippes,
he briefelye teacheth howe to lye in waite, and also howe to ioyne open
battell on the sea: and thus endeth he his fourth and last booke of the
institutions of warre. In all whiche worke briefelye and plainlye is
contained, not onlye (as I saide before) a methode or compendious
waye, but also a perfect knowledge and arte of warre: to the which if
painefull dilligence and experience be ioyned,Experience ioyned with knowledge, brīgeth great thinges to passe. what let shoulde be, but
that no lesse worthines 
                  •
               ud excellencye appeare in warriours of these
our dayes, then hath beene founde in the most famous Captaynes before
our time: to the which not experience alone brought them, but diligente
learninge and studyinge of the feates of warre, written and set
forth both by historicall writers & Poets, a
                  •
               d by such also as this our
present Author Vegetius is. Innumerable examples might be here
recyted, but passing ouer all the residue for shortnes of time, two of the
chiefest may suffice.
                  Alexander the great. 
               Alexander the great, who in short space subdued
the greatest part of the world, had alwayes the Poet Homer layd vnder
his beddes heade, in whom he might beholde the office as well of
excellent Princes, as of most worthye Captaynes.
            
               Iulius Caesar,
               C. Iulius Caesar. howe greatlye he was geeuen to this kinde of studye, it
doth most euidentlye appeare by such notable bookes as he hath written
and intitled Commentaryes. And surelye in mine opinion, it seemeth
a farre better and shorter waye to attaine to the name of a worthye
and perfecte Captaine to ioyne experience vnto knowledge,Better to ioyne experience to knowledge, then to gette knowledge by experience. then
to get knowledge by experience. For mans life being short and subiect
to manye casualtyes, oftentimees is cutte of before it can come to anye
such perfection as is requyred in an excellent man of warre: whereas
small experience with diligente readinge and perfecte learninge
of feates of ware, maye frame and make manye polliticke Captaynes
in a shorter space. I do not meane that knowledge withoute experience,
can do anye great thinge at all: but beinge ioyned both together,
doubtles they maye be as able to bringe to passe as great and marueilous
thinges in valiant men in these our dayes, as they haue beene in
manye noble men before our time, as namely in those most worthy and
famous conquerours, whom partly for breuityes sake, partly for honours
sake I mentioned before: whereof Alexander the greate (as
Iustine and others do witnes) neuer foughte with anye ennemyes,
whom he did not vanquish and ouercome: and howe Iulius Caesar did
preuaile, his historyes do declare, who being much inferiour in nomber
to his ennemyes, was so skilfull and experte in the ordering of his
battelles,The not
                     ••••
                   skilfulnes of Iulius Caesar. that as it were before throughlye assured, he woulde foretell
to his men, euen in this bande (naminge and pointinge oute the same)
shall consist the victory: which should afterward euen so come to passe

as you maye reade in the greatest and last conflicte betweene him and
Pompeie, besydes other places in the thirde booke of the Romayne
cyuill warres.
            Presupposinge that I haue sayde sufficientlye for the exhortinge of
thee gentle Reader to the ouerlookinge of this booke: as well for the
necessarye matter therein contayned, as for causes by occasion chauncinge
from time to time, whereby the same matter maye neede to be
practsed: with hope of thy good pardon for anye my faultes whatsoeuer,
as thou mayest seeme rather to encourage then discourage mee:
I committe thee to Almightye GOD, and to the readinge of my
Author Flauius Vegetius, rudelye, yet profitably hereafter speakinge
in Englishe.
            Farewell.
         
         
            
            Christopheri Carlili
Saphphica.
            
               
                  ARte qui quauis patriam tuetur,
               In domo diuûm locus est paratus:
               Id facit Sadler: patet ergo coeli
               Porta supremi.
            
            
               Nonne constanter patriam tuetur?
               Qui modos tradit quibus amouentur
               Hostium fraudes, furiae rebelles,
               Insidiae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ?
            
            
               Scire vis turmas equitum locare?
               Copias crebras peditum? legantur
               Quae dat interpres Vegetj lat
                     ••
                  i
               Ore Britanno.
            
            
               Scire vis quid sit manus, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   turma?
               Quid cohors, alae, legio, balista?
               Quid
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sit quincunx, aries, duelli
               Cornua bina?
            
            
               Scire vis qui sit locus at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tempus?
               Machinae martis? celeres biremes?
               Classium portus? sonitus tubarum
               Palladis arma?
            
            
               Bellicum quid sit? lituus sonorus?
               Tela bellonae? docetid polita
               Arte Sadlerus: facit, vt regustet
               Angla inuentus▪
               
            
            
               Anglicae pubi dedit haee legenda
               Cura Sadleri: monumenta sunto
               Digna, quae cedro simul ac cupresso
               Perpetuentur.
            
         
         
            
            Thomas Dranta
            BElla viros
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                canit Sadlerus tempora belli,
            Castra acies fossas, spicula, tela, duces.
            Perbellè facit is, bellum qui rite repandit:
            Aurea per bellum pax solet essere dux.
            Edocuit bellum, bellum Deus ipse probauit:
            Si bellum, belli tunc probatilli librum.
            Sic Sadlere tibi multum pax bella
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                debent:
            Sic Deus & librum, te probat at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tuum.
         
         
            Thomas Drante
            To write of peace is good, to wryte of warre is gaye
            and good, for God himselfe taught Dauids hands to fraye▪
            
            Warre faughtē right is good, such warre doth Sadler tell
            the fact he doth is right, the worke he wrytes is well.
         
         
            In I. Sadlerum eiusque versionem
Gulielmus Iacobus.
            
               DVra quod vt nuper, nunc non sint scripta Veget
                     •
                  ,
               Dic cuius studio, cuius & ingenio?
               Dic mihi quis castris Anglus, quis tantus in armis?
               Sic quis ad arma vocet, sic sua crastra locet?
               Dic quis tam doctus sic explicat omnia doctè,
               Sic aptè loquitur, sic sua bella parat?
               Deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   dic quis sit sapienter tempore in isto
               Adfert qui patriae commoda tanta suae?
            
            
               Vnus is èmultis, vel dicam, ex omnibus vnus,
               Qui facit vt durum hoc non videatur opus:
               Qui dedit effigiem belli quasi clarus in armis,
               Bella paransisto commodiora modo:
               Qui docte scripsit, posuit nec quid nisi rectè:
               Qui prudens isto tempore bella parat:
               Est is Sadlerus qui sic sentit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sapit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  :
               Hec fiunt studio cuius & ingenio.
            
         
         
            
            In Vegetium quem I.S. Anglicè
loquentem fecit.
            Gulielmi Charci carmen.
            CAstra quid & campi possint, virtus
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                dolus
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               ,
            Scripsit Vegetius: nobile Martis opus.
            Quas habeant artes terrestria praelia, scripsit,
            Et quae Neptuni bella geruntur aquis.
            Quas teneant equites classes, pedites
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                phalanges
            Et qui cui turmae fortior ordo siet:
            Vt celeres alae possint volitare per agros,
            vt possis cuneos hostibus incutere:
            Vt formas formae superent, vt
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                hostibus hostes
            Fortius occurrant, agmina
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                agminibus:
            Haec eadem Martis, magna ornamenta, potentis:
            Aptum opus & gratum, terra Britanna tibi:
            Sadlerus sermone dedit cultu
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Britanno.
            Vtere, nam rebus maximus vsus inest.
         
         
            William Bulleyne
            
               THe fruites of fearefull warre, eche wight maye plainly knowe:
               It is the rodde from God aboue, to vs that dwell belowe.
               A blessing rich it is in deede, where God doth winne the fielde:
               Or els a triple plague (God wotte) to vse the sword or shielde.
               By warre most lands & Cittyes great were wonne and still do stand:
               By warre Nauyes and gallyes swift haue gayned many a lande.
               Euen so great fortes and walled townes by warres ouerthrowne:
               Sometime (agayne) the Nauyes great in stormes are ouerblowne.
               And captiues great in bondage ledde, which neuer backe returnes
               And bloudye corpes in streete lye dead: the fyer consumes & burnes.
               The buildinges fayre, and antiques olde: in bedde the child is slaine:
               The Temples huge are cast a downe: nothinge doth els remayne,
               
                  But hunger plague, & bloudy woundes, ye mother her child doth ea
                     •
                  e:
               Dunge is daintye to hungrye slaues, when they do dye for meate.
               Why then feare God, loue wel your Prince, esteeme ye man of warre:
               For they do garde eche common wealth, & chase thine ennemye farre.
               Geue peace good God in these our dayes, for thou dost for vs fight
               Preserue the Church, defende ye Queene, and people daye and nighte.
               And Sadler then for his rewarde d
                     •
                  e prayses let him haue:
               Take in good part his diligence, els nothing doth he craue,
            
            
               The Prince to chiefe rule,
               The Preacher to the worde:
               The Lawyer to the skroule,
               The Souldiour to the sword.
               The Marchant to the purse,
               The thrasher to the flayle,
               The sheapehearde to the flocke:
               The mariner to the sayle.
            
         
         
            Iohn Higgins.
            AS warre hath wonne eternall fame, & found a lasting prayse,
            As war hath kingdomes great preserude, & kept thē frō decayse
            So sure the Feates of warre do passe, which if thou canst attayne:
            Shall cause the winne the field, and liue, to see thy enmyes slaine.
            This Sadler by translating of, Vegetius shewes so well:
            That thou by practise mayest attaine, and therein soone excell.
            Foure bookes there are, the first doth teache, to muster and to chuse;
            And after choyse what exercise, to practyse learne and vse.
            The next declares how wyghtye warre, deuyded is in partes,
            Howe legions, wings, & armyes stands, and teacheth eche their artes.
            The thirde of good prouision shewes, & how the armyes knit:
            Which way to skirmishe fight & frame, your force wyth wyles of wit.
            The last doth teache howe Cityes maye, prepare for their defence:
            And telles what engines erst were vsde to driue the ennemyes thence,
            Likewyse what shippes on sourginge seas, in time of warre do well:
            By Sea what wyles & weapons cause, the souldiour to excell.
            In such a sort are these so pende, by Sadlers painfull skill:
            
               Vegetius teacheth Englishmen the Feates of warre at will,
            And learnes himselfe a language straunge, he erst ne wist before,
            Thus he by Sadler taught, of warre doth teache and learneth more.
         
         
            
            Sadleri carmen ad
praecedentia.
            
               CVius hae laudes nisi Brudenelli?
               M
                     •
                  litis clari, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   equitis Britanni?
               Cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , si quid sit, meritò putetur
               Maius honore?
            
            
               Quicquid huius sit studi
                     •
                  , laboris:
               Huius hortatu patriae tributum:
               Vna causa, & fons fuit iste primus,
               Solus & author.
            
            
               Si tamen verum volumus fateri:
               Nemo, preterquàm Deus ipse solus
               Dignus est, sic cui tribuenda laus sit,
               Omnis honor
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  .
            
         
         
            The same.
            
               To whom are all these prayses due, and more then these, by right?
               but to syr Edmonde Brudenell that worthye Englishe knight?
            
            
               Whatsoeuer frute may by this worke redounde vnto this lande,
               at his request the same was done, and taken first in hande.
            
            
               But if the truth we will confesse: no man, but God in throne,
               is meete, to whom al laude and prayse ought to be geuen, alone.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A COMPENDIOVS
treatise of the Institutiōs, of warre, writt
                  •
               n
by Flauius Vegetius, a famous Author, vnto
Valentinianus Augustus, gathered oute of the
Commentaryes of Cato, Celsus, Traianus,
Hadrianus, and Frontinus.
            
               The Prologue of the first Booke.
               
                  
                     THe maner hath beene of olde time to
write the studyes of good sciences, & the same
orderlye brought into bookes, to dedicate vnto
Princes. Because neyther anye thinge is
well begonne, excepte the chiefe Prince after
God shal like well thereof: neither doth it become
any man to know eyther better thinges,
or mo things then ye Prince, whose knowledge
may be profitable to all his subiectes. Which knowledge that Octauius
Augustus and other good Princes after him, willinglye haue had
and practised, it is declared by manifolde examples. By that meanes
through the testimony of rulers, hath eloquence encreased, and yet aduenture
beene by no meanes blamed. Beinge compelled by this imitation,
when I consider that your clemencye, more then others, maye
pardon the bolde enterprises of learning: I haue not greatly perceyued
my selfe to be so much inferiour to the olde writers, (althoughe in
this worke, neyther elegancye of wordes, nor sharpenes of witte is necessarye,
but dilligent and faythfull labour) that those thinges whiche
beinge scattered and darckelye written by diuers Historiographers, &
such as teache the schole of armes, hidde and vnknowen, maye of mee
be set forth openlye for the commodity of the Romaynes. Therefore as
touchinge the choysing and trayning of yong souldiours, I do meane
by certayne degrees and titles to represente the aunciente maner: not
that these thinges may seeme vnknowen to you, most puisante Emperour,
but to proue that the first beginners of the Romayne Empyre,
haue heretofore obserued, what thitges you at this time for the safetye
of the cōmon wealth do willingly practise: & to shew you howe to finde
oute of this little booke for all most waightye and necessarye affayres,
whatsoeuer may appeare at all times most requisite.
            
            
               
               That the Romaines, through the
onely exercise of armes haue ouercome
all Nations. The firste Chapiter.
               
                  IN any maner of warre, not so much
in the great nūber of men & manhood
without skyll, as in knowledge and
practise, doth consiste the victory. For
why we see that by no other meanes
the Romaines haue subdued ye whole
worlde vnto them, but by exercise of
armes, the exacte knowledge of encamping,
and vse of warre. Howe coulde els the Romaines
being but a fewe, haue preuayled against the Frenchemen
being so many in nombre? How durst els the sayd Romains
being of so small stature, haue aduentured against the Germaines
being so highe and tall? It is very euident that the
Spaniardes not onely in multitude, but also in strengthe of
body, haue excelled our men. With the Aphricans in subtiltie
and ryches, we were neuer comparable. No man at any
tyme hath doubted, but in sciences & wysedome, the Grekes
haue farre passed vs. But alwayes we founde it profitable to
those an actiue and wyse souldier, to teache hym, if I may so
terme it, the lawe of armes, to confirme his knowledge by
dayly exercise, to make him vnderstande by trayning hym at
home, suche thynges as may befall in battayle abroade: and
sharpely to take punyshement of the dull and slouthfull souldiour.
For the knowledge of warre maketh men more bolde
to fight. No man feareth at any time to doe that whiche hee
perswadeth him selfe he hath throughly learned. Surely in
battayle a small nombre well practised, soner getteth the
victory, then a rude and vnskilfull multitude, alwayes in
daunger of slaying.
            
            
               
               ¶Out of what countreis a younge souldiour
should be chosen. Chapiter .ij.
               THe order of thinges for our purpose doth require, that
in the first parte we intreate, out of what prouinces or
countries younge souldiours should be chosen. For it
is most sure and euident, that in all places bothe cowardes
and hardie men be bredde. But yet, because one nations doth
excelle an other in warre, and the clymate of the heauē doth
very muche auayle, not onely to strengthen the body, but also
the minde, for in this place what is of the best learned men
moste approued & allowed, I meane not to pretermit. They
say that all nations whiche be nigh to the Sunne, parched &
dried with ouer muche heate, haue more witte in deede, but
yet lesse bloud within thē. And for that cause, they dare not
manfully & boldly stande to it when they fight, wel knowing
how litle bloud they haue, & feare much therfore wounding.
Contrariwyse, the people of the North, whom the Sunne
burneth not so nere, being more rashe and vnaduised, yet a
great deale better blouded, are moste ready of all, & desirous
of warre Out of the more tēperate costes then should souldiours
be chosen, whiche both may haue bloud enough, and
so not force neither for hurting nor killing: & haue wisedome
also sufficiēt, wherby wisely to kepe a moderate meane & aduisedly
by circumspect councel, to preuaile in their fighting.
            
            
               ¶Whether out of the countrey, or out of the citie, yong
souldiours may be taken moste conueniently.
Chapiter .iij.
               IT foloweth that we knowe, whether out of the countrey
or out of the citie, a young souldiour maye be chosen more
cōuenient. As concerning which part none, I thinke euer
doubted, but the common rude sorte alwayes was fittest for
the warres: whiche is brought vp abroade, & vseth to take
paine, that can abide sunne burning, that passeth not for the
shade, that neuer knewe what bathes ment, ignorant of delicatenes,
simple of minde, content with a litle, hardened in
euery parte to abide & beare labour. Howbeit, sometime necessitie

so constraineth, that euen out of cities they be forced
to the warre. Suche therefore when they are ones made
sworne souldiours, let them learne to toyle & trauel, to rūne
to & fro, to cary burdēs, to abide ye sunne & dust. Let thē fare
hardly & homely, let them sometimes be occupied abroade,
sometimes in their tētes: then at the length let thē be taught
to vse their armour. And if the armie shall soiourne long abroade,
they must be kept hard to their taske, & holden farre
from all allurementes of the citie, that by this meanes both
the strēgthe of their bodies and myndes may encrease. Neither
is it to bee denied after the citie was buylded, that the
Romaines went al
                     •
                  ayes out of the same vnto warre. But
then were they not weakened with pleasures of the bodie &
deliciousnes. The sweate which was gotten in running and
other exercise of Campus Martius, the youthe washte it
away with swimming in the ryuer Tyber. The warriour &
husbandman, were all one, onely they differed in kynde of armoure.
Whiche thing is altogether so true, that it is moste
true, howe that vnto Quintius Cincinnatus, as he was at
plough, the greatest authoritie amongest the Romaines in
tyme of warre, the office Dictatura, was offered and geuen.
Out of the countrey therfore the force of the armie seemeth
chiefly to be supplied. For it comes to passe, I can not tell
howe, that hee lesse feareth death whiche hath tasted least
pleasure and delicious
                     •
                  es in his lyfe.
            
            
               ¶Of what age those young souldiours should be, whiche
should be thought allowable. Chapiter .iiij.
               NOwe let vs searche of what age it is conuenient that
wee chose our souldiours. Uerely if wee wyll obserue
old custome, so soone as they growe any thing toward
mans state, about fourtene and sixtene yeares, euerye man
wyll graunte, they should appeare at the m
                     •
                  ster, for not only
more spedely, but also more perfectly all thinges are learned
whiche we learne in our younge tyme. Besydes, agilitie
and actiuitie, fitte for warre, as leaning & running, must be
tried and put in vre before the bodie be infeebled by age: for
it is readines gotten by former practice that maketh a good

souldiour. The younger sorte must be chosen as saith Salust,
for no sooner were younge men able to awaye with warre,
as they learned vsually and painfully in the campe, the practise
of the same. And it is better that a yonge man exercised
should alledge that all his age to fight is not yet come, then that
he should truely lamente that the same were already paste.
Let him also haue space and tyme to learne euery poincte
thereof. For whether you will make a good horse mā, a good
footeman, a good archer, or teache a man at armes all his
numbers, places, and gestures: that he forsake not his standing,
that he breake not araye: to caste his darte with good
ayme and strength, conningly to entrenche and driue his
stakes, to welde his terget well, to awarde onerthwarte
strokes, warely to auoyde blowes, and boldely to stryke his
enemie: It semeth no small nor lyghte poinct of warre. A
souldiour in this sorte instructed, shal not be afrayd but take
pleasure to fight with what so euer enemy in the fielde.
            
            
               ¶Of what stature yonge souldiours should
be chosen. Chapter .v.
               
                  MArius Consull of Rome, I knowe, alwayes chose
younge souldiours of tall stature, so that he woulde
allowe none for horsemen in the wynges and fronte
of his battayle, but suche as were sixe foote hyghe, or fiue &
tenne inches at the least. But then was there more plenty of
people, & more that followed the warre. For as yet had not
ciuile dissention spent awaye the flourishing youth of the citie.
Therefore if nede so r
                     •
                  quire, it is mete to haue regarde
more of strengthe then of stature, and that we are not herein
deceiued, we haue Homere for wytnes, who declareth that
Tideus was but small of persone, but yet of good courage
and stomake.
            
            
               ¶To knowe by the countenaunce and making of the
body whiche souldiours are like to proue good.
Chapter .vj.
               
                  HE that wyll goe about to muster men, must be verye
carefull that by the continuance, by the eyes, by the
sure compacting and ioyning of the lymmes, he chose
them whiche may be able to perfourme the parte and dutie
of souldiours. For not only in men, but also in horses and in
dogges, the chiefest power is signified by many tokens, as
the best learned men haue declared in their wrytinges, and
as also the Poete Virgill speaking of Bees, thus noteth to
be obserued.
               
                  Of bees two sortes there are, but yet the better sure is hee,
                  With semely coate that semeth so of golden hewe to bee:
                  The other grosse and full of slouth, deserues no prayse we see.
               
               Let the young man therefore that shalbe a souldiour, not
looke drowsely, let hym be straighte necked, broade brested,
let his shoulders be well fleshe, let him haue strōg fyngers,
longe armes, a gaunte belly, slender legges, the calfe and
feete not to full of fleshe, but knitte faste with harde and
stronge synowes. Fynding these tokens in a souldiour, you
neade not greatly complayne for wante of tall stature. For
more requisite it is that souldiours be stronge and valiant,
then huge and great.
            
            
               ¶What sciences younge souldiours should be
skilful in, whiche should be either chosen
or refused. Chapiter .vij.
               IT followeth diligētly to be knowen what sciences young
souldiours should haue learned, that are either to be admitted
or vtterly refused. I suppose that fishers, fowlers,
Pasterours, linnen weauers, and whosoeuer that dealeth
with any thing that betokeneth a womanishe nicenes, should
be vtterly banished the campe. Smythes, Carpēters, Butchers,
Hunters of the harte and wylde boares, maye moste
conueniently be called to warre. And herein consisteth the
safetie of the whole common wealthe, that wee choose our
souldiours, not so muche for goodly bodie as for manly courage
of minde. The strengthe of the realme, and the name

of the Romaynes lieth in the firste examining of th the souldiours
that are chosen. And let none thinke this a small office,
and euerywhere to be committed to euery one, whiche
of dyuers vertues that Sertorius had, was thought of the
olde Romaynes to be chiefest, and moste commendable for
youth▪ vnto whome the defence of countreis, and fortune of
warre is to be committed, ought to come of a good stocke if
it may be, and also be wel conditioned. Because honestie maketh
a mete and able souldiour: for whylest they dare not flie
for shame, they thereby get the victorie. To what vse should
we trayne and brynge vp a cowarde, to let hym remayne in
the campe and spende wages vpon hym? Neuer Sped that
armie well in battayle, whereof, hee that tooke the muster,
was any thing negligent in allowyng the souldiours. And
for as muche as vse teacheth, and we finde by experience, hereof
proceade euery where so many discomfitures and damage
by the enemy: whyles to long peace causeth vs make
so negligent and carelesse choise of our souldiours, whyles
the honest are suffered to followe the citezins trade, whyles
yong souldiour loth to leaue their masters, dissemble ye matter
that they be fauoured and borne withall, whyles suche
fellowes are made out as their maisters are wearye of, and
therefore wyllingly forgoe them. Circumspect men for this
cause with as circumspecte diligence muste of this younger
sorte chose both meete and able persones.
            
            
               ¶Wha
                     •
                   tyme younge souldiours should
be registred and bylled.
Chapiter .viij.
               FOr all this, notwithstanding, vpon these foresayde tokens,
a younge souldiour maye not by and by be bylled
or preste, but wee m
                     •
                  st firste see by exercising hym what
he can do, that wee may knowe certainly whether hee be a
meete fellowe for so great a purpose. It is necessary that
hee bee ready and stronge, wee must vnderstande whether
hee can perfectlye learne the knowledge and feates of armes,

and whether he hath a good souldiours stomake or no.
For a great sort although by syght they seame alloweable,
yet when they come to be tried, they are vntollerable. The
lesse worthy therefore must be lefte, and the worthier succede
them, and be placed in their roume. In euey conflicte the
multitude auayleth nothing so muche as manhode Let the
younge souldiours therefore after they are bylled, by continuall
exercise learne the feates of armes. But a presumption
of long securitie, hath brought these thinges out of vse.
Whome shall a man finde that is able to teache that whiche
hee hym selfe hath not before learned? out of histories then
or other authours, wee must learne againe that olde lesson.
Yea, but they seame to haue written the noble actes and successe
onely of warres, leauing these which wee nowe doubt
of, as thinges throughly and sufficiently knowen. The Lacedemonians,
Atheniens, and other of the Greekes, haue
wrytten manye thinges in their bookes, whiche in thier
to 
                     〈◊〉
                   are called Taktika, that is to saye, ordinarie matters
pertayning to warre. But wee must searche out the
martiall pollicie of the people of Rome, who, of small
boundes haue enlarged their dominion, wel nighe to the regions
of the Sunne, & extended the same nere to the worldes
ende. This necessitie compelled mee to ouerlooke manye authours,
and in this present woorke moste faithfully to sette
forth what thinges Cato Censorius hath written of warre:
what Cornelius Celsus, and what Frontinus hath brieflye
comprehended, and what Paternus, the moste diligent mainteiner
of the lawe of armes, hath orderly put in wrytinge.
Al which thinges are prouided for by Augustus, Traianus,
and Adrianus constitutions. I chalenge no manner authoritie
to my selfe, but gathering of ye forenamed, what things
haue bene dispersed, make of them as it were abridgemētes
called Epitomes.
               
            
            
               ¶That younge souldiours be exercised in marching,
running, and leaping. Chapiter .ix.
               
                  THe first and principall thing that a souldiour must be
doing withall, is to learne howe to marche well. For
there is nothing in iournying or in battayle more to be
obserued, then that all the souldiours do kepe their arraye,
whiche can not well be done but by walking ofte apace, and
iuste and euen one with another. For a cōfused and disordred
armie, standeth ofte in great perill & daunger of the enemy.
Therefore in fiue howres, a souldiour must be able to go .xx.
myles in sommer. But going a full pace, whiche is swifter,
in as many howres he must be able to ridde .xxiiii. miles. A
more spedie pace then this, is plaine rūning. The space wher
of cannot be iustely limited. The younger sorte must chiefly
vse to runne, that with greater violence they may set vppon
their enemies, that with more haste when nede is, they may
take the more commodious places, or preuent their enemies
if they would doe the lyke: that, being made out for scowtes,
thei may more cherefully go forward, more redily retourne
& more easely ouertake their enemies whē they flie. To leaping
also the souldiour must be vsed, for iumping of ditches,
for passing depe places, whiche els might hinder them: that
when such kinde of difficulties happen, they maye goe ouer
without any maner of trouble. Moreouer, in the encounter &
ioyning of battayle, when a warriour setteth forward running
and 
                     •
                  eaping, he da
                     •
                  els his enemies eies, and puttes him
in marueilous feare, and sodainly striketh him ere he can be
ready to resiste, or by any meanes able to defende him selfe.
And as touching the exercise of Pompey the great, Saluste
in this wyse semeth to make mention. With the lightest in
leaping, with the swiftest in running, with the strongest hee
stroue in casting the barre. For he could not otherwyse possible
haue matched Sertorius, except he had with often and
sundrie exercises prepared thus him selfe and his souldiours
for the battayle.
            
            
               ¶What younge souldiours shoulde vse to swymme.
Chapiter .x.
               
                  IN sommer euery younge souldiour with his fellowes,
should exercise swymming. For they shall not euer haue
bridges ready to passe ouer ryuers withall, and when an
armie retireth or hath his enemies in chase, it is oftentimes
constrained to swymme. Sodaine showers or great snowes,
make the waters breake out, and by ignorance herein, souldiours
are subiecte to daunger, not onely on behalfe of
the enemie, but also for drowning and perishing thēselues.
Therefore the auncient Romaines, whiche by so manye
warres and continuall perylles, came to be excellent in all
warre matters, those the fielde Campus Mar
                        ••
                     us, harde by
the ryuer Tyber, that in the same when they had lefte exercising
their weapons they mighte washe of cleane 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
sweate and duste. And when they were weary with running
refreshed them selues with swymming. And it is very necessary
that not alone the footemen be able to swymme, but
also the horses them selues, yea, and the pages whiche they
call Galeareos, that is to saye head piece bearers, least the
vnskilfull miscarie when necessitie shall approche.
            
            
               ¶Howe warriers afore tyme caused their souldiours
to vse for exercise wicker tergettes, and
cudgels at a stake or poste.
Chapter .xj.
               AUncient men as we finde in bookes, trayned vp yong
souldiours after this manner. They did wrythe and
make of twigges hurdlewise, rounde tergettes twise
as heauy as a common terget. And the same olde captaines
moreouer, gaue the souldiours insteade of swordes, great
wodden cowgels as heauy agayne as their vsuall and wonted
wasters. And thus bothe in the morninge and at after
noone▪ the younge souldiours were occupied at an exercyse
called the stake. And this vse of the stake, is not onely necessarye
for souldiours, but also for maisters of sence. Neither
was any euer thought either in the place of exercise, or in the
fielde, a tried and valiaunt fellowe, that had not bene very

well exercised at ye stake. And for euery souldiour was there
a stake dryuen into the grounde, so faste, that it might not
stirre: and so depe, that it might bee sixe foote aboue the
grounde Against this stake, as against the enemie, the yong
souldiour did aduaunce hym selfe with his wicker and his
waster, as with a sworde & a buckeler. Sometyme he stroke
alone as it were at the heade or at the face, sometyme hee
made at the 
                     •
                  yre, sometyme belowe at the legges, sometime
hee would geue barke, sometyme steppe in, sometyme euen
leape at it, and as earnestly and artificially would hee fighte
with the same stake, as if his enemy had bene in place before
him. In whiche 
                     〈◊〉
                   of exercise, this was generallye to
bee obserued: that so the younge souldiour shoulde striue to
venne w
                     •
                   his ennemie, that he him selfe in no parte laye open
to any blowe.
            
            
               ¶That younge souldiours should be taught to foyne
and thruste, not to cutte and stryke downe
right. Chapiter .xij.
               FUrthermore, they did learne to pricke, not to cutte. For
suche as vsed to strike downe blowes, the Romaynes
woulde easely ouercome, and besides laughe at them,
when they had done. A downe stroke come it neuer so violētly,
seldome kylleth: by reason of armoure and bones, that
defende the vitall partes. Contrariwyse, a sricke out twoo
inches depe, dispatcheth a man: for running inwarde so, it
must needes pearce the liuely partes. Besides, when a man
reacheth vp to strike a downe stroke, hee lieth open, both of
his arme and his syde: but castinge a pricke, a man is euer
warded, and the enemy hurte before the pricke bespied. And
certaine it is that the Romaines vsed chiefly to fighte after
this maner. Deuising for this cause a wycker 
                     〈◊〉
                   and a
wooden waster twyse againe so heauy as was customable,
that whē the souldiour should take in hande the wonted and
lighter weapōs in dede, hee might vnburdened, as it were,
fight both more easely, and also more cherefully.
            
            
               
               ¶That younge souldiours be taught cunningly
to handle weapons. Chapter .xiij.
               MOreouer, the younge souldiour must bee perfectly
enstructed, cunningly to handle his weapon: whiche
thing is set forth by them that teache the same in the
fieldes, or other places of exercise, the whiche vse yet in some
parte is kepte For it is playne that euen nowe, in all maner
of battayles, those that can best vse and hādle their weapōs,
doo fighte a great deale more conuenientlye then others.
Wherein the difference may bee perceiued betwene a well
practised souldiour, and him that hath had litle or no exercise:
when as they that are but meanely this waye instructed,
farre passe and goe beyonde their fellowes in artificiall and
cunning fighting. And so carefully did our auncestours obserue
this practised discipline, that thei doubly rewarded the
teachers thereof. And as for the souldiours whiche had but
smally profited in this same practise, in steade of wheate wer
fayne to take barley, and not one of thē had euer any wheatē
breade geuen him, till in the presence of the lieutenante, the
captaines and suche as were chiefe, they had shewed by sure
proofes that they had fulfilled all thinges which were to
be required in a good souldiour. For there is nothing more
sure, more happy, nor more commendable then suche a common
wealth, whiche hath plēty of experte and learned souldiours,
It is not glistering and gaie apparell, it is not ple
                     •
                  
                  ty
of golde, siluer, & precious stones, that makes the enemies
to stoupe or seke for fauour, but the onely terrour of weapōs
that subdueth thē. Besides, in other thinges, as saith Cato,
if ought be done amisse, it may afterward be amended: but
a faulte committed in battaile, is altogether past cure, whē
present punishement followeth by and by vpō the ouersight.
For either they are forthwith slayne whiche haue cowardly
or ignorauntly foughte, or els being once put to flight, they
dare not euer after deale and encounter againe with those
that ouercame them.
            
            
               ¶That younge souldiours should vse to caste dartes
and other shot. Chapiter .xiiij.
               
                  BUt I returne to the same wherewith I begonne. The
younge souldiour whiche is exercised with the cudgell
at the post, must at y• same post caste dartes, as it were
at a man, but muche more heauie must those dartes be, then
suche as afterwardes he shall by occasion vse in deede. In
whiche exercyse, the teacher of this maisterie, must take diligent
heede, that euerye one whurle his speare stronglye,
that with good leuell he hitte the poste, or els goe very nere
it. This exercise maketh a man strong in the armes, and very
expert also in whurling and casting.
            
            
               ¶That younge souldious should be diligently
taught to shoote
Chapter .xv.
               ALmoste the thirde or fourthe parte of younge souldiours,
suche as were thoughte fittest to make archers,
with wooden bowes and arowes for the same,
were wont for exercise to shoote also at the stake. For this
purpose were there teachers chosen, and cunning fellowes
in deede, diligently to take heede that the souldiour helde
his bowe well and cunninglye as hee shoulde doe, that hee
drewe home and stronglye, that his lefte hande were euer
stead
                     •
                  e, that he ruled his ryght hande well, that he eyed and
mynded the marke altogether at the whiche hee woulde
shoote: that whether hee were on horsebacke or on foote, he
endeuoured to shoote euer as straight as coulde bee. Whiche
arte both had neede to be learned diligently, and also with
daylie vse to be kept cōtinually. And how necessary and profitable
good archers are in battell, Cato in his bookes of the
knowledge of feates of warre plainely declareth. And Claudius
with archers well practised before, ouercame that enemy,
with whom til then, he was neuer able to deale. Uerely
Scipio Aphricanus, when he should ioyne battaile with the
Numantines, whiche had sometime subdued the armie of ye
people of Rome, thought it was not els possible for him to
get the victorie, except he placed in euery bande a certaine of
chosen archers.
            
            
               
               ¶The younge souldiours should be vsed to cast
stones with a slinge, or with the hande.
Chapiter .xvj.
               IT is conuenient that the younger sorte bee diligentlye
exercised in casting stones, either with handes, or with
slinges. They, whiche firste inhabited the Iles called Baleares,
are reported to haue first founde out and deuised the
vse of slinging, and so carefully besides to haue exercised the
same, that the mothers would suffer their little boyes not to
eate any meate, but that whiche they had stricken and kylled
with a slinge. And oftentimes rounde stones throwen leuell
out of a slinge or slingestaffe, against warriours fenced with
helmettes, cors
                     •
                  ettes, and coates of plate, are more greuous
then anye kynde of arrowes: when as vnto those partes
whiche be whole and safe, they do bring a deadlye wounde:
and without anoiance of bloud, the enemy is forthwith slaine
with the stroke of the stone. Uery well knowen it is that in al
battayles of the old aunciēt men, slingers haue bene alowed:
and because to carie a slinge is no labour at all, euery souldiour
therefore must often vse this exercise. For sometyme it
falleth out, that in stony places a skirmishe may be had: that
some highe grounde or hille, shal neede defending: that with
stones and slinges, the forayne enemies must be dryuen from
the assaulte of townes and cities.
            
            
               ¶Of the exercise of leaden plummettes.
Chapiter .xvij.
               THe exercise also of leaden of plummettes, whiche they
call Martiobarbulos, as who saye weapons of Mars
the God of battell, should be taught younger souldiours.
For not longe agoe, in the Illirian sea, there were of
late twoo legions to the numbre of sixe thousande, who, for
that they handled these weapons manfullye and skilfully,
were called Martiobarbuli. By these for a long space it is
certaine that all warres were very valiauntly ended. In so

muche that till Dioclesian and Maximian were Emperours,
it was thought good that these aforesayde, for their
prowes and manhoode, deserued worthely to bee named
Martiobarbuli, Iouiarii, and Herculiam, as who shoulde
saye, the champions of Mars, Iupiter and Hercules. And
they by commaundement were preferred before other legions,
and their vse was to carie fiue of these kyndes of plū
                  mettes
within their tergettes: whiche if the souldiours
could hansomely and conueniently caste, they that wre armed
with tergettes, seemed in a maner to doe as good seruice
as those they call archers. For they wounde the enemies,
and gall their horses, before they can come not onelye
to fighte hande to hande, but also to the stroke and daunger
of the darte.
            
            
               ¶Howe younge souldiours should be exercised
to vaulte or mounte on horses.
Chapiter .xviij.
               NOt onely of the younge souldiours, but also of stipendarie
souldiours, the vaulting of horses hath alwayes
bene straightly looked to. Whiche vse verely hathe
cōtinued to this our age, although they would haue it seeme
nowe as though it were not so▪ Horses of woode in wynter
were set in a house, in sommer in the open fielde. Upon these
the younge sorte were compelled to mounte, at the first without
armour, vntyll with vse and exercise, they could doe indifferently
well, afterwarde in their harneis they were forced
to doe the same. And so great regarde was there hereof,
that they learned, not onelye on the right syde, but also on
the lefte, bothe to gette of and on: yea, euen with drawen
swordes, or long poles in their handes. And here was the
commoditie of this continuall exercise, that these which in
peace had plied this practise so diligently, when neuer so soden
a tumulte was moued in battayle, with the leaste warnynge
that coulde be, could mounte and horse them selues.
            
            
               
               ¶That younge souldiours should vse to carie
weyght and burdens. Chapiter .xix.
               YOu should often force the younge souldiours, to take
vp a three score pounde weight, and to walke with the
same a wonted souldiours space. And needeful is this
for theim whome neede ofte compelleth, in many a shrewde
iourney to cary victuall and armoure. Neyther should this
be thought a harde matter, if great neede so require: for
what can not dayly exercise ouercome and make at lengthe
very easie? That this forsayde kinde of exercise, the souldiours
of foretyme haue vsed, the Poete Virgill wytnesseth in
these wordes.
               
                  Like as the Romaine fearce in armes like to his countrey guise,
                  Which heauy burden on his backe him selfe fast forwarde hyse,
                  And readie on his foe vnwares doth set in battell wyse.
               
            
            
               ¶What kynde of armour souldiours of olde tyme
were wont to vse. Chapiter .xx.
               NOwe is here fitte place to shewe with what kynde of
armour and weapons the young souldiours should be
furnished & fenced. But in this point the olde custome
is vtterly layde asyde. For although horsemen in armes did
good, as we haue of the Gothians, Alanes and Hunnes for
example, yet it is playne that the footemen were naked and
vnarmed. For after ye citie of Rome was builded, vnto worthie
Grecians tyme, the armie of footemen was fenced bothe
with coarselettes & headpieces. But whē the exercise of Cā
                     pus
Martius, by negligence & slouthfulnes, was geuen ouer
and discontinued, armour begon to seame heauy, & was not
worne ofte of souldiours. Therefore firste they made a petition
to ye Emperours, that they might weare no more coarselettes,
afterward yt they might lay away their helmettes.
And so whē they should go to fight against ye 
                  Gothiās, being
naked of their brestes, & hauing nothing of their heads, they
wer oftētimes by ye multitude of archers vāquished & ouercō.
And notwtstanding so many misfortunes which haue hapned

euen to the destructions of so mightie and great cities. No
man hath regarde as yet to restore againe to the footemen,
either their coarselettes or headpieces: whereby it comes to
passe that naked men in the forewarde in daunger euer of
wounding, haue greater mynde of flying then they haue of
fighting. What can an archer on foote do without harneis?
without head piece? which can not holde his bowe and buckeler
both together? What shall the standerd bearers doe
in battayle, aduauncing the ensigne with their lefte hande, &
haue nothing to saue their heades or their brestes? Mary a
footeman perchaunce, whiche seldome doth exercise & handle
his armour, wyl thinke a brestplate troublesome & heauy.
Howebeit, by dayly vse he might well enough away withal,
whiche, though it beare heauy thinges, yet neuer complayneth.
But they, whiche wyll not take payne to carie aunciēt armoure
for their furniture, shall vnfurnyshed beare the
blowes awaye, and catche their deathes wounde. And that
whiche is a greater griefe, and more shamefull to be spoken
of, either become captiue, or betraye their common wealthe
by running away. So that eschewing exercise and laboure,
with ye greatest shame that can be, thei are slaine like beastes.
Wherefore was an hoste of footemen of our auncestours aforetyme
called a wall? but because the legions, besides
their tergettes armed with dartes or other shotte, made a
goodly glistering shewe also with coarselettes and headpieces:
in so muche that the archers were fenced on their lefte
armes with splēces or gauntelettes. Footemē that had tergettes
besides their coarselettes and head pieces, were also
constrayned to harneis their right legges. And thus were
they armed whiche fought in the forefront of the battayle,
and were called Principes, as who faye the firste and foremoste
to perilles. And they, in the seconde order, whiche
were called Hastat
                        •
                     , that is to saye speare men: and they in
the thirde order called Triarii, as who shoulde saye of the
reare warde, ready in the thirde place to fighte. But these
Triarii were wont to stoupe and keepe thē within the fence
of their tergettes, leaste standing vp they might be woūded

with their ennemyes weapons, and that when neede should
requyre, hauing rested themselues so well, they might more
vehementlye assaulte and set vppon their ennemyes. And
certaine it is that these often haue gotten the victory, whē
the spearemen before them called Hastati, haue bene slaine,
The auncient warriours had also amonge their footemen,
such as were called lighte harnessed men, as Slingers and
other with lighte Armoure, which chiefelye were placed in
the out sydes or winges, by whom euer the vnset was geuē
                  ▪
and these were of the swyftest and best exercised sort, neither
were they very manye, because in retyring if necessitye constrayned,
they were succoured and receyued of those in the
forefronte, so that the whole battayle stoode still vnbroken.
There hath a custome continued almost to this oure tyme,
that al souldiours vsed cappes made of skinnes, which souldiours
they called Pannonicos, deuised for this purpose, y•
the head peece should not seeme heauie to any man in fighte,
whiche did bere alwayes somewhat on his heade. But the
shotte which the armye on foote did vse, were called Pila,
fastened with thinne yron to the foreparte of a triangle of
nine inches, or a foote longe, which beinge faste in the Targette
could not be cute awaye, and beinge skilfullye and valiantlye
directed, coulde easelye breake in sonder anye harnesse:
of the which kinde there be verye fewe weapons nowe
amonge vs. But the forrayne barbarous footemen that
haue Shieldes or Tergettes, do chiefelye vse these Dartes,
whiche they call Bebras: and of them they haue two or
three a peece. Moreouer we must know, that when the matter
is tryed with Dartes, the souldiours must set their lefte
feete before, for so in throwing theyr dartes when they step
in with their right legge, the stroke is much more vehemēt.
But when the matter is come to ye pintch (as they terme it)
and fight as it were at the halfe sword, thē must their righte
feete be formost, that theyr sydes be from theyr ennemyes,
least they catche a wound, and that theyr right hand be readye
to geeue a blowe when neede is. Therefore it is manifest,
that yonge souldiours shoulde be furnished and fenced,

with al cunning and pollicye in fighting, and with all manner
of armour and weapons. For needes must he fight more
boldlye, that beinge safe of breast and heade, standes not i
                     •
                  
feare of woundinge.
            
            
               ¶Of the fortifyinge of Campes.
Chap. xxi.
               THe souldiours also ought to learne to fortifye their
Campes, for there is not a more safe, nor a more necessarye
thing in all warre. For whye, if the army be
well planted, the souldiours so safe enbulwarked, voyde of
all care passe ouer dayes and nights, yea euen thoughe their
ennemyes besiege them, they are as safe as though they had
a walled Cittye on their backes. But the knowledge hereof,
is vtterlye come to nothinge: it is longe agoe, since that
when any would pitch theyr Campes, they vsed to entrench
them, and sette stakes before them: so that we haue knowen,
when the forrayne horsemen as wel by daye as nighte, haue
come of a sodayne manye armyes, manye times haue beene
maruelously annoyed. But not onlye the foole hardy without
ye Campe suffer these thinges: but whē as by any chaunce
in the forebattell they beginne to retyre, they haue not a defence
of the Campe, where to saue themselues, & so are killed
vp like dogges: and so longe do they dye, as theyr ennemyes
please to pursue and chase them.
            
            
               ¶In what places the Campe shoulde
be pitched. Chap. xxij.
               THe Campe shoulde alwayes be placed, especiallye
if the ennemyes be nighe, in a place oute of daunger,
whereas maye be plentye of woode, forage & water.
And if there they be likelye to lye long, a consideration must
be had, for the holsomnes thereof. They muste also take
heede that there be no hill nighe, higher then the Campe,
whiche if their ennemyes take, they maye greatlye annoye

theym. They muste also consider whether the fielde where
they woulde encampe, hath beene wonte at anye time to be
ouerflowed with sodaine waters: whiche by the like chaūce
mighte force the hoast to remoue. Accordinge to the nomber
of souldiours, and the carriages, y• Campe must be fortifyed,
leaste the greater multitude be crowned into small
roume, or least the small nomber be constrayned to stande a
loufe one from another, and more scatteringe then is conueniente.
            
            
               ¶In what forme the Campe shoulde stande.
Chapiter .xxiij.
               
                  A Campe muste be pitched sometime fouresquare,
sometime threesquare, sometime halferounde, as the
qualitye or necessitye of the place shall requyre. But
the gate which is called Porta Praetoria, that is to saye, the
gate for the Captayne, must be eyther Eastwarde, or els in
suche a place that is full before the ennemye, or if they be
iourneyinge, it muste stande that waye whether the armye
meaneth to goe. Hard within this gate the first hundreds,
(that is to saye) the chiefe bandes or companyes of souldiours
do pitche theyr Pauilions and place their Standers.
               But the gate which is named Decumana, (that is saye) the
greate gate or entrye into the Campe is behinde the Captaynes
gate, oute of the which suche souldiours as offende,
are ledde to take their punishement.
            
            
               ¶Wyth what thinges a Campe shoulde
be fortifyed. Cap .xxiiij.
               DIuers wayes a Campe may be fortifyed, & especiall
thre wayes, for if they be not driuen to a marueylous
pinch, they cut turfes out of y• ground, & wt thē make

a wall as it were a wall three foote high aboue the grounde,
so that wher the turfes were digged, euen iust before it their
be a ditche. Then in all hast must their be 
                     •
                   ditche made nine
foote broade and vii. foote deepe. But when ennemyes of
great force are at haude: the Campe must be fenced rounde
about which a verye large ditch, so that it be by the line (as
they call it) twelfe foote broade, and nine foote deepe. But
after they haue set hedges aboue the same euerye way with
earth throwen out of the ditche, and cast vppon the hedges
it will be reared foure foote highe, and thus shall it be .xiii.
foote deepe, and xii. foote broade, aboue the which, must be
stakes of very tough woode well entered, which the souldiours
are wont to carry. For the which purpose it is good to
haue alwayes in readines mattockes or spades, rakes, scuttels
or baskets and other kinde of implementes.
            
            
               ¶Howe a campe shoulde be fenced when the
ennemye is at hande.
Chapter .xxv.
               IT is an easye thinge to fortifye a Campe, when ennemyes
are farre of, but if the ennemyes do come faste vppon
them, then all the horsemen and halfe the footemen,
are set in battayle raye, to breake the brunte of the ennemy:
the residue behinde them, when they haue drawen the ditches,
do fortifye the campe, and by a cryer is wont to be proclaymed
what ye first companye hath done, what the second,
what the thirde, what the fourth, vntill they haue finished
all the whole worke. Then come ye Captaynes to vewe and
measure the ditche, and suche as haue wrought leaselye and
slouthfullye are therefore punished. After this sorte thenne
the yonge souldiour must be trayned, that when neede shall
requyre hee maye by and by fortifye the campe withoute
trouble.
            
            
               
               ¶How the yonge souldiours maye be trayned, that in
the battayle they keepe good order and theyr
arraye, and space betweene one and
an other. Chap. xxvi.
               IT is certayne that there is nothinge more profitable in
fight, then that souldiours exercise daylye themselues to
goe in battayle in good order and arraye, neyther runninge
on heapes, nor scatteringe abroade more then is expedient.
For truly when they are thicke thronged together,
they lose theyr space they should fight in, and euerye one euerye
where letteth another: and when they stand thinne that
eche maye be seene howe he standes, they shewe a waye to ye
ennemye to enter and go through the armye.
               And thus if the ennemye shall cutte and parte the armye, &
come to the backes of them that fight, verye feare must needes
bring all thinges out of order. Therefore the yong souldiours
must be brought forth alwayes to the field, & as they
are by name billed, they must be called to ye battayle: so that
the battayle be longe right out at the first and single: that it
be not hollowe, that it be not croked, y• the souldiours stand,
of like and conuenient distance one from another: then they
muste be charged of a sodaine to double the fronte: so that
thoughe they go as faste as euen they are accustomed in the
fielde, yet they maye keepe theyr arraye. Thirdlye commaundemente
muste be geeuen, that forthwith they bringe
themselues into a quadrangle forme. That done, they must
turne them into a triangle (wedgewyse as they terme it) y•
is to saye, small before, thicke and broder afterwarde. This
good orderinge of souldiours hath done verye much good, &
beene profitable in warre. They must also be warned to conueye
themselues into a rounde forme, whereby when as
violently the ennemye doth breake into the battell, the souldiours
with this practise may be able to resist them, least all
the whole multitude be compelled to runne awaye, and by
that meanes greuous perill followe therevppon. If the yonger
sorte can by dailye exercise ones perceyue these thinges,

they shall a greate deale more easelye saue themselues when
they fight.
            
            
               ¶Howe much space the souldiours must go and come
when they be brought forth to marche: And how
often they must be exercised in a moneth.
Chapiter. .xxvij.
               MOreouer the custome hath bene and remayneth still,
and also is in the decrees of worthye Augustus, and
Adrianus Emperours, it is prouided in the same, y•
thrise in the moneth, as well horseme
                     •
                   as footemen, should
be brought forth to marche, (for so do they terme this kinde
of exercise.) The footemen armed & furnished with all maner
of weapons, were commaunded to go and come y• space
of .10 myles from ye Campe a marching pace, so that some
part of the way they might runne ouer merilye. The horsemen
deuided by troupes in armour, likewyse wente euen as
longe a iourneye, and as such on horsebacke are wonte to do
for exercise: Sometimes they followed, sometimes gaue
backe, and forcinge theyr horses, ranne them out vppon the
spurre, not onlye in ye plaine fieldes, but also in places steepe
downe, and verye highe both horsemen and footemen were
caused to go vp and downe, so that hap what happe could to
them in their fight, these practised souldiours had very well
forelearned.
            
            
               ¶Of the perswasion to warrefare, and of the manhoode
of the Romaynes. Chap. .xxviii.
               IN consideration of my faythfull promise and vowe (most
puisaūt Emperour, I haue gathered together into this
litle booke, these things which I haue chosen oute of all
authors, which haue written the science and Arte of warrefare:
that in mustering and exercising of yonge souldiours,
if anye man woulde be dilligente, hee maye easelye make a
stronge armye: but followinge the auncient manhoode that

hath bene in times past. For neyther is all martiall bloud
and stomacke quite gone and decayed in men, nor yet lands
which brought forth ye 
                  Lacedemoniās, ye 
                  Athenians, Mar
                     
                        •
                     ians,
Samnites, Pelignes, yea & the very Romaines themselues,
be barren and vnfruitful. Haue not the people of Epirus,
sometime preuayled verye much in armes? Haue not
the Macedonians and Thessalians by warre, conqueringe
first y• 
                  Persians, come as farre as Indie? And it is manifest
that the Danes, the people of Media and Thracia, haue alwayes
bene such stoute warriours, y• 
                  Mars himselfe is fayned
to haue bene borne among them. It were to long to recken
vp the strength of all countryes, when as they all consist
in the Empyre of the Romaynes. But greate securitye and
longe peace hath made men partlye delighte in idlenes, and
partlye in seruice at home in the common wealth. By such
meanes therefore it is well knowen, that the care of warrelye
exercyse was at the first negligently handled, afterward
dissembled, last of all broughte into obliuion & quite forgotten.
Neyther let any man marueyle that this hath chaunced
in the time late passed: when as after the first warre betweene
the Romaynes and the Carthagiens, when 24. yeares
were come and gone, peace so weakened the Romaynes
throughe idlenes and disuse of Armoure, which before had
bene euerye where conquerours, that in the seconde warre
of Carthage, they were by no meanes comparable to Hanniball.
After so manye Consulles loste: so manye Captaynes
slaine: so manye armyes cast away: finding
a meanes to learne the vse and exercise of warfare,
they came at ye length to be cōquerours
agayne. At all times therfore should yong
men be chosen and exercised, for cheaper
certayne it is to instruct a mans owne
souldiours in armes, then to hyre
straungers for moneye.
            
         
         
            
            The seconde Booke of Flauius
Vegetius Renatus of the institutions
of vvarre.
            
               The Prologue.
               
                  COntinuall conquestes and triumphes, do declare
that your Grace doth chiefelye and most skilfullye
keepe in remembraunce the auncient ordinances of
the elders, as touchinge the knowledge and feates
of armes: For the effect of thinges is alwayes the
most certaine proofe of any science. But your rest
and quietnes (moste victorious Emperour) doth
requyre the olde and auncient thinges oute of Bookes, wyth a deeper
iudgement then anye earthly minde is able to conceyue: when as with
newe and freshe noble actes, it passeth antiquitye it selfe. Being therfore
commaunded to comprehende briefelye in wrytinge these thinges,
not therein to teache or instructe your maiestye, but onlye to put you in
remembraunce thereof: my due obedience and solempne promise hath
oftentimes striuen wyth shamefastnes. For what greater bouldnes cā
there be, then to the Lorde and Prince of the whole worlde, the vanquisher
of all barbarous and forraine Nations, to write of the knowledge
and vse of warre: excepte peraduenture you commaunded that
to be done, which you your selfe had perfourmed. And againe, it seemed
a very haynous and dangerous thinge not to obeye the commaū
                  dementes
of so great and mightye an Emperour. Therefore in obeyinge
I am become verye boulde, whiles for feare that in denyinge I
shoulde appeare more bolde. To the which rashenes the longe continuance
of your accustomed and excedinge great clemencye hath encouraged
mee. For of late I offered a little Booke of the chusinge and
trayninge vppe of yonge souldiours, as one of your owne familye, yet

                     •
                  herein sustayned no blame: and therefore feare I not at your commaundemente
to aduenture on a worke, when as that which was voluntarilye
done, hath past vnreprehended.
            
            
               
               Into howe manye kindes the
Arte of vvarre maye be
deuided. The first Chapter.
               
                  WHat soeuer belongeth to warre (as
the singuler and notable Authour amonge
the Latynes doth testifye) cō
                  sisteth
of armoure and men: Whatsoeuer
partayneth to warre, I saye
is deuided into three partes, Horsemen,
Footemē and Nauyes. Of the
horsemen one sort be called winges,
because that like vnto winges they defende the battayle on
both sydes, which nowe be called Vexillationes, that is to
saye, companyes of men of warre all vnder one Standard,
a Velo, because they do vse banners or Ueiles, termed glistering
flagges or ensignes. There is another sort of horsemen
which be named, Legionacij, because they be ioyned to
the Legion: like to the which are deuised another kinde (&
for their harnes they weere of their legges) called Ocreati.
               
               There be likewyse two maner of Nauyes, one which may
be called Foystes or Gallyes, and the other of shippes. The
horsemen keepe the playnes, the Nauyes the seas and waters,
the footemen the hilles, Cittyes the champion groundes
and also steepe places. Whereby we see that the footemen
are most necessarye for the common wealthe, doinge
good seruice euerye where. And whereof a greater nomber
maye be maintayned with lesse cost and charge. An host of
men is in lattine Exercitus, of the verye thinge it selfe, and
of the vse of exercise hath therefore so proper a name geuen
vnto it, to the intente it should neuer forget what it was called.
The footemen are deuided into two partes, the one sort
Legionaries, the other Aides: the Aides were sente from
their part takers and confederate Nations. The Romaine
vertue doth farre exceade all other in the orderinge of their

Legions. A legion hath y• name Ab eligendo, which worde
of it selfe requyreth theyr fayth and dilligence by whom the
souldiours are allowed: For reskewe & ayde the lesser nomber,
for legionarye souldiours a much greater nomber hath
euer customablye bene appointed.
            
            
               ¶How the legionarye souldiours and those that
are sente for ayde do differ. Cap. ij.
               THe Macedonians, the Greekes, the Troyans, did vse
those battayles which they called Phalanges, about ye
nomber of .8000. men in a Phalange. The Frenchmen
and Spaniardes, and many barbarous Nations, vsed
in battell such as they called Gaternas, wherin were 6000.
harnessed menne: the Romaynes haue Legions, in the
which are .6000 warriours or moe. But what difference
maye seeme to be betweene the Legions and Aydes, I will
plainly declare. Those which are sent for aydes come from
sondrye places, for diuers and sondrye hyre: neyther in trayning,
in knowledge, nor in disposition one like another, farre
vnlike be theyr fashions, their vse of their Armour cleane of
another sort. And needes must they be longe of getting the
victorye, which before they come to fighte differ thus after
this sort. Finallye whereas expedition requyreth, it is verye
expedient that all the souldiours at one onlye warning,
should straighte way turne themselues: then howe can they
do all a like that, which they are commaunded, when they
neuer kept anye companye altogether before: and yet these
thinges solemnlye vsed, often exercised, almoste dailye confirmed,
profit not a little. The aydes went alwayes wyth y•
legionarye souldiours, as lighte harnessed men in the forebattayle,
rather for an helpe in fightinge then a principall
succour. But a Legion where is but one peculiar kinde of
souldiours, hauinge in it complete harnessed men (that is to
saye) first and foremost Principes, then Hastati, the thirde
Triarij or of the rerewarde, the Ensigne bearers: then
lighte harnessed men, as casters of 
                     •
                  artes, Archers, men

with Slinges, Crossebowe men: hauinge also in it m
                     •
                  n at
Armes, and such as be annexed vnto the Legiō called legionarye
horsemen, and all these in one register: when as with
one minde and one consent they 
                     •
                  ortifye ye campe, order their
armye, and ioyne battayle together, beinge safe and sure on
euerye syde, needing no maner of outward helpe or ayde.
               What multitude is so manye, that suche an armye shall not
conquere? As we are plainlye taught by the great prowesse
of the Romaynes, which vsinge Legions alwayes in suche
sort aforesayd, ouercame so manye ennemyes as eyther willinglye
they would, or all thinges considered, they possible
coulde.
            
            
               ¶The cause why Legions haue beene wasted and
deminished. Chap. iij.
               THe name of Legions remayneth yet till this day, but
through negligence of former times, ye strength therof
is abated: for y• ambitiō preuenting manhoode, hath
got awaye his due rewarde: & souldiours nowe a dayes are
promoted by fauour, which neuer were promoted but onlye
by labour. And againe for this cause, y• whē we haue payed a
certen their wages, & with a pasport (as ye custome is) dismist
thē, we neuer substitute other in their roumes. Besides it cā
not be chosen, but some must fall sicke, become weake & so be
discharged: some geeue ouer warfare, or dye by one chaunce
or other: y• except euery yeare, (yea almost euery moneth) as
many againe succeede them, & come in theyr place: an armye
be it neuer so greate, must needes consume & wast. An
other cause there is why legions may be lessened: A souldiour
takes muche paine in a Legion, armoure is heauye and
burdenous, rewardes come sloulye, punishementes ryfe &
sharpe, which thinges the most part to auoyde, if it mighte
be, seeke to be sworne and serue for ayde, where bothe they
take lesse paynes, & are more sone preferde. Noble Cato ye
Elder, both valiant in armes, & who that being Cōsull had
oftentimes himselfe conducted an army, he thought yet, he
might profit ye cōmon wealth a great deale more if he put in

wrytinge what belonged to warre: for valiance and noble
actes continue but one age, but what things are written for
the profitte of the common wealth, are remembred throughoute
all ages. The like haue manye other done before, but
especially Frontinus, writinge to ye gracious Prince Traianus,
for this endeuour and trauaile was very much commē
                  ded.
These mens ordinaunces, these mens instructions, as
much as in me lyeth, briefelye and faythfullye I intende to
put in wrytinge. For seinge that whether an armye be well
ordered or euill, the expenses are as greate of the one as the
other: it shalbe profitable not onlye for the time present, but
also for euer hereafter, if by your maiestyes good prouision,
(moste noble Emperour) stronge and polliticke vse of Armour
maye be renued and established, and whatsoeuer dissimulation
for fauour hath tofore beene practised, the same
maye by your meanes be redressed and amended.
            
            
               ¶What nomber of Legions the auncient Romaynes
ledde wyth them to the warres.
Chapter. .iiij.
               VVe finde in al Authors that euerye Consull, against
the greatest nomber of ennemyes, leade neuer mo thē
two Legions, reckening there with the aydes y• came
from theyr frendes & confederates. So well exercised were
they, so stoute and valiant, that they thought two Legions
sufficient for any warre whatsoeuer. Wherfore according
to the rule of the lawe of Armes, and trade of warres, I wil
declare the olde maner of ordering of a Legion: which description
if it shall seeme somewhat diffuse or homelye, impute
not the same to mee, but to the hardnes and difficultye
of the matter it selfe. With a diligent and attentiue minde,
they must therefore be reade ouer and ouer, that they maye
be throughlye vnderstode and perfectlye remembred. For
needes must that common wealthe be vnuincible, that hath
a gouernour so skilfull in chiualrye, as when hee will, can
make both stronge and valiaunt Armyes.
            
            
               
               ¶How a Legion shoulde be ordered.
Chapiter. .v.
               AFter much diligence hath bene vsed in choosing such
of the yonger sorte as shalbe of good stomacke & courage,
and also practised before for the space of foure
monethes or more: then at the commaundement and by the
authoritye of the mightye soueraine Prince, a legion is framed
& made. For souldiours beinge once bilde, pricked and
registred they vse to be sworne. And hereof therefore comes
that Ceremonious taking of an othe in warre, of the which
this is the forme. They sweare by God ye father, by Christ
the sonne, and by the holye Ghoste, and by the Maiestye of ye
Emperour or Prince, which after God, oughte to be beloued
and worshipped of all mē lyuing. For when as the Emperour
or Prince hath receyued the tytle of royall maiestye,
vnto him (as if God were presently and corporally with vs)
our faythfull obedience must be performed, and moste vigilante
and diligent seruice declared and shewed. For whosoeuer
lyueth eyther out of the warres or in the warres, doth
then serue God, when as hee faythfullye loueth him, whom
God hath appointed to rule and raigne ouer him. But to
this, do the souldiours sweare, that they wil do all thinges
valiantly, which the Emperour or Prince doth commaūde:
that they will neuer forsake ye warres, neyther refuse death
for the Romayne common wealth.
            
            
               ¶Howe manye cohortes or bandes shoulde be in
one Legion, and howe manye souldiours
should be in one bande. Cap. vj.
               VVe must know that in a Legion there ought to be 10.
bandes. But the first bande passeth al the rest, both in
nomber of souldiours, and also in estimation, and cō
                  monlye
they be (as it is requisite) of very good callinge and
wel brought vp in learninge: for this bande beares the Eagle,
which alwayes is the chiefest standard in the Romaine
                  
armye, & the ensigne of al the whole Legion. These ha
                     •
                  e in
reuerence and worship theyr Emperours pictures as present
tokens from God. This first bande contayneth .1105.
footemen: heauye armed horsemen 132. And it is named
Cohorsmiliaria, that is to saye, a companye of a thousande
and mo souldiours. This bande is the head of all the Legiō:
when soeuer they must fight, this band beginnes the battel,
and are first set in order in the fronte of the battell. The second
bande contayneth .555. footemen, & 66. horsemē of heauye
armour. And this band is called Cohors quigentaria, y•
is to say, a cōpany of .5. hundred & mo souldiours. The third
bande likewise hath .555. footemen, and .66. horsemen. But
here they vse to place their strong & more expert mē, because
this third bande is in the middes & strengthe of the battell.
The fourth bande hath .555. footemen, & 66 horsemen The
fift bande hath as manye, but it is requisyte they be valiante
and couragious souldiours: because as the first Cohorte is
set in the righte wynge, so the fift is set in the lefte winge.
               These fiue bandes are set in a raye in the first battayle. The
sixte bande hath .555. footemen .66. horsemen, and the same
must be chosen and picked mē: for why, the sixt band is placed
next behinde the standarde, and next the Emperours armes
in the seconde front or battell. The seuenth bande hath
.555. footemen .66 horsemen. The eyght bande hath .555.
footemen 66▪ horsemen: but couragious men, as it is expedient,
because it is the middlemost bande in the seconde battayle.
The nynthe hath 555. footemen .66. horsemen. The
tenthe doth containe also .555. footemen 66 horsemen: valiant
and expert warriours, because in the seconde battayle it
defendeth the lefte winge. These tenne bandes make a
full and perfecte Legion, contayninge 6100. footemen, and
726. horsemen. There maye not be in a Legion anye fewer
of harnest men: mo there hath beene oftentimes. For when
one bande would not serue, by cōmaundement haue bene taken
mo other bandes, of a Thousand souldiours in a bande.
            
            
               ¶Names and degrees, of the chiefe and principall
men of the Legion. Chap. vij.
               
                  NOwe that I haue set forth the auncient orderinge of a
Legion, I will declare the names and offices of the
principall souldiours: to speake plainlye and properlye,
shew by what name euery souldiour was first registred
and billed. The chiefe Tribune was appointed by the descretion
and iudgement of the Emperour, by his solemne Epistle
or letter written to that effecte. The vnder Tribune
came vp by his seruice. And he is called Tribunus a tribu:
of geuing euery one his right: because he hath authoritye ouer
the souldiours, which Romulus first chose out of ye Tribes
(that is to saye) out of ye wardes, hundreds, or other such
like companyes of the peoples of Rome. Those souldiours
Ordinarij, are called such as haue charge in the battaile, &
leade the first rankes or rayes. They were called Augustales,
which were ioyned to those ordinarye souldiours by the
Emperour Augustus. Fla
                        •
                     iales in like sort, as it were Secundi
Augustales, noble Vespasian added to the Legions.
Aquiliferi, are they which carrye the Eagle. Imaginarij or
Imaginiferi, whiche carrye the Images or pictures of the
Emperours. Optiones ab optando, whē those next going
before them were sicke or greeued, these as it were their successours
& supplying their places, were wont to take vppon
them all their whole charge. Signiferi, are the Standarde
bearers now called Draconarii. Tesserarii be they, whiche
gaue the watche worde to the souldiours of all the Legion.
And this worde Tessera, is the commaundement of ye chiefe
Captayne, to call the armye eyther to any worke or battell.
Campigeni, that is to saye, Antefignani, are therefore so
named, because by their endeuour and manhoode, ye maner
of exercise doth encrease in the fielde. Metatores, are those
which go before ye armye, to chose them a place to encampe
in. Beneficiarij, so called whō the Tribune to benefite preferreth
and promoteth. Librarii, that kepe a booke of ye souldiours
accompts. Tubicines, Cornicines, and Buccinatores,
which by blowing a trumpet, brasen horne or Sagbut,
cause the souldiours to ioyne battaile. Armaturae duplares,
were souldiours, which had double allowance of victuals.
Simplares, which had ordinary allowance.
               
                  
                  Mensores, which in the campe measured out by y• foote to y•
souldiours, places to pitch their tentes in, or appointed euerye
souldiour his lodginge in the Cittyes. Torquati duplares,
souldiours with double chaynes: & Torquati simplares,
souldiours such as wore a single chayne al of golde, had
it, for some reward of manhoode and vertue. Which who so
deserued, besides the prayse and commendation sometimes
had double allowance of victuals. There were also Candidati
duplares, suche as laboured or stoode for double allowance
of victuals: and Candidati simplares, suche as laboured
for single allowance. These be the principall souldiours
which haue anye prerogatiue or priuiledge aboue the other.
The rest are named Munifices, because they are cōstrayned
to loke to their charge and office.
            
            
               ¶The names of them which ledde the auncient
orders of souldiours. Chap. viij.
               THe olde custome hath beene, that the chiefe leader of
the Legion, shoulde promote the Centurion or Captayne
of the vaunte guarde called Primipilus, whose
office was not onlye to take charge of the Eagle or chiefe
standard, but also to haue vnder his leading in y• first battell
foure Centuries, that is to saye .400. souldiours. This captayne
as the chiefe of al the Legion, did obtayne manye profites
and commodityes. Also the chiefe of them which be called
Hastati did leade in the second fronte, two Centuries, y•
is to saye, 200 men, whom we do nowe call Ducenarium,
that is a Captayne of two hundered. But the principall of
the first band, had vnder his gouernment one Centurie, and
an halfe, that is to saye .150. men, and the orderinge of all
thinges in the Legion whatsoeuer. Likewyse the second called
Hastatus, did leade as manye as did the firste, that is to
saye, 150▪ men. The first or chiefe Triarian, did leade an hū
                  dred
men: so that these fiue ordinarye souldiours, gouerned
tenne Centuries of the first cohor
                     •
                  or bande, and vnto whom
the auncient fathers did great houor, and also appointed to

their commoditie: for this ende chiefly, that the other souldiours
of all the legion with all kinde of labour and humble
seruice should endeuour thē selues to attain such rewardes.
There were also centurions or vnder captaines, which had
the charge of a single centurie or iuste hundred, whiche bee
named Centenarii, there were Decani. That conducted ten
souldiours, whiche are nowe called the chiefe of one company
in one pauilion or tent. The seconde cohorte hath fiue centurions,
likewyse the thirde, the fourth, the fifthe, and so to
the tenth cohort. And so in al the legion were .155. centuriōs.
            
            
               ¶Of the office of him that is called Praefectus legionis,
the lieutenauntes deputie. Chapter .ix.
               SUche as sometime had beene Consuls, sent the Emperours
lieutenantes to warre, vnto whome al the whole
armies and those whiche were sent for ayde, as well in
peace as in necessarie time of warres were alwaies obediēt:
whose roume it is certaine that right excellent famous men,
as maisters of the souldiours doe nowe supplie, which were
wonte to haue the gouernement, not onely of twoo legions,
but also of a greater nūbre. But the very chiefe and peculiar
iudge of the legion was Praefectus, hauing common authoritie
of the beste estate or order, & in the absence of the lieutenaunt,
as it were his deputie or vicegerent, had the greatest
power of all. The tribunes or centurions, and all the other
souldiours, were all at his cōmaundement. This same gaue
the watche their charge, and when any voiage was to bee
made gaue onely commaundement. If a souldiour had committed
any faulte, this deputie forthwith by his authoritie,
commaunded the marshall to take punishement of him. Hee
tooke charge of all the souldiours armoure, also of the horses,
apparell and vitaile. Hee might commaunde seuere punishement
to be executed, and exercises, not onely of the footemen,
but also of the horsemē daily to be practised. Him self
as a diligent and sober ouerseer, trayned vp the legion committed
to his charge, alwayes honestly and diligently in all

good seruice & industrie, as one not ignoraunt that the valiauntnes
of the souldiours redounded chiefly to the commē
                  dation
of the captaine.
            
            
               ¶Of the office of the chiefe ouerseer of the campe.
Chapiter .x.
               THere was also an ouerseer of the campe, though not
of great authoritie, yet occupied in no meane or small
affaires: whose office was to see to the encamping of ye
armie, to all fortification, to ditching and entrenching. The
tentes or hales of the souldiours, withal the bagge and baggage
were ordred euer as it seemed good to him. The sicke
souldiours besides of euery tente, with those that had theim
in cure, all expences belonginge to the same, concerne his
onely trauell and diligence. Cartes or wagons, shotte or artillery,
timber, edge tooles, wherewith to hewe and sawe
the same, for opening of ditches, when a bulwarke should be
purposed, and for more commodious conueyinge of water,
this matter pertayneth properly to him. Hee did moreouer
forsee that there wanted not at anye tyme either strawe, or
woode, battring rammes, crosse bowes, field pieces, & other
kinde of ordinaunce. This officer, after long and great experience
of warrefare, was chosen as one moste experte, and
cunningest wel to teache and enstructe others in that, which
hee him selfe had done with commendation.
            
            
               ¶Of the office of the maister of the artificers.
Chapter .xj.
               MOreouer, there are in a legion Carpenters, and such
as make preparation, as Cartwrightes, Smithes,
Painters, and other artificers, for building places to
winter in. For ye speedy making of engines, wooden towers,
and other thinges wherewith ye enemies cities are annoied,
and their owne better defended. And either to make newe,
or to repaire the olde shaken armoure, weapons, wagons &
other kinden of ordinaunce. They had also forges or shoppes
for tergets, or b
                     •
                  clers, for coates offēce, for bowes, in which
arrowes, dartes, helmets, & al kinde of weapōs were made.

For this was his speciall charge, that no necessarye thinge
should at any time be missing in the campe: in so muche that
thei had also pioners, which after the maner of the Bessians,
working vnder the ground, & vndermining the foūdacion of
the walles, would sodainly issue out & take their enemies cities.
Of all these, the maister of ye artificers had the charge,
and was the onely ouerseer.
            
            
               ¶Of the office of the chiefe tribune or Colonel. Chapiter .xij.
               
                  A Legion, as it is before said, hath .x. cohortes, but the
first cōteined a .1000. or more souldiours, in ye which
were such placed as were sent, for their great wealth
for birth, for their learning, for comlines, for vertue, & manhode.
Ouer this cohort the tribune had the gouernemēt, passing
all other in knowledge of armes, in goodly personage,
in honest manners and condicions. The other cohortes as it
seemed good to the prince, were ruled by other tribunes or
gouernours. But so great regarde was there had for the exercising
of the souldiours, that not onely the said tribunes
or gouernours did commaunde their owne souldiours committed
to their charge to exercise them selues, euery daye in
their owne presence: but also they thē selues being perfecte
in the knowledge of armes, did exhorte and encourage other
the rather by their example, often to doe the lyke. The tribunes
carefulnes by this industrious traueile was verye
muche commended, when as his souldiours went cleane in
apparell, when their armoure was sure and brighte, when
they often exercised them selues by vse to become skilfull.
            
            
               ¶Of the centuries, or hundredes of the footemen, and
of their ensignes, or penoncels or banners.
Chapter .xiij.
               THe firste and chiefe standerd of all the legion is the
eagle whiche he that carieth is called Aquilifer. Also
there be caried in euery cohort dragōs, and those that
carie them, are called Draconarii. But the auncient men of
warre, because they knewe that in the fightinge of the b
                     •••
                  taile

it might so fall out that array in the armie might very
soone be brokē: for remedie thereof, they deuided the cohorts
into centuries, or hūdredes, & to euery hundred they appointed
a peculiar ensigne, so that it was written with letters in
that ensigne or flagge, of whiche cohort or bande, & of which
centurie in order of the same cohorte, euery one was. The
whiche the souldiours beholdinge and readinge, in neuer so
great hurly burly, could not farre wander from their companies
of their own tent. Moreouer, they cōmaunded the cē
                  turions,
which now are called Centenarii, beinge valiaunt
warriours in complet harnis, to gouerne euery centurie or
hundred, the crestes of their helmets being set ouerthwart,
to thentent they might be more easely knowen, and to thend
there might be no great disorder, when as an hundred souldiours
might followe, not onely their ensigne, but also their
centurion or captaine by the marke or ensigne in his helmet.
Againe the centuries or hundredes were deuided into companies
of ten souldiours, so that ouer ten souldiours abiding
vnder one pauilion, one was chiefe ruler called Decanus (as
who say ye chief of ten) which is named ye head of ye company.
And y• cōpany oftē was called Manipulus, for that, yt hād in
hād as it were, they faught alwayes iust & iointly together.
            
            
               ¶Of the trompes of the legionary horsemen, called
Turmae. Chapiter .xiiij.
               LIke as among the footemē, there was century (that is
to say, the nūbre of a hūdred mē) or Manipulus, which
is lesse▪ y• is y• nūbre of x. euē so is turma called amōgst
ye horsemē. One troupe doth cōteine .32. horsemen. The captaine
ouer these is called Decurio, the leadear of .30. or mo
of horsemen. For an .100. footemen go vnder one centuriō, &
vnder one ensigne: likewise vnder one Decuriō
                   .32. horsemē,
vnder one ensigne. Moreouer, like as ye centuriō to be chosē,
should be a mā of great strēgth, of tall stature, cūningly and
strōgly to tosse his pike, throw his darte, knowing very skilfully
how to fight wt his sworde, & how to turne & welde his
terget, hauing very good knowledge in hādling his weapon,

vigilant, sober, nimble, and actiue, a doer rather then a talker,
whiche can holde in his owne souldiours, learne them
feates of warre, make them exercise their weapons, see they
bee well apparailed, & cleane shoode, that euery souldiours
harnisse be without ruste, well skoured and bright: So the
Decurion to bee chosen Captaine of a troupe of horsemen,
muste firste of all bee a handsome man, a comelye and tall
man, able with prayse and admiration of all men to mounte
on his horse, though he be harnissed & armed at all pointes,
whiche can cunningly handle the staffe, & aduisedly bestowe
his arrowes, which can enstructe y• souldiours of his troupe
(that is to say) the horsemen committed to his charge, in all
maner of thinges whiche appertaine to a horseman: whiche
will see that they often make cleane their mayle, furbushe
their harnisse, their speares and helmettes. For the glistering
of armoure breedeth and striketh, a great feare to the
enemy. Who wil take him to be a valiaunt souldiour, which
lettes his armoure ruste and be euil fauoured by negligēce.
And it is cōuenient that not onely the horsemē, but the very
horses also them selues be at commaundemēt, and wel broken.
The chardge therfore as well of the men, as of the horses,
of health no lesse then exercise, coucerneth the Decurion
or captaine of the horsemen.
            
            
               ¶After what sorte the legions should be se
                     •
                   in
order. Chapiter .xv.
               NOwe by the example of one legion, wee wyll declare
after what manner a whole armie shoulde bee set in
araye, if necessarily they must ioyne battayle spedely.
This thing if neede shall require, may bee applied to mo legions.
The horsemen must bee placed in the wynges. The
fore fronte of the footemen in the first cohorte or bande, must
beginnne the arraye in the right wynge. Hereunto must bee
ioyned the seconde cohorte. Then the thirde cohorte in the
middest, and there withall the fourth. The fifth cohorte must
stande for the lefte wynge, but before and behynde the standerdes.

Those whiche fought in the fore fronte or firste battayle,
were called Principes: that is to saye, chiefe and principall
souldiours, as those in complete harnisse whiche had
helmettes, coarselettes, legge har
                     •
                  isse, shieldes, swordes &
great daggers, and fiue leadē plommettes in their shieldes,
whiche they doe caste at their firste ioyning. Also two kindes
of dartes: the one greater, with an yron heade thre square,
of nyne inches longe, the staffe fiue foote longe and a halfe,
whiche they named Pilum, at this tyme called Spiculum.
This vsed the souldiours oftentymes to caste, for that the
same directed with cūning, and throwē with good courage,
striketh through both footemen with shieldes, and horsemen
with their complete harnis: the other lesse, and was a kinde
of darte with an yron head, three cornered of fiue inches lōg,
the staffe of three foote and a halfe: whiche they were wonte
to call Verriculum, but nowe Verutum. The firste and
chiefest souldiours in the firste araye, called Principes, and
the seconde called Hastati, were wonte to be furnished with
this kynde of weapons. Behinde these were suche as were
called Pherentarii, and light armed men, which nowe with
harnisse and armoure wee place for ayde. Next were suche
as bore shieldes, with leadē plummettes, swordes & dartes,
as now a dayes almost all our souldiours vse. Then archers
with helmettes, brestplates, & swordes, arrowes & bowes.
Likewyse slingers whiche with slinges, or staffeslinges, did
caste stones. There were also that were called Tragularii,
whiche did shoote arrowes with hande bowes, and crosse
bowes. The seconde battell was likewyse armed, and those
whiche were placed in that bande were called Hastati, that
is to 
                     •
                  aye, pikemen or spearemen. But in the seconde battayle
the sixt bande was set in the right wynge: to the which
the seuenth bande was ioyned. The eighte bande kept the
middle fronte of the battayle, hauinge the nynthe ioyned to
it. The tenthe cohorte in the seconde battayle, did alwayes

                     •
                  epe the lefte wynge.
            
            
               
               ¶After what maner the Triarians, and also the Centuriens
should be armed. Chapiter .xvi.
               AFter all these battels, the Triarians, or souldiours of
the rerewarde were placed with shieldes, coarselets,
helmettes, beinge harnissed on the legges, hauinge
swordes, great daggers, leaden plūmettes, and two dartes,
the whiche did reste kneelinge vppon one knee: that if the
firste battaile were ouercome, these might repayre and make
vp the battayle againe, and set on the enemies a freshe and
recouer the victorie. But all the standerd or banner bearers
although they were footement, had on coates of mayle or
plate, of the lighter sorte, and helmettes couered with beare
skinnes, to terrifie and make aferde the enemies. The Centurions
also had coarselettes, brigantines, shieldes and helmettes
of steele, but with crestes ouerth warte, and couered
with siluer, that they might bee the better knowen of their
souldiours.
            
            
               ¶Nowe that the battayle being ioyned, the complet
harnissed men stoode as a wall.
Chapiter .xvij.
               THis thing also must bee knowen and diligently obserued,
that in open warre the firste and seconde battaile
should stande sure and vnmoueable. The souldiours
also of the rerewarde, should abyde and reste. The light armed
souldiours, and terget men, archers, slyngers, that is
to saye, suche as were armed with light harnisse should goe
before the armie, and prouoke the enemies. And if they could
put the enemies to flighte, they shoulde pursue them, but if
they were ouermatched and ouerlayde with the power and
multitude of their enemies, they muste retire to their owne
companie, and stande behinde them. But the complet armed
men muste receiue the brunte of the battayle, and stande as
wee saye, lyke a brasen wall, and they must not onely caste
dartes, but also with swordes fighte neerer hande.

And if they put the enemies to flight, these complete harnissed
men must not pursue them, least they should disorder the
bande, and breake the battelraye, and so the enemies returning
and sodainly comming vpon them, so disordered & scattered
abroade, might easely ouercome them. But the lyght
armed men, with the slingars, archers and horsemen, muste
pursue the enemies in the chase. By this good order and diligent
prouision, and circumspection, this legion shall either
easely vanquishe their enemies, or els shalbe out of daunger
if they chaunce to be ouercome: because it is necessarely required
in this companie, not, without great cause, either to
geue backe or flie themselues, or pursue their enemies reculyng.
            
            
               ¶The names of souldiours, and the orders and degrees
should be wrytten in the shieldes.
Chapiter .xviij.
               BUt, least souldiours sometimes in the hurly burly of a
battayle, should departe from their owne companie:
they did painte in diuers bādes, diuers signes or markes
in the shieldes, whiche they called Digmata, that is to
saye, signes, markes, or tokens: lyke as they vse to doe now
a dayes. Moreouer, in the shieldes, the name of euery souldiour
was written with letters, and also of what bande
euerye one was, or of what hundred. Thereby by these it is
manifest that a legion well furnished and ordred is, as it
were, a moste sure defenced citie, which caried with it euery
where all thinges necessarie vnto battayle: neither feared
the sodaine comminge of the enemies, whiche also in the
middle of the playne fieldes coulde fortifie it selfe quickely
with trenche and bulwarke. Whiche also had within it selfe
all manner of warriours, and furniture fitte for the warre.
Therefore if any do couet in open battayle to ouercome the
rube and barbarous people, let hym earnestly desire & praye
that according to the wyll and pleasure of God, and the appointement
of the victorious prince, and the good guiding &

ordering of a valiaunt captaine, the armies maye bee repaired
and made vp againe with younge and freshe souldiours.
And within shorte space younger men being skilfully picked
out and exercised diligently euery daye, both in the morning
and after noone, with all manner of martiall affayres and
feates of warre, shall sone be equall to those olde souldiours
whiche haue subdued the whole worlde. Neither let your
maiestie be moued O Caesar, that the olde custome which in
tymes paste did flourishe and was best liked, is nowe altered
and chaunged. But the cōtinuance of this good prouision &
happie successe consisteth in you, that is for the safetie of the
common wealth, bothe to inuente newe thinges, and to restore
the olde. Euery woorke seemeth harde before a man assaye:
but if experte and politike men bee appointed to picke
out and choose souldiours, an armie meete for the warres,
may quickely be gathered, and diligently instructed: for any
thing may bee 
                     ••
                  ought to passe by diligence and pollicie, if
sufficient and competent expenses be allowed.
            
            
               ¶Besides the strengthe of the body, the cunning or
knowledge of ciphers and countyng, must
be regarded in younge souldiours.
Chapter .xix.
               BUt for as muche, as in armies there bee many scholes
and exercises of cheualrie, whiche doe require cunning
and expert souldiours, it is verye expedient that they
which doe admitte and allowe the young souldiours, should
searche out diligently, and knowe in euery one the bignes of
the stature, the strengthe of the body, and the promptnes of
his mynde. But in certaine the cunning of ciphers and augurim,
and exercise of reckening and casting accompte is required.
For the accompte of all the whole legion, whether it
bee of the diligent seruice, or of the numbers of souldiours,
or els of money, is daily registred in the actes or chronicles,
with greater diligēce almost then the trade of victualling,
or ciuile gouernement, is noted in the register bookes of the

citie. They note also the continual watches in time of peace.
Also the warding on the daye tyme, and the charges or offices
in carying from place to place: amongest all the centuries
and companies, what the souldiours doe by course: that
none be charged or burdened more then is due and right, or
if any haue libertie graunted and are exempted. The names
of thē whiche ordred their courses, are noted in the bookes.
When any man hath receiued a pasporte, and for how many
dayes it is noted in the abbridgementes. For at that tyme a
pasporte was graunted very hardely, except it were for most
iuste and probable causes. Neither the souldiours whiche
were lately begonne and entered, were assigned to any certayne
seruice, nor any priuate charge committed vnto them.
For why, it was not thought meete and conuenient that any
souldiour of the prince or chiefe captaine, whiche is founde
meate, drincke and clothing, of the commō prouision, should
attende vpon priuate commodities. Notw
                     ••
                  hstāding, there
were souldiours appointed to wayte on the chiefe Iudges &
tribune, and other that were in authoritie, whiche were called
Accensi, that is to saye, souldiours appointed to bee about
great officers. For whē the legi
                     •
                  n was fully made vp &
perfecte, these were added whiche nowe wee doe call Supernumerarios,
aboue the iust number. And yet the very ordinarie
souldiours, did carie ferdels or būdels into the campe,
that is to saye, woode, haye, water, and strawe. For of this
they were called Munifices, because they did those commendable
thinges whiche they were charged withall.
            
            
               ¶Howe souldiours ought to put aside the halfe part of any gift
in money, or other thinges geuen them, in the keeping
of suche as are standerd bearers.
Chapter .xx.
               THis thing in times paste was excellently wel ordeined
and appointed of the auncient men, that the one halfe
of suche thinges as were geuē the souldiours, should
be set aparte with the standerdes, and there should be kepte

for the vse of these souldiours, least through excesse and riot,
or the getting of vayne thinges, it might be wasted of their
owne companions. For the moste parte of men, and namely
the poorer sorte, doe spende and laye forth willingly so much
as they haue, or can come by. But this sequestration or putting
aside of the money, firste of all is proued profitable and
commodious, euen for their fellowe souldiours. For seing
that they are susteined and foūde meate, drinke, and clothing
of the common expences, their goodes which they haue gotten
in warre are encreased, according to the equall parte or
one halfe of those thinges which were giuen them. Furthermore,
the souldiour whiche knoweth his money to be kepte
with the standerdes, dothe neuer minde to forsake the standerdes,
but rather to sticke to them. He fighteth more stoutly
and valiauntly for them in the battaile, as all men are cō
                  monly
wont to doe. That is to take care for those thinges
wherin he knowes their whole wealth and substaunce doth
consiste. Finally, there were set abroade tēne bagges in euery
bande, in the whiche these thinges were put. There was
also ioyned the .xi. bagge, into the whiche the whole legion
did put a certaine portion to be bestowed on the burials: that
if any of the companies died, 
                     •
                  uner all charges should be taken
out of that eleuenth bagge. This accompt was kept in a
basket or cophin by standerd bearers (as the report is nowe)
And therfore, suche were standerd bearers, as were not only
faithfull, but also learned and skilfull, whiche could both
safely kepe thinges whiche were cōmitted to their custodie,
and also geue iuste accompte of that, which they had in keaping,
to euery man.
            
            
               ¶Promotions and dignities in the legion, are so disposed and
ordered, that none is aduau
                     •
                  ced thereto before he haue
passed through the .x. bandes or companies of
the legion. Chapiter .xxj.
               
                  I Thinke verelye that among the Romaynes, the legions
were appointed and ordered, not onely by the pollicie of
man, but also by the inspiration of God.

In the whiche, tenne bandes are so sette in order and ioyned
together, that of all those is made as it were one bodye and
one societie. For the souldiours are aduaunced, and proceade
through diuers bandes, and diuers companies as it were
rounde about, one after an other, so that from the first bande
going forwarde in order by little and little hee came to the
tenth bande, and againe from thence he came backe agayne
through the reste to the firste bande: hauing better preferrement,
and his wages stil augmented. Therefore the Centurion
or chief captaine of the forewarde, after that he ruled
and gouerned all the bandes rounde about in course, by sundrie
exercises and feates of armes: in the first bande he obtained
that rewarde, whereof redounded innumerable commodities
to him out of ye whole armie. Like as Primicerius,
or he that hath the chiefe authoritie in the principall office of
the ouerseers or other rulers, doth come to some honest and
gainefull preferrement in warfare: euen so the horsemen of
euery bande, doe courteously vse their owne companie with
good fellowe shippe: because the horsemen and footemen do
naturally vary & disagree one with an other. Therefore by
this ioyning, and as it were linking together of the armie,
good agreement was kept and continued throughout al the
bandes, both of horsemen and footemen.
            
            
               ¶What difference is betwene trumpetters, blow
                     •
                  rs of
hornes, or shawmes and suche like.
Chapiter .xxij.
               MOreouer, an armie hath trumpettes, cornettes, and
shawmes. The trompetters doe call the souldiours
to battayle: and againe doe call them backe blowing
the retraite. The cornettes were an ornament to set foorthe
the whole armie, bothe in the marching forewarde toward
to the battaile, and also in the retiring from the fighte. As
often as these do blowe, not onely souldiours, but also standerdes,
are ready at the 
                     •
                  ounding of them to remoue. Therefore,
as oftē as the souldiours marche forward alone to any

busines or skirmishes, the trumpetters doe blowe, and the
souldiours only do come together at ye sound of the trūpets.
As often as the standerdes must be remoued, the blowers of
cornettes do sounde. But when they do fighte, both y• trumpettes
and the cornettes doe sounde together. Also Classicū,
is called that noyce whiche the trumpetters doe make with
the soūde of a cornet. This is a notable signe of great power
and authoritie royal, because this is soūded when the prince,
chieftayne, or generall captaine is present, or els when a
souldiour for some hainous offence is put to death. For this
must nedes bee done by the statutes and lawes of the generall:
but if the souldiours goe forth to kepe the watches, to
carie thinges from place to place, or to doe any woorke, or to
make a rode, at the sounde of the trumpettes they doe it, and
by the sounde of the same doe retire to the cāpe agayne. But
when the standerdes doe marche, or in marching when they
should staye, the blowers of the cornettes sounde to bothe
these. The whiche thing in dede for this cause is obserued &
kept in all maner of exercises, skirmishes, rodes, and marchinge
forwarde of the armie, that in the fighte the souldiours
might more easely obeye: if the captaines should commaunde
them, either to fight or to staye, to pursue, or to retire.
For this proofe is plaine that such things must be practised
at vacant time and leasure, whiche of necessite must bee
atchieued and done in the battell.
            
            
               ¶Of the exercise of souldiours. Chapiter .xxiij.
               THe appointing and administration of an armie, being
orderlye descrided, let vs returne to exercise againe:
whereof (as it is sayde already) Exercitus, that is
an hoste hathe deriued the name. The younge and newe
souldiours were exercised with al kinde of weapons & feates
of chiualry, both in the morning and after noone. But the
olde beaten and expert souldiours, once a daye were exercised
in armes. For neither longe age, nor number of yeares,
doth teache the feates of armes, but the continuall vse & studie

of exercise: and a souldiour not exercised and trainde vp
in feates of warre, although hee hath beene neuer so longe
in wages, yet hee is alwayes but a younge begynner, and
altogether ignoraunt in handling his weapon, whiche on
the holye dayes is set abroade for to behoulde in the exercise.
Therefore not onely they, which were vnder the chiefe maisters,
did learne by daylye exercise the handlyng of armoure
and weapons, and the swiftenes and nimblenes of the body,
but also all the souldiours a lyke did exercise the same. For
swiftenes and agilitie of the bodye, and also the cunning
bothe to stryke the enemie and defende hym selfe, is chieflye
gotten by exercise and practise, especially if they fight neere
at hande with swordes. But this is more weightie and needfull
that they learne in their playing exercise to keape theyr
orders, and that in so great sturres and thronges, beinge
vsed to the lyke in these exercises, wherin they are firste trained
and entered, they doe wayte vppon their owne banners
and ensignes, and that among the well trayned and experte
souldiours, there bee no erroure or disordre committed, although
in the common sorte there may bee very great confusion.
It is also very good that the younge souldiours bee
exercised with some poste or stake, where they maye learne
to stryke at the sydes, the legges, and heades, eyther with
the thruste, or with ryght downe strokes. Let them also accustome
to leape and strike together: to vawte against their
shielde, as if they were dauncynge, and skypppe downe
againe: sometyme to runne forwarde skipping and leaping,
and fetchynge of gamboldes, sometyme to steppe awaye
quickelye, and leape backe agayne. Let them exercise also
to throwe dartes a farre of at the postes or stakes, that they
bothe maye bee more cunninge in castinge straighte, and
more nimble and quicke with the right hande. But the archers
and slyngers, dyd set vp some broome for a marke, or
bundels of shrubbes, or strawe, that standing sixe hundred
foote from the marke, oftentymes they might hitte it with
their arrowes, or with their stoones leuelled out of a slynge
staffe. Therefore, more boldely they did that in the battell

whiche before they had exercised in sporte in the fielde. They
muste also at all tymes accustome them selues, that they
swynge the slynge, but once about the head onelye, when a
stone is caste out of it. And all the souldiours did vse with
one hande to caste stones of a pounde weighte, whiche exercise
is thought more readie, because it needeth not a slinge.
They were also compelled alwaye and with continuall exercise,
to caste dartes or leaden plummettes: in so muche that
for the horsemen in wynter season, large galeries were
couered with tyles or shingles, whiche are cliftes of woode:
or if they did fayle, with readde, flagges or stubble, or els
strawe: and also certayne large places made for the footemen,
and couered in lyke maner: in the whiche in the tyme
of stormes, wyndes, or foule weather, the armie was enstructed
and exercised with armoure and weapons vnder
couert. But the other dayes in wynter, if snowe and rayne
dyd ceasse, they were compelled to exercise them abroade in
the fielde: leaste if this custome should be lefte of, the mindes
and also the bodyes of the souldiours myght bee weakened.
At is good also that they vse often to cutte downe woode,
to carye burdens, to leape ouer ditches, to swymme in the
Sea, or Ryuers, to walke a good rounde pace, or to runne
yea, although they bee loden with the weyght of their armoure
& other burthens: that daily labour in time of peace▪
mighte not seeme harde, or paynefull in tyme of warre.
Therefore, lyke as the whole legion is exercised, euen so the
aydes oughte to bee exercised daylye. For lyke as a well
tryaned and exercised souldiour desires the battayle, euen
so the vnexperte and ignoraunt, dothe feare the same. Laste
of all wee muste knowe that in fyghte, vse and experience,
dothe auayle more then force. For if the teachynge to handle
weapons doe ceasse, and cunnyng in feates of armes be
not regarded, then a countrey clowne is as good as the best
souldiour.
            
            
               
               ¶Examples of exhortations, and the exercise in warlike
affaires, taken of other artes and sciences.
Chapiter .xxiiij.
               THe wrastler, the hunter, the carter, commonly for a
small rewarde, yea, for fauour of the common people,
vse to kepe and encrease their cunning and knowledge
with daily exercise. Muche more it behoueth a souldiour, by
whose manhode and valiauntnes, the common wealth is defended
and preserued, perfectly to knowe, and by continuall
exercises to retaine and kepe the cunning in martial affaires
and feates of warre: to whome often chaunceth not onelye a
glorious victorie, but also proies of great price: and whome,
also both the lawe of armes and the good iudgement of the
general, will aduaunce to wealthe and honoure. The cunning
stage plaiers do not leaue of their exercises, loking onlye
for prayse and commendation of the common people: a
souldiour then chosen and admitted by a solemne othe, whether
he be a young souldiour or an olde, ought not to ceasse,
discontinewe or bee slacke in the exercise of chiualrie, who
muste fight both for his owne saffetie, and also for the libertie
and safegarde of his countrey: especially seinge there is
an olde and wyse saying, that all maner of sciences do
                     •
                   consiste
in continuall studie and exercise.
            
            
               ¶A rehersall of Iron tooles and other engines of
the legion. Chapiter .xxv.
               AN army also commonly vanquisheth and conquereth
the enemies not onely through the multitude of souldiours,
but also through diuers kindes of Iron tooles,
and other engines. First of all, it is furnished with shot,
whiche no coate armooure nor tergettes are able to abide.
For in euery century or hundred, they vse to haue a fielde
piece: the whiche a mule was appointed to drawe. And the
companies of one pauiliō, that is to say .xi. men, were assigned
to addresse, and set forth the same. For the greater these

peeces be, the further and more strongly they shoote the pellets.
And they not onlye defende the Campe, but also in the
field they are planted behinde the battell of the complete armed
men. The brunt and violence wherof, neyther y• horsemen
with coates of fence, neither footemen with their shieldes,
are able to withstand. And there are wont to be in one
Legion lv. fielde peeces: also tenne greater peeces called Onagri,
that is to saye, in euerye cohort one, and they are carryed
in tilted cartes with two Oxen, that if by chaunce the
ennemyes came to assaulte the rampyre and bulwarke, the
campe mighte be defended with arrowes and pellets. The
Legion also doth carrye with it, boates made hollow of one
peece of timber with very longe cordes, and sometimes also
with yron chaynes: and forasmuch as they are ioyned together
(as they saye) all of one peece of timber and bordes ioyned
together, and layde vppon them: by the helpe of these,
both the footemen and horsemen safelye passe ouer ryuers,
which otherwise without bridges they could not passe ouer.
It hath also yron clampes which they call Lupos, and yron
hookes fastened to great longe poles. Likewyse it hath for
dispatching the worke about the ditches and trenches, mattockes,
spades, shou
                     •
                  ls, rakes, maundes, baskets, chipaxes,
sawes, with the which stakes and other stuffe are squared &
sawen a sunder. It hath also artificers with all kinde of yron
tooles, which for the assault of the Cittyes of the ennemyes
maye make engines, which they call Testudines, and Musculos,
that is to saye, engines of warre to beate downe walles,
wherby they are defended which do approch the walles
of a Cittyes besieged. And Arietes, which were peeces of ordinance,
made lyke a rammes head to beat downe y• walles.
And Vineas, which are an ordinaunce of warre made of timber
& hurdles, vnder the which men went surely to the walles
of a towne besieged. Also battell rammes & towers mouable.
But least in rehersing euery thing more be sayd then
neede: a legion ought euery wher to carye with it all maner
of thinges, which are thoughte necessarye in anye kinde of
warre: that in what place soeuer it shall pitch the Campe,
it may make an armed Cittye.
            
         
         
            
            The thirde booke of Flauius Vegetius
Renatus of the feates of vvarre.
            
               The Prologue.
               
                  THe auncient Chronicles do testifye that the Athenians,
the Lacedemonians, and ye 
                  Macedonians,
haue bene chiefe Lords and mighty rulers.
But the Athenians haue not onlye taken
diligent trauayle in feates of warre, but haue
also in diuers sciences famouseiye flourished.
As for the Lacedemoniās they had their chiefest
regarde, and applyed themselues most to
warre. For they first of al other, gathering the experiments of fight by
the successe therof, are affyrmed to haue written of warre: in such sort y•
they brought that which was thought to cōsist in māhoode & good fortune,
into a forme of knowledge & cunning: & cōmaunded the masters
of Armes (which they cal Tak
                        •
                     ikous) to teach their youth the vse & diuersitye
of fightinge. Men worthy of prayse & much to be m
                     •
                  rueled at,
which would be cunninge in that science, without the whiche, other sciences
are altogether nothing. The Romaynes following their ordinā
                  ces
both haue kepte in vse, and also sette forth in writinge, the rules of
martial pollicye: y• which being dispersed abroad in diuers Authors &
bookes, you haue cōmaunded mee most victorious Emperour, as my
meane knowledge in learning shalbe able briefelye to abridge: least the
multitude of those rules should bring tediousnes, or the small pointes
be deuoyde of due and full credence. But howe greatlye the knowledge
of the Lacedemonians haue preuayled in battaile (to let the other
passe) it is declared by the example of Xantippus: which toke Attilius
Regulus, and gaue the ouerthrow to the armye of ye 
                  Romaynes, whiche
before had beene conquerours against the Carthaginians. All whiche
he did not by prowesse and manhoode, but by the helpe of pollicye, and
that triumphinglye, and at one onset to the dispatchinge of that whole
battaile, and bringinge it to an ende. Hanniball when he prepared to
come into Italye, sought for some Lacedemonian to leade and guide ye
Armye, by whose counsels (although inferiour in nomber & strength)
he vtterlye destroyed so manye Consulles, so mightye and great Legions.
He therefore that desyreth peace, let him prepare for warre: he ye
coueteth the victorye, let him diligentlye trayne and enstructe his souldiours:
he that wysheth for prosperous successe, let him fight with art
and pollicye, not at all aduenture and by chaunce. No man dare prouoke
or offende him, whom hee doth perceyue to be the better or superiour,
if the matter come to blowes.
            
            
               
               What maner or of what nomber
an Armye shoulde be of. The first Chapter.
               
                  IN the first Booke I haue shewed the musteringe
and exercyse of yonge souldiours: in y•
seconde was taught the orderinge of a Legion,
and the knowledge & science of warfare.
But this third booke doth sound the Trompettes
and bloweth out the Alarum. For therefore are those
thinges written before, that these wherein the cunninge of
conflictes and the chiefest pointe of the victorye doth consist,
mighte the sooner, by obseruing some order in teachinge, be
vnderstoode: and thereby profite the more. An host or armye
is called a multitude, as well of Legions as of aydes,
and also of horsemen, gathered together to make warre.
               The maner whereof is, to be knowen of the maisters of armes.
For whereas we reade examples of Xerxes, Darius,
Mithridates, and other kinges, which haue had in theyr armyes
infinite nombers of people: it doth euidently appeare
that ouer great armyes, haue oftner bene destroyed through
the greatnes of their owne nomber, then throughe the manhoode
of their ennemyes. For the greater multitude is subiecte
to manye chaunces: in iourneyes and vyages, it is alwayes
slower by reason of the vastnes thereof. And when
it traueyleth a lengthe, it chaunceth oftentimes to be inuaded,
and to suffer losse, thoughe the ennemyes be but fewe.
               And in passinge of roughe places or ryuers, it is oftentimes
deceyued by the lettes and stayes of the carryages. Moreouer
for the great nomber of cattel and horses, forage is gathered
and gotten not without great labour.
               
                  Also the trouble and daunger in prouidinge grayne, and the
scarcitye thereof, which in anye maner of vyages is to be auoyded,
doth eftsones encumber the greater armyes. For
with howe greate studye and diligence soeuer victualles be
prepared, yet the moe that they be employed and distributed
vnto, the sooner they do fayle. The very water also sometimes
doth scantly suffice a greate multitude. If so be that y•
armye by chaunce should be put to flighte, it must needes be
that of a great nomber, a great meanye must be slaine: and
that they which haue escaped being once thorowly afrayde,
will afterwarde feare to fight againe. But the auncient mē
of warre which by experience had learned remedyes against
incumberaūces, would not haue theyr armyes so huge in nō
                  ber,
as well trayned vp in the feates of warre. Therefore in
smaller battayles, they thoughte one Legion with the aydes
ioyned vnto it, that is to saye, tenne Thousande footemen
and two Thousand horsemen, able to suffice: which armye
the Pretors beinge as meaner Captaynes, did vse to
leade forth when anye vyage was in hande. If the power of
then ennemyes were great, then the mighte of the Consulles
(as who saye a greater authoritye) was sent with xx. Thousande
footemen, and foure Thousand horsemen. If that an
infinite nōber of cruell people had rebelled: then in so great
and daungerous time of neede, two Captaines, namely both
the Consulles were sent with two armyes, with suche commaundemente,
that they shoulde foresee that the common
wealth should take no damage nor detriment. Finally whē
as y• 
                  Romaynes almost al their time fought in diuers realmes
against diuers and sondrye ennemyes, their souldiours
were for this cause the more sufficiente, because they iudged
it not so profitable to haue great armyes, as well instructed
and trayned in the knowledge of feates of armes: Yet prouided
alwayes that there should not be in the campe a greater
nomber of the confederate helpes, then of Cittizens of
Rome.
               
            
            
               
               ¶After what maner the health of an army
                     •
                  
should be maintayned. Chapiter .ij.
               
                  NOwe I will declare (which thinge ought chiefelye to
be foreseene) how the health of the armys may be preserued:
that is to saye, by reasonable places, waters,
time, medecine, and exercise. For the places that the souldiours
do not tarye long in a pestilent and vnholsome country,
nigh vnto marisses or fennes, apt to breede sickenes: nor in
fieldes wanting water, nor hillles without woode: nor in ye
Sommer withoute tentes and pauilions: least that goinge
late from their place, they bring sickenes on them throughe
the hea
                     •
                  e of the Sunne, and wearines of their iourneye: but
rather in Sommer season y• they come to the places whervnto
they meane to trauayle, before it be day: that in cruell
and could Winter they trauayle not by night through frost
and snowe, or sustaine the scarcitye or want of wood: or litle
store of apparell. For that souldiour can neither be healthfull
nor fitte for anye voyage, which is constrayned to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
for could. Neyther let the armye vse noysome or 
                     〈◊〉
                   waters:
for the drincke that is made of naughtye water is like
to poyson, and breadeth the pestilēce in those that drincke it.
Nowe as touchinge that anye companye of souldiours being
sicke by anye such chaunce, maye be refreshed with conuenient
meates, and healed with the helpe and cunning of y•
Phisitions: the dyligence of th
                     •
                   rulers and Tribunes, yea
and of the lieuetenaunte himselfe which executeth the greater
power, shalbe requyred herevnto. For they are in verye
ill case vppon whom the necessity both of warre and sicknes
doth lye. But the experte and cunninge menne in feates of
warre haue thought, that dailye exercises of armes coulde
more auayle to ye health of souldiours, then Phisitiōs could.
Therefore they would haue the footemen in raigne & snow,
continually to be exercised for health vnder couert, at other
times in the plaine field▪ Likewyse they commaunded that
the horsemē should daily exercise both themselues and their
horses, not onlye in the plaine: but also in most difficult passages

as in steepe downe places, & in the gaping of ditches.
That nothing mighte happen vnto them in the necessitye of
fight, which they knew not before. Wherof it is to be vnderstande
with howe greate studye and dilligence, the armye
should at all times be learned the knowledge of armes: whē
as the vse of labour both maye get them health in theyr tentes,
and victorye in the battaile. In the time of Haruest &
Sommer, if a multitude of souldiours to tarye longe in a
place, there must needes aryse most hurtful sicknes, both of
the infection of the water, and smell of the verye filthe with
corrupte breathinge and naughtye ayre: whiche none other
way can be kepe from them, but with often remouing of the
Campe.
            
            
               ¶Wyth how great care and regarde, forage or
grayne ought to be prouided and kepte.
Chap. iij.
               ORder doth requyre that we should now speake of the
prouision of forage & grayne. For scarcitye doth more
consume an armye, then fighting: and hūger is more
cruell then ye sword. Moreouer other casualtyes be helped
in time, but the prouiding of forage & victuall hath no helpe
or remedye, vnlesse they be layed vppe before hande. In any
maner of enterpryse this is one and the chiefest counsayle y•
thine armye may haue sufficiēt to liue with: that lacke of necessarye
thinges maye weaken the ennemyes. Therfore before
warre be begonne there ought to be a wyse and prudēt
deuyse, for money and other charges, that forage, grayne, &
other victuals (whiche the olde custome did requyre of forrayners)
might be gathered in time: and greater store therof
then is sufficient alwayes layed vp in suche places as are
strongly fenced, and most conuenient to serue the turne. If
so be that the tributes or paymentes do fayle, all thinges
must be compassed & gotten with money payed before hand.
For possession of riches is not without care, except it be kept
with force of armes. But manye times there is twyse as

much neede, & a s
                     •
                  ege oftētimes is longer then they thin
                     •
                  ke
it wilbe: when as the ennemyes themselues beinge almoste
famished, do not geue ouer to besiege them whom they hope
may be ouercome wyth famyne. Furthermore whatsoeuer
cattell, grai
                     •
                  e, or wyne, the ennemye that causeth warre cā
preuente and take to their owne prouision of victuall: (the
owners thereof not onlye beinge warned by publicke commaundement,
but also constrayned by chosen sear
                     •
                  hers) the
fame must be brought to conuenient houldes, and streng thened
with garrisons of armed men: or to safe and surelye defenced
Cittyes: and the forraine people muste be called earnestlye
vppon, to keepe themselues and all that they 
                     ••
                  ue
within theyr walles before the enemyes 
                     〈◊〉
                   enter in.
For the repayring of the walles and all maner of ordinance,
muste be loked too before. For if the ennemyes do once preuent
them beinge otherwyse occupyed, euerye thinge is disordered
through feare: aud such things as are to be demaū
                  ded
of other Cittyes, are alwayes denyed after that the passages
be once stopped. But to keepe those thinges trustelye
that may be saued, and to destribute them moderatlye, is as
good as if there were plenty, namely if from the beginning
they be well looked to. But it is to late to spare when nothinge
is remayninge. In harde and daungerous voyages
the auncient warriours did vse to bestowe the victuals, rather
accordinge to the nomber of the souldiours, then to the
worthynes of them. So that after the necessitye was past,
then recompence was made to those that were worthye, of
the common charge and coste. In the winter, the scarcenes
of woode and forage, in Sommer the lacke of water is to be
auoyded. But the wante of grayne, wyne and vyneger, and
also of falte, at all times is to be shunned: so that such souldiours
as can do least seruice in the fielde, should defend the
Cittyes and houldes with armoure, arrowes, 
                     ••
                  ingstaues,
slinges, and also stones, artillerye of all sortes. And chief
                     •
                  
                  lye
wee must take heede that the vncyrcumspecte simple forrayne
people confederate with vs, be not deceyued by the
craft and periurye of the ennemyes.
               
                  For oftentimes deceitful couenaunts and fayned peace, haue
done more harme to suche as are lighte of credite, then the
force of armes. By reason whereof, the ennemyes if they be
altogether do suffer hūger, and if they be dispersed they are
easelye onecome by such as euery foote will be skirmishing
with them.
            
            
               ¶After what maner they ought to foresee, leaste
the souldiours do make any sturre
or sedition. Chap. .iiij.
               AN armye gathered oute of sondrye places sometime
doth stirre vp sedition and vprore, and when they are
not willinge to fight, they fayne themselues to be angrye:
to the intente they shoulde not be ledde to battayle.
Whiche they chiefelye do, that liued at home idlye and deliciouslye.
For they, which would shrincke frō fighting, rūne
headlong into such desperatnes, because they are greeued wt
the sharpenes of y• laboure, wherwith they are not acquainted,
which notwithstanding in the voyage they must needes
sustayne, and moreouer because they are afrayde to enter into
battayle. To the which wound men haue vsed to layemanye
and diuers medecines: that they maye be holden, whiles
they be yet a sunder in theyr places, to all maner of knowledge
and exercise with most strete sharpenes of the Tribunes,
lieuetenauntes, and also the chiefe and principall of the
armye: that they obserue nothinge els, but their solempne
vowe and promise, and that wyth descretion: that they haue
no 
                     •
                  eysure to set their mindes on pasportes: let them vse cō
                  tinuallye
to attende to theyr name, and to their ensignes: let
them practise dailye the runninge of the field (as they terme
it) and the dilligent beholding of the handlinge of armoure
and weapons: They must be helde verye often to these exercises,
and that most part of the daye, euen till they sweate agayne,
to shootinge and to throwinge stones, eyther with a
stinge or with the hande, to weare armour that they maye
weilde themselues in it, to pitching the barre, and with wasters

as thoughe they should fight with swordes, now with
the point, nowe with the edge to strike one at another.
               Also they must with like diligence be trayned in running &
leaping, that they may skippe ouer ditches, if the sea or a riuer
be nye to their tentes. In Sommer time all t
                     •
                  e souldiours
shoulde be constrayned to swimme: moreouer to cutte
downe woode, to iourney through bushye and shrubbye places,
to square timber, to scoure the trenche, to take and kepe
some place, and to endeuour themselues wyth shieldes, violentlye
meeting one 
                     •
                  nother, that they be not beaten from it
by theyr owne companyes. In suche wyse the souldiours of
the Romaynes beinge exercised and trayned at home, whether
they be of the Legions or of y• aydes, or of the horsemē,
when they shall come from diuers places to take a voyage,
they must needes through an ambitious desyre to trye their
manhoode, rather wyshe for warre, then for peace. No mā
doth take anye thought for seditious styrring, which hath anye
confidence in his cunninge and strength. But the Captaine
ought to be cyrcumspecte, if there shalbe anye troublesome
or seditious souldiours amonge all the Legions, or aydes,
or troupes of horsemen, that he may know them by the
Tribunes, deputyes & principall men, not for the ill will of
the enformers, but for the truth of the matter: and the same
to be seperated from the Campe by some witty deuise, to do
and accomplishe some thinge, whiche euen vnto themselues
maye seeme such, as in a maner they would wishe for: or els
let them* fortifye and keepe some holdes and Cittyes, * wt
such a preetye subtiltye, that whereas in deede they be reiected
and dispysed, they maye seeme to be chosen of purpose.
               For a multitude doth neuer burst out to disobedient stubbernes
with like agreement: but they are styrred vp by a fewe,
which hope they may with a nomber offende freely without
punishment, for their vices and wickednes. If so be that extreeme
necessitye shall requyre a remedye to be had therein,
the best way is after the maner of our forefathers to punishe
onlye the Authors and beginners of such faultes, that feare
may come to all, punishment to a fewe. Notwithstanding

those Captaynes are more worthy of prayse, whose armyes
laboure and vse hath instructed to sobernes and humilitye,
then they whose souldiours the feare of punishmente doth
constrayne to obedience.
            
            
               ¶Howe manye kindes there be of ensignes of
warre. Chapter .v.
               MAnye thinges oughte to be well learned and marked
of them that fight: for why, negligence ought not to
be pardoned, where as they fighte for life and death.
But amongest other thinges nothinge is more profitable to
the victorye, then to obeye the warninges of the ensignes.
For when as in the hurlye burlye of battayles, a great nomber
cannot be ruled with one voyce onelye, and when as of
verye necessitye manye thinges forthwith must be commaū
                  ded
and done: the auncient vse and experience of all nations
hath inuented, how the whole armye by the ensignes should
knowe and follow that, which the onlye Captayne iudged
to be profitable and expedient. Ther are therfore as it is manifest,
thre kindes of ensignes, one sort hauinge voyce which
are called Vocalia, another partlye hauing voyce, and partlye
not, whiche they call Semi
                        •
                     ocalia, the thirde withoute
voyce, and they are called Muta: of ye which they that haue
voyce, and they that partlye haue voyce, are perceyued and
knowen by the eare: but the dumme without voyce, are referred
to the eyes. Vocalia, are sayd to be they, which are
pronounced with the voyce of a man, so that in the watche
                     •
                  
or in the battayle it is accompted for a tokē: as for example:
victorye, rewarde, vertue, God be with vs. The triumphe
of the Emperour & suche other, whatsoeuer they will geeue
which haue the greatest authoritye and power in the armye.
Yet we must knowe that these woordes must euerye day be
altered: least by vse the ennemyes maye knowe our token or
watcheworde: and searchers or spyes may be amongest our
men without daunger and punishment. Simi
                        •
                     ocalia be called
which are geuen by the trumpette, or the hornes, or the
shawme. The trumpet which is streight is called Buccina,
                  
which is bowed towardes it selfe with a brassen cyrcle. The
horne of the wilde bulles beinge bounde with siluer is best
hearde, when it is moderated with arte, & the breath of him
that bloweth it. For by these with most certayne & vndoubted
soundes, the armye doth knowe whether they oughte to
staye or go forwarde, or certainlye to retyre: whether they
should followe the chase anye longe waye, or sounde the retraite.
Muta signa, be the Eagles, Dragons, banners,
redde peno
                     •
                  celles, redde scarfes, feathers, crestes of helmets.
For whether soeuer the leader shall commaund these
to be caryed, thyther of necessitye must al the souldiours go,
following and waytinge vppon their owne ensigne. There
be also dumme signes, whiche the Captayne of the warre
doth commaunde to be obserued: in the horses, in garmentes,
and also in the verye armoure: to the intent the ennemy
maye be knowen from their owne companye. Moreouer he
signifyeth some thinge with his hande, or (after the cruell
maner of rude and straunge people) with a whippe, or els wt 
mouing or styrring his apparel which he hath on. All which
thinges all the souldiours shoulde acknowledge both to followe
and vnderstande in their places, in iourneys, in all maner
exercise of the campe. For continuall vse of that thinge
is necessarye in time of peace, whiche in the confusion and
trouble of y• battayle should be kept. Also there is a dumme
and common 
                     •
                  igne, as often as in the goinge of a multitude,
the dust styrred vppe, ryseth like cloudes, and doth bewraye
the comminge of the ennemye. Likewyse if armyes be deuided,
the flame of fyre in the night, and in the daye time the
smoke, doth signify vnto their fellowes that, which by no other
meanes can be shewed. Sometimes they do hang out
beames in the Turrettes of Cittyes, which other whiles being
raysed vppe, and other whyles letten downe, do declare
what thinges be done.
            
            
               ¶Howe great subtiltye ought to be vsed when an
armye is remoued the ennemyes beinge
nighe. Chapter .vj.
               
                  THey which with great diligence haue learned the feates
of warre, do affyrme: that mo perilles are wont
                     •
                  
to happen in iourneyes, then in y• very battell it selfe.
For in ioyninge together of the battayle, all the souldiours
be armed and see the ennemye in the face, and comes wyth
courage to fight against him. But in the iourney a souldiour
is lesse armed and lesse headfull, and he is sodenlye troubled
with the force and deceite of the priuye inuasion of the ennemye.
Therefore the Captayne ought with all diligence, and
with al care to foresee least in going he suffer inuasion of his
ennemye: and that, althoughe not easelye, yet withoute damage
or losse, he resist and repell the same. First of all he
ought to haue perfectlye set forth the passages of all the coū
                  tryes
in the which the warre is: so that hee maye learne the
distances of places, not onlye by the length thereof, but also
the fashion or qualityes of the wayes: that hee consider the
shortnes of wayes, the turninges, the mountaynes, the ryuers
beinge faithfullye described vnto him. In so much that
the wittyer Captaynes are affyrmed to haue had the iourneying
descriptions of coūtryes, in which they must needes
haue to do, not onlye dyligentlye noted, but also painted before
their eyes: that they might point out the waye to them
that should go, not onlye with the aduisement of the minde,
but also with the sight of the eyes. Furthermore he shoulde
dyligentlye enquyre euerye thinge seuerallye of the wyser
men, and such as be of reputation and skilfull of the places,
and so gather the truth of a meanye. Moreouer when there
is daunger in chosing the wayes, he shoulde take meete guides
and cunninge, and deliuer the same to the safe keepinge
of others, with a sure promyse eyther of punishment or of rewarde,
if they serue trulye. For those guides shalbe profitable
when they shall vnderstande that in no wyse they can escape
or runne awaye, and that for their faythfulnes & truth
rewardes be prepared, and for their vntruth and false dealinge
punishmentes are readye. Also it muste be foreseene y•
wyse and experte men be soughte, least the errour of two or
three maye purchase daunger to the whole multitude.
               
                  Sometime ignorance and bolde rudenes doth promise manye
thinges, and beleueth that he knoweth y• which hee doth
not know. But the chiefest point of this warenes and heede
taking is: that it be kepte close vnto what places & by what
wayes the armye should passe forth. For it is thought y• in al
vyages the thinge which muste be done, shoulde be not knowen.
For this cause the olde men of warre haue had in their
Legions the badge or signe of Minotaurus, that as he was
sayd to be hidde in the innermost and most secrete place of ye
maze or intricate place called Labyrinthus: euen so the intent
of the Captayne should be kept secrete and hidde. That
iourneye is taken in hand without feare, which the ennemye
doth not so much as once suspect: but because spyes sent out
on the other parte, do eyther see or suspecte which waye the
armye goeth, and manye times there wanteth not runnagates
and traytours: it must be declared howe these beinge at
hande, may be preuented and resisted. The Captayne readye
to marche forth with his armye, must sende most trustye
and fine witted men with the best tryed horses: which maye
searche the places throughe which they must take their iorneye,
before and behinde, on the righte hand and left hande,
least the ennemyes go about to set an ambushmente, and lye
in waite to deceiue them. But y• searchers or spyes do worke
more safelye by night then by daye. For he, after a certaine
maner is a traytour to himselfe, whose spye or scoutewatch
maye be taken of his ennemyes. Therefore let the horsemē
go first: after them the footemen, carriages, Archers, pages,
and in the middest the waggons must be placed: so that
part of the light armed footemen, and light harnessed horsemen
do followe. For seldome as they do marche on, they are
inuaded before, but more often behinde. Also on the sydes ye
carriages ought to be garded with a good company of souldiours.
For they that lye in waite, oftentimes with a cōtrarye
course rushe into some other place of the armye, then
where they are suspected. This also is specially to be obserued,
that y• part, to the which the ennemye is lykest to come,
may be fortifyed with the most choise horsemen, with lighte

armed men, and also with archers on foote set purposely to
withstand them. If so be that the ennemyes do assayle on euerye
syde, then euerye syde must be defended. But least sodaine
trouble should excedingly hurte them, the souldiours
are to be warned aforehande, that they be ready with mind
and courage, and that they haue theyr weapons in theyr hā
                  des.
For sodaine chaunces which amase men most whē they
are put to theyr pintche, are nothing fearefull, if they be prouided
for aforehande. The olde men of warre did most dilligentlye
take heede least the souldiours in theyr fight should
be troubled by the pages sometime beinge hurt, sometimes
being in feare, and least archers throughe theyr crye should
be made afrayde: leaste that eyther beinge scattered farre
a sunder, or gathered togethered on heapes, they might let
their owne partye more then profite them, & by reason therof
further the ennemyes. And therefore euen as the souldiours
marche forth, so they also leade the carryages well appointed
vnder certaine ensignes. Finallye they did choise of
the verye pages (which they cal headpeece bearers) such as
were fit and cunninge by experience: whom they make as it
were Captaynes, ouer two hundred fletchers & other yong
fellowes, and not aboue. Unto these they gaue banners or
flagges, y• they might know to which ensignes they oughte
to gather their carryages together. But the fightinge men
are deuided from the carriages a preatye space, least beinge
thrust thicke together while the armye is in marchinge forwarde,
they may be hurt in fight. As the places do differ, so
the maner of defence should be altered. For in ye open fieldes
horsemē vse to assault the armye, rather then footemē. But
in places full of woods, hilles, or fennes, footemē are more
to be dreade. This also muste be auoyded, least y• while one
sort make to much hast another sort through negligence going
to slowlye, ye armye be broken a sunder in the middest or
els peraduenture be made thinne. For ye ennemyes alwayes
make their inuasion there, where the armye is slender.
               Therefore the most expert Captaynes of the field, the deputyes
or the Tribunes must be set before, whiche maye staye

them that go to faste, and constrayne them to make hast that
go to slowlye: for they that go a greate waye before, if a sodaine
inuasiō come, do not so much couet to retyre, as to flie.
But they that be last, being left behinde of their owne companye,
what with the violence of the ennemyes and theyr
owne dispayring, are straight waye ouercome. We must also
know, that the ennemyes do priuilye laye ambushmentes
in such places as they perceyue meete for them: or els do assayle
them with open battaile. But least anye priuye places
may do hurte, that the dilligence of the Captayne prouideth
for, whose dutye it is to searche euery thing before hand. Also
the ambushe beinge perceyued, if it be compassed aboute
pollitikelye, it doth suffer more perill and daunger, then it
went about to do. But if an open power be prepared in the
mountaines, the higher places must be taken vp with aydes
sent before: to the entent that when ye ennemyes shal come,
he maye be on the lower grounde, and then he dare not aduenture
to withstande, when he seeth armed men as wel before
him, as aboue his head. If so be that the wayes be narrowe,
and not safe enoughe, yet it is better that souldiours
go before, with hatchets and axes, and with labour to make
the wayes open and plaine, then in neuer so good a waye to
suffer perill and daunger. Moreouer we ought to know the
vsuall trade of oure ennemyes, whether by nighte, or in the
dawning of the daye, or in the time of repaste, their custome
is to assayle theyr wearyed ennemyes: and to e
                     •
                  chewe that,
which after their accustomed trade we thincke they will do.
Furthermore it behoueth vs to knowe, whether they canne
do more with footemen, or horsemē: whether with slingers,
pykemen, or archers: whether they excell vs in nomber of
men, or munition & fence of armour and weapons: & then we
ought to order that thing well, y• we know profitable to our
selues, & contrary to them. We ought also to consider & deliberate,
whether it be better to begin our iourney by day or
by night: what & how great distaunces be of the places to y•
which we couet to make hast: least in Sommer y• scarcity of
water hinder vs in iorneying: in winter daūgerous fennes &

such as men cānot passe, or great waters: and by such meanes
y• iourneye being letted, our hoast may be cōpassed 
                     •
                  rentrapped
before it can come to the place appointed. As it is
our commoditye at all times to auoyde these thinges: so if y•
ignorance or negligence of ye ennemyes shal geue vs occasiō,
it oughte not to be let passe: but we ought instātly to allure
the traytors & spyes, to the intent that we may knowe what
our ennemye both presently and afterwarde doth purpose to
do: and with horsemen in readines, or light armed footemē,
prepared for the purpose to beguile them, and so to cast them
into a sodaine feare, as they be ranginge abrode seekinge for
forage and victuals.
            
            
               ¶After what maner greate ryuers maye be
passed ouer. Chap. .vij.
               IN the passinge ouer of ryuers 
                     •
                  hey that are not verye
cyrcumspecte, are oftentimes excedinglye molested. For
if any water be rough and boysterous, or the chanell verye
broade, it manye times drowneth the carriages and the
boyes and nowe and then slouthfull and lyther souldiours.
Therefore after the foorde be serched, two troupes of good
horsemen vpon chosen horses are appointed, beinge seperate
a sunder a reasonable space, that the footemē and carryages
maye passe ouer through the middest: for the former troupe
doth breake the violence of the waters, and the latter doth
gather and put ouer such as be caughte and were vnder the
water. But when the floude is deeper, so y• neyther footemā
nor yet horseman can passe it: if it do runne through plaine
places, it is best to deuide ye ryuer into many partes wt ditches,
& thus being parted, ye passage ouer wil be easye. But
ryuers are made easye to passe ouer wyth boates, or with
spearestaues rammed fast into the earth▪ & plantchers layed
ouer them, or els with muche labour to gather together as
many emptye vessels as can be, and to laye boards ouer thē
But the experte horsemen vse to make bundells of drye reedes
or flagges, vppon the whiche they do put theyr armoure

and weapons, least they shoulde synke. They 
                     ••
                  em selues,
and their horses dyd swymme after their bundels and so
passe the ryuer. But experience hathe founde out this to be
a more commodious waye, that the hoste doe carie with it
in cartes certayne boates, whiche they call Monoxilos, that
is to say boates somewhat broade, made hollowe, all of one
beame, very light according to ye kinde & fines of the woode,
hauing boardes lykewyse and Iron nayles in a readines for
that purpose. And thus a bridge being made without delay,
and bounde strongly with roopes (whiche for the same purpose
muste be prepared, wylbe as stronge for the tyme as if
it were a brydge of stone. But the enemies are nowe alreadye
vppon the bankes, and their vse is to lye in wayte, and to
come vppon them that passe ouer of a sodayne. Against the
whiche extremitie or neede, companies well armed, are set
in the banke on eitheir syde, least they being deuided by the
chanell that runneth betwene them, should be opprest of the
enemies. But the surest waye is, to fasten stakes before on
both sydes, that if any assaulte be made they maye sustayne
it without harme. If so bee that the brydge bee necessarye,
not onely for passinge ouer, but also for comminge backe againe,
and prouision of victualles: then at either ende it
shoulde haue souldiours to defende it, and broade ditches
should bee cut out of it with a rampire made by it, and the
souldiours should keepe and defende the brydge as longe as
they shall haue any necessarie affaires in those places.
            
            
               ¶After what maner a campe should be placed.
Chapiter .viij.
               THus hauing described the maner how an armie should
be ordred in the iourney, it seemeth good next to come
vnto the orderinge of the tentes, wherein wee muste
remayne. For in tyme of warre, a fortified or walled citie is

not alwayes ready in the waye to abyde at, and it is an vnwyse
poincte aud very daungerous, that they shoulde staye
or abyde euery where without any munition or forte: when
as the souldiours being busied to take their meate, or scattered
abroade to doe anye thinge pertayning to their charge:
it is an easie matter to fynde out wyles to entrappe them
or euer they bee aware. Finally, the darkenes of nyghte, the
necessitie of sleape, the scatteringe of the horses when they
feede, doe minister occasion to sodayne inuasions. In pitching
a campe, it is not inough to chose a good place: except
it be suche one that an other better then it can not be founde,
least wee, forsakyng the better place, & our enemies takyng
it to their vse, wee may chaunce to smarte for it. Wee muste
also take heede in Sommer, least either corrupte water be
nyghe the armie, or holsome water be farre of: In Wynter
least wee lacke store of forage, or plentie of woode nowe and
then: leaste the fielde wherein wee muste abyde nowe and
then bee ouerflowed with sodayne stormes, leaste it bee pitched
in steepe downe and roughe places, and suche as if the
enemies shoulde besiege vs, wee myghte hardely get forth:
leaste it bee within the reache of oure ennemies arrowes,
when they caste them from hyghe places ouer oure heades.
The whiche thinges being foreseene warely and dilygently
as they ought to be, thou shalt make the campe, either foure
square, or rounde, or three cornered, or els longewayes, according
to the necessitie of the place. For the fashion or forme
is not preiudiciall to any commoditie. Neuerthelesse, those
campes are thought fayrest, whiche are longer by the thirde
parte, then they are broade. But they that vewe and suruay
the fielde, ought so to measure euery foote thereof, that the
armie maye bee compacted accordinge to the numbre of the
same. For if the campe be narrowe, they in the forefronte
hemme it in to straightly. And if it be to broade, they scatter
farther then they should doe. There be three wayes whereby
they saye a campe may be fortified. The first they saye, is
some what sleight, seruing them one night onely whyle they
are in their iourney, that is to digge vp turues and to laye

them in order rounde about the campe vppon heapes, and
aboue them in good order to make a pale. I meane to sette
stakes there, or briers and brembles. A turfe it cut of earth,
that conteineth both the grasse, the rootes & the earth also,
and is cut out of the ground with an Iron spade or such like,
it is made halfe a foote deepe, a foote broade, a foote and a
halfe long. If it be so that the grounde be so sandy that after
the fashion of a bricke, a turfe can not be cut vp, then euerye
man must set to his helping hand to the making of a ditche,
whiche must be fiue foote broade and three foote deepe, in the
inner side whereof a rāpire must be raised: so that the armie
may take their rest without feare. But if the campe remaine
in one place, then whether it be sommer, or winter, if so be ye
enemie be at hande, it must with greater care and labour be
fortified: for euery hundred haue their stations appointed out
by the captaines and generals of the field, whiche they take
and kepe thē vnto: and laying of their shield & fardels about
their owne ensignes, 
                     •
                  hey girde their swordes vnto them, &
caste a trenche about the armie of .ix. foote, or .xi. or .xiii. foote
broade, or els if they feare a greater power of enemies .xvii.
foote broade, (for it is a custome alwayes to obserue an odde
numbre) then they raise vp a rampire and hedge it about, or
els driue stakes into it, & bowes of trees, least y• earth should
slide a way: vpon the whiche rāpire they make battilmentes
and fortresses, euen as they doe vpon a stone wall. The captaines
do measure out this worke with poles or perchies .x.
foote long, least any man should digge lesse then he ought, or
els through his fellowes negligence shoulde digge out of
square. The tribunes also ouerse this worke, neither do they
departe if they be good & diligēt in their office, before that al
be finished. Now least there should be any sodaine inuasiō on
thē that labour, all the horsemen & part of y• footemē whiche
doth not worke by reason of prerogatiue of dignitie, do stand
armed in readines before the trenche, that they maye withstande
the enemies inuading thē. Therfore, within y• campe y•
stāderds are first set in their places: because there is nothing
more to be had in reuerēce of ye souldiours, thē y• maiestie of y•
same. The pauilion called Praetoriū, is prepared for y• chiefe

captaine and his companie. Other tentes are pitched for
the tribunes, vnto whome water, woode, forage, are ministred
by certayne companies assigned to those charges.
Then accordinge to their degree, are places appointed in
the campe for the legions, aides, horsemen, and footemen,
wherein they may pitche their pauiliōs: and there be chosen
of euery hundred foure horsemen and foure footemen, which
doe keape the watches by nighte. And for as muche as it
semed vnpossible, or a very harde thing, in the watche tower
for euery one to continewe watching all the whole nighte:
therefore the watches are deuided by an howre glasse into
foure partes, that it shoulde bee neede for noone to watche
more then three howres in the night. The watches are begonne
by a trompetter, and after the howres be ended, they
are called awaye agayne by a blower of a horne. But for all
this, the tribunes doe choose and pyke out fitte and tried
men, whiche maye goe aboute the watches, and shewe if anye
faulte maye appeare, whome they call Circuitores,
that is to say searchers of the watche. Nowe are these made
a certayne degree in the warres, and are called Circitores,
that is to saye, officers going aboute to see good rule in the
nyghte. Yet we muste knowe that the horsemen ought to
watche without the trenche and bulwarke. But euery daye
tyme, after the campe bee pitchte, they doe vse to take order
for warding and posthorses, some in the morninge, some after
noone, for weareing of the men and horses. Among the
chiefe and speciall pointes, it behoueth the captayne, whether
hee remayne in the campe or in a citie, to prouide that
feeding for the cattell, conueying of grayne & other kindes,
the cariage of water, woode, and forage bee made assured
and without daunger, from the inuasion of their ennemies.
Whiche thynge otherwyse can not come to passe, excepte in
meete and conuenient places, by whiche the prouision of
oure victualles muste passe, there bee sette and disposed
places of refuge and succoure: whether they bee cities or
defenced castels. If so bee that any oulde munition bee
not founde, there muste hastelye bee made sure fortresses

compassed about with great ditches. For the worde fortresses,
is so named being deryued of this woorde forte: as who
saye, a litle forte or castle, within the whiche a certayne nū
                  ber
of horsemen and footemen continuing, hauing charge
to watche and attende for the same, doe conducte and make
safe the waye, for the conueyaunce of victualles. For the enemy
dare scarcely aduēture to come to those places, in which
he knoweth his aduersaries to abide both before & behinde.
            
            
               ¶What maner, and howe great thinges should be considered,
to vnderstande whether we ought to fight
with skirmishing, and lying in wayte, or
with open battayle. Chap. ix.
               VVhosoeuer will vouchesafe to reade these bridgemēts
briefly gathered out of the moste experte and tried authours,
he coueteth quickely to heare the law, or maner
of a fielde foughten, and the preceptes of rules of fighting.
But an open or a set battayle, is soone determined by
the triall of two or three houres space: after that all hope of
the syde which is ouercome, doth once beginne to fal & decay.
Therefore al thinges should be thought on & assaied before,
that it come to the vttermoste & laste breaking of. For good
captaines doe not assaye the fielde with open battaile, where
ensueth common daunger to al, but alwayes closely and priuily,
that by that meanes they might destroye, or at the least
terrifie their enemies, their owne souldiours being yet fresh
and lustie. Concerning whiche parte, I wyll declare suche
thinges as are very necessary, whiche I haue gathered out
of olde wryters. The chiefe art and commoditie of the captaine,
is oftentimes to debate & entreate of his owne power,
and also if his enemies power, taking vnto him throughout
all his armie experte and cunninge men of warre, and also
wyse and discrete men, that (all flatterie set a part) which is
very hurtefull, hee maye knowe whether hee or his enemies
haue the greater number of fighting men: whether his men
or ye enemies be better armed, & furnished with artillerie,
whiche are moste exercised, and which in greatest daungers

are more valiaunt. He must also enquire whether part haue
better horsemen, and whether better footemē. He must also
knowe that the strengthe of the armie doth chiefly consiste in
the footemen: and among the horsemen hee must see whiche
were beste with the launce, and whiche with the bowe, who
haue the best armoure, the best horses: last of al, whether the
places in whiche they must fighte, be more commodious for
the enemies then for them selues. For if we delite in an hoste
of horsemen, we must desire the playne fieldes: if in an hoste
of footemen, we must chose suche places, as be narrowe and
streight, enuironed and stopped with ditches, marisses, and
fennes: or wt trees, & sometime hillie places: for the whiche
armie, store of victuall must be had, rather to muche then to
little. For hunger (as men say) dothe pinche inwardly, and
oftentimes doth ouer comme without di
                     •
                  te of swoorde. But
chiefly he must consulte and deliberate, whether it bee more
profitable to prolong the vrgent necessitie of battaile, or to
fight it out of hande. For sometime the aduersarie doth hope
that the voiage may soone be ended: and if it may be delayed
and lōger, either the armie is famished for lacke of victuals,
or is called away to their owne, through the loue and desire
that they haue thereof: or els hauing done nothing worthy of
prayse, is compelled to departe through dispaire Then many
discouraged with paines and wearines doe forsake him:
some betraye him, and some yelde them selues to their enemies.
For in aduersitie faithfulnes is rare, and he that came
welthie, nowe beginnes to be bare and neady. It is profitable
also to knowe what maner of man the aduersary is, what
his companions are and leaders, whether they be rashe and
hastie, or ware and circumspect, whether they bee hardy or
feareful: cunning in the feates of warre, or such as are wōte
to fight at all aduenture: what valiaunt people haue foughte
with them, what cowardly and fearefull: of what trustines
our aydes be, and of what force: what courage his armie is
of, and what also our hoste hath: and whiche parte doth more
hope for the victorie, for by suche cogitations manhoode is

either encreased or diminished. By the encouraging of the
captaine, euen those whiche despaire are muche boldened, &
if hee bee not feareful, they waxe couragious, if he hath done
any valiaunt acte, either by laying wayte, or by other occasion
offered: if thinges goe not well, but fall out vnluckelye
with their enemies: if he can vanquishe any of his enemies,
either suche as bee weaker, or not so well armed. But you
must take diligent hede that you bring not foorth the armie
to fight at any tyme, if it be doubtfull or fearefull. It is very
necessary to knowe whether you haue newe souldiours or
olde. Whether they haue bene some little time in warres, or
haue continued a good whyle in peace and quietnes: for they
are to bee esteamed as younge souldiours whiche haue not
fought a long season. But when the legions, aides or horsemen
doe come from sundrie places to vs, a noble and worthy
captaine oughte to exercise euery company seuerally in all
kinde of weapōs and artillerie by the tribunes or marishals
thereto appointed, whose diligence hee hathe tried before:
and after warde shall exercise them gathered together into
one place, as though they should fighte in open battaile. Hee
him selfe shall often trie and proue what cunning they haue,
what force, howe they agree together, whether they can be
readie at the sound or blowing of the trumpettes, at the shewing
of the ensignes, yea, & at euery becke and commaundement.
If they doe amisse in any poinct, they must be exercised
and enstructed, vntil they be cunning and experte. Although
they maye bee fully enstructed in runninge in the 
                     •
                  ielde, and
other exercise: in shootinge, in throwyng dartes, in settinge
the armye in ordre: yet they muste not rashely bee broughte
to the open or sette battayle vppon euerye lyght occasion,
but they muste fyrste bee entered and acquainted with litle
encounters. Therefore the paynefull, discrete and wyse
Captayne, doothe iudge of his owne, and also of his aduersaries
power, euen as hee and his councell shoulde iudge
of a ciuile matter betwene partie and partie. If he be founde

more able and better furnished in many thinges, let him not
differ the conuenient and fitte occasion of fighting. But if he
perceiue his enemie to bee the better, let hym auoyde the opē
and sette battayle. For a fewer in numbre, and weaker in
strengthe, oftentymes vnder good captaines haue obtained
the victory by sodayne inuasions, and lying priuely in wayte.
            
            
               ¶What must be done if any captayne haue an army
out of vse of fighting, or an armie of younge
souldiours. Chapiter .x.
               ALl artes and sciences, and all our dayly workes doe
proceede and encrease by continuall vse and exercise,
which if it be true in smal thinges, howe muche more
ought it to bee obserued in the greatest affaires. And who
doth doubte that the knowledge and skyll of warre, is more
mightie then all other thinges: by the whiche libertie is
mainteined, and the dignitie of a prince enlarged, and the
Empire mainteined and preserued. The Lacedemonians, in
tymes past (all other kyndes of learning set a side) did iudge
this onely to be obserued, and after that the Romaines lykewyse.
And euen at this tyme, the barbarous and straunge
nations, doe also thinke that this onely ought to be obserued
and kepte. And they haue suche confidence herein, that they
thynke all other thinges doe consiste in this: or that they
may obtayne all thinges throughe this. This vnto them
that muste fight, is very necessary, by whiche they may saue
their lyfe, and obtaine the victorie. Therefore a captaine vnto
whome the worthie honoures of so great power and authoritie
are geuen: to whose faithfulnes and prowes, the
goodes of the possessours, the defence of cities, the safetie of
the souldiours, the honour of the common wealthe is committed:
ought to be carefull, not onely for the whole armie,
but also for euery particuler cōpanie of the same. For whatsoeuer
doth happen in the warre otherwyse then well, the
faulte is his, but the iniurie and hurte is common. Therefore
if he guide an armie of younge souldiours, or suche as

haue bene long out of vse in chiualry, he ought diligently to
trie and searche the strengthe, courage and experience of euery
bande of the legion, and also of euery company of the
horsemen. Let him also knowe (if it bee possible) by name,
who is captaine vnder him, who is tribune, whiche bee his
housholde seruauntes, whiche be cōmon souldiours in euery
hande, and howe muche he can doe in the warre: and let him
get great authoritie by sharpenes and seueritie: let him punishe
all the souldiours faultes by the lawes, let him not bee
thought to winke at any that offendeth, let him vnderstande
and knowe the proofe and triall of all in sundrie places vpon
diuers occasions. These thinges (as it behoueth) being thus
ordred and looked to, when the enemies doe wander abroade
carelesse, dispersed here and there for booties, then let him
sende expert and tried horsemen, or els footemen with the
younge and meaner souldiours, to the entent that if, by occasion
the enemies bee foiled, they might bee made more cunning,
and the other more bolde and hardie. Let him place
certayne companies very priuely to come sodainly on the enemies
at the passing ouer of Riuers, at the stiepe or fall of
mountaynes, at the narrowe straightes of woodes, at the
daungerous passages of fennes and other wayes. And let
him order his owne iourney so, that beinge readye and well
furnyshed, he may set vpon them, either when they are eating
or sleaping, or being idle, careles, vnarmed, vnshodde,
their horses being scattered abroade, suspecting nothing: because
in suche skirmishes his souldiours may bee boldened
and encouraged. For they whiche before of a longe tyme or
neuer in their life haue seene men wounded or 
                     •
                  layne: at the
first sight are so afrayde, that they quake and tremble: and
being amased throught feare, haue more mynde of flying thē
of fighting. Furthermore, if the enemies doe range abroade
to make inuasions, let him set vpō them after they be weary
with their longe viage: and let him inuade the hindermoste,
euen at vnwares. Let him also sodainly preuēt with chosen
mē, such as either for forage, or for a bootie do tarie a great
waye from their companie. For these thinges must be tried

firste, whiche if they haue ill successe, it doth small harme:
if they prosper well, it doth muche auayle. It is the pointe
of a good captayne to minister and breede causes of discorde
amongest th ennemies. For no nation though it bee very
little, can quickely be destroyed of the enemies, except it bee
consumed with priuate dissensions and hatred within it self.
For ciuile discorde and hatred is to hastie and rashe in seeking
the destruction of the enemies, and to careles and vnheedy
of foreseing of their owne defence and safetie. And in
this enterpryse, this one thinge muste bee foretolde, that no
man shoulde dispayre of the perfourminge of those thinges
whiche haue bene done before. But some man may saye that
no man in many yeares space doth enuironne an army which
is pitched, in a place compassed about with a ditche, a rampire
or trenche. I aunsweare hym thus, that if this heede
were taken the sodaine inuasion of enemies, neither by night
nor daye, coulde doe any hurte at al. The Persians following
the example of the Romaines, doe pitche their campes with
diches drawen about: and for as muche as all places in a
manner be sandie, they fill sackes, whiche they caried empty
with earth very dustie and drie (which in those places is digged)
and with an heape of them they doe make a rampire. Al
the barbarous people hauing their cartes ioyned together
in a rounde compasse, after the manner of a rampire, do passe
ouer the nightes quietly, and out of daunger of them that do
inuade them. And doe we feare that we can not learne those
thinges whiche others haue learned of vs? These thinges
must be learned by experience, and also by reading of suche
thinges as before tyme were obserued: but being left of for
a great whyle, no man hath sought them out, because that
as long as peace flourished, the necessitie of warre was far
out of mynde. But least it may seeme impossible to renewe
and restore the knowledge of marshall affayres, being long
intermitted and decayed for lacke of exercise, examples may
sufficiently teache vs in this point. The knowledge of warfare
hath oftentymes bene forgotten with them of olde, but

                     〈◊〉
                   hath bene sought out againe in bookes, and confirmed by

the skill and authoritie of good captaines. Scipio Aphricanus,
did take the armies which were in Spayne, being oftē
                  times
ouercome vnder dyuers generall captaines: and obseruing
the order and preceptes of warfare, hee so diligently
exercised thē in casting of ditches, & making trēches, that he
would saye commonly that diggers muste bee defiled with
myre, whiche would be washed with the bloud of their enemies.
And at the lengthe with those he so fired the Numaintines,
that their citie was taken, and neuer one escaped. Metellus
receiued an armie in Aph
                        •
                     ike, whiche was subdued
vnder Albinus their generall captaine: whiche he did so repaire
with olde preceptes and pollicie of the auncient warriours,
that afterwarde they ouercame them, of whom they
had bene subdued before. The Germaines also in Fraunce,
destroied the legions whiche Cepio, Manilius and Sillanus
led: the remnaunt wherof, whē 
                  Caius Marius had receiued,
he so enstructed them with knowledge and skill of fighting,
that hee destroyed in open battayle an innumerable multitude,
not onely of Zelanders, but also of Germaines, & Hungarians
For it is easier to enstructe souldiours of new vnto
prowesse, then to cal againe them that be throughly afraide.
            
            
               ¶What thinges should be done the same daye, that
the open or set battaile should be ioyned.
Chapiter .xj.
               THe more easie feates of warre beinge declared before,
the order of the trade & knowledge of warfare, dothe
moue me nowe to come to the doubtfull daie of the opē
fight, and mortall daie vnto nations and people. For the
whole victorie consisteth in the successe of open battayle.
Then at this tyme so muche more ought the captaines to be
diligent and carefull, in as muche as greater renowne is
hoped for of them that be diligent, and the greater daunger
dothe followe them that bee slouthefull and vnexperte: in
whiche the vse of skilfulnes, the knowledge and pollicie of
fighting, incontinent doth trie and rule all the matter.
               
                  In olde tyme they were wonte to bryng forth the souldiours
to fight, refreshed before with a small portion of meate: to
the intent that their meate receiued might make them the
quicker: and that in the longer bickeringe they mighte not
be wearied with hunger. Great care also must be had, if the
enemies be present, whether you bryng forth the souldiours
to the battell out of the campe, or out of a citie, least whyles
the armie goeth forthe through the straighte passage of the
gates by smal numbres, it be discomfited of the enemies gathered
together in a readines. Therefore this muste be prouided,
that all the souldiours doe issue forth of the gates, and
the armie be set in araye before the enemy come. If 
                     •
                  o be that
the enemies beinge ready come to them abiding still in the
citie: let their issuing foorthe, either bee differred, or at the
least dissembled: that when the aduersaries shall beginne to
aduaunce and boaste them selues against those whome they
thinke wyll not come forth of their citie: when as they shall
retire, and purpose to gette some bootie, and so shall breake
their araie, then they beynge astonied, let the moste choice
and piked men rushe out, and foorthwith set vpon them at
vnawares. But this must be obserued that the souldiours
be not wearied with any long iourney: least you compel the
horses being wearie after their running to the opē battaile.
He that shall fight, must needes be muche weakened with
the trauayle and payne of the iourney. What shall he doe
that commes blowyng & panting to the battel? This thing
the oulde men of warre haue alwayes shunned, and in the
tyme late passed, when as the Romayne captaines, through
ignoraunce, haue not bene ware of, (so that I wyll saye no
more) they haue vtterly cast away their armie. For the state
or condition is vnlyke, for him that is wearie, to fight with
him that is well refreshed: he that sweateth with him that
is freshe: he that runneth with him that stode still.
            
            
               ¶We must diligently searche out▪ what myndes the
souldiours be of, when they should fight.
Chapiter .xij.
               
                  THe very same daye that the souldiours shall fighte, it
is meete to searche diligently what they thinke. For
fearefulnes or confidence is perceiued by the countenaunce,
talke, going, & mouing: neither ought you to be very
bolde, although the young souldiours do couet to fight. For
battaile is pleasaunt to suche as haue not tried it, and you
may be assured that the battayle muste bee prolonged if the
expert warriours be afrayed to encounter with their ennemies.
Yet with the aduertisementes and exhortations of the
captaine, manhode and courage encreaseth in all the army,
specially if they can perceiue suche order and meanes inuented
for the battayle that shall be foughten, that they may be
in hope easely to attayne the victory. After this, the cowardnes
and ignoraunce of the enemies must be declared. And also,
if they haue beene ouercome of vs before tyme. Suche
thinges also muste bee declared, by the whiche the mindes
of the souldiours through hatred of the aduersaries, may be
stirred to anger and indignation. For this is geuen naturally
almoste to all men to be afraide, when as they come to ye
ioyning of battaile. But without doubt they are more fearefull,
whose mindes the very sight of the enemies doth amase
and trouble. But that feare is mitigated by this remedie, if
before you shall fight, you doe often set your armie in araye
in safe places: from whence they may vse both to vewe the
ennemies and to knowe them. Sometime they maye venture
some thing of good occasion, and so either chase or 
                     •
                  lea
the enemies: that they maye knowe the manners and fashions
of the enemies, their armoure and their horsemen.
For the thynges whiche are practised by experience, are
lesse fearefull.
            
            
               ¶Howe a meete place should be chosen to fight in.
Chapiter .xiij.
               IT behoueth a good captaine to know, that the very place
wherein they must fight, doth contayne a great part of the
victory. Take paines therefore, that when you shall ioyne

battaile, first you haue the aduauntage of the place: whiche
the higher it shalbe when as it is taken, it is thought to bee
the more commodious. For the dartes & other weapons are
cast down with greater force against them that be vnder: and
the higher part doth driue them back that withstande, with
greater violence. He that forceth him selfe against the rising
or bending of an hill, he doth take on hand a double conflicte,
both to striue with the place and with the enemie. But here
must be discretion had, and a difference made if you hope for
the victorie through your footemen, against the horsemen of
your enemies, you must choose rough places, vneuen, and
full of hilles. But if you seeke the victorie against the footemen
of your enemies throughe youre horsemen, you muste
choose suche places as bee in deede some what hygher, but
playne and open, encumbred neyther with woodes, nor with

                     •
                  ennes.
            
            
               ¶Howe an armie ought to be set in order, that in the
battell it may be inuincible, or not easely
ouercome. Chapiter .xiiij.
               HE that goeth about to set his battell in good order, he
ought to forsee three thinges: the Sunne, the duste, &
the wynde. For the sunne before their faces, doth blemishe
or basell their sight, a contrary wynde dothe turne awaye
your dartes and beatheth them downe, and furthereth
those of the enemies. The duste gathered before the face filleth
the eies and closeth them vp. The vnskilfull captaynes
vse to auoyde these incommodities euen in that very momēt
when they set the battaile in araie: but a wyse and circumspecte
captaine oughte to take heede betime, & forsee things
to come▪ leaste a litle whyle after the daye comminge, the
course of the sunne being chaunged, it maye be hurteful: and
leaste a contrarie wynde dothe ryse, euen in the tyme of the
battayle. Therfore let the rankes be so set in araie that these
may be behinde vs: and (if it may be possible) that they maye
be full in the face of our enemies. Acies is called an armie

set in order and in good araye, and the forefronte of it is placed
directly against the enemies. This forefronte in open or
sette battayle, if it be wysely sette in ordre, dothe helpe and
profite very much. If they be ordred vnskilfully, if they were
neuer so good warriours, yet with ill setting in araye, they
are soone vanquished and ouerthrowen. The rule of setting
in araye, is that in the firste rancke bee placed the experte
and oulde beaten souldiours, whome in olde tyme they called
Principes, that is the moste experte and valiaunt souldiours.
In the seconde ranke muste bee appointed archers,
being armed with curets or breastplates, and the beste souldiours
with dartes or els speares, who of olde were called
Hasti, that is pikemen. Euery armed man was accustomed
to take streight foorthe three foote space betweene one and
other. That is to saye, in the space of a myle, a thousande
sixe hundreth three score and syxe, are placed and sette in
lengthe, that neyther the battayle maye appeare thynne betweene
the souldiours, and that there maye bee roume enough
to handle their weapons. They would haue betwene
one ranke and other, a space behynde their backes, sixe foote
in bredthe, that they that fyghte, myghte haue roume to
come forewarde and goe backewarde. For the dartes in
leaping and running, are caste with a greater violence. In
those twoo rankes are placed suche as are of riper age, hardie
through vse and experience, and also armed with more
heauie and weightie harnesse. For these as a wall within
them selues can not be compelled, either to retyre, or to pursue
their enemies: leaste they should disorder their rayes: but
are ready to receiue the enemies marchinge forwarde, and
by standing stoutly to it and fighting valiauntly, eyther to
driue them backe, or put them to flyghte. The thyrde ordre
or raye, is placed of the lyghtest armied menne, of archers,
beynge younge men, of good casters of dartes, which
in oulde tyme were called Ferentarii, that is, men armed in
lyghte harnisse, readie to come quickelye to succours.
               The fourthe ordre muste be sette with the moste readie souldiours,
which are armed with shieldes, with young archers

and such as fight with dartes and leaden plūmettes (which
they name Martiabarbulos, all which were called light harnissed
men. Therefore wee muste knowe for as muche as the
twoo first orders doe stande still: the thirde ordre & the fourth
with their dartes and arrowes, must alwayes goe forthe to
prouoke the enemies. If so be that they can put thē to flight,
then they with the horsemen doe pursue. But if they be driuē
backe by the enemies, they returne to 
                     〈◊〉
                   firste and seconde
ordres againe, and amongest them euery one takes his owne
place. But the firste and seconde battayle, as soone as they
come to fight with dinte of swoordes, and shorte dartes, that
is (as they saye commonly) to hande strokes they endure and
heare of, the brunte of all the battaile. In the fifthe raye or
battayle, sometyme were planted field peeces, and shooters
in crossebowes, slingers both with the slyngestaffe, and with
the hande. They be called Fundibulatores, whiche caste stones
with staffeslinges. The slinge staffe is a staffe foure foote
long: to the whiche through the myddes is bounde a slinge
of leather: and being forced with both handes, dothe caste
leuell the stones in manner of a great gunne. Funditores,
be suche as caste stones with slynges made of flaxe, threede,
or great heares, for these they doe call the better, they doe
throwe stones, fetching their arme rounde about their head.
They that had no shieldes, did fight in this order, whether
it were with stones caste with hande, or with dartes: whom
they did name Accensos, as who saye, as yet younger men
and not expert, but afterwarde added and put to the legion.
The sixte order, was vpholden and stayed with the moste
valiaunt and couragious warriours, and suche as hadde
shieldes and were fenced with al kinde of armour and weapons:
whome the auncient men did name Triarios, that is
to saye souldiours whiche be set alwayes in the rerewarde,
whiche were the strongest men. These are alwayes placed
after the laste rankes: that being rested & freshe, they might
more sharpely assaile their ennemies. For if any thing had
happened otherwyse thē well vnto the first orders, al ye hope
of recouery did hange and depende of their force & strengthe.
            
            
               
               ¶The maner of measuring by the foote, how much
space in the battell should be betweene euery man
in length, or in breadeth, and howe much betwixte
euerye rancke. Chap. xv.
               BUt after that I haue sette forth in what maner the armye
ought to to be set in arraye, nowe I wil declare ye
footinge and measuringe of the same. In one myles
space one battell doth containe 1666. footemen: because that
euery souldiour doth occupye three foote space. If that you
would ordeine sixe battelles in a myle space, there must needes
be 9996. footemen. But if you woulde pitche the same
nomber in three ranckes, you must take .2000. paces. But
it is bettter to make mo battelles, then to disperse them farther
a sonder. But I sayde before that there oughte to appeare
betweene euery rancke behinde their backes sixe foote
in breadth. And the fighters as they stande to take euery one
a foote. And therefore if you would set in araye vi. ranckes
or battelles: 42. foote in breadth, and a myle in lengthe
will containe an armye of tenne Thousand men. But if you
would set the same in araye deuide into three battelles .21.
foote in breadth, and two myles in length, will containe the
armye of tenne Thousande me
                     •
                  . After the same reasō, whether
there be xx. thousand or .30 thousande footemē, accordinge
to ye measuring by the foote, they maye be set in araye
verye easelye. Neyther is the Captaine deceyued when hee
knoweth howe many armed men euerye place can containe.
Finallye if the place be somewhat streight, or if the nomber
be sufficient, then it is best to set them in nine battels or moe.
For it is better that they fight thicke together, then seuered
further, & a great distaunce one from another. For if ye battell
be made to slender and thinne, the ennemyes do easelye
breake through, and disturbe the araye by violent inuasion,
and no helpe afterward can be had. But what bandes ought
to be set in the right wi
                     •
                  g, what in the lefte, and what in the
middest, it is 
                     〈…〉
                   a custome and maner, either accordinge
to their dignityes & degrees, or els for the order and
fourme of the ennemyes it is altered.
            
            
               
               ¶Of settinge the horsemen in order Chap. xvi.
               AFter y• the footemen be set in battel raye, the horsemē
are set in y• winges, so yt all they y• be in complete harnesse,
& such as haue lances be ioyned to the footemē.
But archers & such as are not well armed, let them roue abroade,
& keepe a loufe from those which are better armed, &
more valiant souldiours. For the sydes be defended wt horsemen,
and the winges of the ennemyes must be seperate, scattered
and disturbed by the quicke and light horsemen. The
Captaine ought to know against what troupes of the ennemyes,
or against what ranckes of his ennemyes, hee muste
place his troupe of horsemen. For I knowe not by what hid
or secrete waye, yea rather by some heauenlye meanes, some
do fight against some better then others: and they that had
ouercome stronger men, oftentimes are ouercome of yt weaker.
If so be that the horsemen be not equal, ye swiftest footemen,
after the maner of the olde warriours with light Tergettes,
exercised to the same purpose should be ioyned wyth
them, whom they did name Expeditos velites: that is to say
light and nimble for skirmishes. Which being done, though
there were neuer so stoute horsemen of the ennemyes, yet cā
they not be able to matche an armye so mingled and tempered.
The olde Captaines inuented this remedye that they
vsed to exercise certaine yonge men that ranne notablie, and
did alwayes place of them betweene euerye two horsemen a
footeman, with light sheldes, swordes and dartes.
            
            
               ¶Of aydes or rescues which are placed behinde
the battell. Chap. xvii.
               BUt the best waye is and doth most auaile to the obtayning
of the victorye, that the Captayne haue in a readines
behinde the battell, the moste pyked and choise
souldiours of the footemen, horsemen, with the deputyes,
rulers & Tribunes attending onlye to that purpose. Some
about the winges, some in the middest, that if the ennemyes

in any place do violently assault them, and striue to burste in
by force, the may steppe forth sodenlye and fulfill the places,
least the battell raye might be disturbed and broken: and so
by shewing their manlines and courage, they might abate ye
stoutenes of the ennemyes. The Lacedemonians first inuē
                  ted
this waye: whom the men of Carthage haue followed:
afterwarde the Romaynes in all places haue obserued the
same. There is no better order or placinge of a battell then
this. For the forefronte which is placed directlye against the
ennemyes, oughtt onlye to do this, if it be possible, eyther to
driue backe the ennemye, or els to discomfite him. If it be
set like a wedge small before and broade behinde, or spreading
open like a payre of sheares, you must needes haue behinde
the battell souldiours, more then ordinarye: of which
you woulde make your battell wedgewyse, or open like the
sheares: if it should be ledde in and out like a sawe, it shalbe
made likewyse of the superfluous souldiours. For if you beginne
to put out anye souldiour set in araye, out of his place,
you shall disturbe and bring all out of order. If anye troupe
of the ennemyes departe from their companye, and beginne
earnestlye to inuade eyther your winge or anye other parte,
vnlesse you haue souldiours more then ordinarye, whom you
maye set against those troupes: whether you take horsemen
from the battell or els footemen: whiles you wou would defende
one part, you shall endaunger the other by dispoyling
of it so. If you haue not a sufficiente multitude or plentye enoughe
of fightinge men, it is better to haue the battell lesse
pitched, so that you place verye manye to serue for ayde and
succour: for you must haue manye choise men about the middle
part of the battell, pyked out of the wel armed footemen,
of which you maye make your battaile wedgewyse, and so
shortly breake into the armye of your ennemyes. And it is
verye good to enuirone the winges of your ennemyes battell
with the horsemen aboute your winges, appointed and
kepte for this purpose, whiche are furnished with lance and
armour, and the light armed footemen.
            
            
               
               ¶In which place the first and chiefe Captaine
ought to stande, in which the seconde, and
in which the thirde, Chap. xviij.
               THe Captaine which beareth the chiefest rule and auctoritye,
vseth to stande betwene the horsemē and footemen
on the righte syde. For this is the place in which
all the battell is ruled, from whence is the streighte and free
passage to the skirmish. And therfore doth he stand betwene
both those cōpanies, that he may both guide with wisedome
and counsell, & also exhorte with his auctoritye & estimation,
as well the horsemen as footemen to fight. He with ye horsemen
which are aboue the ordinarye nomber, and the lighte
footemen mingled with them, must cōpasse the left winge of
the ennemyes which standes against the same, & alwayes assault
& presse on them beehinde their backes. The seconde
Captaine is set in the middle battell of the footemen, which
may staye & strengthen ye same. This Captaine must haue wt 
him the most valiant & wel armed footemen, of them that be
ouerplus. Of the which eyther he himsellfe maye make his
battel wedgewyse, and burst the forefront of the ennemyes:
or els if the ennemyes shall make theirs wedgewyse, he may
make his battell open like the sheares, that he maye meete &
encounter with the ennemyes wedge. In the lefte syde of y•
armye ye third Captaine ought to be very valiant in armes,
wyse and cyrcumspect: because the left syde is more in daunger,
& as it were stands in the battaile maymed and weake.
Therefore he must haue aboute him good horsemen, whiche
are aboue the ordinary nomber, & the most nimble footemē,
by the which he maye alway enlarge the lefte winge, least it
should be cōpassed about of the ennemyes. But the shoute or
crye (which they do call Barrithum) muste not be raysed vp
before that both the battelles be ioyned. For it is the pointe
of such as be vnskilfull, and cowards to crye aloude a great
waye of, when as the ennemyes are made more afrayde, if
with the dint of weapons come together the hedious shoute
and crye.
               
                  But you must alwayes caste and studye to set your battaile
in arraye before your ennemyes: because you maye at your
owne wil and pleasure do that, which you thincke to be fitte
and profitable vnto your selfe, when no mā doth let or withstande:
by this meanes also you shall more encourage and
bouldē your souldiours, and discourage your ennemyes.
               For they are moste couragious, whiche dare prouoke and
chalenge their ennemyes. And the ennemyes do beginne to
feare, when they see the battell set in order and arraye: and
this commonlye also commeth hereof, that you beinge now
set in order and well prepared, maye preuente and assaulte
your enemyes, ordering themselues & tremblinge for feare.
For it is one part of the victorye to disturbe the ennemye before
you fight.
            
            
               ¶Wyth what meanes the vallantnes and deceytes
of the ennemyes in the battell, maye be withstande
and preuented. Chap. xix.
               BEsydes the priuye onsettes & sodaine inuasions vppon
occasiō, which ye Captaine of an army doth neuer omit:
somtime it is good to set vpon the ennemyes, whē they
are wearyed with long iourneyes, dispersed through passing
ouer of ryuers, letted with fennes or marisses, trauailinge
in the toppes of mountaynes, scattered in the plaine fieldes,
and sleaping quietlye in their abyding places. For when the
ennemye is hindred or troubled with other busines, he maye
be slaine before that he can prepare himselfe. If so be that y•
aduersaryes be ware and cyrcumspect, and that there is no
oportunitye of lying in waite: then with like choise and aduauntage,
we must fight hande to hand with our ennemyes,
which knowe and see all as well as wee. For this cause the
skill and knowledge of warre doth no lesse helpe them that
be enstructed, in this open fight, then in the priuye deceiptes
and lyinge in waite. But aboue all thinges you muste take
heede, least vppon the left winge (whiche more commonlye
doth chaunce) or els on the righte (whiche happeneth verye

seldome) your souldiours be compassed aboute of the multitude
of the ennemyes, of troupes of horsemē, rouing abrode
whom they call Grumos. Which thinge if it shall chaūce,
one helpe and remedye is: that you turne your winge (as it
were the insyde outward) and make it rounde, because that
they being turned, may defend the backes of their fellowes.
But in that corner where most perill and daunger is, muste
be placed the moste valiance men: for there the greater violence
and brunte is wont to be. Likewyse against the araye
of the ennemyes comming wedgewyse, you may resist with
certaine and ordinarye meanes. Cuneus, is called a companye
of footemen, which ioyned with the forebattell goeth in
like order small before & broade behinde, and so doth inuade
and breake the arayes of the aduersaryes: for so muche as y•
dartes be caste of a great manye into one place. The whiche
thinge the souldiours do name Caput Porcinum, the swynes
heade: against the whiche that order and raye is appointed,
which is called Forfex, opening like a payre of sheares.
For this battell is made of wel chosen souldiours, set thicke
together, in forme and likenes of the letter V: and doth receyue
the wedge or sharpe battell of the ennemyes: and encloseth
it on both sydes, which being done, it cannot pearce
throughe the forebattel. Also Serra, is called a companye
which beinge appointed of the stoute and valiant souldiours
fighteth in battaile, sometime marchinge forwarde, sometime
recoylinge as a sawe goeth when it is drawen, and is
placed before the forefront directly against their ennemyes,
that the forebattell disordered, may be brought into araye againe.
But Globus is called a companye of men of warre,
which beinge seperate from their owne battell, doth inuade
the ennemyes with an vncertaine and sodaine comming vppon
them: against the which is sent another globe or troupe
of horsemen, of a greater nomber of people & more valian
                     •
                  e.
You must also marke wel that a litle before the time, wherin
the battell is ioyned, in no wyse you do alter your rayes,
or remoue anye companyes from their owne places vnto others.
For straight wayes doth ryse discorde and confusion

of all thinges, and the ennemye doth soner set vppon them
beinge vnprepared and altogether disordered.
            
            
               ¶How many kindes of wayes an open or set battell
is ioyned, and howe also that armye
which is lesse in nomber and strength,
maye obtayne the victorye.
Chap. xx.
               THere be seuen kindes of open fighting, when the banners
displayed in defiance on both partes, do ioyne together
in fight. One kinde of fight is with a long forefront,
and a foure cornered armye: as now a dayes alwayes
almost they vse to fight: but this kinde of fight, they that be
skilfull and expert in armes, do not iudge to be best: because
that when the battell is stretched forthe in lengthe, an euen
plaine grounde is not alwayes in the waye nighe hand and
readye, and if sometime there be anye emptye or hollowe
place, or bowing or crouking in the middle part, in that part
oftentimes the foreranke is broken. Moreouer if the ennemye
do passe you in multitude, hee doth compasse eyther the
righte or the lefte winge on the sydes: in the which there is
great daunger, except you haue aboue your ordinarye nomber,
which maye staye and put backe the ennemye. He onlye
ought to ioyne battell after this sort, which hath both mo in
nomber, and more valiant fighting men: that he maye compasse
his ennemye of both the winges, and enclose him as it
were within his owne armye. The seconde kinde of fighte is
common, which is better then anye other. In which if you
wyll appointe a fewe stoute and couragious men in a place
conueniente, although you be troubled with multitude and
manhoode of your ennemyes: yet maye you easelye winne
the victorye. The maner of this fight is that when the battelles
set in araye do ioyne together, then shall you seperate
the lefte winge a good waye of, from the righte winge of
your aduersarye, that no dartes or arrowes maye come as
farre as it.
               
                  But you shall ioyne your right wing to his left winge: and
there first beginne you the battaile: so that you do assaulte &
compasse about the left syde of it, to ye which you shall ioyne
your selfe, with the best footemen and most tryed horsemen:
and that you maye come to the backes of the ennemyes, by
thrusting them out of place an ouerrunning them. If so be
that you once beginne to make your ennemyes to recoile:
and geue backe frō thence: if your owne men do come on wt
                  all,
you shal obtaine most certaine victorye: and that part of
your armye which you remoued frō your ennemye, shal remayne
in safety. But in this kinde of fighting the battel is
ordered after the similitude of ye letter A. or els the Carpenters
squyre. If so be yt the aduersary do the same before
you: you shal gather together vnto your left winge, ye extraordinarye
souldiours, as well horsemē as footemen: which
before I sayde must be set behinde the battaile: and so shall
you withstand your aduersarye with great force & strength,
that you be not driuen backe with crafte and pollicye. The
thirde kind of fight is like vnto the seconde, but in this point
it is the worser: because you beginne with your left winge,
to fight with your ennemyes right winge. For the inuasion
is very weake, & they that fight in the left winge with much
difficultye do assault their ennemyes openlye. The which I
will more plainelye declare. If you shall at anye time haue
your left winge a good deale the stronger, then ioyne together
the most valiant horsemen and footemen: and in ye conflicte
bende ye same first to the right winge of the ennemyes,
and as much as is possible, make hast to driue backe and cō
                  passe
the right syde of your aduersarye. But seperate the other
parte of your armye in which you knowe that you haue
the worst fighting men, a good waye of from his left wing,
that it maye not be inuaded with swordes, or that the dartes
come vnto it. In this kinde of fight you must take heede least
your crosse battel be beaten throughe wt the wedge or sharpe
battell of your ennemyes. But by this way in one case ye shal
fight profitablye, if your aduersaryes righte winge be weaker,
and your lefte winge a great deale the stronger. The

fourth kinde of fight is such: when as you haue set your battell
in arraye, foure or fyue hundred pases before they come
to the ennemye, sodenly when he lookes for no suche thinge,
you must couragiouslye set forward both your winges: that
you maye on both his winges put the ennemye to flight, and
so soner attaine ye victorye. But this kinde of fight although
it do quickely ouercome, if it shall set forth verye expert and
valiant souldiours, yet it is full of daunger, because hee that
fighteth in such wyse is constrayned to leaue his middle battaile
naked, and to deuide his armye into two partes. And if
the ennemye be not ouercome at the first brunte, he hath afterwarde
occasion, whereby he may both set vppon the winges
deuided, and the middle battel also left withoute ayde &
succour. The fifte kinde of fight is like to the fourth. But
it hath this one thinge more, for because it doth set lighte armed
men and archers before the first battell: that they may
resist the inuasion of ennemyes, and let them for breaking in:
for so doth hee set vppon the left winge of the ennemye wyth
his right wing, and with his owne left wing the right wing
of the ennemye. If so be that he canne put the ennemyes to
flight, he doth straight way winne the fielde: if not, the middle
battaile is in no ieopardie, because it is defended of the
light armed men and archers. The sixt kinde of fight is the
best of all, and in a maner like the second: which they do vse
that dispayre or mistrust of the nomber of theyr owne souldiours,
and also of their manhoode. And if they do sette them
well in araye and good order, althoughe it be with a small
nomber, they do alwayes get the victorye. For when as the
battell set in araye doth approche and come to thennemyes,
ioyne you your righte winge vnto the lefte winge of thennemyes,
and with the most tryed horsemen and swiftest footemen,
there begin to fight. But remoue and take awaye the
other syde of the armye, a great waye from the right syde of
your ennemye, and stretch it out a length as it were a spitte
or a darte. For if you shall beginne to beate the lefte part of
his armye, both of the sydes and behind, without doubt you
shall put them to flighte. But thaduersarye cannot succour

his y• be in daunger, neither with his right winge, nor wt his
middle battell: because your battell is stretched forth & reacheth
it selfe al in length, after the fashiō & similitude of the
letter .I. & goeth a great way of frō thēnemyes: wt the which
kinde many times they bicker in their vyages. The .7. kinde
of fight is, which through y• helpe & benefit of the place, doth
helpe him y• doth fight. In this kinde also you may wtstand &
match wyth your aduersary, both wyth a small nomber, &
also with lesse valiant souldiours, if you haue on one syde an
hill, or ye sea, or a ryuer, or a lake, or a Cittye, or fennes, or
rockes & stiepe downe places: by y• which the ennemyes cannot
come vnto, & set y• residue of your armie in straight battel
raye. But in yt winge which hath no defence, you must set al
your horsemen & Gūners. Then with more safetye you shal
encounter wt the ennemye, after your owne will & pleasure:
because of one part ye nature of the place doth defende you, of
y• other part almost a double strēgth of horsemē is set. Notwithstāding
this thing ought to be obserued, which is most
necessary: yt whether you would fight, you right winge wt 
his left wing, there set the valiant men: or whether your left
with his right wing, there place ye stoutest men: or whether
you would make a wedge or sharpe battell in the middest, by
the which you might breake ye battel rayes of your enemies:
in the same wedge you must ordaine & set the most experte &
cunning souldiours. For the victory is wont to be atchieued
by a few. The matter doth altogether rest in this, that by a
wyse and discreete Captaine, chosen men be set in those places,
which by skill are thought most fit and commmodious.
            
            
               ¶That a waye should be geuen to the ennemyes to depart,
that they may more easelye be destroyed in
flyinge awaye. Chap. xxi.
               MAnye men being ignorante of the feates of warre, do
thincke they maye haue a greater victorye if they can
compasse the aduersaryes eyther wt straitnes of places,
or wt multitude of armed mē: y• they can finde no way to
depart or flie away. But they which are so enclosed be more
encouraged & boldned through desperatiō: & when ther is no

hope at al, feare doth cōstraine them to fighte. He doth couet
willingly to die wt company, which knoweth most certenly y•
he must needes dye. Therfore is the saying of Scipio cōmended,
which sayd, y• the way wherby the ennemies might flie
shold not be fortifyed. For if a passage to depart awaybe once
opened, as sone as y• minds of al do agre to rūne away: they
are slaine & murdered like beasts, neither is there any daū
                  ger
to them y• pursue, when as they y• be ouercome haue turned
their weapons into flighte, with the which they mighte
haue bene defended. After this sort y• greater y• an armye is,
so much more easy a great nomber is ouerthrowē, for there
is no nōber to be required, wher the hart of ye souldiers once
sore afraied & discouraged, doth not so much couet to shun y•
weapons of the ennemyes, as their faces. But being enclosed,
though few in nōber, & weake in power: yet in this same
point they be equal to their ennemyes, for as much as being
in despayre, they know that they hopinge for no escape, muste
needes fight. For this only hope haue they yt be desperate,
to loke for no safetye or life at all.
            
            
               ¶After what maner ye may depart frō the ennemye, if you
do not like of your purposed battel. Chap. xxii.
               AL thinges beinge orderlye declared & made plaine,
which the trade of warre hath by experience & knowledge
obserued: one thing remayneth to declare, after
what maner we may retyre frō the ennemies. For they y•
be expert in the knowledge of warre & in examples, do testifye,
y• no where any greater daūger doth appeare. For he y•
before the ioyninge together doth recoyle, doth both take awaye
good hope frō his owne armye, & doth encourage and
bolden the ennemyes. But forasmuch as this thing doth of
necessity happen oftentimes, we must declare by what meanes
the same may be done safely. First of all that your owne
men do not knowe that therefore you departe, because you
shunne to ioyne battel: but y• they may be brought in beleue
that they be called backe by some pollicye, for this intente y•
the ennemies may be allured vnto a more cōuenient place, y•
                  
may be the more easelye vanquished: or els if the ennemyes
should pursue after them, priuye waytes might be layed the
better. For it must needes be that they wil be ready to flye,
which perceyue theyr owne Captaine to despayre. This also
is to be auoyded, that the ennemyes in no wyse perceyue of
your departure away, and so forthwith runne hastelye vppō
you. Therefore manye haue set their horsemen before their
footemen: to the ende that they running to and fro, shoulde
not suffer the ennemyes to see when the footemen departed.
Also they withdrewe euery rancke or batteile particularly,
beginninge at the first and called them backewarde. The other
remayninge still in their order and place: which afterwarde
by little and little re
                     •
                  oylinge, they ioyned vnto them
which they had withdrawen. First after the wayes were
searched, some did retyre with the armye by night: to thintent
that whē the daye came, the ennemy
                     •
                  es could not ouertake
them that went before. Moreo
                     •
                  er the lighte harnessed
men were sente before to the hilles, by the which the armye
might sodainlye be called againe withoute daunger: and if
the ennemyes woulde followe on, they were discomfited of
the light harnessed men, which gotte the place before them,
with ye horsemē also ioyned to them. For nothing is thought
more daungerous, then if they whiche lye in the ambushe
should meete them that pursue them, vnaduisedly or before
they haue prepared themselues. This is the time wherein
ambushmentes or trappes conuenientlye are layed, because
there is greater boldnes and lesse care against them that are
in flying. For of necessity, of greater securitye and lesse carefulnes
ensueth greater perill and daunger. Ennemies are
wont to come sodainlye vppon such as are vnprepared, or takinge
their meate, wearye in theyr iourneye, feedinge their
horses, and suspectinge no suche thing at all. Which thinge
both we our selues must avoyde, and in such maner of occasions
we must annoye our ennemye. For neyther manhoode,
nor yet the nomber of men can helpe suche as be oppressed by
such a chaunce: for as muche as he that in battaile is ouercome
in open fight, although pollicy and cunning doth there

auayle verye muche, yet he may accuse or alledge ill fortune
for his defence: but he that hath fallē into ye sodaine comming
on of the ennemyes, and theyr ambushes layed for them: can
alledge nothinge to excuse his falte: because he mighte haue
auoyded it, and knowen before by scoutes and spyes meete
for the purpose. Whensoeuer any armye or companye doth
retyre, this subtiltye is commonlye vsed. A fewe horsemen
do followe after with a straight iourney: a stronge power is
secretely sent by other places or wayes: as sone as the horsemen
come to the ennemyes, they trye and assay lightly what
they can do and so depart The ennemye thinketh streight y•
whatsoeuer lying in wayte had beene, that is gone and past,
and so waxeth carelesse & negligent
                     •
                   then that power which
was appointed by a secrete waye, comminge on them sodenlye,
doth oppresse them at vnwares. Manye when they
departe awaye from the ennemye, if they goe throughe anye
woodes, do preuent and take rockes or straight places: least
their ennemyes shoulde there lye in wayte for them. And agayne
they stoppe the waye behinde theym with trees cutte
downe, which they call Compedes, that is to saye fetters or
gyues, to the entente they maye let their ennemyes in pursuing
them: and in such wayes there is occasion for both the
partyes, as well the one as the other to lye in waite. For he
that goeth before, doth leaue ambushmentes as it were behinde
him in valleys meete for the purpose, or mountaynes
full of woodes, into the which when the ennemyes shal fall,
he returneth quickely and helpeth his owne companye. But
he that followeth by backe wayes, doth sende light harnessed
men a good waye before: and gettinge before, doth kepe
his ennemye from passing ouer, to the ende that he may encclose
him beinge deceyued both behinde and before. And as
wel he that goeth before maye returne backe, as also he that
followeth (thoughe it be farre of) may sodainlye come vppō
them that are a sleape in the night, by some deceipte or pollicye.
In the passinge ouer of ryuers, he that goeth before,
doth assaye to oppresse that part which is sent before to passe
ouer, whiles the residue are scattered in the ryuer. But he
                     •
                  
                  
that followeth in hast, doth trouble those yt coulde not passe
ouer before.
            
            
               ¶Of Camelles and men of armes vpon barded
horses. Chap. xxiii.
               SOme Nations haue vsed in times paste, to bringe forth
Camelles in the forebattell: as the people called Vrciliani,
in Affricke & they that be called Macetes, at this
daye do bring forth the same. But this kinde of beastes: being
apt for sandye and drye places, and to abyde thirst, is reported
to go y• streight wayes without wādring, yea though
they be troubled with dust through the wynde. But sauinge
for the strangenesse, if it be put awaye from the thinges that
it hath bene accustomed with, it is of no force in the warre.
The barded horsemen for the munitiō of armour which they
beare, are in deede safe from woundes. But for the hinderance
and waightines of armour, it is an easye thing to take
them: and many times they be in danger to gi
                     ••
                  es and shares:
they be better against footemen scattered abroade then
against horsemen in fight: neuerthelesse being set eyther before
the Legions, or els ioyned with the Legionaryes, what
time as they ioyne together in fight, that is to saye, hande to
hande: oftentimes they breake and inuade the forebattell of
the ennemyes.
            
            
               ¶After what maner we may withstande Chariottes
armed with hookes, and also Elephantes
in the battell. Chap. xxiiii.
               KInge Antiochus and kinge Mithridates, had Chariottes
in the warre armed with hookes. Which as at
the first broughte greate feare in the battell, so afterward
they were laught to scorne: for the armed Chariottes
doth hardlye finde a plaine and euen fielde at all tymes: and
with a small let it is holden backe, & one horse being vexed or
woūded, it is disappointed. But these things haue perished

and decayed, chiefely through the pollicye of the Romayne
souldiours. After they came to fight, the Romaines sodenly
thorow out the fieldes did cast caltroppes: on ye which when
as ye Chariottes fell in their running, they were destroyed:
this same Tribulus or caltroppe is, an instrumēt of defence
fastened together wt .iiii. yron pin
                     •
                  es: ye which whatsoeuer
waye you will cast it, doth stande with three corners or prickes,
and with the fourth, standing vp right is verye daungerous.
The Elephantes by reason of ye greatnes of theyr bodyes,
the fearefulnes of theyr cry or braying, the strangenes
of their forme and shape, do trouble both men & horses in the
battayles. Kinge Pyrrhus brought these first against the
Romaynes in Lucania. Afterward Hanniball in Affricke,
kinge Antiochus in the East parte, Iugurtha in Numidia,
had many of them, against the which they inuented sondrye
kinds of armour and weapons to withstand them. For a certaine
Centurion in Lucania, wt a sworde cut away frō one of
them ye hand or long snoute (which they call Promnistidē
                  )
and two barded horses were ioyned to the Chariottes; vpon
whom such as were called Clibanarij sitting, did directe against
the Elephantes longe speares called Sarissas, that is
to say, the longest poles they could get: for being fenced with
yron armour, neither were they hurt of the Archers (which
the beastes did carrye) & they shunned the violence of the Elephantes
throughe the swiftnes of the horses. Some other
haue sent out against the Elephants, souldiours in complet
armour: so that in their armes and helmettes or shoulders,
were sette great sharpe prickes of yron, least the Elephant
with his hande or longe snoute, maye laye holde of the man
that came to fighte against him. Yet the olde men of warre
chiefelye appointed lighte harnessed men called Velites against
the Elephantes. Velites, were yonge men wyth
lighte armoure, of a lustye and liuelye bodye, whiche shotte
and cast dartes verye well on horsebacke. These when they
ranne besydes the Elephantes, wyth broade speares and
greater Dartes, then they were wonte, killed the beastes:
but when hardines and boldnes grewe, afterwarde

manye souldiours together cast al at once their dartes, that
is to saye, theyr shotte against the Elephantes & so wounded
them. Yet this also they vsed to do, y• slingers wt slingstaues
& round stones leuelled out of their slinges, did ouerthrow,
and kill the men of Inde which ruled the Elephantes with y•
towers also: and there was no safer waye to destroye them
inuented then this. Moreouer the souldiours made roume
for the comminge of the beastes, where they mighte breake
into the battell: whiche when as they came so farre as the
middest of the hoast, the troupes of armed men compassed
them about on euerye syde, and toke both the beast and their
rulers not hurte nor wounded. It is verye good also to set
certaine field peeces behinde the forebattel of a greater bignes,
then the residue layed vppon cartes wyth two horses or
Mules, for suche do shoote leuell their pellets farther and wt 
greater violence: and when the Elephantes come within y•
reache of the darte, the beasts are stricken through with the
shotte of the Gunners. Notwithstanding the yron is thrust
broder and more surelye into them, because in great bodyes
are made greater woundes. Wee haue rehersed manye examples
and engines against the Elephantes, to the intente
that if at anye time necessitye shall requyre, it maye be knowen
what defence may be had agaynst so huge and terrible
beastes.
            
            
               ¶What ought to be done if eyther part, or the
whole armye doth flye. Chap. xxv.
               VUe must knowe, if one parte of the armye hath ouercome,
& another doth flye, we should not yet dispayre:
when as in such an extremitye ye constancy of the Captayne
maye get the whole victorye to himselfe. This thing
hath happened in very manye warres: and such haue beene
accompted to haue the vpperhande, as haue not dispayred.
               For in such like case, he is thought to be more valiaunt, whō
aduersitye doth not discourage. Therefore let him first take
the spoyles of the ennemyes slaine, and as they do terme it,

let him gather the field, let him first reioyce and triumph wt 
a shoute and the trumpettes. By this boldnes and confidēce
he shall make the ennemyes afrayde: so shall he encrease the
courage of his owne men, and go away as though he were a
conqueroure. If so be that by any chaunce all the armye be
discomfited in the battell with great losse of men, yet manye
haue had good lucke in recouering and rescuing that which
was lost, and therfore such remedye in the like distresse must
be soughte. Therefore a wyse and cyrcumspect Captayne,
ought in open or set battel, to fight so aduisedly and warely,
that if any thing should happē otherwyse then wel, through
mutability of warres, and mans fraile condition, he might
deliuer him & his ouercome souldiours without greate losse
or displeasure. For if hilles be nighe, if anye defence be behinde
their backes: if, althoughe the other go away, all the
most valiant stande stoutely to it, they shall saue themselues
and theyr owne companye. Oftentimes and armye now discomfited,
if it can recouer strength againe, doth slea them y•
pursue, dispersed & scattered abroad out of order. For they
which reioyce and aduaunce themselues, are neuer in more
daunger, then when from sodaine fiercenes & boldnes they
are chaunged into sodaine feare. But what successe soeuer
follow, they must be gathered together that remayne aliue,
and must be encouraged with meete exhortations, and cherished
& comforted by repayring of their armour. Then must
there be newe choice had of freshe souldiours, and new aydes
must be sought for: and then a freshe assault & inuasion must
be made vpon the conquerours if occasion serue, by some priuye
lying in waite: for this is verye good & profitable: and so
boldnes may be recouered againe. Neyther cā opportunity
want at such tymes: because mens mindes are commonlye
puft vp with pride, through good lucke and prosperous successe,
& then are lesse cyrcumspect & fearefull. If any man
thincke this to be ye greatest misfortune yt can be, let him 
                     〈◊〉
                  
& remember, that they cōmonly, which get the victory,
haue the worse alwayes in the beginninge of the battell.
            
            
               Generall rules of warres. Chap. xxvi.
               
                  IN all maner of battelles, the state or condition of the settinge
forth is suche, that whatsoeuer is profitable to you,
is hurtfull vnto the aduersarye: that whiche doth helpe
him, is alwayes hurtfull vnto you. Therefore wee neuer
ought to do or dissemble anye thinge after his will and pleasure:
but to do that only which we iudge to be profitable vnto
our selues: for you do against your selfe, if you followe y•
which he hath done for him selfe. Againe, whatsoeuer you
haue attempted for your selfe, it will be hurtfull to him if he
minde to imitate it. In time of warre, he that in posting or
conueyinge of his carriages is dilligent: and taketh greate
paynes in exercisinge his souldiours: shall incurre lesse perill
and daunger. A souldiour must neuer be broughte forth
into the battell, before you trye and proue what he can doe.
It is better to subdue the ennemye throughe scarcitye and
lacke of necessary thinges, by sodaine inuasions, by terrour
and feare, then wyth open battel: In which fortune cōmonlye
beareth more swaye, then manhoode and prowesse.
               No coūselles are better then those, which the 
                     〈◊〉
                   knoweth
not before you accomplishe them.
               Occasion and oportunitye is commonly more profitable
in warre, then valiantnes.
               It is very good to entice & receiue suche as flye from their
Captaynes, if they do it faythfullye and dissemble not: because
suche as forsake their owne Captaynes, and go to the
contrarye partes, do discourage the aduersarye more then
they that be slaine.
               It is better to kepe some in readines behind y• forebattelles
for succours, then to haue ye souldiours scattered abroade.
               He is hardly ouercome, which cā truly iudge of his owne
power, and also of his ennemyes power.
               Manhoode doth more auaile then multitude of men.
               The opportunitye of place doth oftentimes profite more thē
manhoode.
               Nature bringeth forth fewe valiaunte men, but dilligence
doth make many by good enstruction and discipline.
               An armye with labour doth profite and proceede, with idlenes
it doth decaye.
               
                  Neuer bringe forthe a souldiour into the f
                     •
                  elde, excepte
thou perceiue that he hoopeth for the victorye.
               Sodaine thinges do make ennemyes afrayde, thinges common
and stale are nothing set by.
               He y• rashlye pursueth the ennemyes when his owne men
are oute of araye, will soone geue to the ennemye y• victorye
which he had gotten.
               He that doth not prepare graine and other necessaryes, is
ouercome without any dent of sword.
               He that hath more store of mē & also more valiant, let him
fight with the forefront foure square: which is the first way
of settynge an armye in araye before described.
               He that thīketh himselfe vnequally matched with his ennemye,
let him with his righte winge driue backe the lefte
wing of the ennemye: which is the second waye.
               He that knoweth himselfe to haue his left winge, the strongest
and best furnished: let him set vpon the righte winge of
the ennemye: which is the thirde waye.
               He yt hath the most expert & cunning souldiours, must set
on both the wings of his ennemyes battell together: which
is the fourth waye.
               He that is Captaine of the lighte armed men, let him inuade
both y• winges of the ennemye, placing ye light harnessed
mē which are quicke & ready, before the forefront: which
is the fift waye.
               He that hath not sure trust, neither in y• nomber of his mē,
nor in their manhoode: if he purpose to fighte, let him driue
backe the left wing of the ennemyes, with them of his right
wing: the residue of his men being stretched in length after
the forme of a spit or broche: which is the 
                     •
                  i. way.
               He y• knoweth himselfe to haue the fewer & weaker men
after the seuenth waye, oughte to haue of one syde, either a
mount, or a Cittye, or the Sea, or a riuer, or els some other
succour or safegarde.
               He y• hath most confidence in his horsemē, let him seeke y•
higher places, & do his chiefe feates of armes by ye horsemē.
               He that hath most trust in his foote armyes: let him get ye
higher places for the footemen, & accomplishe his enterprise

chiefelye by them. When a spye of the enemyes doth go to
and fro in y• campe verye priuily, let euery man be comma
                     •
                  ided
in the day time to resort to his pauilion, & straight way
                     •
                  
the spyes is apprehended.
               When you shall know that your counsell and purpose is
bewrayed to the ennemyes: then you muste chaunge your
intent and purpose herein.
               That which chiefely ought to be brought to passe, intreat
and deliberate with manye: but that which you do intende
to do herein, communicate with verye fewe and those moste
trustye & faythfull, or rather deliberate and consult of them
wyth your owne selfe and no mo.
               Punishment and feare do amende souldiours abyding in
one certayne place: in a vyage oriourneye, hope and rewardes
do make them better.
               Good Captaynes do neuer fight in open or set battell, but
vppon good occasion, or very great necessitye.
               It is a good deuise rather to oppresse the ennemye wyth
hunger and famine, then wyth the sworde.
               As touchinge an armye of horsemen, there be manye rules
and precepts: but seing that this part of warrefare hath
profited and proceded through vse and exercise, through the
kinde of armour, and ye worthines of horses: I suppose that
nothinge is to be gathered out of bookes, when as this present
instruction may be sufficient.
               Let not the ennemyes knowe after what maner you intende
to fight, least they go about to preuent and withstand ye same
by one helpe or other.
               I haue orderly declared thinges, O valiaunt and mighty
Emperour, whiche being approued, diuers & sundry times,
through faithfull and diligent experience, the moste worthy
authours haue set foorth and published: that vnto the cunning
of shooting, which in your grace the Persian doth praise
and maruayle at: vnto the knowledge and comelines of riding
of horses, whiche the people of Hungarre and Scithia,
called Hunni, & Alani, would gladly imitate if they could:
and to the swiftenes of running, wherein the Saracine, and

man of Inde, can not matche with you: to the exercising of
handling the weapons, & vsing al kinde of artillerie, wherin
the captaines and maisters of the fielde are glad, that they
knewe some good examples to followe: (vnto all these
thinges I saye) a rule or trade howe to fighte in battayle,
yea, rather pollicie howe to gette the victorie, muste bee annexed:
that as much as you can through puissance and
marueilous good orderinge of your common
wealth, you may shewe the office and perfourme
the dutie, bothe of an
Emperour and a
souldiour.
            
         
         
            
            The fourth booke of Flauius Vegetiu
                  •
               
Renatus of the feates of vvarre.
            
               The Prologue.
               
                  BUilding of cities, was the thing that in the beginning
did separate and deuide the homelye and rude lyfe of
men, from the societie and companie of dumme creatures
& wilde beastes. The whiche cities vpon their
common vtilitie and profite haue the name of publike
weales. Therefore most mightie nations and princes
of famous memory haue thought there could be no greater renowme,
then either to builde newe cities or els amplifying those whiche haue
bene builded by others, to call them after their owne name. Wherein
your maiestie doth obtayne the chiefest prayse of al other. For whereas
other princes haue builded one citie a piece, or fewe moe: Your grace
with continuall labour hath erected suche a nūber, that they may seeme
to be builded, not so muche by mans hand, as by the will and working
of God. So you excell all other Emperours in happines of estate, in
temperance, in chastnes of life, in examples to bee followed, and in the
great loue that you beare towardes learning. We see with o
                     •
                  r eies the
goodnes of your gouernemēt, and also of your good minde. The which
thinges, both they whiche haue gone before vs, did wyshe to enioye, and
they whicht are yet to come, desire to cōtinue for euer. By reason wherof
we doe reioyce that so great a iewell is geuen to all the worlde, as either
the minde of man could desire, or the bountiefulnes of God could
geue. And as for the building vp and repairing of walles howe it hath
gone forewarde, through the good orders deuised by your grace, the citie
of Rome can shewe. Whiche by defending the tower Capitolium,
hath saued the citizēs liues, that afterward it might with greater glory
obtayne the dominion of all the worlde. Therefore for the accomplishing
of this worke, taken in hande at the commaundemen of your maiestie,
I wyll bringe into order the deuises of sundry writers, by the
whiche both our owne cities may be defended, and the cities of our enemies
ouerthrowen: neither shall it forthinke me of my labour, because
these thinges in time to come may be profitable to all men.
            
            
               
               That cities ought to be fenced
either vvith handvvorke, or nature,
or bothe. The first Chapter.
               
                  CIties and castels are fenced, either by nature,
or with hande, or els with both, which
is rekened the stronger. By nature: as with
the heighte or craggines of the place with
the sea, with fennes, or with riuers. By
hande, as with ditches and walles. In that
benefite and helpe of nature, the moste safetie consisteth in ye
wittines and counsell of the chooser: in the playne grounde,
full necessary is the diligent trauel of the builder. And we see
some very auncient cities so builded in playne & open fieldes,
that although the helpe of situation did faile, yet with cunning
and workemanship they were made inuincible.
            
            
               ¶That wales should 
                     •
                  ot be made streight but with
many coignes. Chapiter .ij.
               MEn in times past drewe not y• circuite of their walles
streight lest they might be apt to receaue the strokes
of the battering ramme. But laying the foundation
they enclosed their cities with many wyndinges & turnings
in and out, and in the very corners did builde many towers.
For this cause, that if the enemy would set ladders or other
engines vnto a wall builded after suche order, hee might bee
beaten downe, not onely before but also on the sides, and in a
manner behinde, as enclosed in a lane or bought.
            
            
               ¶After what sorte earth may be heaped vp and ioyned to a
wall, so that it shall neuer be beaten downe. Cap. iij.
               
                  A Wall which can neuer be throwen down is made after
this maner. Make two walles on the towne side
of y• ditche a good way distant a sunder, then caste betweene
them that earthe whiche yowe throwe out of the
ditche, and beate it downe harde with beetels and weig
                     •
                  tie
instrumentes: so that, that whiche is firste and nexte to 
                     •
                  he

vtmoste stonewall, be somewhat lower then the stonewall it
selfe, and the seconde a good deale lower then the firste: that
from the citie men may goe vp easely to the battlementes,
as in the rising of an hil, or after the māner of steiars. A wal
thus strengthened with earthe, can neuer be beaten downe
with any ramme, and though the stones should chaūce to be
throwen downe, yet the greate heape of earthe that is rammed
betwene the walles, doth withstande them, that geue
thassaulte, as well as any wall.
            
            
               ¶Of portcluses, and howe gates may be safe
from burning. Chapter .iiij.
               MOreouer, wee must take heede least the gates be burned
with fier, for the whiche cause they should be couered
with leather and yron. But that is more profitable
whiche in the olde time hath beene inuented, that before
the gate there should be a fortresse, in the entring wherof
is a perculles, hanging with rynges of Iron and ropes:
that if the enemies should enter in, the same being let down,
they might bee enclosed and destroyed. And the wall aboue
the gate, must so be made with holes that wee maye power
downe water and quenche the fier vnderneath.
            
            
               ¶Of making ditches. Chapiter .v.
               BUt the ditches before the cities muste bee made verye
depe, and very broade: that they maye not easely bee
made euen, and filled of the besiegers. And that the
water running ouer, may stoppe the vndermining of the ennemie.
For twoo manner of wayes is vndermining letted,
either with the depenes of the ditche, or ouerflowyng.
            
            
               ¶Howe to kepe them whiche stande on the wall
harmeles from the arrowes of the enemies.
Chapiter .vj.
               
                  IT is to be feared sometyme, least that many archers dryuing
the defenders downe, maye sodenlye take the wall.
Therefore it shall bee good to haue in the citie complette
harnis and store of shieldes. Moreouer, mantils, clokes, and
heareclothes, maye bee hanged before them, and so receyue
the shotte of arrowes: for the heades of the arrowes cannot
easelye pearse throughe that whiche yeldeth and waueth to
and fro. There is also a remedy founde: to make hurdles of
woode, called Metellae, and to fille them with stones, and to
set them betwene twoo battlementes so cunningly, that if
the ennemies should clyme vp by ladders and touche anye
parte of them, the stones may turne vpon their heades.
            
            
               ¶By what meanes it ought to be forseene that they
that are besieged be not famished.
Chapiter .vij.
               THere be many kyndes of defending and assaultinge of
cities, whiche wee wyll speake of in places conueniēt.
Nowe wee must knowe that there be twoo kyndes of
besieging. One when the enemy appointing his men in dew
places, doth with continuall assaultes assaile the besieged.
The other, when as he kepeth them from water, or trusteth
that they will yelde through famishement, hauing stopped
all victualles from comming to them. For by this deuise hee
him selfe being quiet and safe, doth wearie his enemies. Against
whiche chaunces, the townes men vpon small suspicion
of their enemies, ought moste diligently to place within
the walles all kynde of foode, whereby man may lyue: to the
entent that they them selues may haue aboundaunce, & their
enemies through nede compelled to rayse their siege. And
not onely porcke or bakon, but also al kinde of fleshe, yt may
be preserued close, ought to bee layde vp, that through the
helpe of fleshe graine may suffice. And pulleyn likewyse in a
citie may be kepte without charge. And for suche as be sicke
very necessary. Especially foder must be gotten in for horses:
and suche as can not be brought in must be burnt. Likewyse

of wyne vineger and al other kinde of graine, or fruite great
store must be layde vp, and nothing that may be profitable to
thē, ought to be left for the enemies. Gardens also, both for
the profite and pleasure of them, ought not to be neglected,
in the grasseplotes and yardes of houses. But it dothe litle
profite to haue gathered muche together, except from the
beginning, the deliuerie or distributiō be moderated by such
conuenient ouerseers, as haue charge thereof with a good &
profitable measuring of the same. For they be neuer in daunger
of famine, whiche vsed in time of plentie to kepe sobrietie
and moderation in spending. Also the youth and weomē,
whiche are vnfitte for warre, many tymes are thruste forthe
foor wante of vitailes, least scarcitie vppresse the souldiours,
by whome the cities often haue bene defended and kepte.
            
            
               ¶What kynde of thinges must be prepared
for the defence of walles.
Chapter .viij.
               IT is conuenient that there be prepared, to set the engines
of the enemies or fire, suche thinges as are apte to burne,
rosyn, brymstone, cleare pitche without dregges, oyle,
called Incendiarium, that is to saye, ready to set any thinge
on fire. Iron of both tempers to make armour and weapōs,
and coales ought to be saued in store houses, woode also for
speare staues, and arrowes, must be layde vp in store. Roūd
stones out of riuers which for their roundnes are somewhat
heauy, and meete for the casters, must be gathered moste diligently:
with the whiche the walles and towers should bee
filled. The leaste stones of all are to throwe with slinges, or
slingestaues, or els with the hande, the greater stones are
shotte with the gunnes. But the greatest of all, by reason of
their weight & rowling fashion muste be layde in fortresses,
that they being throwen downe headlong vpon a soden, may
not onely ouerwhelme ye enemies vnderneath, but also may
breake their engines. Also mightie great wheeles muste be
framed of greene woode, or rowlers cut of very strōg trees,

whiche they call Taleae, muste be made smoothe, that they
may rowle, whiche sliding downe doe ouerthrowe the souldiours
with the sodayne vehemencie, and make the horses
sore afrayde. There must be also in readines beames & trasinges
or boordes. And nailes and pinnes of iron of diuers
quantities. For suche engines of the enemies muste bee hindred
by other lyke, specially whē as the walles or fortresses
vpō a soden shall haue neede to be made higher, least the moueable
towers of the enemies should rise aboue them and so
take the citie.
            
            
               ¶What ought to be done if store of stringes or cordes
doe fayle. Chapter .ix.
               IT is also expedient to gather very diligently good store of
stringes or sinewes, for as muche as y• ordinaunce whiche
is called Onager and Balista, and other like, excepte they
be bent and drawen with cordes or sinewes auayle nothing.
Notwithstanding, the bigge heares of the tayles or manes
of horses, are thought good for the lesser artillery. But it is
a thing moste certaine, and hath bene tride in the Romaines
neede that weomens heares in suche kinde of ordinaunce are
no lesse profitable. For in the long siege of Capitolium (the
chiefe castell of the citie of Rome) their artillerie being marred
with the continuall and wearisome fight of the enemies,
and cordes or stringes failing them, the matrones of Rome
cutte their heare from their head & brought it to their husbandes
as they were fighting, & so repairing their engines,
they draue backe the force of their enemies. For those honest
and chaste
                     •
                  weomen, rather chose with heades for a time disfigured
to liue at libertie with their husbandes, then with
all the
                     •
                   trimming to be subiecte to their enemies. It is also
good to get together hornes & rawe hides, for the couering
of complet armoure, and other engines and munitio
                     •
                  s.
            
            
               ¶What should be done that the besieged lacke not
water. Chapiter .x.
               
                  IT is a greate profite and commoditie for a citie, to haue
within the walles welles, and springes, euer continuing,
and enduring. If so be that the nature of the place doe not
serue, thē must you digge pittes of what depenes soeuer you
thinke good, and drawe vp the water with ropes. But some tyme
the places which are fenced with moūtaines & rockes,
are more drie then other. In suche a case you may builde a
forte at the foote of the hil, & so shal you by digging finde water.
And from of the forte defende it with dartes, or other
shotte appointed for the purpose, that there may bee free going
and comming, for the fetching of water. If it be so that
the water be without the caste of the darte, & yet in the side
of an hyll vnder the citie: it is mete that a little forte (which
they cal a blockehouse) be builded betwene the citie and the
springe: and there to be placed ordinaunce and archers, that
the water may be defended from the enemies. Moreouer, in
all the publike and common buyldinges of the citie, and in
many priuate buildinges there should be cesternes moste diligently
ordeined, that they may be receites for rayne water
whiche falles from the houses. For thirste doth seldome ouercome
them whiche in a siege haue vsed water onely for
their drinke, though it were neuer so little.
            
            
               ¶If 
                     •
                  ault should fayle in the citie, what ought
to be done. Chapiter .xj.
               IF the citie stande by the sea, and salte bee wantinge, take
water out of the sea, and poure it into broade vessels, and
by the heate of the sunne it wyll turne to salte. If so bee
that the enemy doe stoppe thee from the water (for that oftē
tymes doth chaunce) then take the sande, whiche the sea casteth
vp, and washe the same with fresh water, and that water
being dried, will turne likewyse into salte.
            
            
               ¶What should be done when the enemy doth first
assaulte the walles. Chapiter .xij.
               
                  VUhat time as the assault is geuen to a Castell or Cittye,
great is the daunger on both partes, but greater
is the bloudshedde of them that geue the assaulte. For
they that couet to enter the walles, with rerrible preparation
shewe forth al theyr armye, and wyth noyse of men and
trumpettes fray the towne, hoping therby to make it yelde.
Then the townes men being astonyed at the first brunte (for
feare dismayeth the vnexercised) if they know not the experience
of suche daungers quickelye loose their Cittye, if the
ennemye set ladders to the wall. If it be so that at the first
meeting the ennemye be put backe by bolde and warreli
                     •
                  e
men, streight waye the townes men waxe boulde, and then
they fight not with feare, but with courage & cunning.
            
            
               ¶A rehearsall of engines with which the
walles are assaulted. Chap. xiij.
               THe engines that are set to walles are in latine called
Testudines, Arietes, Falces, Vineae, Plutei, Musculi,
Turres. In Englishe, Snayles, Rammes, Hookes,
Uines, deskes, Myse, Turrettes. Of which particulerlye
after what maner they may be made, by what maner cunninge
also they may fight or be driuen backe, I will hereafter
declare.
            
            
               ¶Of the battering Ramme, the hooke and the snayle
Chap. xiiii.
               THe engine called Testudo, that is to say, the snaile is
ioyned together of timber and boards, which to kepe
awaye fyre is couered wit
                     •
                   lether or hear
                     •
                  clothes, or
any patched clothe. This engine hath within it a beame
which is headed with a croked yron called Falx, that is to say
an hooke, to thende that it may drawe stones out of the walles,
or els the heade of the selfe same beame is couered all
with yron, and is named Aries, that is a Ramme: eyther
because it hath a verye hard forehead to cast downe the walles,

or els because after ye maner of Rammes it goeth backewarde,
to the intente it maye strike with a more vehemente
force. But Testudo, hath taken that name of the forme &
similitude of the verye snayle in deede: because like as the
snayle somtimes pluckes backe her head, sometimes puttes
it forthe: euen 
                     •
                  o this engine, sometime draweth the beame
backe, sometime thrusteth it oute, that it maye strike with
greater power.
            
            
               ¶Of sheddes, deskes and countermur
                     •
                  .
Chap. xv.
               THe engine named Vinea, that is a vyne, is compacte
of light woode and it is viii. foote highe, seuen foot
                     •
                  
broade, and xvi. foote longe. The coueringe of it is
double with boardes and hurdles. The sydes also are hedged
with roddes, least they should be pearsed with violence
of stoones and dartes. The out syde is couered with rawe &
new hydes, or els with tyltclothes, that it be not set on fyre.
A nomber of these are ioyned together in a rowe: vnder the
which the besiegers being safe, do pearse the foundations of
the walles to throw them downe. Plutei are called, which
after the similitude of a compassed vaute or arche, are compacted
of roddes, and couered aboue with heareclothes or
lether, and are moued as it were a cart, vnto what part soeuer
you will, with three little wheeles, of the which one is
set in the middest and two in the heade or forepart. These do
the besiegers bring to the walles: and standing vnder them
wyth arrowes, or slinges, or dartes, driue awaye the defenders
from the walles, that they maye better s
                     •
                  ale the walles
with ladders. But that that is called Agger, or countermure,
is raysed vp of earthe and woode against the wall,
from the which the dartes are throwen.
            
            
               ¶Of engines called Musculi.
Chapiter .xvj.
               
                  
                  MVsculi be lesser engines, wyth the whiche the men of
warre being couered, if myre or the ditche of the Cittye
do hinder them, do not onlye fill the same, but also
make it harde with stoones, woode, and earth broughte
therevnto. To the ende that the moueable towers maye be
ioyned to the walles without anye let or hinderaunce. They
be called Musculi, of beastes of the Sea like vnto myse. For
like as they, although they be lesser, yet the ayde and helpe ye
Whales, in going before them for dashinge against rockes:
euen so these lesser and shorter enginnes appointed to serue
the greate mouable towers wyth wheeles, do prepare the
way for their cōminge, and fortifye the passage before them.
            
            
               ¶Of towers mou
                     •
                  ble. Chap. xvij.
               TOwers are a kinde of engines ioyned together of beames
and boardes, after the similitude of buildinges.
And to kepe so great a worke from fyringe by the ennemyes:
it is most dilligētly fenced on all partes with rawe
hydes or tylt clothes: for the heighte of it is proportionable
to the breadth, for sometime they be xxx. foote broade by the
square, sometime xl. or l. But the tallenes or height must
be such, that they may passe in height, not onlye the walles,
but also the towers of stone. These towers must haue many
wheeles cunninglye made, by the easye rolling of the which
so great a frame may be moued. And it is present daunger to
the Cittye, if the tower come once to the walles. For it hath
with it a nomber of ladders & diuers wayes maye set men
into the towne. For in the lower part it hath the Ramme, wt
the violence of which it beates downe the walles About the
middle it hath a bridge made of two beames and hedged wt 
roddes which may quicklye be brought forth, & set betwene
the tower and the wall, & the men of warre going by ye same
out of the engine passe ouer into the Cittye & take the walles
In the higher partes of the same tower, be placed pykemen
and Archers, whiche from an highe maye ouerthrowe
the defenders of the Cittye, wyth pykes arrowes and stones
Which being done, the Cittye is taken without delay.

for what helpe doth remayne, when as they which did trust
to the height of their walles, sodainlye beholde aboue them
a wall of their ennemyes higher then theirs.
            
            
               ¶Howe the mouable tower may be set on fyre.
Chap. xviii.
               THis euident and apparant daunger many wayes may
be resisted. First if your souldiours be strong & bould,
a nomber may issue forth together. And dryuinge awaye
the ennemyes, pull of the lether and set fyre on the tower.
If so be yt they dare not issue forth, let them dischardge
the greater artillerye, and such as they call Malleoli & Phalaricae,
with fyre shotte, that rentinge the hides or tyltclothes
a sonder the flame maye be hidde inwardlye. Malleoli
be as it were, arrowes which burne all where they light.
               But Phalarica after the maner of a Iauelin hath a stronge
heade of yron, and betweene the hollownes or pype thereof
and the staffe, it is wrapped rounde aboute wyth brimstone,
rosen, pitche & towe soked in oyle apt to burne, the which beinge
discharged leuell with the violence of your artillerye,
breaketh the coueringe, and s
                     •
                  ickinge in the woode oftentimes
burneth the whole turret. Also you maye let downe
men wyth roopes when your ennemyes be a s
                     •
                  eape, & wyth
lanternes priuilie hidde, burne theit engines, and then pull
them vp againe.
            
            
               ¶Howe you maye make your walles higher.
Chap. xix.
               THat part of the wall to ye which the engine commeth,
maye be made higher either wyth morter and stones,
or with claye or bricke, or wyth bards and planckes,
and so shall not the defenders 
                     •
                  e oppressed wyth the heighte
of the turret. And the turret being to lowe shall serue to no
vse. But they that besiege townes, vse oftentimes this pollicye.
First they build such a tower as may seeme lower then
the walles of the Citty: afterward they make another litle
tower within of bourdes and plankes, and when the tower
is ioyned to the walles sodainlye they putte forthe that

little turret with roopes and pullyes, oute of the which the
armed men going forth, because it is higher then the walles
straight waye take the Cittye.
            
            
               ¶By what meane the earth maye be digged, that
the engine can do no harme.
Chap. xx.
               SOmetime they do set longe beames headed wyth yron
against the comminge of the engine, and so keepe of the
same from the wall. But when as the Cittye of Rhodes
was besieged by ennemyes, and they had made a tower
wyth wheeles aboue the heighte of all the walles and towers,
this remedye was inuented by the witte of a certaine
craftes man: in the night he vndermined the wall, and that
place to the which the daye after the tower shoulde be remoued,
he made hollowe within casting, out the earth, none of
the ennemyes perceyuing it: so that when that great frame
was driuen and forced forward with the wheeles, and came
to the place whiche vnderneath was made hollowe before,
straight waye it soncke, the grounde yeldinge to so greate a
weight, so that it coulde not come neare y• walles nor be moued
anye further, and by this meane the Cittye was delyuered
and the engine left behinde.
            
            
               ¶Of ladders and the frame of tymber wyth
ropes, of the bridge, and of the sweape.
Chap. xxj.
               VUhen the tower comes to the wall by all meanes possible
they driue the ennemye from the wall, with stones,
dartes, arrowes, pellettes & such like. This being
done, and ladders set to the wall, they take the Cittye.
But they which do scale the walles with ladders, manye times
sustaine perill and daunger after the example of Capaneus:
by whom this manner of assaulte with ladders is
sayde to be first inuented, who was slaine with so greate violence

by the Thebanes, that he was thought to be destroyed
with thunder. And therfore the besiegers do enter the walles
of the ennemies with these engines called Sambuca, Exostra
and Tolleno, that is to saye, a frame of timber & roopes,
a bridge, and a sweape. Sambuca is called after the similitude
of an harpe: for like as in a harpe there be stringes,
so in the beame which is nexte the towers, be roopes which
do loase and set at lybertye the bridge wyth pullyes, from ye
vpper part, that it may go vppon the wall: and straight way
the men of warre issue out of the tower, on
                     •
                   goinge ouer vppon
it, do inuade the walles of the Cittye. Exostra is that
bridge which we spake of before, which sodainly is stretched
forthe of the tower vnto the wall. Tolleno is this, when a
beame is set fast and deepe vppon the earth, vppon the which
in the highest toppe, another beame is ioyned ouerthwarte,
longer by the one halfe in measure so equallye, that when
you pull downe the one ende, the other ryseth vppe. In the
one ende of this wyth hurdles and boardes, is made roume
for a few men to stand in. Then pulling the one ende downe
with roopes, ye lifte vppe the other ende, & so set your men
vppon the walles.
            
            
               ¶Of the lesser kinde of Ordinaunce called Balista. Of
the greater named Onager, of that which is called
Scorpio, of Crossebowes called Arcubalistae, of
slingstaues and slinges, by the which the
wall is defended▪ Chap. xxij.
               AGainst these incōmodityes such kindes of ordinaunce
defende them that be besieged, Balistae, a lesser kinde
of ordinaunce, Onagr
                        •
                     
                   a greater, also that which is
called Scorpio, Arcubalistae, Crossebowes, Fustibali,
slingstaues, archers and slinges. Balista is a kinde of Ordinaunce
bente with roapes or cordes, the which the longer
and greater that it is, so muche the further it casteth y• shot,
and this kinde of ordinaunce if it be cunninglye framed, and
afterwarde discharged by skilfull men that know the reech

and compasse of it, doth pearce throughe whatsoeuer it stryketh.
That which is named Onager, serueth to shoote stoones
withall: and because the roopes of it are greate, therefore
the stones are mightye that it casteth. For the greater
and larger the engine is, so much the greater stones it hurleth
in maner of thunder. There is no kinde of ordinaunce
more violent then these two sortes. Scorpiones were called
in the olde time such as nowe we terme Manubalistae, so named
because that with small arrowes they kill mē. I thinke
it superfluous to declare Fustibalistas, Arcubalistas & Fundas,
which experience at this present knoweth wel enoughe.
The ordinaunce that I named Onager, if it shoote mightye
stoones, doth not onlye ouerthrow horsemen and footemen,
but also breaketh the engines of the ennemyes in sonder.
            
            
               ¶Against the engine named a Ramme, be flockebeddes
or matresses very good, also roopes and great
pillers. Chapiter .xxiij.
               AGainst the battring Rammes or hooks, ther be manye
helpes and remedyes, for some with cordes lette
downe their tiltclothes and other patched geare, and
mattresses, and so let them hange in such places as ye ramme
doth beate, that the violence and force of the engine may be
broken with the softnes of these, and not throwe downe the
wall. Some others with a nomber of men, do from the
wall catch the Ramme wyth roopes, and drawing it a syde
ouerthrowe it: Manye vse to tye vnto roopes a peece of yron
muche like vnto a payre of sheeres full of teethe, which
they call Lupum, and so eyther they do ouerthrowe the
Ramme caughte with the same, or els lifte it vppe, that it
hath no force to stryke. Sometime they throwe downe
huge stones of marble, or other of like hardnes from ye walles,
and all to breake the Rammes.
               
                  If the force of ye Ramme shalbe so greate, that it shall beate
throughe the wall and cast it downe (as oftentimes it chaū
                  ceth,)
then is there none other helpe but to pull downe your
houses, and make another wall within, & so betweene two
walles to slea your ennemyes, if they breake in.
            
            
               ¶Of vndermining and throwing downe walles
that waye. Chap. .xxiiij
               THer is another kinde of assault, that is vnder y• earth
and priuye, which is called vndermininge. The maner
of it is this, a nomber of pyoners digge in the
earth as myners do, and makinge a trench
                     •
                  , by that meanes
seeke to destroy the Cittye. The which by two wayes
they bring to passe. For eyther they do enter the Cittye, and
by nighte when the townes men are not ware of it, do issue
oute of their trenche, and vnlockinge the gates let in theyr
owne armye, and slea the ennemyes in their houses at vnwares:
or els whē they come to the foūdations of the wall,
they digge vnder a great part of it, and with drye timber vnderset
it, that for a whyle it maye not fall, afterwarde they
laye manye fagottes and suche lyke drye fuell about it, and
hauinge placed theyr souldiours in araye, they set fyre to it,
so that the pillers of woode and boardes being burnte, and
the wall there with falling sodainly, they haue a way layed
open for them to burst in at.
            
            
               ¶What the townes men oughe to do, if
the ennemyes brust into the Cittye.
Chap. xxv.
               IT is manifest by infinite examples, that they which haue
entered theyr ennemyes Cittye oftentimes haue beene so
slaine, that not one hath escaped. Which thinge withoute
doubte doth come to passe, if the townes men do keepe their
walles and towers, or take first the highest places.
               
                  
For then suche as be of age, both men and women, do ouerwhelme
with stones and other kindes of weapons, suche as
do breake in: the which to auoyde, wyse Captaynes set open
the gates of the Cittye: to thintent that hauing leaue to departe,
they maye not resist. For desperation in such a case,
is a necessarye enforcement to manhoode.
               The townes men haue onlye this helpe, whether the ennemyes
enter by day or by night, to holde and keepe their walles
and towers, and to clyme vppe to the highest places, and
so to ouerthrowe theyr ennemyes on euerye syde, in all the
streetes of the Cittye,
            
            
               ¶What heede oughte to be taken, Ieast the
ennemyes priuilye take the wall.
Chap. xxvj.
               MAnye times y• besiegers do inuent some guile or craft,
and by a counterfette desperation depart a good way
of. But when as, after feare is past, the vnheedefull
and carelesse townes men haue taken rest, watch of the walles
being geuen ouer, the ennemyes come priuilye with ladders,
takinge occasion of the darckenes of the nighte, and so
clyme the walles. For which cause a greater and more dilligente
heede muste be had, when as the ennemye is gone awaye:
and in the verye walles and towers, ought small cabines
to be made, in which the watche men in winter season
may be defended from showers and colde, and in Sommer
from the heate of the Sunne. This thinge also experience
hath founde that in the towers is good to keepe fierce dogges
and quicke of smellinge, whiche can perceyue the comminge
of the ennemye by the sente, and geue warning therof
by barkinge.
               Also geese by like skil of nature declare by their cryings, the

                     •
                  odaine inuasions of the ennemyes by night. For the French
men enteringe into the chiefe Tower or Pallace of Rome
(called Capitolium) had for euer blotted out the name of
the Romaynes, had not Manlius wtstode them beinge raysed

vppe with the cryinge of geese. And by the meanes of one
goose they were saued, which afterward subdued the whole
worlde.
            
            
               ¶How the town
                     •
                  s men maye be deceyued. Chap. xxvii.
               ABoue all thinges it is counted the greatest matter,
not onlye in sieges, but euen in all kindes of warre, to
spye out and knowe dilligentlye the custome and vse
of the ennemye. For you cannot conuenientlye by layinge
wayte for them deceiue them, excepte you knowe at what
houres they cease from theyr labour, and at what time they
be lesse cyrcumspecte, whether at none or towardes euen or
in the night, or at such times as they eate their meate, when
as y• souldiours of both sydes are dispersed to take their rest,
and to refreshe their bodyes. Whiche thinge when the besiegers
perceiue, subtillye they withdraw themselues from
battell, that they maye geue free libertye to the ennemye to
be verye negligent. Which negligence what time as it shalbe
greatest, for that they feare nothinge, then the besiegers
shall sodenlye bringe their engines and ladders to the walles,
and take the Cittye. Therefore in the walles the townes
men ought to haue stones and ordinaunce in a readines,
to thende that as sone as the deceipte is knowen, they maye
resist and haue at hande such thinges as they may roule, and
cast vppon the heades of their ennemyes.
            
            
               ¶What the besiegers oughte to do that they
be not entrapped of the townes men.
Chap. xxviii.
               IF the besiegers likewyse be negligente, they are as sone
caught by deceipt as the other, for whether they be occupyed
at meate, or sleape, or els scattered a sonder throughe
idlenes or anye other necessitye: then the townes men sodē
                  lye
rushe forth, they slea them ere they be aware, sette on fire
their enginnes, rammes, and the verye countermurs, and

ouerthrowe all the workes that were made against them.
For this cause the besiegers do make a trench, a stones cast
of, and so furnishe the same, not only with a pale and stakes,
but also with turrettes and fortresses, that they may easelye
withstande them that issue forth of the Cittye, which worke
they call Loriculam, and oftentimes when a siege is described
in anye historye, yee shall reade that this or that towne
was compassed rounde aboute with this paleworke called
Loricula.
               
            
            
               ¶Wyth what kinde of ordinance Cittyes maye
be defended. Chap. xxix.
               AL kinde of shot, either pellets of leade, or Iauelines,
short dartes, or longer dartes, the higher that they
come downe, so much more violentlye they fall vpon
those that be vnder them. Arrowes, also shotte with bowes
and stones throwne with hands, slinges or slingstaues, from
how much the higher place they be cast, so much the deeper
do they pearse. But Bal
                        •
                     stae and Onagri, two kindes of ordinaunce
if they be warelye discharged by such as be skilful
and cunning, they do cutte in sonder euery thing they meete
with, and against this kinde of ordinance can nothinge be a
sufficient defence▪ For whatsoeuer it strikes in maner of thū
                  der
it vndoeth it & goeth through it.
            
            
               ¶Howe ye maye knowe what heyght your ladders
and other enginnes ought to be of.
Chap. .xxx.
               LAdders and other enginnes do verye muche auayle
for the takinge of towne walles, if they be made of such
heighte that they ouer reache the towne.
               The heyghte of the towne yee maye take two maner of
wayes, for eyther maye you tye a slender line to the one ende
of an arrowe, and so shootinge it, when it shall come to the
toppe of the wall, by the lengthe of the lyne you maye know

the heighte of the wall, or els when the sonne eyther setting
or rysinge doth caste a shadowe from the towers and walles
to the earthe, then measure the lengthe of that shadowe,
thine ennemyes not knowinge thereof. And afterwarde
sticke vppe a poole tenne foote hye aboue the grounde, and
measure likewise the shadowe therof, the which being done,
ye maye easelye knowe the heyghte of the wall or towne, by
proportion of the poole, seinge that a bodye of this heighte
casteth a shadowe of this or that lengthe.
               And thus haue I sette forth for the common commoditye
and profitte (as I suppose) of those thinges, which auncient
writers of chiualrye haue lefte behinde them, and the latter
age by experience hath necessarilye founde out touching the
assault a
                     •
                  d defendinge of Cittyes. Marye this one thinge
I cannot to muche warne you of, that you prouide dilligentlye
that there be neyther scarcitye of meate nor drincke in
your Cittye besieged, for that cannot by anye meanes be remedyed.
Therfore the longer time that you suppose y• siege
wil endure, so much the more victualles must you laye vppe
in your towne.
               ⸪ And thus much the maner of warre on lande, beinge
declared sufficientlye, with the meanes of defendinge and
assaulting of Townes: I will consequently treate of warre
helde on the Sea, and of shippes and Gallyes, and first of y•
                  Liburnian Gallyes.
            
            
               Preceptes to be obserued in makinge
warre vppon the Sea.
Chapiter. xxxj.
               THe maner of makinge warre vppon the lande, sufficientlye
declared at your maiestyes commaundemente
(most mightye and worthye Emperour) the portion
yet not spoken of, as I trowe, is of warre vppon the Sea.

Of the feates and cunninge whereof the lesse therefore remayneth
to be spoken, for that the Sea beinge quieted now
this good while, wee keepe warre with other strange Nations
vppon the lande. Notwithstanding that the people of
Rome for the worshippe and commoditye of their greate renowne:
and not for anye necessitye growing by sodaine commotion,
but least at anye time it mighte suffer daunger, alwayes
had an armye in readines. For no man dare geue occasion
of warre, or do, or offer anye wrong to that kingdome
or people, whom hee knoweth well prouided, and readye to
withstande and to reuenge the same. Therefore at Misenū
                  
and Rauenna Cittyes of Italye, at eche there abode a Legion
of Romaynes with y• Nauies: that they should not leaue
the Cittye vndefended: and when as occasion serued, without
delay or fetching much compasse, they might passe to al
partes of the worlde. For the Misenates had lyinge harde
vppon them Fraunce, Spayne, the Moores, Affricke, Egipte,
Sardine, and Cycil. The Rauennates vsed to passe
with a streighte course into Epyrus, Macedonia, Achaia,
Propontis, Pontis, East Asia, Creta and Cyprus: and to
these with most speede, because in warrelye affayres speedi
                  
                     •
                  es
and swiftnes doth more auayle then manhoode.
            
            
               ¶The names of the Iudges which gouerned
the Nauye. Chap. .xxxii.
               THe chiefe Captayne of the Nauye of the Misenates,
did gouerne the shippes or Gallyes which laye in Cā
                     pania,
on the weste syde of Italye: but the Captayne
of the Nauye of the Rauennates, did keepe them that rested
in the Sea called lonium on the Easte syde of Italye:
vnder the which there were appointed .10. Tribunes, in euerye
bande one. But euerye Gallye had such a one as was
called Naua
                        •
                     chus, that is, the maister or gouernour of the
shippe whom they called also Nauicularium, a Pilote or cō
                  ducter
of shippes. Which besides other duties of Mariners,
did carefullye and dilligentlye euerye daye, helpe the gouernours

and rowers, and further also wyth all possible industry,
all maner of exercises of the souldiours.
            
            
               ¶Why the Lyburnian Gallyes were so called.
Chap. xxxiii.
               DIuers countryes at diuers and sundrye times haue
beene able to do muche vppon the Sea, and therefore
haue had diuers and sondrye kindes of shippes. But
what time as Augustus foughte the battell at Actium,
whereas Antonye by the ayde of the people of Liburnia,
was chiefely ouercome, it appeared by the experiment of so
greate a conflicte, that the Liburnian shippes were more fit
for the warres then others. And according to the fashion of
them, did the Romayne Emperours afterwarde builde
their Nauye, borrowing of them both their name and their
likenes. For Liburnia is a parte of the countrye called Dalmatia, lying nighe to the Cittye called 
                     
                        •
                     adera: after whose
example now the shippes of warre are builded, & be named
Liburnae.
               
            
            
               ¶Wyth what dilligence the Gallyes or shippes
called Liburnae are made.
Chap. xxxiiii.
               LIke as in buildinge of houses men seeke dilligentlye
for good morter and stones, euē so ought good stuffe be
soughte for the framinge and makinge of shippes, and
so much rather because the daunger is greater if a shippe be
faltye, then an house. Therfore if you wil builde a Liburnian
vessell, chose chiefely to make it of Cyprysse and Pyne
tree, Larche & Firre, then any other tymber. And for your
nailes, it is more profitable to haue them of brasse then yrō,
althoughe the cost be greater. For yron nayles will sone be
rustye with water, and so consume: but brasen nayles for all
the water, do keepe their naturall substance still.
            
            
               ¶What heede must be taken in cuttinge downe
of Timber. Chap. xxxv.
               
                  THe Timber whereof Gallyes must be made, oughte
to be cutte downe betweene the xv. and the xxiii. daye
of the Moone. And this must especiallye be obserued.
For none other but onlye that which is cutte in these eyghte
dayes, will be free from wormes and rottinge. That which
is vppon anye other daye hewed downe, within a yeares
space, wilbe worme eaten and turne to dust. And this do all
Carpenters know to be true, by their skill and dailye experience.
            
            
               ¶In what monethes Timber should be cutte
downe. Chap. xxxvi.
               IT is good cuttinge of Timber in Iulye and August, and
so till the first of Ianuarye, for then be trees most without
sappe, and therefore the timber both drier and stronger.
But you must beware that straight vpon the cutting downe
your Timber, you square it not, nor make your shippe of it,
as sone as you haue squared it. For timber asketh a double
dryinge tyme, one before it be sawen, and another after, and
so shall it be thorowlye drye, and fitte for your vse: wheras
if you put greene Timber or boarde into a shippe, within a
whyle after when it waxeth drye, it will shrincke and make
wyde riftes, which is most perillous for those that are in the
shippe.
            
            
               ¶Of the bignes and fashion of Gallyes
called Liburnae. Chap. xxxvij.
               AS touching the quantity or greatnes of the Gallyes
named Liburnae, the least of all haue euerye one, one
row or bench of Oares: they that be somwhat greater
haue two, they that be of a conuenient bignes haue three
or foure, or els sometime fiue. Neyther let this thing seeme
straunge to anye man, seinge that in the battell at Actium,
there were much greater Gallyes then I haue spoken of, so
that some had sixe ranckes of Oares and aboue. But small
boates yt serue for scoutes, and go alwayes with the greater
Gallyes, haue almost twenty rowers in eche syde: the olde
Brytaines termed these kindes of boates Pictas.
               
               
                  Their vse is sodenlye to steale vppon the ennemyes shippes,
and to meete with their prouision by the waye, and to spye
out theyr counsell, and to geue warninge of their comming.
And if you will not haue them discryed by their whitenes,
you maye coloure their sayles and tacklinge with a lighte
blewe, because that is like the Sea coloure: and with the
same likewyse staine your pitche wherewith you dresse your
shippes, and let your souldiours and Marriners apparel, be
likewyse couloured with the same, that neyther in the night
nor daye time, they may well be espyed in their scouting.
            
            
               ¶The names and nomber of the windes.
Chap. xxxviij.
               VUhosoeuer caryeth an armye with his Nauye, ought
to foreknow the signes of stormes and whirlewindes.
For Gallyes haue more often beene taken away with
tempestes and surges, then with the force of ennemyes. In
the which behalfe the whole cunning and knowledge of naturall
Philosophye is to be vsed. By the which we learne y•
nature of wyndes and tempestes, by a certaine deuine kinde
or meane. And in a roughe and raginge sea, euen as heede
takinge doth defende and saue them that be ware and cyrcū
                  specte:
so negligence doth cast them a waye that lie rechles &
carelesse. Therefore he that wilbe skilfull in saylinge, ought
first to consider the nomber, and also the names of wyndes.
Olde warriours perswaded themselues that accordinge to
the situation of the foure coastes of Heauen, that onlye foure
principall windes did vsuallye blowe from euery part therof,
but a latter tyme founde oute twelue windes by experience.
Wee haue set forth the names of the same, to put all
maner of doubt cleane awaye: so that the principall windes
beinge declared, wee maye shewe those also, whiche are ioyned
to the same, both on the righte syde and on the lefte.
               Therefore from the place where the sonne stayeth in the
Springe time, that is to saye, frō the chiefe and middle point
of the Easte, commeth the plaine Eastwinde. Unto this is

keepeth the middle pointe of the South, vnto this is ioyned
on the right syde the South southeast wind: on the left syde
the South southwest winde. The plaine west wind keepeth
the middle point of the West. Unto this on the right syde is
ioyned the West Northwest winde, on the left syde y• West
Southwest winde. The plaine Northwynd doth keepe the
middle point of ye North▪ vnto which is ioyned on the righte
syde the North northeast winde, & on the left syde y• North-northwest
wind. Of these oftentimes bloweth one at once,
sometime two at once, but in greate Tempestes, yea three
are wonte to blowe together. The Seas whiche of their
owne nature are still and quiet, through the vehemencye of
these windes, waxe roughe with raginge and troublesome
waues. As these windes blowe accordinge to the nature of
times or places: so tempestes are turned into calme weather,
contraryewyse calme weather into tempestes. And 
                     •
                  
luckye winde bringes a nauye to the most desyred hauen: th
                     •
                  
contrarye winde compelles a man to lye a loofe, go backe againe▪
or els to sustaine perill. And that man therefore dot
                     •
                  
seldome suffer shipwracke, which hath diligently considere
                     •
                  
the nature and reason of the windes.
            
            
               ¶In what monethes men may sayle more safelye
then others. Chap. xxxix.
               NOwe it followeth to speake of monethes and daye
                     •
                  ,
for neyther doth the violence or raginge of the sea suffer
men to sayle al the yeare long: but some monethes
are most conuenient to sayle in, some be vncertaine & doubtfull,
and other not to be vsed at all. During the course of y•
cleare and lightsome time of Sommer, that is to say, after
the rysinge of the Pleiades, in latine Vergilie, in english the
seuen starres: from the xxvii. day of Maye: vnto the rysing
of the starre called Arcturus, otherwise in Greeke Bo
                        •
                     tes:
that is to saye, vnto the xiiii, daye of September saylinge is
thought good and safe, because through ye benefite of Sommer,
the rage of the winde is assuaged▪ After this time vnto

the vi. day of Nouember, sayling is more vncertaine and
more daungerous: because after the xiii. day of September
Arcturus doth ryse, the most vehemente starre of all other.
The xxiiii. day of September commeth in the raginge time
of the Equinoctiall. About the seuēth daye of October do aryse
certayne starres called Haed
                        ••
                     pluu
                        •
                     ales, betokening
rayne. The xi▪ of October doth ryse the starre called Taurus.
But from the moneth of Nouember the going downe
of the seuē starres which is in winter, doth trouble the shippes
wyth manye tempestes. Therefore from the xi daye of
Nouember vnto the x. day of Marche, the Seas are shutte
vp. For whye the verye shorte dayes, the longe nightes▪ the
thicknes of clouds, the darckenes of the ayre, the double raginge
of the windes, showers, and snowes: doth much trouble
and driue awaye, not onlye Nauyes from the Sea, but
also goers, by the waye, or trauellers from a iourney on the
lande. But after the byrth day of sayling (as I may terme
it) or first settinge forth of shippes to the Sea, which is kept
solemne with yearely games and common shoes, or specta
                  
                     •
                  les
of manye Nations. The seas are daungerous to proue
vnto the xv. daye of Maye, by reason of manye starres raygninge,
and also of the time it selfe: not that the trauayle of
marchantes shoulde ceasse, but because there is more heede
to be taken, when an armye doth fayle wyth Gallyes, then
when the foolish & greedy hardines for priuate marchandise
doth make hast therevnto.
            
            
               ¶After what maner the signes and tokens of tempestes
maye be obserued. Chap. xl.
               MOreouer the rising and going downe of certaine starres
doth styrre vp & cause most vehement tempestes:
in y• which although certayne dayes be marked by y•
testimony of authors, yet for as much as they be sometimes
altered by diuers chaūces, we must confesse & acknowledge
that mans nature cannot know perfectlye the condition or
state of heauē. The rysing of tēpestes yerely is of thre sorts.
For by experience we find y• 
                  
                     ••
                  pestes do happen either about

                     •
                  ne certayne daye of the yere prefixed, or before it, or after,

wherevpon the tēpestuous seaso
                     •
                  s that go before y• day appointed
or middest of winter, we call by y• name of a Greeke
word Procheimasin, those y• ryse iust at ye ordinary day we name
Epicheimasin: those y• followe the same we terme Metach
                        •
                     imasin.
But to reherse euerye thinge by name, it seemeth both vnmeete
for this place & to long. Seing y• many wryters haue
declared dilligently y• course & order, not only of monethes,
but also of dayes in this case. Also the motions of planettes
many times trouble the clerenes of the ayre, when as at certaine
dayes appointed by God the creator of the world, they
draw neare or depart from some of the xii. signes. Likewise
the dayes wherein the Moone chaungeth are commonly ful
of tempestes & fearefull to such as vse the sea.
            
            
               ¶Of s
                     •
                  gnes and tokens whereby to know the clearenes
and troublesomenes of the ayre. Chap. xlj.
               BY many tokens may men foreknow both stormes after
a calme, & fayre weather after tempestes, & this doth y•
cyrcle of the moone declare as in a glasse. A ruddie coloure
betokeneth windes, a blewish or skye coloure, rayne.
A colour mixt of both, foretelleth stormes & ragīg weather.
A pleasant & brighte cyrcle doth promyse cleare weather to
shippes, especially if the fourth day after y• chaūge, her hornes
be not blunt & redde, nor yet darkened with much moysture.
Furthermore in ye Sonne ye must marke whether at
his rising or settīg, his beames be chereful & of one colour:
or by reason of a cloude ouer against it, they be of diuers colours,
& whether they be bright & glisteringe, or redde like
fyre, which is a signe of wynde yt will shortly follow: or pale
and speckled which betoketh raine sone after. Likewyse by
the ayre & sea, & the greatnes and fashion of the clouds, may
maryners knowe the chaūges of weather if they geue their
minde to it And some tokens may they learne of byrdes, and
some of fishes, as Virgill in his Georgikes doth very wisely
declare, and Varro in his bookes of sayling doth dilligētly
set forth the same. And these things do Pilats & maisters
of shippes professe themselues to know, so farre forth as vnlearned
experience without any profound learning hath enstructed
them.
            
            
               
               ¶Of ebbing and flowing of the Sea▪
Chap. xlii.
               THe Element of the Sea is ye third part of the worlde:
whiche besydes the blowinge of the windes doth also
moue by it selfe. For at certaine houres as well in the
daye time as in the night, it runneth to and fro by ebbing &
flowing. And sometime like a running brooke, floweth to y•
landwarde, sometime backe into the deepe againe. This
doublenes of the mouing of the Sea, doth helpe the course
of shippes if it be wyth them, and hinder them if it be contrarye.
Whiche thinge must be eschewed wyth greate heedefulnes
of him that intendeth to fight. For the violence of the
tyde cannot be ouercome by any helpe of Oares, when as y•
winde it selfe doth geue place thereto. And because that in
diuers conntryes thorowe the state of the moone encreasing
or diminishing: at certaine houres the tydes do alter, Therfore
he that goeth about to make warre on the Sea, oughte
to knowe before hee ioyne battell, the vsage of the Sea in
that place.
            
            
               ¶Of the knowledge of places, and of the rowers.
Chapiter .xliij.
               THe dilligence and cunning of the Marriners and gouernours,
is to knowe the places and hauens where
they sayle, that they maye esche we shallowe places &
suche as be daungerous, by reason of rockes appearinge or
hidde. For the deeper that the sea is, so much the more safe &
quiet it is. In marriners is requyred dilligence, in ye Maister
skilfulnes: in the rowers strength and manhoode. Because
that a Sea battell is ioyned when the water is calme:
and Gallyes when they strike their ennemyes shippes with
their stemmes & forepartes, are driuen with Oares and not
with wind. And also when they shunne the brunt of others,
they vse the helpe of Oares, and not winde thereto Therefore
loke what parte hath strongest rowers and cunningest

Captaine and maister, that same carryeth the victorye.
            
            
               ¶Of weapons and ordinaunce of shippes. Chap. xliiii
               A Land battel requyreth many kindes of armour and
weapons, but that which is fought on the Sea, needeth
manye mo kindes, both of armour & weapons,
and also enginnes and ordinaunce, euen as they should 
                     •
                  ight
on the walles & towers of a Citty. For what is more cruell
thē the fight vpon the Sea? whereas men be killed▪ not onlye
with water, but with fyre. Therefore there must be a speciall
regarde had of harnesse and other coueringes, that the
souldiours he fēced with complete armour, coates of plate,
helmets and legge harnesse. For no man can complaine of
the waight or burdē of his armour, which fighteth standing
in the shippes: ye maye make your shieldes both stronger &
larger, to beare of the strokes of stoones, hookes, and clampers,
and other kinde of weapons vsed in shippes. Dartes
and stones are caste betweene both partyes, with arrowes,
pellettes, slinges, slingstaues, leaden plummettes, greater
ordinaunce, lesser ordinaunce, yron bowes or Crossebowes:
and (which is a more gre
                     •
                  ous thing) they that presume and
thincke themselues sur
                     •
                   by reason of theyr manhoode, after
their Gallyes be ioyned 
                     〈◊〉
                  , do passe ouer into y• shippes
of their ennemyes on bridges layed ouer betweene.
               In the greater gallyes they do make vppe fortresses and towers,
that as vppon a wall, so they maye from aboue more
easelye wounde and slea their ennemyes. Also they vse to
wrappe arrowes in towe, pitche and bri
                     ••
                  stone, and so kindling
them▪ to shoote and strike them into the sydes of theyr
ennemyes shippes, and so sodainly to set them on fyre by reason
of the pitche and rosen, wherewith the sydes of the shippes
are alreadye annoynted. One sorte are slaine with the

                     •
                  word, and stones or pellettes, another sort are compelled to
burne in the water, and amonge so many kindes of deathes
(which is the must cruell of al) their bodyes vuburyed, must
be deuoured and confumed of fishes.
            
            
               
               ¶Howe wyles maye be wrought on the Sea.
Chap. xlv.
               AS the vse is in a fielde battell, so likewys
                     •
                   on 
                     〈◊〉
                   water,
you may priuilye steale vppon your ennemyes at
vnwares, or in 
                     ••
                  eekes and str
                     •
                  ightes conuenient,
you maye hyde a nomber of Gallyes readye to come forthe
when neede shall requyre, that your ennemyes being vnprouided,
may the sooner be ouercome specially if they be wearye
with longe rowing, or if the winde or tyde be contrarye
to them▪ or if they sleape suspecting none ill, or if the rode or
corner which they keepe haue no way to issue out. If opportunitye
to fight do come as you would wishe, then must your
men fall to it cherefullye hauinge these helpes, and so ioyne
your battell as maye be most for your aduauntage. If so be
that the foresight of the ennemye be such, that they will not
be beguiled, but encounter in open fight, then your Gallyes
muste be placed in araye not straighte as souldiours be in a
fielde battell, but bowinge in, after the similitude of ye halfe
moone, so that the two endes come oute, and the middle be
hollowe, that if the ennemye shall assaye to burst throug be▪
he may be caught and compassed in, by reason of the very order
and araye. But in the winges must ye place the chiefest
strength both of your Gallyes and of your souldiours.
            
            
               ¶What should be done when open battel is ioyned
on the Sea. Chap. xlvj.
               MOreouer it is profitable that your nauye be alwayes
in the deepe sea and at libertye, but your ennemyes
alwayes driuen to the shoore. For they do loose all
force and strength in fighting, which are thrust to lande. In
this sea 
                     •
                  ight, three sortes of weapons helpe muche, named
in latine. As
                        •
                     eres, Falces, Bipennes. Asser is when a scle
                     •
                  
                  der
and a long beame much like the sayle yeard, doth hange
on the mast, and hath both y• endes headed with yron. This
serueth in steede of the battell Ramme, and beinge driu
                     ••
                  
                  
mightely and with great force, it throweth done and killeth
both Mariners & souldiours, & oftentimes beateth through
the shippes sydes. Falx is a verye sharpe yron, croked like
a hooke, which beinge put vppon greate longe pooles, doth
sodenlye cut the ennemyes tackeling a sonder, and the roopes
that beare vppe the sayle yarde: and so the sayle clothes
falling downe together, doth make the shippe more 
                     •
                  lowe &
vnprofitable. Bipennis is a double edged axe, on both sydes
verye broade and sharpe, with the which the moste skilfull
Mariners when as the battell is hottest, they go downe
into a small boate, and priuilye cutte a sonder the roopes
wherewith the rudders of the ennemyes shippes are tyed
Which thing beinge done, the shippe is streight way taken
as vnarmed. For what helpe is left when the rudder is
lost. As touchinge the shippes of pastyme which are
vsed in the ye ryuer of Danubius, in daily watchinges,
I purpose to speake nothing at all, because
that in them by often vse, hath bene founde
more cunninge, then our auncestours
haue left to vs in wryting, and my
purpose was only to gather such
thinges together, as I finde
written in Bookes.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  This engine serueth for the xiiij. Chapter
of the fourth Booke. Folio. 55.
               
            
            
               
               
               
                  This engine surueth for the xv. Chapter
of the fourth Booke. Folio. 55.
               
            
            
               
               
               
                  This engine serueth for the xvi. Chapter
of the fourth Booke▪
Folio. 56.
               
            
            
               
                  This serueth for the xviij. Chapter
of the fourth booke. Folio 56.
               
            
            
               
               
                  This engine with the two next following
serueth for the xxi. Chapter of the fourth
Booke. Folio. 57.
               
            
            
               
               
                  For the▪ xxi. Chapter of the
fourth Booke.
               
            
            
               
               
                  For the xxi. Chapter of the
fourth Booke.
               
            
         
         
            
            A table declaringe what euerye
Booke contayneth in euery Chapter.
            
               The first Booke.
               THat ye 
                  Romaynes through ye only exercise of armes,
haue ouercome all Nations. Chapter. 1.
               Out of what coūtryes a yong souldiour should be chosen.
Chapter. 2.
               Whether out of the countrye or out of the Cittye yong souldiours
may be taken most conueniently. Chap 3.
               Of what age the yonge souldiour should be, which shoulde
be thought allowable. Chap. 4.
               Of what stature yong souldiours should be chosen Chap 5.
               To know by the countenaunce & making of the body which
souldiours are like to proue good. Chap. 6.
               What sciences yonge souldiours should be skilful in, which
should be eyther chosen or refused. Chap. 7.
               What time yonge souldiours should be regestred or billed.
Chap. 8.
               That yonge souldiours be exercised in marchinge, running
and leaping. Chap. 9.
               That yonge souldiours should vse to swimme Chap. 10
               Howe warriours aforetime caused their souldiours to vse
wicker tergets, & cudgels, at a stake or post. Chap. 11.
               That souldiours shoulde be taughte to foyne & thrust, not to
cutte, and strike downe righte. 12.
               That yonge souldiours be taughte cunningelye to handle
weapons. Chap. 13.
               That yonge souldiours shoulde vse to cast dartes and other
shot. Chap. 14.
               That yong souldiours should be diligently taught to shoote
Chap. 15.
               That yonge souldiours should be vsed to cast stoones with a
slinge, or with the hand. Chap 16.
               Of the exercise of leaden plummettes. Chap. 17.
               That yonge souldiours should be exercised to vault or moūt
on horses. Chapter. 18.
               That yonge souldiours should vse to carry weight and burdens.

Chap. 19.
               What kinde of armour souldiours of old time were wonte
to vse. Chap. 20.
               Of fortifying of campes Chap. 21.
               In what place a campe should be pitched Cap. 22.
               In what forme the campe should stande Cap. 23.
               Wyth what thinges a campe should be fortifyed Cap. 24.
               How a campe should be fenced whē the ennemye is at hand.
25.
               How the yonge souldiours may be trayned that in the battell
they keepe good order, their aray, and space betwene
one and an other. Chap. 26.
               How much space y• souldiours must go and come when they
be broughe forth to marche: and how 
                     •
                  ften they must be
exercised in a moneth. chap. 27.
               Of the perswation to warrefare, and of the manhoode of y•
Romaynes. chap. 28.
            
            
               The seconde Booke.
               INto how many kindes the Art of warre may be deuided
Chapter. 1.
               Howe the Legionary souldiours, and those that are sent
for ayde, do differ chap. 2.
               The cause why Legions haue beene wasted & deminished. 3
               What nomber of Legions the aunciente Romaynes ledde
with them to the warres. chap. 4.
               How a legion shoulde be ordered. chap. 5.
               How manye cohortes or bands shoulde be in one legion, and
how manye souldiours should be in one bande. chap 6.
               Names & degrees of the principal men of the Legion. ca. 7.
               The names of them which ledde y• auncient orders of souldiours.
chap. 8.
               Of the office of him that is called Praefectus legionis, the
Lieuetenantes deputye. chap. 9.
               Of the office of the chiefe ouerseer of the campe cap. 10.
               Of the office of the maister of the artificers. cap. 11.
               Of the office of the cheife Tribune or colonell. cap. 12.
               
                  Of the Centuries or hundredes of the footemen, and of their
ensignes, penoncels or banners. chap. 13.
               Of the troupes of the legionarye horsemen called Turmae.
chap. 14.
               After what sort the legions should be set in order chap. 15.
               After what maner the Triarians and also the Centurions
should be armed chap. 16.
               How that the battell beinge ioyned, the complete harnessed
men stoode as a wall. chap 17.
               The names of souldiours, and other orders and degrees,
should be written in the shieldes. chap 18.
               Besydes the strength of the body, y• cunninge or knowledge
of cyphers and counting must be regarded in souldiours
chap. 19.
               Howe souldiours ought to put asyde the halfe parte of anye
gift in money, or other thing geuen them, into the keping
of such as are standerde bearers. chap. 20.
               Promotions and dignityes in the legion are so disposed and
ordered, that none is aduaunced thereto, before hee haue
passed through the 10. bandes or companyes of the legiō
chapter. 21.
               What difference is betwene trumpetters, blowers of hornes
or shawmes and such like. chap. 22.
               Of the exercise of souldiours. chap. 23.
               Examples of exhortations and the exercise in warlike affayres,
taken oute of other artes and sciences chap. 24.
               A rehersall of yron tooles and other engines of the legion.
chap 25.
            
            
               The thride Booke.
               VUhat maner, or of what nomber an armye should be
of chap. 1.
               After what maner the health of an 
                     •
                  rmre shoulde be
mayntayned▪ chap 2.
               Wyth how great care & regarde, forage and grayne ought
to be prouided for and kept. cap 3.
               After what maner we oughte to foresee least the souldiours
do make any sturre or sedition. chap 4.
               
                  Howe many kindes there be of engines of warre. Cap. 5.
               Howe greate subtiltye oughte to be vsed when an armye is
remoued, the ennemyes being nighe. Chap. 6.
               After what maner great ryuers may be passed ouer. Cap. 7.
               After what maner a Campe should be placed. Chap 8.
               What maner, and howe great things should be considered,
to vnderstande whether we oughte to fight with skirmishinge
or with open battel Chap. 9.
               What must be done if a Captaine haue an armye out of vse
of fighting, or an armye of yonge souldiours Chap. 10
               What thinges should be done the same day that the open or
set battell should be ioyned Chap. 11.
               We must diligently search oute what minde the souldiours
be of, when they should fight. Chap. 12.
               Howe a meete place should be chosen to fight in. Cap. 13.
               How an armye may be set in order, that in the battel, it may
be inuincible, or not easelye ouercome. Cap. 14.
               The maner of measuring by the foote, howe muche space in
the battell should be betweene euery man in length, or in
breadth, and howe much betwixt euery rancke. Chap. 15.
               How to set the horsemen in order. Cap. 16.
               Of 
                     •
                  ydes or rescues which are placed after the battell
Chap. 17.
               In which place the first a
                     •
                  d chiefe Captaine ought to stand,
in which the seconde, and in which the third. Cap. 18.
               With what meanes the valiantnes and deceytes of the ennemyes
in the battell may be withstande and preuented.
Chap. 19.
               How many kindes or wayes an open or set battell is ioyned,
and howe also that armye which is lesse in nomber and
strength, may obtayne the victorye. Chap. 20.
               That a way should be geuen to the ennemyes to depart, that
they maye more easelye be destroyed in flyinge awaye.
Chap. 21.
               After what maner you maye depart from ye ennemye if you
do not like of your purposed battell. Chap. 22.
               Of Camels and men of armes vpon barbed horses. Cap 23
               
                  After what maner we maye withstande Chariottes arme
                     •
                  
with hookes, and also Elephantes in the battel. Cap. 24▪
               
               What oughte to be done if eyther parte or the whole armye
do flye. Chap. 25.
               Generall rules of warres. Chap. 26.
            
            
               The fourth Booke.
               THat Cittyes oughte to be fenced eyther with handyworke
or nature, or both. Chap. 1.
               That walles shoulde not be made streighte, but with
many coignes. Chap 2.
               After what sort earth maye be heaped vppe and ioyned to a
wall, so that it shall neuer be beaten downe. Cap 3▪
               
               Of Portcluses, and how gates may be safe from burninge.
Chap. 4.
               Of making ditches. Cap. 5.
               Howe to keepe them, which stande on the wall, harmelesse
from the arrowes of the ennemyes Cap. 6.
               By what meanes it ought to be foreseene, that they that are
besieged, be not famished Chap. 7.
               What kinde of thinges must be prepared for the defence of
walles. Chap▪ 8.
               What ought to be done if store of stringes or cordes do fayle
Chap. 9.
               What shoulde be done that the besieged lacke not water.
Chap. 10.
               If salt should fayle in the Cittye, what ought to be done. 11.
               What shoulde be done when the ennemye doth first assaulte
the walles Cap. 12.
               A rehersall of engines with which the walles are assaulted
Chap. 13.
               Of the battering Ramme, the booke, & the snayle. Cap. 14.
               Of Sheddes deskes or peintesses and countermure. 15.
               Of engines called Musculi. Chap. 16.
               Of towers mouable. Cap. 17.
               Howe the mouable tower may be set on fyre Cap. 18.
               
                  Howe you maye make your walles higher. Cap 19.
               By what meanes the earth maye be digged that the engine
can do no harme. Cap. 20.
               Of ladders & the frame of timber wt roopes, of the bridge,
and of the sweape. Cap. 21
               Of the lesser kinde or ordinaunce called Balista: of the greater
called Onager: of that whiche is called Scorpio, of
crossebowes called Arcubalistae: of slingstaues & slinges,
by the which the walles are defended. Cap. 22.
               Against ye engine named a Ramme be flockebeddes or mattresses
very good, also ropes and great pillers. Cap. 23.
               Of vndermyning & throwing downe walles that way. 24.
               What the townes men oughte to do, if the ennemyes brust
into the Cittye. Cap. 25.
               What heede oughte to be taken least the ennemyes priuilye
take the wall. Cap. 26.
               How the townes men may be deceyued. Cap. 27.
               What the besiegers o
                     •
                  ght to do, that they be not entrapped
of the townes men Cap. 28.
               Wyth what kinde of ordinaunce Cittyes may be defended.
Cap. 29.
               Howe you may knowe what height your ladders and other
engines ought to be of Cap. 30.
               Preceptes to be obserued in makinge warre vpon y• sea. 31.
               The names of the Iudges which gouerned y• Nauyes ca. 32
               Whye the Lyburnian Gallyes were so called. cap. 33.
               With what dilligence the gallyes or shippes called Libu
                        •
                     
                     nae
are made. cap. 34.
               What heede must be takē in cutting downe of timber. ca. 35▪
               
               In what monethes timber should be cut downe cap. 36.
               Of y• bignes and fashiō of Gallyes called Liburnae. cap. 37.
               The names and nomber of the windes chap. 38.
               In what monethes mē may saile safely, more thē others. 39
               After what maner the signes and tokens of tempestes may
be obserued chap. 40.
               Of signes and tokens whereby to know y• clearenes & troublesomenes
of the ayre chap. 41.
               
                  Of ebbinge and flowing of the sea chap. 42.
               Of the knowledge of places, and of the rowers. chap. 43.
               Of weapons and ordinaunce of shippes. chap. 44.
               Howe wyles may be wrought on the sea. chap. 45.
               What shoulde be done when open battell is ioyned on y• sea.
chap. 46.
            
            Then ende of the contentes.
         
         
            Faultes escaped in the printinge,
whereof the first nomber signifyeth the leafe,
the letter a. the first syde, and b. the
seconde syde.
            In the Epistle dedicatorye, b. for translation thereof, read
                  •
               
translating thereof.
            Folio 3. a. continuance, reade countenance.
            Folio. 3. reade souldiours for souldiour.
            Folio. 8. Grecians, reade Gratians.
            
            Folio. 9. b. army, reade Campe.
            Folio. 10. a. standers, read standerds.
            Folio. 10. a. especial, reade especially.
            Folio. 13. a. Legionacij, reade Legionari
                     •
                  .
            
            Folio. 13. b. Gaternas, reade Cateruas.
            
            Folio. 14. a. possible, reade possibly.
            Folio. 15 b. haruest, reade harnesde.
            Folio. 20. a. footement, reade footemen.
            Folio. 24. readde, saye reede.
            In y• third booke the Prologue, Men worthye,
read O men worthye.
            Fol. 34 a. it, reade is.
            Fol. 40. a. Hasti, reade Hastati.
            
            Fol. 41. a. rankes, reade orders.
            Fol. 48 a. Promuscide, read Promuscidē.
            
            Fol. 53. b. vppresse, reade oppresse.
            Fol. 56. b. bardes, reade boardes.
            
               Folio. 63. a. there lacketh before the beginninge of this
leafe, all these wordes followinge: ioyned on the righte
syde, the East Northeast winde: on the lefte syde, y• East,
Southeast winde. The plaine southwinde.
            Folio▪ 64. a. Pilats, rea
                  •
               e Pilots.
            FINIS.
         
         
            Imprinted at London in Fleete-streete
neare vnto Saint Dunstones
Church, by Thomas Marshe.
            
         
      
   