
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE PLOT OF THE PLAY, CALLED ENGLANDS JOY.
            
            To be Playd at the Swan this 6. of Nouember. 1602.
            
               FIRST, there is induct by ſhew and in Action, the ciuill warres of England from Edward the third, to the end of Queene Maries raigne, with the ouerthrow of Vſurpation.
            2 Secondly then the entrance of Englands Ioy by the Coronation of our Soueraigne Lady Elizabeth; her Throne attended with peace, Plenty, and ciuill Pollicy: A ſacred Prelate ſtanding at her right hand, betokening the Serenity of the Goſpell: At her left hand Iuſtice: And at her feete Warre, with a Scarlet Roabe of peace vpon his Armour: A wreath of Bayes about his temples, and a braunch of Palme in his hand.
            3 Thirdly is dragd in three Furies, preſenting Diſſention, Famine, and Bloudſhed, which are throwne downe into hell.
            4 Fourthly is expreſt vnder the perſon of a Tyrant, the enuy of Spayne, who to ſhew his cruelty cauſeth his Souldiers dragge in a beautifull Lady, whome they mangle and wound, tearing her garments and Iewels from off her: And ſo leaue her bloudy, with her hayre about her ſhoulders, lying vpon the ground. To her come certaine Gentlemen, who ſeeing her pitious diſpoylment, turne to the Throne of England, from whence one deſcendeth, taketh vp the Lady, wipeth her eyes, bindeth vp her woundes, giueth her treaſure, and bringeth forth a band of Souldiers, who attend her forth: This Lady preſenteth Belgia.
            
            5 Fiftly, the Tytant more enraged, taketh counſell, ſends forth letters, priuie Spies, and ſecret vnderminers, taking their othes, and giuing them bagges of treaſure. Theſe ſignifie Lopus, and certaine Ieſuites, who afterward, when the Tyrant lookes for an anſwere from them, are ſhewed to him in a glaſſe with halters about their neckes, which makes him mad with fury.
            6 Sixtly, the Tyrant ſeeing all ſecret meanes to fayle him, intendeth open violence and inuaſion by the hand of Warre, whereupon is ſet forth the battle at Sea in 88. with Englands victory.
            7 Seuenthly, hee complotteth with the Iriſh rebelles, wherein is layd open the baſe ingratitude of Tyrone, the landing there of Don Iohn de Aguila, and their diſsipation by the wiſedome and valour of the Lord Mountioy.
            
            8 Eightly, a great triumph is made with fighting of twelue Gentlemen at Barriers, and ſundrie rewards ſent from the Throne of England, to all ſortes of well deſeruers.
            9 Laſtly, the Nine Worthyes, with ſeuerall Coronets, preſent themſelues before the Throne, which are put backe by certaine in the habite of Angels, who ſet vpon the Ladies head, which repreſents her Maieſtie, an Emperiall Crowne, garniſhed with the Sunne, Moone and Starres; And ſo with Muſicke both with voyce and Inſtruments ſhee is taken vp into Heauen, when preſently appeares, a Throne of bleſſed Soules, and beneath vnder the Stage ſet forth with ſtrange fireworkes, diuers blacke and damned Soules, wonderfully diſcribed in their ſeuerall torments.
         
      
   