
      
         
            
            
            An Abridgement of the notable woorke of POLIDORE VERGILE conteignyng the deuiſers and firſte finders out aſwell of Artes, Miniſteries, Feartes & ciuill ordinaunces, as of Rites, and Ceremonies, commōly vſed in the churche: and the originall beginnyng of theſame. Cō
               pendiouſly gathered by Thomas Langley.
            ¶IMPRINTED AT LONdon vvithin the precincte of the late diſsolued houſe of the Grey Friars, by Richard Grafton Printer to the Princes grace, the .xvi. daie of Aprill, the yere of our lorde M.D.xlvi.
            Cum priuilegio adimpris mendum ſolum.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT vvorſhipfull ſir Antony Denny knight his daily oratour Thomas Langley vviſheth proſperitee and long continuance of vvorſhippe.
            
               
                  LACTANTIVS writeth that certain philoſophers of Epicures feet did ſore bewayle the eſtate o
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , as weke and far vnder the degre of beaſtes, bicauſe thei wer by nature fenſed as well 
                  •
               rō all diſpleaſures & grefes of vnſeaſonable ayre, as armed againſte the aſſautes and inuaſions of their enemies, and onely man deſtitute & voide of all ſuche and

other like ſuccours & purueighaunces: For bothe beaſtes & birdes haue euery one accordyng to their kynde ſkynnes, hides, or fethers, to ſuſtein the ſharpenes of the cold, and to bere of the ſtormi raynes and tēpeſtes, & alſo weapōs as hornes, tuſkes, and other like munimentes too reſiſt their foes, or at the leaſt thei haue agilitee and ſwiftnes, to eſcape and preſerue them ſelfes frō daunger Cōtrarywiſe mankynd is of his nature ſo delicate and tēder that he can abyde no heate, no colde, no raynes, nor tempeſtuous wether: ſo feble alſo he is that his membres be not able to helpe his owne wekeneſſe, muche leſſe too vnderſtād or auoide the power of his enemies. But if theſe groſſe and carnal Philoſophiers hadde

withdrawē their heartes frō vewyng the behauour of the body, and applied their mynde to the contemplacion of the worthines of the ſolle, they ſhould haue wel perceiued their owne erroure, the baſe and vile cōdicion of beaſtes the high dignite of the ſolle, & the excellent noblenes of man. For albeit this frayle and yearthly body of oures is not ſo ſtrong as the brutiſhe carkeſes of beaſtes be, yet by reaſon of their groſnes they be vnfit to receiue the ſpiritual ſolle of man, or to be mete inſtrumentes of the ſame, where as the imperfection of mannes bodye is abled by the inuentiue and politike reaſon of the ſolle whiche deuiſeth all neceſſaries, for the vſe of the ſayd body by all endeuoure and induſtrye. And

that manne, whiche can ſhifte for himſelf, decline frō thynges hurt full, forſee alſo thynges to come, is iudged & reputed worthye the title and name of a manne, ſo he likewiſe farre excelleth al kinde
                  •
                of liuyng creatures, whiche althoughe thei bee better armed with the giftes of nature▪ yet for defaute of reaſon to gouerne the ſame, thei be far inferiours to the noblenes of manne, whiche knoweth through the dotes & qualites of the ſolle too deuiſe all neceſſaries fit for his affaires and buſineſſe.
            Wherefore me thynke them worthy of high commendacion, that haue bent them ſelues wholy to adorne and garniſhe this life mortal, with their inuencions, & to accompliſhe the feble indigēce

of our condicion, by the diligence of their prouiſion: as thei yt haue excogitated & imagined any arte wherby the commen welth of the worlde is preſerued, or any other handy craftes or miniſteries too the maintenaunce ayde and comforte of the body. Howbeeit thei be worthy to haue greateſt laude and praiſe, that by their deuiſes haue found out the ſciences liberall, wherewith the diuine and imperiall parte called the ſolle of manne is bewtified: yet maie we not therefore forgette writers of meaner thynges, but be of deutie bound to make ſome worthy memoriall of their benefites declaryng our kindnes toward thē: to the intente other might bee incoraged to enterpriſe the acheuyng of like endeuoures to the great

ayd and preferment of the whole common wealth, conſidryng that their ſuche deuiſes ſhalbee regeſtered to their perpetuall fame & renoune. And ſeeyng that the artes and craftes, with other like feates, whoſe inuentours be contained in this booke, are in this realme of Englande occupied & put in daily exerciſe to the profet of many and eaſe of all menne, it were in myne opinion bothe a poynt of deteſtable vnkyndnes, and a parte of extreme inhumanite too defraude theim of their praiſe and perpetuall memorie, that wer autours of ſo great benefites to the vniuerſall worlde. For as a beneficiall gift conferred to a man that hath nede therof, is of the owne propre nature commēdable, ſo if the receiuer of

that ſo liberall benignitee, ſhewe hymſelf in mynde inwardly obliuious and forgetfull, or in dedes outwardly vnthankefull, it is naturally hated, and as an vnnaturall vice abhorred.
            In conſideracion whereof I was moued to take in hande too compile out ſo well as my learnyng would ſerue me, in a brefe ſome ſuche thynges, as Polidore Vergile hath copiouſli gathred togither by muche readyng, by lōg ſtudy, & hath written with greate lernyng, conſernyng the inuentours of thynges, to thentent the autours of ſuche neceſſary artes might not be forgottē, & Polidore for his great payne and trauaile in collectyng and celebratyng the ſaid artes and ſciences might receyue thankes accordyng to

his deſertes. And althoughe the booke tranſlated might haue been for the diuerſitee of matter profitable: and for the authours high lernyng laudable, & finally to a good tranſlatoure commendable, yet in ſo muche, as for the greatnes, it ſhould haue been to the berers greuouſe, & for length to the reders tediouſe, I thought it beſt to omit ſome parte, not bycauſe any thyng was ſuperfluous, or otherwiſe written thē wel But for as muche as many thynges mighte bee taken diuerſly, and other wiſe then thei wer mēt. Therefore I haue not admitted any thyng in too this abridgemente, whereby the reader maie bee iuſtely offended, nor haue on the other ſyde omitted any ſuche ſentence, that either cōcerned the

title, or that mighte in any parte pleaſe or profit the readers. And as Polidore in his booke written in latin dooth pretende to repleniſhe & enriche latin menne with delectaciō and knowlage of thinges delectable & worthie knowlage, not myndyng to derogate either any laudable ceremonies, or to define vpō any matter, now or then beeyng in controuerſie: euen ſo I muche deſirouſe, accordyng to the litle talent that God hath giuen me, to dooe all menne good, haue tranſlated the ſaied booke of Polidore into oure Engliſhe toungue, to the ende, that alſo artificers and other perſons not expert in latin, might gather knowlage and take pleaſure by the readyng therof.
            
               ALTHOVGH this booke be

but ſimple & vnfitte to be preſented to your good maſterſhip, ye it ſemed of verye right due to bee offered to you bicauſe you haue bene alwaies, as the mooſt parte of men reporte, and many by experience can teſtifie, not onely enflamed with deſire of knowledge of antiquites, but alſo a fauorable ſupporter of al good lernyng and a verie Mecenas of all towarde wittes. Wherfore I dedicate this boke to your Maiſterſhip for the conformitie of the argument beyng to your foreſaied deſire correſpōdent: In ſomuche as it conteigneth the original of all ciuill artes and handecraftes and alſo the inuentoures of all ſuche ceremonies as bee vſed in the churche. And here playnely maie bee perceiued what the ſcripture

of GOD commaundeth, what thynges mennes pollycye haue diuiſed for the ſetting furth of good order, and what hath crepte in to the congregacion to the peruertyng of our faithe and ſeducyng ſimple people with ſuperſticion: as theſe manyfolde ſwarmes of popiſh religiōs, that here emōg vs were not long ago vſed, with other papiſticall baggage. And I tooke it to bee my bonde dewtie to beſtowe the firſt frutes of my labours (albeit thei bee verie ſlender and rude) after ſuche ſorte, that thei might be, not onely a continuall monument of the ſpeciall loue and mynde that you haue too further the knowlage of the trueth and abholiſhe ignoraunce, hipocriſie, and all other like peinted holines: but alſo

too bee a teſtimonie of my honeſt and louyng herte toward all fauorers of good learnyng and moſt ſpecialli toward your Maſterſhipe, whoſe worthie fame mē of pure liuyng and high knowlage doo ſo extoll, bothe for your alacritee and redineſſe in preferryng the bleſſed woorde of God and the ſincere ſetters furthe of theſame, that you nede nothyng the teſtimonie of my commendacion. Notwithſtandyng when oportunitee ſhalbee giuen me, I ſhall not apere ſlacke in this behalfe, deſiryng you in the meane tyme to take this litle booke into your tuicion, ſo dooyng you ſhal bolden and encorage me hereafter to employe more earneſt laboure in doyng ſome thyng that maie redownd to your perpetuall

memorie and renoune: Praiyng in the meane tyme for the long continuaunce of your Maiſterſhipe in health felicitee & encreaſe of knowledge in our lorde to whom be onely honour for euer.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt booke.
            
               The fyrſt Chapiter. ¶The original of the Heathen Goddes.
               
                  
                     WHAT tyme the ſpirites of the aire (whō the ſcripture callethe rulers of thys worlde) began to geue anſweres of Prophecie out of Images made to reſemble mortall menne,Ephe. vi. and by their wicked ſubteltie dyd pretend thē ſelfes ſome tyme to be of the nomber of good ſpirites, ſome tyme Goddes celeſtiall, and ſometyme the ſolles of valiaunt lordes: they brought men into ſuche errour, and perplexitee, that in ſhort ſpace they dyd all together alienate mens heartes from the religion and reuerence of the verye God. And for ſomuche as their ſpiritual nature is ſubtile, they vſurped ye name of good Angels. For after the opinion of antiquitie, not onely to euery man, but

alſo to euerye ſinguler place and familie were allotted two Angelles: Wherof the one wente aboute to endomage vs:Good angels the other with all endeuour ſtudied to profite vs. Theſe inuaded particularly euery houſe, conueighed them ſelues into mennes bodies, and cloſly in their entrailes imbecilled their health, procured diſeaſes, illuded their heartes with fantaſtical viſions and dreames: And by ſuche miſchief enforſed menne to repayre to them for helpe, and enquire their oracles and anſweres, whiche of purpoſe had doubtfull vnderſtandynges:Oracles doubtful. lest their ignoraunce ſhould be perceyued.What men were deified. By theſe deceiptfull meanes, they were ſo deified, that ſundery people after diuerſe ſortes choſe theim goddes, and with greate reuerence worſhypped them. For ſuche menne, as euery nacion had attained any ſpeciall commoditee by: to the furtheraunce or garniſhyng of their liuyng, or buylders of cities, or ladies excellent in chaſtitie, or menne puiſſaunt in armes, were honored for goddes, as the Egyptians had Iſis: ye Aſſirians Neptune:Iſis. Neptunus. the Latines Faunus
                  ▪
                  
the Romaines Quirene, Athens Pallas, the Delphians Apollo,
                  Faunus Pallas. Apollo Iupiter. Belus. the Cretians Iupiter, ye Aſſirians Belus, and manye countries had diuerſe other goddes, & ſome whiche is ſhame to ſpeake, worſhypped brut beaſtes, & tooke theim for goddes, by reaſon wherof the Grecians had the opiniō that the goddes had their beginnyng of men. And thus when menne withdrewe their phātaſies from imagerie to the ſpirites inuiſable, they perſuaded them ſelues that there wer many goddes, & of no ſmaller nombre then mortal men.
               Of this varietie of opinions the Philoſophiers,Opinions of the philoſophiers. whiche laiyng away al priuate and publique affaires, employed all their ſtudie in tracyng out the trueth, toke occaſion to diſpute of the nature of goddes diuerſely. As Thales Mileſius, which fyrſt ſerched ſuche maters, ſayd that God was an vnderſtandyng,Thales. that made and faſhioned all thynges of the water as matter preiacent. Pythagoras called him a liuely mynde, that pearſed and paſſed through al thynges, of whom all liuyng creatures receyued theyr

lyfe: and Cleanthes defined God to be the ayre.Cleanthes. Anaxagoras. 
                  Anaxagoras eſtemed him to be an infinite mynde, whiche did moue it ſelf,Chryſippus. 
                  Chryſippus thought he was a natural power endued with godly reaſon, Some were of the opinion that there was no goddes. As Diagoras and Theodorus affirmed plaine that there was no God at al.Diagoras.
               
               
                  Protagoras reported that he knew no certaintie of the Goddes,Protagoras. wherefore the Atheniens baniſhed him out of their empire.
               
                  Epicurus.
                  Epicurus graūted there was a god, but ſuche one as was neither liberal, bounteful, nor that had any regarde of thinges: that is to ſay, God is no God, but a cruel & vnkynde monſter. Anaximander ſuppoſed the Goddes to be borne and not to dye tyll after many ages.Anaximāder. 
                  The Egyptians. The Egyptians bycauſe of the aūcientie of their linage, faine the Goddes to haue begonne among theim, and that they were but twoo and euerlaſtyng: the ſonne whō they called Oſiris, & the Moone that was named Iſis. Notwithſtandyng Lactācius writeth, that Saturnus was the firſt father of the goddes,Saturnus father of the goddes. whiche

begat Iupiter, Iuno, Neptune, Pluto and Glauca by his wyfe Ops. And for the benefites that they ſhewed to their ſubiectes, they were deified of them. But in ſuche varietee of opinions it is a thyng difficile too determine the firſt ofſpryng of the goddes both bycauſe they be but vayne, and alſo ſprong out of mortal humanitie. And againe to ſpeake of God as he is in his ſupernatural eſſence is a thing daūgerous,To ſpeake of the nature of God is daū
                     gerous. bycauſe we can neither behold the reſplēdent brightneſſe of his maieſtie with oure corporal eyes, nor with any quickeneſſe of wit comprehende his infinite might, as the Poetes Simonides dyd declare verie well:Simonides. for when he was required of kyng Hiero to ſhew him what thyng and of what ſorte God was, he deſired to haue one day reſpite: when he aſked him the nexte daye, he praied to haue two dayes: and ſo often as the kyng enquired of him an anſwere he encreaſed the nomber of the daies of deliberacion: the kyng meruelyng that he doubled ſo many tymes the daies, enquired why he dyd ſo? For ye more (ꝙ he) that I cōſidre the thyng

and muſe on 
                     •
                  t, the more obſcure and in
                     •
                  ricate it ſemeth to me. The wh
                     •
                  
                  che thyng if the Philoſophiers, 
                     •••
                  
                  che lyke to blynde warriers, wanderyng in darkeneſſe had doone, they would not haue diuiſed ſo many lyes to offende or diſpleaſe their creator. For it is better to be ignoraunt in the trueth, then to teache errour. Therfore to cōclud (as Macrobie writeth) there is but one God,One God. ſubiecte to no mutabilite, of all naturall thynges one eternal, of all naturall thynges the cauſe principal, whiche ſaieth by his Prophet Eſaie, I am God, afore me there was no other, neither ſhalbe after me, with out beginnyng, onely euerlaſtyng, of whom Virgil writeth thus.

                     Heauen, and yearth, and the vvater large,
                     The bright circle of the heauenly ſphere,
                     The ſpirite all foſtereth: and hath ful charge
                     Paſſyng through all, to guyde it euery vvhere.
                  
                  AND Plato ſaieth there is but one God, and affirmeth that this worlde

was created by him: and was called God,what God is bycauſe he geueth frely to men all thynges good & profitable, and is of all goodneſſe in this worlde the cauſe principal, fountain and ſpryng.
            
            
               The .ii. Chapiter. ¶The principles of natural thinges.
               
                  
                     ALBEIT it was cōuenient to haue begonne this preſent treatiſe of declaryng the principles of naturall creatures, and ſo conſequently to haue expounded the originall of the Goddes, forſomuche as they haue their beginnyng of the ſame thynges: yet the reuerence that I haue to the true God, whiche was afore all other creatures, moueth me to begynne at hym as the cauſe principal of the reſt. Therefore as concernyng the cauſes of thinges, I wyl ſhewe fyrſt the myndes of the Philoſophiers that be mooſt probable, vntyl I come to the trueth ſelf. Thales one of the ſeuen wyſe men of Grece holdeth opiniō that water was matter of all thynges.Water is cauſe material. Contrary wyſe Heraclitus an Epheſian and Hippaſus
                  
ſuppoſe al to be procreated of fire Empedocles ſaieth the foure elementes wer the cauſes of thinges as Lucretius writeth.Fyre, Foure elementes.
               
               
                  Of vvater, earth, aire, & firye glede,
                  All thinges natural duely procede.
               
               
                  Anaximenes thynketh al thynges to haue their beginnyng of the ayre, Metrodorus affirmeth the vniuerſal worlde to be eternal without beginnyng or end.Ayre. 
                  Epicurus one of Democritus diſciples putteth two cauſes Atomos or Motes & vacuite or emptines,Atomos of theſe he ſaieth, ye foure elemē
                  tes come. Theſe are the opinions of the Philoſophers, yt were men without the knowledge of God: but (as Moſes & Ioſephus recorde) the ſcripture concludeth that God made all thinges of nothing in the beginnyng,The worlde was made of naught. as ſ. Iohn ſaieth al thing was made by him. And therfore (as Lactantius writeth) let no mā be curious in ſearching of what ſtuffe God made theſe great and wonderfull workes, for he fourmed thē al of nothyng by the power of his mightie worde. For as Dauid the prophet ſingeth, he ſpake the worde and they were made, he gaue

cōmaundement and they were created. Of the ſame opinion is Plato in his booke called Tymaeus.
                  Plato.
               
            
            
               The .iii. Chapiter. ¶The procreacion of man, the diuerſitee of languages, and diuiſion of nations.
               
                  
                     THE moſt famous writers of naturall hyſtories (as Diodorus recordeth) ſpake of two ſōdry maners of birth:Two opinions of the birth of man. and fyrſt ſtocke of mankynd. For they whiche contend that the world was vngenerate, and with out any daunger of corrupcion, ſaye alſo that man hath bene in a certaine perpetuite without beginnyng. Of this opinion, were Pythagoras, Architas, Xenocrates, & Ariſtotle with other Per
                        •
                     patetekes, affirmyng that al thinges in the eternal world, whiche haue bene or ſhall hereafter come to paſſe, be by generation endles and without beginnyng, and haue onely a circuite and courſe of generacions, wherin both the birth & natural reſolucion

of thynges may be perceyued. Other that ſuppoſe this worlde had both an originall cauſe of beyng and ſhal alſo ſuſtein an end by putrifaction,The ſecond opinion. hold opinion that man had a time of his generacion. For this cauſe the Egyptians report that men wer fyrſt borne among them,The Egiptians opinion of man. aſwell by reaſon of the fruitful rankenes of the ſoyle, and ſeaſonablenes of the ayre, as by cauſe of the riuer Nilus, whiche, for the luſtye fatnes of the ſlyme, dothe procreate diuerſe kyndes of beaſtes, & hath in it ſelfe naturally a certeyn power nutratiue. For in the countree of Thebais Mice be engendered of the mudde:Mice engendred of the mudde. Wherfore men of thoſe parties merueil muche, when they be holde the fore partes of them to the breſt walowe & moue ſenſibly in the mire, and the hinder partes as yet nothyng faſhioned but all out of ſhap.
               Neuertheleſſe Pſammaticus their kyng,The ſtory of Pſammaticꝰ deſiryng to knowe in what coū
                  trie men were fyrſt begotten, deuiſed this meane. He cauſed .ii. yong infantes newe borne to be deliuered to his herdmen to be brought vp among his cattel, & cōmaunded that no mā ſhuld

ſpeake any word to them, becauſe he would know what word they would ſpeake fyrſt. Then two yeare after, when the herdmen opened the doore where they were noriſhed, they ſtretched out their handes and cryed Becos, which in the Phrigians lāguage ſignifieth breade. Thus it was knowen that the Phrigians were the eldeſt linage and fyrſt borne. The Ethiopians, of this coniecture,Ethiopians opinion of man. thynke them ſelfes to be the fyrſt, becauſe no man would come out of any other place into that region, and they of that partie bee by a general conſente called home bread,Aborigines. and (as Diodorus ſayeth) it is probable that thoſe vnder the Meridional equator ſhould be the aūcienteſt of al. For ſeyng the heate of the ſunne dryeth vp the moyſture of the yearth, and hath alſo of it ſelfe a power to geue and preſerue the life of thynges, it is like that the place whiche marcheth nereſt to the ſūne ſhuld bryng furth ye fyrſt liuyng creatures.Anaximāder. For that cauſe Anaximander taught that men fyrſt ſprong of water and yearth warmed with liuely

heate. Empedocles in a maner cō
                  firmeth the ſame, where he writeth, that euerye particular membre was ſeuerally made & proporcioned of the yearth (as a mother) and ſo to haue bene compacted and cōglutinated by heate and moyſture into the perfecte figure and ſhappe of a man.
               
                  Democritus.
                  Democritus thinketh menne were fyrſt made of water and mudde tempered together.zeno. 
                  Zeno iudgeth the cauſe of mankynde to haue proceded of the newe worlde. And menne to be onely begotten by the ayde and comfort of the diuine fyre, that is the prouidence of God. As for the Poetes, ſome faine howe man was made out of ſofte claye by Prometheus,
                  Poetes. ſome ſay that they ſprong of the hard ſtones that Deucalion and Pyrtha caſt, and thus muche is of ye vaine opiniōs of Gērilitee. But to ſpeake the truth (as ſcripture teacheth) ye beginnyng of manne was in Iurye.God made man▪
                   For God when he had finiſhed the worlde, did create the fyrſt mā Adam of the yerth in the felde of Damaſce,Adam the fyrſt man. as ſome thinke. Thus Adā made by God mariyng his wife Eue was auctour and

beginner of the whole poſterite and linage: But forſomuche as God fourmed but one man, and indued him wt one kynd of ſpeche onely to vtter and declare the thynges that he conceyueth in his mynde: men perchaunce wyl merueile, what the cauſe ſhould be that there be at this daye ſo many diuerſe lāguages, that accordyng to the varietee of countries ther be ſondry ſpeches. And therfore I thought it cōuenient to ſhew the occaſion of ye ſame.Diuerſitee of ſpeches. What tyme Nemroth the ſōne of Cham that was ſonne to Noe, after the vniuerſall flud went about to withdrawe men (whiche dreade the daunger of drounyng) from the feare of God,Religion. ſuppoſyng all their hope to conſiſt in their owne might & power, perſuaded them to buylde a towre of ſuche altitude,Babilon. that the water ſhould not be hable to ouer flowe it. Whileſt they were thus earneſtly occupied aboute their enterpriſe, God deuided their ſpeches in ſuche ſorte, that one of them could not perceyue another by reaſon of the diſcord and diſagreyng of their languages. And thus began the diuerſytee of tonges

that we vſe & haue nowe. The ſame o
                     •
                  caſion was that the poſterities of Noe were diſperſed and ſcattered a broade. For when one could not vnderſtand anothers language, it came to paſſe that euery mā departed into ſundry prouinces and countries,Deuiſion of nacions. and there named places wherof they had the gouernaūce, & alſo cities, whiche they builded, after their owne names as Euſebius teſtifyeth. The ſōnes of Noe were Sem,
                  Sonnes of Noe. 
                  Cham, and Iaphet. The yſſue of Sem was Elam, whereof the Elamites came.Auctours of the names of countries. 
                  Aſſur, of whom the Aſſirians were named Arphaxad was auctoure of the Arabians and Lud of the Lidians: the children of Cham were Chus that named the Ethiopians, and Meſre the beginner of the Egyptians. Chanaan of whom the Cananites had their name: the linage of Chus was Saba wherof the Sabees came, & Euila auctoure of the Euelites. And ſemblably we muſt beleue that of them came al other nations and people of the worlde, whiche be now in ſo great nombre, that they cannot eaſely be nombred & counted.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of mariage and ſundry rightes of the ſame.
               
                  
                     GOD after that he had fully accompliſhed, and perfectly poliſhed the world and the reſt of his creatures were in their kind cō
                  ſummate, then (as Moſes teacheth) made man laſt of all, to be lorde and ſouereigne of the whole bodye of the world, as one to whom the other his worke ſhould be ſubiect in obedience bycauſe he was faſhioned after his owne lykenes. And leſt ſo worthye a creature ſhould by death peryſhe, or the world might wante his gouernor and ruler,Inſtitucion of wedlocke. it lyked him to make woman out of the bodye of man, and ſo with the bond of matrimony combined them together, yt they ſhould not lyue after the maner of brut beaſtes: Therefore hath God ioyned Adam & Eue in mariage in Paradyſe afore they knewe ſinne,Mariage beganne in paradiſe. that by the cōgreſſion and company of theſe two ſexes and kyndes, their yſſue might be enlarged & repliniſhe the whole world.

In this ſorte was matrimonye inſtituted, albeit antiquitee feyneth Cecrops kyng of the Atheniās to haue ordained matrimony,Cecrops. for which cauſe he was reported to haue had two faces. But all countries dyd not entre like bond of matrimony,The maners of diuers nacions in mariages. nether kept it after one faſhion. For the Numidians, Egiptians, Indians, Hebrewes, Perſians, Parthians, Thracians, and almoſt al the Barbarians, euery one accordyng to his ſubſtaūce maried wyfes, ſome .x. ſome mo. The Scithians, the Scottes, and Atheniens vſed their children and wyfes in common, and occupied with them abrode openly lyke beaſtes, The Maſſagites maried euery one a wyfe but they vſed thē cōmonly.Maſſagites. Arabians. Among Arabians it is the maner that al kynſmē ſhould haue but one wife, and he that came to meddle with her, ſhoulde ſet his ſtaffe at ye doore: for their cuſtome was to beare a ſtaffe, albeit ſhe lay euery night by the eldeſt: by this meanes they were all brethren. An aduouterer was there condemned too death,Puniſhment for aduoutry whiche was perceiued by this if he were of another familie or kynred.

Where chaunced on a tyme a ſtraūge thing worthy to be had in memorye,A ſtorye. there was a certayne kynges doughter of excellent beutie, whiche had .xv. brethren, that loued her all interely well, and vſed therefore one after another to reſorte and companye with her: ſhe beganne by ſuche dayly daliaunce to be werye of theyr wanton companye, and deuiſed this fea
                     •
                  e, ſhe prepared ſtaues lyke her brothers ſtaues, and bi and bi, as one was gone, ſhe ſet a ſtaffe at the doore lyke to hys, and by that deceyte the other when they came too the doore, ſuppoſyng one to be within preaſed no further: and it fortuned on a day when they were all together in the court, one of them departed from the other and repaired to her houſe, and when hee eſpied a ſtaffe at the gate, thinkyng it too be ſome aduouterer, for he was aſſured that he lefte hys brethren in the court, he ranne to his father and accuſed hys ſyſter of aduouterye: but when the matter was knowē, it was perceiued that he had falſely ſclaundered her.Biyng of wiues. The Aſſirians and ye Babilonians bought theyr

wyues in open market at a common pryce, whiche cuſtome among the Saracens and Arabiens yet ſtyl remayneth.Naſamones. The Naſamones when they be fyrſt maried, vſe to ſuffer their wifes the fyrſt night to lye with all her geſtes, in the worſhyp of Venus, & from thencefurth they kepe them ſelues chaſt, and pure of liuyng. A certayn people of the Carthagens, whiche border on Egypt, were wont to offre ſuche maydes as ſhould bee maryed to the kyng of that regiō, to defloure whom it pleaſed him.The vſe of Scotland. In Scotland alſo the vſage was that the Lorde of the ſoile ſhould lye with the bryde afore her huſbande: but for ſomuche as it was vnſittyng to be frequented among Chriſtians,Malcolme kyng of the Scottes. their kyng Malcolme the third of that name aboute the yere of our Lorde .M.xcix. dyd aboliſhe that beaſtly abhominacion, & ordeyned that euerye mayde ſhould geue the Lorde for the redempcion of her maydenheade a croune of golde.Single liuers Some people liued ſingle, as certain nacions called Criſtae & Eſſeni amōg the Hebrues, whiche did abhorre the calamities and trouble in Mariage.

Wedlocke was obſerued ſyncerelye and reuerently of the Romaynes tyl deuorcement began,Deuorcemēt. which although it be an occaſion that women ſhould more earneſtly keape theyr chaſtitee, yet our religion doth ſcarcely permit it. One Spurius Seruilius,
                  Spurius Seruilius. the yere after the cytie was foūded. CCCCC.xxii. (Marcus Pomponius and Caius Papirius beyng Conſulles) fyrſte ſued a deuorce frō his wyfe, becauſe ſhe was barren: for whiche facte albeit he toke openly another afore the cenſoures that he dyd it becauſe too haue yſſue, yet he was among the comon ſorte euyl ſpoken of. This decre of deuorcyng was takē out of the lawes of Moſes,Moſes ordeined deuorcementes. which made ye fyrſt conſtitucion of that matter, yet was there thys dyfference, for by Moſes it was onely lawful for the huſband to forſake his wyfe, but the Romaynes decree gaue theim bothe lyke lybertye.Rites of mariages▪
                   The rytes of Mariage were diuers in Rome, the maner was that two chyldren ſhould leade the bryde and another bare afore her a torche of whyte thorne in worſhyppe of Ceres, that lyke as ſhe wyth fruytes of

the yearth dothe noryſhe menne: ſo the newe Bryde lyke an houſewyfe ſhuld bryng vp her children. Whiche maner is vſed in Englande, ſauyng yt in ſteade of the torche, there is borne here a baſen of ſiluer or golde before. A garlande alſo of corne eares was ſet on her heade: or elles ſhe bare it in her hande, or if that were not, when ſhe came home whea
                     •
                  e was ſcatered abroade ouer her heade in tokenyng of plentie and fruytfulneſſe. Alſo afore ſhe came to bedde to her huſbande Fyre and Water were geuen her,Fyre and water geuen in token of chaſtitee. whiche haue powre too puryfye and clenſe: ſygnifiyng thereby that ſhe ſhould be chaſt and honeſte of her body. There were beſydes theſe dyuerſe rytes whiche I omit.Maydes of Rome and Grece. The maides of Grece and Rome (as it maye appeare by Homere and Catullus) vſed cuſtomablye to gyrde their preuitie with a laſe or ſwathell tyll the daye of their mariage. The Bryde anoynted the pooſtes of the doores wyth ſwynes greaſe, becauſe ſhe thought by that meanes to dryue awaye all miſfortune, wherof ſhe had her name in Latyn 
                     Vxor abvn gendo.
                  . Neither might

ſhe ſtep ouer the threſholde, but muſt be borne ouer, to declare that ſhe loſeth her Virginitie vnwillyngly, with manye other ſuperſticious ceremonies whiche be to long to reherſe.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .v. Chapiter.
¶The inſtitucion of religion and who worſhopped goddes fyrſt with ſacrific
                     •
                  .
               
                  
                     IT is no doubte but men whiche at the fyrſt with out any gouernour ledde an vplandyſh and a rude maner of lyfe,Occaſion of Idolatry. dyd highlye auaunce in honoure and prayſes theyr fyrſt kynges: & by the perſuaſion of the deuil, either for theyr wō
                  derful mālynes and vertue, or to flatter the condicion of their dygnitie, or for ſome ſpecial benefite that they receiued by them, magnified them as goddes. Wherby it came to paſſe that kynges, beyng welbeloued of their people, lefte a greate deſyre and feruentnes of them ſelues among theyr ſubiectes and poſteritee: by reaſon wherof men made Images of them,Images of kynges. to take a comfortable pleaſure of the

beholdyng of them: Afterward becauſe to encorage men to vertue and cheualry, thei reuerenced thē as goddes, for eueri valiant courage would with more alacrite enterpriſe daūgerous aduētures for the cōmon weale when they perceyued the noble actes of worthy and puiſant men, to be recompenſed with honoure and laude of the immortal goddes. Thus temples beganne fyrſt to be buylded, and newe ſeruice of the goddes, by the ordinaunce of Meliſſus,
                  Meliſſus, in the tyme of Iupiter, or not long afore. Albeit that the trueth & very original maye be abſolutely knowen, let vs appoint the cuſtome of Idolatrye to haue begonne in the tyme of Belus kyng of the Aſſirians,Belus. whiche reigned in the thre M.C.lxxx. yeare of the worlde, whom the Babilon
                     •
                  ans fyrſt worſhypped for a God, and ſet vp an Image of him and therefore they that thynke Idolatry hath endured from the beginnyng of the worlde are deceyued. Herodotus ſayeth that the Egyptians fyrſt buylded alters, temples, Images and made ſacrifyce to the goddes, and after taught

them to ſtraungers: Some ſuppoſe that Mercurye ſhewed with what ceremonies goddes ſhould be honoured, ſome ſay it was deuiſed by kyng Numapompilius.
               
               
                  Diodorus thinketh that the Ethiopians did inſtitute the rytes of ſacrificyng to the goddes,Ethiopians. whiche thyng Homere in his Ilias witneſſeth, wher he telleth howe Iupiter & the other goddes went into Ethiopia to the oblacions that were cuſtomably made there, & alſo repared thyther to feele the fragrant odours, that perfumed frō the ſacrifices. And the Ethiopians receiued for a reward of their holynes, that they ſhould neuer be conquered, but euer liue in libertie, wtout any bondage. Lactantius affyrmeth, that Meliſſus kyng of Crete did fyrſt ſacrifice, and ordeined other ſolemne rytes in the ceremonies of their goddes.Ianus. In Italy Ianus and his ſonne Faunus appointed ſacrifices to Saturne, and after them kyng Numa ſet vp a newe religion.Cadmus. Orpheus. 
                  Cadmus out of Phenice, and Orpheus out of Trace brought fyrſt into Grece the myſteries, ſolemnyties, dedicatyng of Images,

and hymnes of their goddes.
               Albeit Herodotus ſayeth that Cecrops kyng of Athens fette all ſuche conſtitucions and ordinaunces out of Egypte into Grece,Cecrops. and fyrſt inuocated Iupiter, founded Images, ſet vpalters, and offered ſacrifices, that were neuer ſene before in Grece. But to God almighty, whō we chriſtians honor and ſerue Cain and Abel fyrſt offered,Cain. Abel. Enos. and Enos fyrſt called vpō the name of God.
            
            
               
                  ❧The ſixt Chapiter. ¶Who founde the leters, and the nomber of them.
               
                  
                     LETTERS, wherein is cōteyned the treaſure of memorye,Letters. and by whom thynges notable be preſerued in freſhe remembraūce, after the opinion of Diodorus,
                  Diodorus. were foūd by Mercury in Egypt, yet ſome ſay one Menon an Egyptian diuiſed them,Menon. The Egyptians letters. but in ſteade of the letters they of Egypte vſed to ſignify and declare the ententes and conceytes of their myndes by the fygures

of beaſtes, fiſhes, foules, & tres Plinie ſayeth,Plinie. he euer thought that the Aſſirians excogitated the letters. whiche Cadmus brought out of Phenice into Grece,
                     Cadmus founde .xvi. letters.
                     Palamedes added foure letters.
                   whiche were but .xvi in nomber. A. b. c. d. e. g. i. l. m. n. o p. r. s. t. v. to theſe Palamedes added in the battail of Troy other .iiii. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Simonides found as many 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Whoſe power is cōteyned in our letters. Ariſtotle ſayeth there were .xviii. of ye olde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . and that Epicarmus put to the other two θ. and ω.Epicarmus. 
                  Hermolaus ſuppoſeth he put to Υ. Herodotus writeth howe y• the Pheniciens that came with Cadmus to enhabite Thebes,Cadmus. brought letters into Grece, whiche were neuer ſene in vſe there afore tyme. Some thinke the Ethiopians inuēted them, and then taught them to the Egiptians, that were one of theyr ꝓuinces. But Eumolphus telleth vnfaynedly that the beginnyng of letters did procede of Moſes,
                  Eumolphus▪
                   
                  Moſes. whiche reignyng long afore Cadmus daies, taught the Iewes

the letters, & thence the Pheniciens receiued thē, & the Grekes lerned of thē. Whiche thyng is cōformable to the ſaiyng of Plinie afore reherſed for Iury is a part of Syria, & the Iewes be syrians. Neuertheles I find by Ioſephus that writyng was afore Noe his flud,Sonnes of Seth found the letters. for the ſonnes of Seth wrote in .ii. pyllers, one of bricke & another of ſtoone, the ſcience of Aſtronomy, whereof that of ſtoone, in the tyme of Ioſephus remained in Firia. Philo aſcribeth the inuēcion of them to Abraham, whiche was elder then Moſes, albeit I had rather aſſigne to Sethes childrē the beginnyng of writyng. As for the Hebrue letters whiche be nowe, after the mynde of ſ. Ierome, were but newly inuented, & deuiſed by Eſdras: for afore that tyme the Hebrues & Samarites vſed al one carecters and print of their letters.
               
                  Hebrue lettersThe olde Greke letters the ſame yt the Romaynes vſe now, as Plinie cō
                  iectureth by a certayne braſen table that came frō Delphos, whiche was dedicated & hāged vp in a librarye in the tēple of Minerua at Rome in his tyme. They were brought into Italy

by Euander & the Archadiens whiche came into Italy to enhabite there as Ouide telleth in his booke De faſtis.
                  Euander brought letters into Italy.
               
               The Hetrurians had alſo a fourme of letters by them ſelfes, wherin the youth of Rome was enſtructed as well as in the Greke letters, whiche one Demaratus a Corinthian taught the Hetrurians.Demaratus taught the Hetrurians letters. And like as the Grecians had enlarged the nombre of theyr letters, ſo the Italyans folowyng theyr example put to theirs, f. k. q. x. y. z. h. whiche h. is no letter, but a ſigne of aſperacion f. they receiued of the Aeolians,The letter f. was taken of the Aeolians. whiche both among the olde Romaynes & Aeolians had the ſame ſound & pronunciacion that p. wt an aſperacion hath, whiche we vſe in writyng Greke wordes. And afterward Claudius Caeſar, as Quintiliane writeth, appoineted yt it ſhuld be taken in the place of v. conſonant as fulgus for vulgus,
                  F. for u. conſonant. 
                  fixit for vixit And euen ſo oure Engliſhemen vſe to ſpeake in Eſſere, for they ſay fineger for vineger, feale for veale, & cōtrary wiſe a vore for a fore, voure for foure And by proceſſe of tyme it was vſed for ph. in Latyne woordes k. was

borowed of the Grekes, but no good auctoure vſeth it in writyng Latyn q. was added becauſe it hath a groſſer ſounde then c.
                  q. letter. x. letter. The letter x. wee had alſo out of Grece, although (as Quintiliane iudgeth) we might well forbere it, in ſomuche yt they vſed for it ether c. s. or g. s. Lykewiſe y. and z were fet from the Grecians & be vſed of vs onely to write Greke wordes.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .vii. Chapiter. ☞The inuencion of Grammer.
               
                  
                     NEXTE the letters, the inuencion of Grammer muſt ordinaryly ſuccede, both becauſe it is the foū
                  dacion & ground wheron al other ſciēces reſt: & alſo for aſmuche as it taketh ye name of leters. For Grāma in Greke ſignifieth a letter in Engliſh. Grāmer is an art that doth cōſ
                     •
                  ſt in ſpeakyng and writyng without faulte, ſo that euery worde haue his due letters, and is diuided, after the mynde of Quintiliane,
                  Two partes of grammer. into twoo partes: the waye to ſpeake congruite, and declaryng of Poetes. As Tully writeth, ther is required

in gramariens, the declaraciō of Poetes, the knowlage of hiſtories expoſicion of wordes, and a certaine vtteraunce of pronunciacion. It had the beginnyng of markyng and obſeruyng what was mooſt fytte or vnfittyng in communicacion, whiche thyng menne counterfettyng in their ſpeache made this arte, euen as Rhethorike was perceiued. For it is the duetie bothe of Grammariens and oratours to haue a regarde & reſpecte howe to ſpeake. Hermippus ſaieth that Epicurus fyrſt taught the arte of Grammer,Epicurus taught grammer firſt. and Plato eſpyed and perceiued fyrſt the commoditee & profette of it. In Rome it was nothyng eſtemed tyl one Crates Malotes was ſent by kyng Attalus to the ſenate to teache it betwene the ſecond & thirde battailles of Punike,
                  Crates taught grammer in Rome a lytle afore the death of Ennius ye Poete. It is of all other ſciences the mooſt ſpeciall, for it ſheweth a meane & way to attayne all the reſt of the faculties and artes Neither can a man come or attain to any excellencie in any arte, oneleſſe he haue fyrſt his principles of Grammer perfectly knowen, and throughly perceiued.
               
                  Therfore in olde tyme Grammariens were called iudges and allowers of all other writers, & for that cauſe they were called Critici.
               
               In this excelled Didimus and Antonius Enipho,
                  Antonius Enipho a ſcholemaſter. whoſe ſchole Marcus Cicero reſorted vnto diuerſe tymes, after this affayres of the lawe were ended: Nigidius Figulus, Marcus Varro, Marcus Valerius Probus, & the arrogant Palemon with many other. Of the Grekes Ariſtarcus, Ariſtotle, and Theodoces were chiefe.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. Chapiter. ¶Of Poetrie, and Meter, and ſundery kyndes of the ſame.
               
                  Poetrie.
                  
                     POETRIE is a goodly arte: aſwell becauſe no other diſcipline can bee perceyued, excepte a manne ſtudie it vehemently, for it comprehendeth al other ſciences: as for that where other faculties be deuiſed by the pregnance, of mannes witte, this art onely is geuen of nature by a diuine inſpiracion, wtout whiche Democritus
                  
affirmeth ther could neuer be excellente Poete: for it procedeth not of art or preceptes, but of a natural inſpiracion, and ſpiritual power. And therfore Ennius called Poetes holy,Poetes be called holy of Ennius. becauſe they be by a ſpecial prerogatiue cōmended & praiſed to vs of God. The beginnyng of this arte is very ancient and as Euſebius ſaieth,Hebrues were auctours of Poetry. it floriſhed fyrſt among the Hebrues, that were long afore the Grekes. For Moſes the great capitain of the Iewes,Moſes. what time he led them out of Egypte into the land of promiſe, paſſyng the red ſea, which by the power of GOD gaue place to them, inſpired by the holy ghoſt made a ſong of Exameter verſes, to rendre thankes to God for that benefite.
               
                  AND Dauid the holy Prophete of GOD,Dauid after he was diſpatched of all his affayres to warre, and eſcaped the aſſaultes and daungers of treaſon, liuyng in great peace, deuiſed many pleaſaunt balades and tuneable Hymnes,The Pſalte
                        •
                      of Dauid. of the praiſe of God in ſundery kyndes of Meter. For as ſamet Ierome ſaieth, the Pſalter of Dauid goeth in as good nombre and

meaſures, as either ye Greke Planudes, or ye Latine Horacius, ſometyme in Alcaeus nombers, ſometyme in the meter of Sappho, ſometyme wt halfe meaſures. What is godlyer then the ſong of Moſes in Deutronomie and of Eſaias?Salomon. Iob. more auncient then Salamon? more perfecte thē Iob? And we maye worthely aſcribe the inuencion of it to the Hebrues, but in deede Orpheus and Linus,
                  Orpheus. Linus and after them Homere and Heſiodus dyd fyrſt polyſhe and adorne the Arte with all kynde of furnature. The Romaynes receiued it not tyll of latter tyme, for Liuius Andronicus (as Tully wryteth) CCCCC.xiii. yere after the cytie was builded,Liuius. And
                        •
                     onicus. 
                  Caius Claudius, Cē
                     to and Marcus Tuditanus beyng cō
                  ſulles, ſet furth the fyrſte Enterlude or fable a yeare before Ennius was borne. Afore thoſe dayes it was had in ſuche diſpyte, that if one had profeſſed him ſelfe to be a Poete, he was takē for a murtherer or ruffian. The beginner of meter was God, whiche proporcioned the world,The worlde was made by meter. with all the contentes of the ſame, with a certain order, as it were a meter, for there is

noone (as Pithagoras taught) that douteth, but that there is in thynges heauenly and yearthly a kynd of armonye, and oneles it were gouerned with a fourmal concorde and diſcribed nombre, howe could it long continue? Al other inſtrumētes, that we occupye, be all faſhioned by a maner of meaſure. And Diodorus aſſigneth the inuencion of Meter, whiche the Poetes fulfilled with a ſpiritual influence, vſe in their workes, to Iupiter as to almightie God.
               Of Meters there be diuers kindes that hath theyr name,Dyuerſe kindes of meter. either of the thyng that is diſcribed therin, as heroical Meter is ſo called of the valiaunt deades of armes of noble men,Heroical verſe. that be cōteined in it, wherin alſo Apollo gaue his Oracles, therfore Plinie ſaieth we haue that Meter of Pithius Oracle: or of the inuentoure as Aeſclepiadical or of the quantitee as Iambus,
                  Archilocus found iambꝰ becauſe it ſtandeth of a ſhorte and a long, whiche Archilocus founde fyrſt, or of the nombre of feete, as Exameter and Pentameter whiche is alſo called Elegiacal the ſheppeheardes ſonges, Daphnis the

ſonne of Mercurie founde,Daphnis founde ye ſheperdes carols and other diuyſed other ſonges, whiche I let paſſe for my purpoſe is only to ſpeke of the Inuentours of the Meter, and not to perſecute the particulars.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of Tragedies, Comedies, Satyres, and newe Comedies.
               
                  
                     TRAGEDIES and comedies had their beginning of the oblacions (as Diodorus writeth) whiche in olde tyme men deuoutly offered for their fruytes to Bacchus.
                  Tragedies. For as the aulters were kyndeled with fyre, and the Goate leyed on it, the quyre in honoure of Bacchus ſonge this Meter called a Tragedie. It was named ſo, either becauſe a Gote, whiche in Greke is called Tragos, was the rewarde appoynted for him that was auctour of the ſong,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . or becauſe a Goate, whiche is noyefull to the vynes, whereof Bacchus was fyrſt inuētour, was ſacrificed to Liber: or of the groundes or dregges, whiche in Greke is

called Tryx, with the whiche ſtage Players vſed to paynte their face,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . afore that Eſchilus diuiſed v
                     •
                  ſers The beginner of them,Vyſ
                        •
                     rs were founde by Eſchilus. after the mynde of Horace, was Theſpis: albeit, Quintilianus ſaith Eſchilus ſetfurth fyrſt openlye Tragedies afore any other, Sophocles & Euripides dyd furniſhe them more galantly. In Rome Liuius Andronicus made the fyrſt Tragedie, wherin Accius, Pacuuius,
                  Famous tragedies. 
                  Ouidius and Seneca excelled. The Comedies began what tyme (the Atheniens beyng not yet aſſembled into ye Cytie) the youth of that coūtry vſed to ſyng ſolempne verſes at feaſtes abrode in the villages, and high wayes for to get monye, they were ſo named of the Greke worde Comos for bankettyng or Come a ſtrete,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . and Ode a ſong. Albeit it is vncertaine among the Grecians who founde it fyrſt. In this kynde of writyng Ariſtophanes, Eupolis & Cratinus bare the price: of the Romanes, Liuius Andronicus founde it fyrſt. In a Tragedie noble parſonages, as Lordes,A Tragedie. Dukes, Kynges and Emperours be brought in, with an highe ſtyle:A comedie. In a comedie,

amorous daliaunce, matters of loue, & deflouryng of maydens be conteyned. Heuynes is apropried vnto a Tragidie: and therefore, when kyng Archilaus deſyred Euripides to write a Tragidie of him be denied it,Archilaus. wiſhyng that neuer ſuche thyng ſhould chaunce to him, as ſhould be worthy of a Tragedye, for it hath euer a myſerable ende, and a Comodie hath a ioyful ende. A Satyre is a poeſy.A ſatyr
                        •
                     . rebukyng vyces ſharpely not regardyng any perſons. There be two kyndes of Satyres, the one is bothe among the Grekes and Romanes of auncient tyme vſed,Two ſortes of Satires. for the diuerſytie of Meters muche like a Comodye, ſauyng that it is more wanton. Demetrius of Tharſus, and one Menippus a bondeman, whom Marcus Varro did counterfeit, were writers in this kynde. The ſeconde maner of Satyres is verye railyng, onely ordeyned to rebuke vyce, and deuyſed of the Romaynes vpon this occaſion. When the Poetes, that wrot the olde Comodies, vſed to handle for theyr argumentes, not onely fayned matters, but alſo thynges done

in dede, whiche although at the fyrſt it was tollerable, yet afterwarde,Lybe
                        •
                     ye of the old ſatyre it fortuned by reaſon that they inueyhed ſo liberally, and largely, at their pleaſure againſt euery mā, that there was a law made, that no man ſhould from thencefurth reprehend any mā by name. Then the Romaynes in the place of thoſe Comodies ſubſtituted ſuche Satyres, as they had newly imagined. Then alſo began ye new Comedie,New Comedye. whiche cōcerneth generally all men of meane eſtate: and hath leſſe bitternes and railyng, but more pleaſauntnes and paſtime for the auditours.Menander. Of this Menander and Philemon were auctours, whiche aſwaged all the crabbedneſſe of the olde writynges. Of them learned Cicilius, Neuius, Plautus, and Terentius, the fourme to compyle Comodies, albeit (as Quintiliane ſaieth) th
                     •
                  y vnneth attayned to the leaſt portion of theyr patrone, becauſe the latin tong is not ſo fyt to receyue the ornamentes of eloquencie, as the Greke tong is.Satires wherof they were named. The Satyres had theyr name of vplandyſhe goddes, that were rude, laſſiuious, and wanton of behauour,

In this fourme of writyng Lucilius Horatius, Perſius, Inuenalis, obtayned great fame and praiſe.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .x. Chapiter. ¶The deuiſers of Hyſtories, Proſe and Rhethorike.
               
                  Hyſtories.
                  
                     HYSTORIES of all other writynges be mooſte commendable, becauſe it infourmeth all ſortes of people with notable examples of liuyng, and doth excite noble men to enſue ſuche actiuite in enterpriſes as they reade to haue bene doone by their aunceſtours, and alſo diſcorageth & dehorteth wicked perſons from attemptyng of any haynouſe deede or cryme, knowyng that ſuche actes ſhalbe regeſtred in perpetual memory to the praiſe or reproche of the doers, accordyng to the deſerte of their endeuoures. Plinie writeth that Cadmus Mileſius fyrſt wrote hyſtories among the Grecians,Cadmus wrote the ſtory of Syrus. whiche conteined ye geſtes of Cirus kyng of Perſia. Albeit, Ioſephus ſuppoſeth it to bee more probable that Hyſtories

were begonne by the olde writers of the Hebrues as in the time of Moſes whiche wrote the lyues of many of the eldeſt Hebrues and the creacion of the worlde:Moſes dyd write the fyrſt ſtorye. or elles to the prieſtes of Egypte and Babilon. For the Egyptians & Babilonians, haue bene of longeſt continuaunce verye diligente in ſettyng furthe thynges in writyng, inſomuche,Prieſtes of Egypt wrote ſtories. yt their prieſtes were ſpecially appoineted to applye theim ſelues to that purpoſe of puttyng in writyng ſuche thynges as were worthy to be had in memory As concernyng the fyrſt writers of Proſe, I cannot holde with Plinie, whiche ſaieth Phereſides a Syrian wrote fyrſt pro
                     •
                  e in the tyme of kyng Sirus.
                  Phereſides. For it is no doubt but he that wrote hyſtories,Proſe. wrote alſo proſe firſt and Phereſides was long after Moſes, whiche was .ccccccc.lxxxviii. yeres afore Ioathan kyng of the Ieues In whoſe tyme the Olimpiades beganne, and this Phereſides (as Euſebius wryteth) was but in the tyme of the fyrſt Olimpiade.
                  Greke ſtories Latin ſtories. Of the Gretians Xenophon, Thuſidites, Herodotus, Theopompus, floryſhed moſt

in writyng hiſtories of the Romanes Titus Liuius, & Caius Criſpius Saluſtius with dyuerſe other were had in highe eſtimacion. Afore that tyme they vſed Annals or Cronicles, whiche contayne onely the geaſtes and factes of euery daye ſeuerally. The fyrſt office of an hiſtoriographer is to write no lye, the ſeconde that he ſhal conzel no trueth, for fauoure, diſpleaſure, or feare. The perfection of an hiſtorie reſteth in matter and wordes The order of the matter requyreth, obſeruaunce of tymes, diſcripcions of places, the maners, lyues of men, theyr behauoures, purpoſes, occacions, dedes, ſaiynges, caſualtes, acheuynges, & finiſhyng of thynges. The tenour of the wordes aſketh a brefe perſpicuite and ſyncere trueth, with moderate and peaceable ornamentes
               
                  Rhethoryke.We may be ſure that by and by after men were formed, thei receiued of God the vſe of ſpeche, wherein what tyme they perceyued ſome wordes to be profitable, and ſome hurtefull in vtteryng of theim: they appoynted and gathered an Arte of ſpeache, or communicacion called Rethorycke,

Whiche (as Diodorus dothe ſaye:) was inuented by Marcurie:Marcurie. Empedocles. but Ariſtotle affyrmmeth that Empedocles was fyrſt auctoure of the Oratorial arte. In Rome this feate of eloquēce was neuer forbidden, but in proceſſe (as it was perceiued to be profitable and honeſt) was had in ſuche eſtima
                  
                     •
                  ion, and ſo manye, partely for theyr defence, partly for glory and ambition, employed theyr ſtudies in it with ſuche endeuoure, that verye many of the ignobilitee were promoted into the degree of Senatours, and atcheued muche worſhyppe by it.
                     Corax and Thiſias gaue rules of Rhethorike.
                     D
                           •
                        moſthenes Cicero.
                   
                  Corax, & Thyſias, beyng Sicilians gaue fyrſt preceptes in writyng of this Science And theyr countremanne Leontinus Gorgias ſucceded them. Demoſthenes o
                     •
                   the Gretians was pryncipal, of ye Romaynes, Tullius Cicero had no felowe. Nowe as touchyng the effect and property of it, there be in it (as Cicero writeth) fiue partes, fyrſt to inuente ſtuffe of matter to ſpeake,Partes of Rhethorike. then formably to ordre hys deuyſes, ne
                     •
                  te to polyſhe it and furnyſhe it with elegance of termes, and picked wordes: & to haue it in perfecte memorye,

and laſt of all to vtter it with comely geſture, in ſuche ſorte that it delyte, for it conueniente treatablenes, teache, and playnely declare the thyng, and moue affections of pytie and fauoure in the heartes of iudges or yf the cauſe permytte, or tyme require, to excite a cheareful laughyng and abandone graue ſeueritye. In termes of them that practiſe this facultie, we haue this difference: we cal him that defendeth matters, and pleadeth cauſes an Oratour,Oratoure, Rhethoricien. a Rhetoricien, is he that teacheth or profeſſeth to be a ſcolemaſter in that arte. A declamatour is he that is occupied in fayned cauſes,Declamator. either for his owne exerciſe, or to enſtructe other therby.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapiter. Who founde Muſyke, and what efficacie it is of in humayne affayres.
               
                  
                     MVSIKE, by the teſtimonye of auncient Poetes,Orpheus. is verye antique, for Orpheus & Linus bothe borne of the linage of the goddes were very excellent

Muſicians. And becauſe the one by the ſweteneſſe of his armonie dilinited & modefied the groſſe heartes, and rude myndes of men, it was fayned that he made the wylde beaſtes, as Lyons and Tygres to folowe him: And the praiſynges of Goddes valiaunt prowes, and deedes of armes of Lordes were vſed to be ſong with Lutes at the royall feaſtes, as Iompas in Virgil and Demodocus in Homere beare wytnes.
               The fynders of Muſyke as Plinie ſuppoſeth was Amphion the ſonne of Iupiter by Antiope.
                  
                     Fynders of Muſike after diuers authours.
                     Dioniſius. zethus.
                     Amphyon.
                   The Gretians aſcribe the findyng of it to Dioniſius. Euſebius ſaith that Zephus and Amphion, whiche were in Cadmus dayes, inuented Muſyke: Solinus contendeth that the ſtudy of this arte came out of Crete, and was perceyued by the ringyng & ſhryl ſounde of bralle, and ſo brought and traduced into numbers and meaſures. Polybius affirmeth that it came frō the Archadiens,Archadiens, whiche haue an exceadyng mynde to that ſcience, and Diodorus wryteth that Marcury founde

the concordes of ſingyng.Marcurye found the cō
                     cordes. Albeit, it is like that theſe onely were the fyrſt ſetters out of it in Grece of late time for Ioſephus telleth that Tubalcain an Hebrue the ſonne of Lamech,
                  Cubalcain. whiche was many ages afore them, vſed muche to ſyng to the Pſaltrie and Lute, notwithſtandyng who was fyrſt procurer of it, and when it was founde, it is yet vncertayne, for it ſemeth to haue bene geuen of nature to mankynde at the beginnyng for a ſpecial rewarde,Nature gaue muſyke▪ to men. to mittigate the cruell paynes, wherein man is bewrapped and compaſſed on all handes, for a chylde newe borne ceaſeth of his lamentable crye at the ſingyng and lullyng of his nurſſe. In all kyng of laboures ſong is comfortable,Labourers paſſe the time with ſonges. the Galiman, the Plowman, the carter, the car
                     •
                  er eaſe the tediouſnes of theyr laboure and iourney with carolynges, leies, and whiſtlyng: yea, the brute beaſtes be delighted with ſonges and noyſes, as Mules with belles, Horſes with trompettes and ſhalmes are of a fi
                     •
                  arſer ſtomake to theyr appointed miniſterye. And of whom I pray you learned the Byrdes theyr diuerſitie

of tunes? Who taught the nightyngale ſo ſundry nootes? Doutles euen nature was of this agreable Harmonye the onely ſcolemaſters. But the Egiptians dyd forbyd theyr yong folkes learnyng of Muſicke becauſe it ſeduceth and maketh effeminate the hardye courage of men,Muſyke maketh men effeminate. and Ephorus ſayeth: it was ordeyned to delude and deceyue men. Neuertheleſſe,Socrates. 
                  Socrates was not aſhamed in his olde age to learne to play on the Harp, and Themiſtocles, becauſe he refuſed the Harpe at a bancket,Themyſtocles. was reckened vnlearned, the prieſtes of Mars in Rome, called Salii ſong verſes aboute the Cytie. And ſpeciallye the great Prophete Dauid,Salii marti
                        •
                      Dauid. whiche ſong the miſteries of God in Meter▪ frequented ſyngyng.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. Chapiter. Who found Muſical inſtrumentes and brought th
                     •
                  m into Italy.
               
                  
                     IT is ſayde that Marcurye founde the Harpe fyrſt.Harpe. Marcur
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   For as he walked by the Ryuer Nilus after an ebbe, he foūd

a Tortyſe al wythered, and nothyng remainyng but the ſenewes, whiche as he fortuned to ſtrycke on them, made a certayne ſounde: And after the patrone of that he faſhioned an Harpe, and accordyng to the thre tymes of the yeare,Thre ſtrynges in the harpe. Sommer, Wynter, and Spryngtyme, he putte to it thre Strynges, a Treble, a Baſe, and a Meane.
               Thys inſtrumente he gaue to Apollo, and Apollo delyuered it to Orpheus: Some thyncke Amphion founde it.Amphyon. I fynde that the Harpe hadde ſeuen ſtrynges to reſemble the ſeuen doughters of Atlas, whereof Maia Mercurie his mother was one. And then after that were twoo other putte to,Goddeſſes of ſauoure. to repreſente the nyne Muſes.
               Some referre the orygynall of the Harpe and Pype too Apollo, for his Image in Delos (as they ſaye,) hath in the right hande a bowe, and in the lefte hande the goddeſſes of fauour. Wherof one hath a harpe, an other a ſhalme,Shalmes. ye third a pype. Shalmes were at the beginnyng made of Cranes legges, & after of great reed:

                  Dardanus Trezenius vſed fyrſt to play & ſyng with them.Dardanius. Trezenus Pype. 
                  Panne an vplandy ſhe god, found the pype of ſmal reed fyrſt to ſolace his loue. Euſebius ſaith Cibele found it, and ſome ſuppoſe it was Apollo. Timarias played on the Harpe or Lute, fyrſt withoute dittye,Singyng to the Lute. and Amphion ſong fyrſt to the Lute, but the Harpe was found afore by Tubal and faſhioned like the Greke letter delta.
                  Δ
               
               
                  Hermophilus fyrſt diſtributed the pulſe and beatyng of the vaynes too certayne meaſures of Muſicke. And the Prophete Dauid founde dyuerſe inſtrumentes, as Regalles and Nables.Regalles. Nables. The Troglodites founde the Dulcimers. Piſes Terrenes founde the Braſen trompe,Dulcimers. whiche the Terrenes footemenne vſed in theyr warres, ſome thyncke it was Tyrteus or Dyrceus an Athenien. For what tyme the Lacedemonians made war againſt the Meſſenians,Braſen trōpe and the warres were long differred, they had anſwere of Apollo, that if they would wynne the feelde, they ſhould haue a capitayne of Athens.
               
                  AND the Atheniens in diſpyte

ſent to them one Dyrceus a lame and one eyed felowe,Dyrceus capitayne of the Lacedemonians. and all out of ſhape: albeit thei receiued him and vſed his counſail, and he taught them to play on trumpes, whiche were ſo feareful to ye 
                  Meſſenians, by reaſon of ſtraūgenes of the noyſe that they fled furth with, and ſo they obteyned victorye, but in dede (as Ioſephus witneſſeth) Moſes the valiaunt capitaine of the Hebrues founde the Troumpe and made it of ſiluer.Moſes foūd the trompe Archadiens brought inſtrumentes into Italy. The Archadiēs did fyrſt bryng al Muſical inſtrumentes into Italye, where afore that tyme thei vſed only vplādiſhe pypes. Thucydides writeth that ye Lacedemonians vſed fyrſt in war Shalmes,Lacedemonians maner in warre. Clarious and Rebeckes, to thentent that when they were ready to the warres by ſuche plaiyng they myght better kepe array.Drumſlades. in warre. The Romaines fotemen ioyned Droumſlades with Trumpettes. Haliattes kyng of the Lydians had in the battail againſte the Mileſians Pipers and Fidlers plaiyng together,Pypers and Fidlers. the Gretians, as thei went to warre had Lutes goyng afore them to modefie theyr paſe, all other countrees (as wee dooe nowe) vſed trumpettes

in battail.
            
            
               ¶The .xiii. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of Philoſophie.
               
                  
                     THE ſcience of Philoſophie,Philoſophie. whiche Tully calleth the ſtudye of wyſedome, ſearcher oute of vertue, expulſer of vice after the mynde of diuerſe dyd procede out of Barbary in to Grece. For it is ſayd that in Perſie the Magiciens (for ſo they called their wiſe and ſage men) were excellent in knowlage,Magiciens. 
                  Chaldees. in Aſſirie the Caldees, in Inde the Gymnoſophiſtes, hauyng their name,Gymnoſophiſtes. becauſe they wēt naked, had their part of wyſedome, of whiche faction one Buddas was chief, in Fraūce the Druides, in Phenice Ochus, in Thrace Xamolxis,
                  Druides. Ochus. Xamolxis. Orpheus. Atlas. & Orpheus, in Lybie Atlas.
               
               The Egyptians ſay that Vulcanus, the ſōne of Nilus found the fyrſt principles of Philoſophie.
               
                  
                  Laertius writeth that Philoſophie beganne in Grece, wher Muſeus and Linus were fyrſt learned menne, but Euſebius ſayeth that Philoſophie, lyke as all other ſciences ſprong among the Hebrues, and of them the Greke Philoſophiers,Hebrues were auctours of Philoſophie. whiche were a thouſande yere after Moſes, learned all their knowledge. As for the name of Philoſophie was not vſed among them,Pythagoras calleth him ſelfe a Philoſophier. tyll the tyme of Pythagoras, for he called him ſelfe a Philoſophier, and his ſtudie of wyſedome, philoſophie, where afore time it was named wyſedome, and they that profeſſed it had the tytle of wyſe menne. There be of it thre partes, one called natural,Thre partes of Philoſophie, another morall, and the facultie of reaſonyng called logike, natural treateth of the worlde and contentes thereof, whiche Archelaus brought out of Ionia vnto Athens. Moral enfourmeth the life & maners of men, this part Socrates traduced and applied from heauenly thynges, to the vſe of life, and to deſerne good and bad, Logike inuenteth reaſons on bothe partes, and was founde by

                  Zeno Eliates, other deuide it into .v. partes, natural, ſupernatural,Fiue partes. moral mathematical, and logike.
               Dialoges, were made fyrſt by Plato,
                  Dialoges. or at the leaſt furniſhed with more eloquence, for Ariſtotle ſayeth that they were diuiſed by Alexamenus Scyreus.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧The .xiiii. Chapiter. ¶Aſtrologie, the courſe of the ſterres, ſphere, nature of the wyndes.
               
                  
                     THE yearth is moſte ſubiect to the influence, and operacion of the Planettes, and by the temperate ſeaſonableneſſe of the cō
                  ſtellacions it bryngeth furthe aboundaunce of fruites: and as Iulius Firmicus ſuppoſeth, the ſterres haue alſo a power in the birth of menne to make them of one faſhion or other,Thre power of the ſterres. this or that complexion, of good or bad diſpoſicion, accordyng to the reſpectes, coniunctions or oppoſicions procure. And the Egyptians

haue deuyſed and appointed to euery night and day his peculiar God,Obſeruyng of daies. and what deſtenie, & what death ſhall chaunce to him yt is borne on any ſuche day.Chaldees. And the Chaldees ſayd, that to acheue any good or hurtful thyng, the planettes helpe muche
               By this occaſion men, through diligent obſeruyng of the celeſtial bodies,Aſtrologie. inuented Aſtrologie, wherin the whole mouable courſe of the heauen, the riſyng, the goyng doune, and ordre or the Planettes bee comprehended, whiche the Egiptians aduaunce thē ſelues to haue found:Egiptians. Albeit ſome ſay Mercurie was auctour of it, and Diodorus affirmeth it to be Actinus the ſonne of Phoebus.
                  Mercury. Neuertheleſſe, Ioſephus plainly declareth, that Abraham enſtructed thē,Abraham. and alſo the Caldees in that arte, & thence it came into Grece, for all the learned menne of Grece,Grecians lerned in Egipt. as Pherceides, Pithagoras Thales acknowledge that they were diſciples to the Egyptians and Chaldees. But Plinie writeth that Atlas was finder of it,Atlas. & therfore the Poetes fayne that he beareth heauen on

his backe. Seruius thinketh it was Prometheus thar found it. Neuertheles al theſe, as I take it, were the beginners of this facultie euery man in his owne coūtree onely, where he dwelled: for euen frō the beginnyng of the worlde,Seth his poſteritie. Aſtrologie. the ſonnes of Seth diuiſed fyrſt the ſcience of the ſterres, and for ſomuche, as they feared leaſt their art ſhould periſhe, afore it came to the knowledge of menne (for they had heard their graund father Adam ſaye that all thynges ſhould bee deſtroyed by the vniuerſal fludde, they made two pyllers, one of ſtone,Two pyllers preſerued Aſtrologie frō the fludde. the other of brycke, to thentent that if the bricke waſted with water or ſtormes, yet the ſtone ſhould preſerue the letters whole and perfecte, and in theſe pyllers they graued al that cōcerned the obſeruaunce of the ſterres. And therfore it is credible that the Egypcians and Chaldes lerned Aſtrologie of the Hebrues, and ſo conſequently it ſpred abrode in other nacions, and thus beganne Aſtronomie conceyued to ſeduce mens wittes. Among ye Romaynes Sulpicius Gallus, in Grece

                  Thales Mileſius perceiued the cauſe of theclipſe of the Sunne and Mone Endymeon marked fyrſt the courſe of the Moone and her changyng as Plinie writeth.
                     Eclipſe of ye Sunne and Moone.
                     Endymion perceiued the courſe of the Moone.
                     Pythagoras. obſerued the day ſterre.
                     Archemedes deuiſed the ſphere.
                     The wyndes. Aeolia.
                   
                  Pythagoras (as ſome ſay (obſerued the courſe of Venus called the daye ſterre, but as Laercius ſuppoſeth it was Permenides. The Sphere was diuiſed by Archemides a Siracuſian, but Diogenes taketh it to haue bene Muſeus, and Plinie aſcribeth it to Anaximāder. The windes were fyrſt obſerued by Aeolus, as it is reported, vpon this reaſon. The inhabitantes of the Ilelandes about Sicile prognoſticate by the ſmoke of the ſayde Iſles three dayes before, what wynde they ſhal haue, and for that cauſe they ſay that Aeolus hath dominion ouer the wyndes. The windes, as ſome deuide theim, bee foure accordyng to the foure principall regions of the ayre,Foure wyndes. they that bee more curiouſe, make eight. And ſpecially one Andronicus Cyrreſtes,
                  Andronicus. whiche buylded in Athens a turret, and ſette on euerye ſyde of it the Images of wyndes, grauen agaynſt the region

whence the wyndes came, and ſette them on pyllers of marble, and in the myddle he ſette a braſen Image of Triton,
                  Images of wyndes. whiche he had made ſo that it would turne with the wynde and ſtand wt his face towarde the wynde that blewe, and poincte with a rodde to the Image of the ſame wynde,Wethercorkes. Fanes. whiche maner is nowe vſed in al countrees, for they ſette vp wethercockes or fanes to ſhewe out of what quarter the wynde bloweth.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .xv. Chapiter. ¶Who founde Geometrie, Arithmetike, with other thynges.
               
                  
                     NILVS THE MOST famouſe Ryuer of the worlde, from the tyme,Nilus ſurundeth Egypte. that the Sunne bee in Tropico Cancri, vntyl it come to the equinocciall lyne in Libra agayne, with an houge aboundaunce of water dothe

ouerflowe al the douned and playne countries of Egypte: by the altitude and depenes of this fludde the Egiptians foreſee the plentie and ſcarſitee of fruites to come.Prognoſticacion of plētie and ſcarſnes. For if it encreaſe but vnto the depeth of .xii. or .xiii. cubites, it portēdeth lacke of ſufficience yf it paſſe .xiiii. and ſo to .xvi. it importeth great plentie: in the tyme of Claudius Caeſar it waxed .xviii. cubites and that was the greateſt tide: the leaſt was in the tyme of the battail at Pharſalia whereby it ſignified, howe ſore that it abhorred the murther of the valiaunt Pompeie. What tyme Nilus with ſuche inundacion had partly miniſhed, partely tranſpoſed, and theſame tyme all together putte awaye the meeres and butrelles with whiche they diſſeuerd their porcions of lande they were cō
                  pelled often to meaſure their bondes afreſhe:Egiptians found Geometrie. for that cauſe the Egiptians glory that Geometrie was immagined by them to meaſure landes. As Arithemetike by the Phenicians by cauſe to vtter their marchādiſe. But Ioſephus ſeameth to attribute bothe

to the Hebrues,Hebrues after Ioſephus mynde found Geometrie. ſaiyng that God prolōged the tyme of their liues becauſe of the ſtudiouſe labour that they employed in ſerchyng out of Aſtrologie and Geometrie, and the Egyptians were ignoraunt in Geometrie and Arithmetike,Abraham taught the Egiptians. Contentes of Geometrie. vnto the tyme that Abraham taught them. Geometrie conteineth the diſcripcion of lengthes, bredthes, ſhapes, and quantities. In this excelled Strabo in Grece in the tyme of Tiberius, and Ptolome vnder Traianus and Antoninus. In Italy Plinius and Folinus.
               
               Meaſures and weightes were foūde by Sidonius (as Eutropius ſayeth) ye ſame tyme that Procas reigned in Alba, Aza in Iurye,Meaſures & weightes. and Hieroboham in Hieruſalē. Some write that Mercurie diuiſed them in Grece, Plinie aſcribeth it to Phidon of Argos, Gellius to Palamedes, Strabo to one Phidon of Elis in Arcadie. Diogenes ſayeth that Pythagoras taught the Grekes weightes and meaſures, but Ioſephus affirmeth that Cain found them fyrſt of al.
               Nombers ſome ſay were inuentedNombers.
                  
by Pythagoras, ſome by Mercurie. Liuius ſuppoſeth that Pallas found them.Maner of rekenyng yeres The maner of countyng yeares in Grece was by Olimpiades whiche conteyned the ſpace of fyue yeres, as the Romaynes dyd by Luſtra whiche conteined the ſame nombre of yeres, and ſometyme they noted the nombre of yeares by letters, ſometyme by nayles.Countyng by nayles. For euery yere the Conſul or chief iudge called Praetor in the Ides of September faſtened a nayle in the walle of Iupiters temple nexte ioynyng to the temple of Pallas, to ſignifie the ſpace of yeres.Letters to counte with. And we vſe to write oure nombers with theſe ſeuen letters .C.I.D.L.M.V..X. or with theſe ſygnes. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. whiche,Figures of Arithmetike becauſe they be in quotidian vſe, it nedeth not to declare.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .xvi. Chapiter. ¶Phiſike, and the partes therof.
               
                  
                  
                     PHISIKE, whiche with remedies prouided of God,Inuentours of Phiſike. doth much comforte and cure men in their maladies and diſeaſes, that breſt furth one euery ſide, is thought worthely to haue bene inuented of the Goddes. For it is ſuppoſed that Mercurie founde it among the Egipcians, ſome ſaye it was Apis their god: or Arabus ſonne to Apollo. Some referre it to Apollo him ſelfe.Apollo god of medicines, becauſe the moderate heate of the Sunne is baniſher of all ſickeneſſe. Clemente dooeth attribute the fyndyng of it to the Egipcians in generall & the amplifiyng and enlargyng of it to Aeſculapius whiche beſyde other thinges, foūde the pluckyng out of teth. Notwithſtādyng,Pluckyng out of tethe. whoſoeuer found the notable knowlage of medicines, it is no faile but it was perceiued by what thinges were wholſome and what vnwholſome.Obſeruyng of diete was beginnyng of Phiſicke. And as they obſerued howe the ſicke folkes vſed their diete and marked how ſome for gredyneſſe did eate by & by, and ſome

forbare theyr meate becauſe of faintneſſe of their ſtomake, and ſo were releued, they learned yt abſtinence was a helper and furtherer of health: and by lyke obſeruaunce other preceptes of Phiſike were gathered.
               It hath thre partes, one of dietyng another of Medicines,Thre partes of Phiſike. the thirde of ſurgery, for by one of theſe .iii. waies euery deſeaſe is releued. But for ſomuche as it is vncertayne and often chaungeth, it ley in extreme darkeneſſe tyl Hippocrates dyd renewe it:Hippocrates reduced it to an arte. and wher as they had a cuſtome that the pacient beyng reſtored to health ſhould write in the temple of the god that healped him, both his name and the maner of healyng, that the example might helpe the like deſeaſe: out of all ſuche precedences he gathered preceptes of Phiſike, and brought it fyrſt to a formall arte.
               
                  Archagathus the firſt Phiſician in Rome.In Rome Archagathus of Peloponeſus was fyrſt Phiſicion, ye ccccc.xxxv. yere of the Cytie, Lucius Emilius and Marcus Liuius beyng Conſuls, and was made fremanne of the cytie, whiche was fyrſt made a Surgion

or woūder, after for the ſharpeneſſe of his cuttyng & ſeryng, he was named a butcher or execucioner and murtherer, and afterward when the nombre begāne to encreaſe they were expulſed out of Rome and baniſhed by Marcus Cato as Plinie telleth in xxxvi. booke.Marcus Cato baniſhed Phiſicians out of Rome. The maner of the Egiptians in their deſeaſes.
               
               In Egypte and Babilon they vſed no Phiſicians, but brought the ſicke perſons into the ſtretes and common places, that the men, whiche paſſed by, might tel them what maner diete or meanes thei theim ſelues had vſed in the lyke deſeaſe to eſcape it: nether was it lawful for anye man to paſſe by tyll he had commoned with the pacient. In the latter dayes the Egyptians diſtributed the arte of Medicines, in ſuche ſorte,Eueri deſeaſe had a ſundry Phiſician. that euery deſeaſe had a diuerſe Phiſician to miniſter in it, as one for the eyes, one for the head, other for the entrayles, and ſemblably other for other ſickeneſſe and ſo it came to paſſe that al places were ful of Phiſicians.
               In this arte excelled Caſſius,
                  famous Phiſicians. 
                  Calpitanus, Aruncius Rubrius, Antonius

Muſa, Galenus, Auicenna.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧The .xvii. Chapiter. ¶The inuentours of Herbes medicinable, what remedies menne learned of beaſtes.
               
                  Herbes were create for man.
                  
                     NATVRE doubteleſſe, the mother and gouernour of al thinges dyd create Herbes, as maye appeare by manye examples, partely by the delectacion, and partely for the wealthe and preſeruacion of mennes bodies. For Xanthus an hiſtoriographer (as Plinie recordeth) telleth how a Dragon reuiued his young faune, that was ſlaine, by the vertue of an herbe called Balin:Herbe called Balin. Hechwal. and the Hechewal if a wedge bee driuen into the hole of her neſte (for ſhe maketh her neſte in the hole of a tree that ſhe woorketh with her beake) compelleth it to fall oute with an Herbe that ſhe knowethe:

and ſome of the Indians lyue onely by Herbes, Appianus wryteth, that the Parthians, whiche Antonie put to flight,Parthians. conſtrayned by extreme famyne, chaunced too eate a certayne Herbe, whoſe nature was to make theim that eate it, too forgette all other thynges, and onely digge vp ſtones, as if they would go aboute ſome greate endeuoure, and after ſuche extreme trauail died. Of ſuche medicines made with Herbes. Chiron ſonne to Saturnus and Phillara was the fynder,Chiron was authoure of medicines & ſalues. and deuiſed alſo ſalues for woundes, ſoores, and byles, albee it ſome thynke it was Appollo, ſome referre it to his ſonne Aeſculapius, whom Chiron brought vppe, ſome to the Samothracians. But I ſuppoſe they attributed the inuencion of it to Chiron bycauſe he founde the Herbe Centaurie,Cētauro was found by Chiron. wherewith he healed the woūd, that he had by Hercules ſhafres fallyng on his foote, as he was hādlyng of his weapons: notwithſtandyng Celſus ſaieth that the arte of Phiſike is verye aunciente, but he maketh no mencion of the authoure

of it,Aſclepiades abholiſhed Phiſike. onely he ſayeth, Aſclepiades, whiche was an excellente Phiſicion, dyd abholiſhe the vſe of it for ſomuche as it annoyed the ſtomacke and engendered euil humours Mercurie founde the vſe of Moly,
                  Moly. Panace. 
                  Achilles Yarowe, Eſculapius, Panace and ſondery menne founde ſonderye Herbes. Medicines of Hony, Sol the ſonne of Oceanus inuented: and beaſtes taught men certayne Herbes neceſſarie for medicines. As the Harte ſtriken with an arrowe driueth it out with Detany: & if he be ſtynged with a Spider,Detany. he healeth him ſelfe with eatyng Pilles or a certayn herbe named Cancer.
                  Cancer. Selandyne. Selandyne, that is a ſoueraigne herbe for the ſighte, was perceyued by the Swallowes, whiche heled the eyes of their yong ones with it. The Snaile or Torteiſe, redy to fight with the Serpente, armeth him ſelfe with Sauery or Maioram. The Bore in his ſickenes cureth him ſelfe with the Iuye.Sauery. Maioram. Of the water Horſe in Nilus,Yuie. menne learned to let blodde.Lettyng of blodde. For when he is coarſye & vnluſtye he ſeketh by the ryuer ſyde the

ſharpeſt reede ſtalkes, and ſtriketh & vayne in his legge againſt it wt great violence, and ſo eaſeth his bodye by ſuche meane: And when he hath done he couereth the wound wt the mudde.
               The Ibis a byrde muche lyke the ſtorke, of the ſame countree taught Phiſiciens to miniſter clyſters: For when ſhe is ful, ſhe purgeth her ſelfe with her croked beake at the foundament. The weſyl in chaſyng the ſerpente preſerueth her ſelfe with Rue,Rue. Organye. and the ſtorke with Organye. In Grece Orpheus, Muſeus, Dioſcorides, in Rome Marcus Cato, Pompeius Leneus wrote of the nature of herbes. In this tyme Plinie thinketh, that this arte was fyrſt receiued among the Romaynes.
            
            
               ¶The .xviii. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of Magike. Driuyng out of ſpirites, Charmes, propheſiyng in ſundry maners
               
                  
                  
                     MAGIKE had it beginnyng of medicine, & was the inuencion of Zoroaſtres kyng of the Bactriās,zoroaſtres found Magike. whiche reigned .viii.C. yere after the ſiege of Troy, the ſame tyme that Abraham and Ninus reigned, aboute thre M.C.lxxxv. yeres after the creacion of the worlde. Lactantius and Euſebius thynke it was ſet furth among other deueliſhe ſciences by the euil ſpirites, and Plinie calleth it of al artes the mooſt deceytful. It is compacte, of medicine or phiſike, ſuperſticion, and the mathematical artes.Theſſaly vſed Magike. The Theſſaloniās moſt ſpecially were ſlaundered with the frequent vſe & practiſyng of this facultie: The writer of this art was Hoſthanes. And Pythagoras, Empedocles,
                  Hoſtanes wrote bohes of Magike. 
                  Democritus, Plato wt diuers other ſayled in far coūtries to learne it: wherin Democritus was moſt famous CCC. yere after the cytee was builded, in whiche time Hippocrates publiſhed the facultie of Phiſike. ¶The maner to dryue oute ſpirites out of men that were poſſeſſed with them,Driuyng out of ſpirites. Charmes. and charmes to heale corporal

maladies, kyng Salomon taught, as Ioſephus witneſſeth: and he ſawe it doone by Eleazar in his tyme afore Veſpaſianus then emperour.Eleazar driueth out ſpirites. The maner to heale them was ſuche: He put to the noſe of the poſſeſſed man a ryng wherein was encloſed a roote that Salomon had ſhewed, & ſo dreue out the ſpirite, and ſtraight way the man fel doune: then he coniured him with ſuche oriſons ande
                     •
                  orciſmes as were appointed by Salomon, to baniſhe the ſpirite out of ye Demoniake
               The ſages or wyſe men of Perſye, whiche in theyr language bee named Magi,
                  Magi. beyng wholy addict to the honoryng of their falſe goddes, came to ſuche extreme folye, that they profeſſed openly, that they could not onely by the obſeruacion of ye ſterres know thynges to come, but alſo by other pretenſed artes and mumblyng of a fewe woordes, they could do & bryng to paſſe auye thyng that they would. ¶Of them were inuented theſe ſixe kyndes of Magike, Necromancye,Negromātie. whiche is by raiſyng vppe of deade men, as in Lucane one rayſed from

death, telleth the aduentures of the battaile of Pharſalus.
               
                  Pyromantie.
                  Pyromantie, that telleth thynges by the fyre and lightnyng as Tanaquilla the wyfe of Tarquinius Priſcus, propheſied that Seruius Tullius ſhould be kyng of Rome becauſe ſhe ſe the fyre enuiron his head. The findyng of this Plinie referreth to Amphiaraus.
               
               ¶Aēromantie that is a kynd of propheciyng by the ayre, as by fliyng,Aēromantie fedyng, ſingyng of byrdes and ſtraūge tempeſtes of wynd & hayle. Hydromantie, was propheciyng by water: as Varro writeth that a childe did ſe in the water the Image of Mercury, whiche in C. and fiftie verſes told al the chaūce of warre againſt Mythridates kyng of Pontus.
               
               
                  Geomantie, was a diuinacion by openyng of the yearth.Geomantie.
               
               
                  Chiromantie¶Chiromantie is a coniecturyng by beholdyng the lynes, or wryncles of the hādes called cōmonly Palmiſtry.
               All whiche dayne illuſions, & falſe perſuaſions, it becōmeth al true chriſtiens to eſchewe and abhorre.
            
            
               
               ¶The .xix. Chapiter. ¶Two kyndes of diuinacion, ſothſaiyng caſtyng 
                     ••
                  ttes, and readyng of dreames.
               
                  
                     CICERO maketh .ii. kindes of diuinacions,
                     Two kyndes of prophiciyng.
                     Natural.
                   one natural and another artificial. Natural is yt, which procedeth of a certeine cō
                  citacion, ſtirryng, & cōmocion of the mynde, that chaunceth ſometyme to men when they be in dreames or ſlepyng: ſometymes when they propheſye in a maner of fury & rauiſhyng of mynde, as it dyd to Sibilla & diuerſe other religious perſons: Of this kind were oracles of Apollo and Iupiter Hāmon. Albeit they were often falſe, becauſe thei came of a deuiliſhe polycie, & mans ſubteltye: but ſuche as come of the holye ghoſt and not of a phrenetike madnes be true.
               ¶The artificiall conſiſteth in thoſe thynges whiche come of coniectures,Artificial. olde conſideracions, and obſeruaunces of the entrailes of beaſtes, fliyng of byrdes, caſtyng of lottes.
               ¶The regardyng of the bowels of beaſtes beganne among the Hetruſ
                     •
                  ians:Beholdyng the bowels of beaſtes. For as it fortuned a manne that

plowed, to rayſe vp a deaper ſorowe then he was wonte to do, all ſodeynly aroſe out of the yearth one Tages, that taught thē al the feates of ſothſaiyng, but Plinie ſayeth one Delphus found it.
               
                  Fedyng, fliyng and chitteryng of birdes.The diuinacions by lokyng on the fedyng of byrdes Thereſias a Thebane deuiſed, Caras fyrſt marked the chitteryng of them, and Pythagoras obſerued theyr fliyng.
               
                  Orpheus added the diuinacion by other beaſtes. What ſtore we ought to ſet by ſuche diuinacions, Moſſolanus a Iew techeth vs. When he was in the warres, a certaine prophete cō
                  maunded euery man to ſtand ſtyll tyl he had taken a coniecture of the bird that flowe by: but Moſſolanus toke priuely a bowe and ſhafte and kylled the byrde,Moſſolanus letteth the Augurie. wherewith the wyſarde & diuerſe other were diſpleaſed, then he ſayd to them. Why doate you ſo? can ye byrde, whiche knoweth not of her owne death, tel vs the caſual aduentures of oure iourney? For if ſhe had had any fore knowledge, ſhe wold not haue comon hether to haue bene kylled of me.
               
                  Caſtyng of lottes, Numerius Suffuſius deuiſed fyrſt at Preneſt.
                     Caſtyng lottes.
                     Dreame readyng.
                  
               
               The expoūdyng of dreames Plinie aſcribeth to Amphiction, but Trogus aſſigneth it to Ioſeph ſonne to Iacob, Clement ſayeth the Telmeſſians foūd it. But al theſe were inuēted to ſeduce men with ſuperſticious errour and for the commoditee of them that vſe it.
            
            
               ❧Here endeth the abrydgement of the fyrſt booke.
         
         
            
            
               ¶The fyrſt Chapiter. ☞The original of lawes, and who made the fyrſt lawes.
               
                  
                     LAVVE IS a conſtant and perpetuall good thyng,Lawe. without whiche no houſe, no cytie, no countre, no ſtate of mē no naturall creature, not the worlde it ſelfe, can cōſiſt ferme and ſtable. For it obeyeth God and al other thinges, ayre, water, lād man be in obedience to it, & Chriſippus calleth it a knowledge of all diuine and humayne matters, cōmaundyng equitee, and expulſyng wickednes and wrong.
               
                  Thre lawes. Natural.¶There be of lawes three kyndes: one natural, that is not onely appropried to man, but alſo it concerneth al other lyuely thynges either in the yearth, ſea, or ayre. As we perceiue in all kyndes of liuyng creatures naturally a certayne familiaritee of male and female, procreacion of iſſue

and approcliuitee to noriſhe the ſame the whiche ꝓcedeth of a natural law engraffed in the heartes of euerye of them: nature her ſelfe, that is God, was auctour of this.
               ¶The ſecond is named the law that al men vſe,
                     Ius gentiū.
                   generally through all the worlde as to ſhewe a man the way, to communicate to men the commoditee of the elementes, water and fyre, to this kynde apperteineth the lawe of armes, and it is called in Latyne Ius gentium.
               
               Ciuile lawe is the pryuate lawe of euery countree or cytie,Ciuile lawe. as of the Romaynes, Lacedemoniens, and Atheniens. This cōſiſteth in decrees of princes, ſtatutes, and proclamacions.
               The chiefe & principal lawes were promulgate by God, confyrmed after the mooſt depured and perfect maner that natural equite could deuiſe or cō
                  ceyue, and be in ſtable conſtance, and ſubiecte to no tranſmutacion. After the example of theſe, man hath inuē
                  ted lawes to defende & preſerue good men, and to puniſhe & kepe euyll perſons in offyce and good order.
               Suche lawes Ceres made fyrſt,Law makers, Ceres. as

                  Diodorus ſuppoſeth, but other thīke it was Rhadamanthus, & afterward other in diuers coūtries deuiſed and ordeyned lawes, as in Athens Draco and Solon,
                  Mercury. Minos. Licurgus. Phoroneus. Romulus. in Egypte Mercurie, in Crete Minos, in Lacedemony Licurgus, in Tyre Tharādes, in Argos Phoroneus, in Rome Romulus, in Italy Pythagoras, or after ye mynde of Dioniſius the Archadians, that were vnder Euander, as their ſouereigne lorde and chiefe capitayne. Not withſtandyng the very true authoure of lawes was God,God was the true authour of lawes. whiche fyrſt planted in vs the law of nature and in ꝓceſſe of tyme when that was corrupte by Adam and his poſteritee, he gaue by Moſes the lawe writen to reduce vs agayne to oure fyrſt ſtate and true inſtincte of nature,Moſes promulgated the fyrſt lawes in writyng. whiche was afore all other. as Euſebius declareth.
            
            
               ¶The .ii. Chapiter. ¶Who ordeyned the fyrſt gouernaunce of a cōminaltie, tyranny, with other conſtitucions.
               
                  
                  
                     THE adminiſtracion of a common weale,The maner of rulyng the cōmon welth. Monarchie. Ariſtocracie. is after thre ſortes, as Plato deuideth it, Monarchie, where one ruleth, Ariſtocratie, when the beſt menne gouerne, Democratie,
                  Democratie. or popular ſtate where the cōmon people haue a ſtroke in rulyng the publyke weale. Principalitee or a kyngdome was fyrſt begonne by the Egyptians whiche could lyue no while without a kyng or rular:Kyngdome beganne in Egypt. there reigned fyrſt, as Herodotus ſayeth, Menes, and theyr maner was to choſe him among the Prieſtes of their religion: & if it fortuned, that any ſtraunger obteyned the realme by conqueſt, he was compelled to be cō
                  ſecrated prieſt, and ſo was the election legittimate, when he was kyng & prieſt. The Diademe, that was the token of the honoure royal had it beginnyng by Liber Bacchus.
               
               The Atheniens fyrſt ordeyned the ſtate of a publike wea
                     •
                  e that was gouerned by the whole commons,Democratie beganne in Athens. as Plinie thynketh, albeit they had alſo kynges, whereof Cecrops Diphyes, which reigned in Moſes time

was the fyrſt. For as Iuſtine wryteth euery cytie and nacion had at the beginnyng a kyng for theyr chiefe gouernour,Fyrſt kynges howe they behaued them ſelfes. whiche attayned to ye dignitee by no ambicion or fauoure, but by a ſyngular wyt, and ſober modeſtnes, and reigned with ſuche loyaltee that he ſeamed onely in tytle a kyng, in deede a ſubiecte. Ninus kyng of ye Aſſyrians,Ninus dyd enlarge his empyre. contrary to the olde ryte and cuſtome of an ambicious deſyre that he had to beare rule, fyrſt arrogantly vſurped thempyre of al Aſia, except Inde. As cōcernyng the inſtitucion of the common wealth, where the cōmon do all thynges, notwithſtādyng the mynde of Plinie. I ſuppoſe it beganne among the Hebrues,Hebrues ordeyned Democratie. whiche were ruled by a popular ſtate many yeares afore that Athens was builded.Ariſtocratie. The fourme of polycie whiche is gouerned by the beſt, as ye Romaynes common wealth was, I can not well tel where it had it original, oneles I ſhould aſſigne it to the Thebanes, whiche in the tyme of Ninus ruled the Egiptians, whoſe rule, becauſe the valiant and noble bare the auctoritee, was called a power or potencie,

whiche was the thre thouſand C.lxxxv. yere of the worlde. Plinie writeth that after Theſeus, Phala
                     
                        •
                     is was the fyrſt tyrante,Theſeus firſt tyrante. whereby it appereth, that he thinketh Theſeus was auctour of tyranny, but Nēroth of the Image of Noe,
                  Nemroth▪
                   not long after the flud vſed tyranny.
               ¶Bondage, as Plinie taketh it, begāne in Lacedemonye and was theyr inuencion:Bondage. neuertheleſſe I finde that it begāne among the Hebrues, & had the original procedyng of Chanaan ye ſōne of Cham, whiche becauſe he had laughed his father Noe to ſcorne, as he lay diſſolutely whē he was drōke, was puniſhed in his ſonne Chanaan with penaltee of bondage and thraldome a thyng to them very ſtraunge, and to his poſteritee, greuous. ¶The ordre of manumiſſion in olde tyme was in this maner, the lorde or maiſter toke the bondmā by the head or ſome other part of his body ſaiyng I wyl this felowe be free,The order of manumiſſion & put him furth of his hādes. The coūcel of the Areapagites, whiche were called ſo of the court or ſtrete of Mars, were inſtituted

by Solon to iudge of life and death, their cuſtome was to vſe ſuche ſeueritee, and entegritee in iudgemēt that they hearde all cauſes and matters in the night,Ariopagites iudged in the night. & not in the day: to the entent they ſhould haue no occaſion to regarde the parties, but onely haue their eye and reſpecte earneſtly to the thyng that was brought afore thē. Voyces, whiche be vſed and occupied in conſultacions,Geuyng of voyces. iudgemē
                  tes and elections were fyrſt ordeined by Palamedes.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧The .iii. Chapiter. ¶The .iii. maner of regimentes in Rome, the beginnyng of ornamentes royal with other matters perteinyng to a common wealth.
               
                  
                     ROME whiche was of al the worlde, the mooſt renoumed cytee bothe for ye valiaunce of armes, and ciuile policie whereby it was gouerned, had thre fourmes of regimentes. In the beginnyng it hadde kynges,Kynges of Rome. for Romulus whiche was builder thereof reigned there, & after him .vi. other vnder whom the

principalitee laſted CC.xliiii. yeares after the cytie was buylded. Then Tarquinius beyng baniſhed for the notable cryme and rape of Lucretia, commytted by his ſonne, it was ordered by .ii. cōſuls. Iunius Brutus, & L. Tarquinius Colatinus: They had the name and title of cōſuls,Conſuls in Rome. of the cō
                  ſultacion & prouiſion that they made for the cōmon wealth: they ruled the empyre, cōducted hoſtes, and by theſe offycers, becauſe they were annual ye yeares were counted. Not .xii. yeres after the expulſyng of the kynges, when .xl. cyties of the Latines, Octauius Manilius, ſonne in lawe to Tarquinius beyng theyr capitayne, had made inſurrection and conſpired agaynſt the Romaynes T. Largius was created dictator or great master,Dictator firſt in Rome. whiche offyce was higheſt in auctoritee, and as Dioniſius thynketh, it was takē of the Grekes, among whō 
                  Elymnetae had the ſame power that Dictators had in Rome.Elymnetae. 
                  Liuius referreth the original of thē to ye Albanes: & ye Carthaginiēs had alſo theyr dictators. This magiſtrate was neuer vſed ſauyng in great daungers

of the common welth,The ſpace of the dictators offyce. & it continued but .vi. monethes, duryng that offyce al other magiſtrates were abrogated except the Tribunate or Prouoſtſhip of the cōmons: The conſuls duetye was to name and proclaime him,The tyme of denouncyng the dictatour and that no tyme but in the night: albeit what tyme the Veients had wonne ye Romaynes campe, A. Cornelius Coſus Marſhal of the armye, nede ſo cō
                  ſtrainyng, denounced Mamercus Aemilius for Dictatour cōtrary to that ſtatute. Aboute thre hūdreth yere after the buildyng of Rome ye publike ſtate was tranſferred from the cōſulſhyp vnto the rule of tenne called decem viri whiche endured but thre yeres,Decrees. for by reaſon of the outragiouſe luſt of Appius Claudius againſt the mayd Virginea, thei were deſpoſed, & conſuls were ſubſtituted to ſupplye theyr roume. Then the CCC.x. yere of the cytie, in the place of Conſuls were choſen marſhals or prouoſtes of armyes whō they named Tribunes, Aulus Sēpronius,
                  Tribunimilitum. 
                  Attacinus, L. Attilius Lōgus, & T. Celicius Siculus. The auctorytee of the commons beganne daylye ſedicions and confederaties

to encreaſe. In ſuche ſorte, ye 
                  C. Cunuleius brought to paſſe that the cōminaltee maried with the nobilitie,Democratia beganne in Rome. and the Tribunes by theyr earneſt inſtance and ſute cauſed that the highe offyces were permitted to thē of the cōmon ſorte. As the .ccc.lv. yere of the buyldyng of the Cytie P. Licinius Caluus was made tribune of the hoſt,P. Licinius a man of the commons. the .CCC.lxxxix. yere L. Sextus Lateranus attayned the conſulſhyp, the .ccc.xcix. yere C. Martius Lateranus was created Dictator.
               From this maner of gouernaunce, it was by Sylla and Marius brought to one rular or prince agayne.L. Sylla C. Marius. Thus hath Rome had al kindes of adminiſtracion of the cōmon welth.Royal ornamentes. The emperiall ornamentes of the kynges of Rome, as fardels of roddes, the a
                     •
                  e, the garlond of gold, the chayre of Iuory, the kyrtyl or cope, chariot, trapped horſes, rynges, coote armoures, robes, mantels of eſtate, enbrodered gounes, with garmentes of baudkyn or motley with all other royal apparell beganne among the Tuſcanes, whiche Tarquinius Priſcus ſubdued and vſed theſe fyrſt by the permiſſion

and licence of the Senate. The .xii. lictours or ſergeantes Romulus fyrſt appointed after the maner of the .xii. nacions of the Hetrurians whō he cō
                  quered, whiche gaue to euery of their kynges, when he was crouned a lictour or ſergeant: whoſe dutie was to wayte on the magiſtrates & bere the roddes & are of execucion. The roddes (as Plinie writeth) were of byrche. The inſtitucion of taxes or nomberyng the people,Taxes or ſubſydes. 
                  Seruius▪ Tullius kyng begāne in Rome fyrſt, but Moſes long afore that nōbred the Iſraelites, & therfore the fyrſt taxe, ſubſidie, or tribute was ordeyned by Moſes among the Hebrues and the coū
                  tyng of the nombre of the people.
               
                  Priſons, fetters, ſtockes.Pryſons, fetters, ſtockes, gyues, ſtaues, with lyke inſtrumētes to puniſhe malefactours, Ancus Martius as Liuie ſaieth, did fyrſt appoint thē to kepe men in feare and good order.
            
            
               The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶Who ordered the yere, the diuerſite of it, monthes, nones, Ides, halendes and prime.
               
                  
                  
                     HERODOTVS writeth that the Egyptians afore all other men fyrſt found out the yere by the courſe of the planettes,Egyptians foūd the yere. and deuided into twelue monthes. Diodorus aſſigneth it to ye Thebanes, whiche ſtādeth wel with the opinion of Heredotus, becauſe ye Thebanes be a nacion of Egypt, and Egypt was ſomtyme named Thebe. Seruius ſaieth that Eudoxus founde it fyrſt, & after him Hipparchus. Laertius ſemeth to aſcribe it to Thales a Mileſian, whiche as he teſtifyeth,Thales. fyrſt perceiued the ſeaſons and times of the yere, and parted it into .CCC.lxv. daies: but that as I thynke was but onely among the Grecians. Ioſephus witneſſeth that ye yere was diuiſed by the Hebrues in Egypt afore Noe his flud.Diuerſe diuiſions of the yere. There be diuerſe faſhions of diuidyng the yere, the Archadiens finiſhed their yere in thre monthes, the Cariens & Acarneus in .vi. monthes: There was a yere that conſiſted in .xxx. daies, whiche was coū
                  ted by the chaūge of the moone, there was alſo ye great yere yt ended, when

all the planettes returned into one poincte or lyne,The great yere. & after the mynde of Cicero it conteyned .xii.M. nyne .C.liiii. yeres of the ſonne: Ioſephus in the fyrſt of his antiquitie ſayth it cō
                  teyneth but ſixe hundreth yere. The other Grecians nombred the ful yere with .CCC.liii. daies:Romulus ordered the yere Marche. April. 
                  Romulus fyrſt deuided the yeare into ten monethes whereof Marche, that he named of his father, was fyrſt, April the ſecōd had that name of Venus, becauſe ſhe was borne of the frothe of the ſea, whiche is called Aphros, Maye of the auncient men, Iune of the yong men: The other he named of their order and nombre as quintilis, ſextilis Septēbre, October, Nouembre, December: Albeit afterwarde Quintilis was called Iulius in honor of Iulius Caeſar, and Sextilis was chaunged into Auguſtus, for the memoriall of the emperour Auguſtus Caeſar. Not withſtandyng for ſo muche as this yere, that Romulus ordered, did neither agree to the courſe of ye ſōne, nor chaūges of the Mone, Numa applied it to the courſe of the Moone by puttyng to .lvi. dayes,Numa added to the yere. whereof he made

ii. monethes, the one he named Ianuary of Ianus the fyrſt king of the Latines,Ianuary. 
                  February. ye other February of theyr god Februus, whiche had the preeminēce 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  t their purificacions. Afterward Numa of a ſuperſticious opinion yt he had, ſupoſyng God to be delighted with odde nōbres, gaue to Ianuary April, Iune Auguſt, Septembre, Nouembre, December .xxix. dayes: To Marche, Maye, Quintilis yt is Iuly and October .xxxi. and to February xxviii. daies.Iulius Ceſar made the yere perfecte. Laſt of al Iulius Caeſar put to the whole yere .x. dayes & ſyxe houres, wherof he put to theſe monthes, Ianuary, Auguſt, & Decēber euery of them .ii. daies: And to April, Iune, Septēber, & Nouēber he gaue to eche of thē one day. In this maner Iulius Caeſar accōpliſhed ye yere perfectely accordyng to the courſe of the ſunne, & of the .vi. houres euery .iiii. yere amoūteth a day, whiche cauſeth leape yere (as we cal it) in latine it is named biſſextus,
                  Leape yeare biſſextus. becauſe euery forth yere we coūte twyſe the .vi. calend of Marche.Monthes. ¶The monthes haue their name becauſe they meaſure the ſpace and courſe of the Moone. Thus the

yere hath .xii. monthes,Daies of euery month. wherof April Iune, Septēber, and Nouēber haue .xxx. daies, all ye reſt hath .xxxi. dayes, ſauyng February, whiche hath but xxviii. in the yere be .lii. wekes and a day. Daies there be .CCC.lxv. & .vi. houres. The calendes, nones, & ides hath theyr appellacions of ye maner of rekenyng of the Romaynes.Calendes. Calē
                  des were named of callyng, for at euery chaūge the chiefe rular of ye ſacrifices called rex ſacrificulus called to an aſſēbly in the Capitoly or place of Rome all them of the coūtree, and ſheweth thē theyr feſtiual daies, and what it was lawful to do ye monthe. The Nones had ye name becauſe thei were the .ix. day frō the ides,Nones. Ides. whiche ides be ye midde daies of euery mōth, and had theyr appellacion of the Hetruſcanes terme iduare that ſignifieth to deuide or ſeperate in ye middes. This faſhion of countyng the month endured to the .CCCC.l. yeare of the cytie, & was kepte ſecrete among the byſhops of theyr religion tyl ye tyme that C. Slauius, P. Sulpitius Auerrio and P. Sempronius Sophullongus then beyng Conſuls, againſt the

mynde of the Senatours diſcloſed al theyr ſolemne feates, & publiſhed thē in a table that eueri man might haue perſeueraunce of them. The Prime,Prime. wherby we fynde the coniunction of the moue, and all mouable feaſtes as Lent, Eaſter, Whytſondaye with other lyke, was inuented by the great clarke ſainct Barnarde.
            
            
               ¶The .v. Chapiter. ¶Who ordeyned the houres, dyals clockes, deuidyng the day and night.
               
                  
                     HOVRES,
                  Houres. whiche beyng in nōber xxiiii. accompliſhe the ſpace of a day & night, were ſo named of the ſōne, whiche in the Egyptians language is called horus.
                  
                     Horus. Sol.
                     Mercurius Triſmegiſtus appointed xii. houres
                   They at the fyrſt were appointed but twelue of this occaſyon. Hermes Triſmegiſtus, perceiuyng a certayne beaſt conſecrated to theyr God Serapis, to make water or piſſe .xii. tymes in the day of equall diſtāce, ſuppoſed therfore that ye day ought to be deuided into .xii. houres. This nōber dyd continue long, but afterwarde yt day

parted in .xxiiii. houres Anaximene
                        •
                     
                   a Mileſian found in Lacedemony the fyrſt dyal,Dials. that declareth the houres by ye ſhadow of the Gnomon. It was long afore they were vſed in Rome, for (as Plinie writeth) in the .xii. tables there was onely reherſed the riſyng & goyng doune of the ſunne, & a fewe yeares after, Noone or midday was added, whiche the Bedel or common crier dyd denounce.Bedel denoū
                     ced noone. This was but onely on cleare daies, when they might perceyue the courſe & altitude of the ſōne. The fyrſt dyal was ſet vp on a pyller openly, whiche ſtode behynd the cōmon pulpite or barre called roſtra at ye coſt of M. Valerius,
                  M. Valerius Meſſala ordeyned a dial in Rome Water dyal. 
                  Meſſala then Conſuls in the fyrſt battail Punike. The water dial was vſed fyrſt in Rome by P. Scipio Naſica ye ix.c. yere of the cytie to deuide ye houres of the day & night. Albeit it was inuēted by C
                        •
                     eſibius of Alexandria. Afterwarde clockes made of metall were inuented by ſubtyl wittes,Clockes and ſād dials were imagined,Sand dial. whoſe authours be yet vnknowen. In ſome places the clockes ſtrike .xxiiii. houres by order,Strikyng of the clockes. in other ſome, as in the

Weſt partes of the worlde, it ſmiteth twyſe in the day .xii. houres in ſuche order that the .xii. houre is at noone and at midnight, whiche is more cō
                  modiouſe for the rekeners then the other. The daies whiche be rekened in ſundry wyſe of diuerſe nacions, began in Egypt,Sundry diuiſion of daies. where the yere & monthes were alſo deuiſed, they take all the ſpace from midnight to midnight for one day, and the Romaynes vſed the ſame maner. For as Plutarche writeth, the ſūne riſyng is the beginnyng of all affayres & functions, the night is a tyme of counſelyng & apparaunce, and they had aſſigned to euery houre a ſōdry miniſtry, as Martial in his Epigramme declareth.

                     The day vvas deuided in ſundry vviſe,
                     That euery hour had a ſeueral office,
                     The .ii. firſt ſerued for ſalutacion,
                     The third for lavvyers alteracion,
                     Tvvo next vvere ſpente in labours diuerſly,
                     The ſixt men might them ſelfes reſt quietly,
                     The ſeuenth of vvorkes vvas reſolution,
                     
                        The eight vvas for vvreſtlers, and in concluſion,
                     The nynth vvas limitted for mennes repaſt,
                     And ſo furth the other, of time vvas made no vvaſt.
                  
¶The Babilonians called the ſpace betwene the Sunne riſynges a day: The Atheniens named all that was betwene the goynges doune a daye. The Vmbrians counte theyr day fro noone to noone: but cōmonly the day is called the ſpace from mornyng tyl night.Partes of the night. The night was diuided into iiii. watches, whereof euerye one (as Hierom wytneſſeth) conteyned thre houres.
            
            
               The .vi. Chapiter. ¶Who ſet furth bookes fyrſt, or made a library, Printyng, paper, parchement arte of memory.
               
                  Bokes,
                  
                     BOOKES, whiche cō
                  teyne the monumentes of ingeniouſe wyttes, and be a regeſtre of all valiaunt proweſſe, in Grece were fyrſt publiſhed, as Laertius thinketh by Anaxagoras: as Gellius ſayeth, it was Piſiſtratus
                  
that made the fyrſt booke, & exhibited it to be redde openly.Piſiſtratus made the firſt booke. Notwithſtandyng Ioſephus declareth yt the Hebrues and prieſtes of Egypte and Chaldee ſet furth bookes fyrſt.
               The Atheniens ſeriouſly multiplied ye nōbre of bookes,Athens made many bookes whiche Xerxes caried frō thence into Perſie, & Seleucus kyng of Macedony cauſed them many yeres after to be conueighed to Athens again.Ptolomeus lybraries. After that Ptolomeus kyng of Egypt gathered together vii C.M. bookes, whiche were all brent in the former battaile of Alexandria. Neuertheles, Strabo recordeth that Ariſtotle dyd inſtitute the fyrſt lybrary,Ariſtotle had the fyrſt lybrary. and left it to Theophraſt his diſciple, & taught the kynges of Egypte howe they ſhould order theyr lybrary: Theophraſt left it to Meleus & of him Scepſis receyued it. There was alſo a lybrarye at Pargamus verye auncient.Aſinius Pollio. In Rome Aſinius Pollio had the fyrſte lybrarye, whiche was occaſyon that good wyttes emploied great and graue ſtudy in learnyng to the ample furtheraunce and commoditee of the common wealth of the cytie. There be at this day many

in Italy, but the moſt famouſe is the liberary,F. Feltrius. whiche Frederike Feltrius duke of Vrbine dyd cauſe to be edified. Truely the cōmodite of lyberaries is right profitable and neceſſary but in cōpariſon of the craft of Printyng,
                  Printyng. it is nothyng, both becauſe one manne may Prynte more in one day, then many men in many yeres could write: And alſo it preſerueth bothe Greke & Latine auctours fro the daū
                  ger of corrupcion. It was found in Germany at Magunce by one I. Cuthenbergus a knight:Iohn Cuthenbergus found Printyng. he found moreouer ye Inke by his deuiſe that Printers vſe .xvi. yere after Printyng was foūd, whiche was ye yere of our lord. M.CCCC.lviii. one Cōradus an Almayne brought it into Rome: & Nicolas Iohnſon a Frenchemanne dyd greatly poliſhe and garniſhe it: And now it is diſperſed through ye whole world almoſt. Before ye vſe of Paper men vſed to wryte in leaues of date trees, and ſomtymes on the barke of trees:Men wrot in plates of lead Afterwarde they wrote ye publique writynges in plates or ſhetes of leade, & their priuate matters in tables & waxe, for tables (as Homer
                  
teſtifieth were afore ye ſiege of Troy Paper was deuiſed by king Alexander as Varro affyrmeth,Paper. it was made of a kynd of fenne riſhes, that grewe in the mariſhe groundes of Egypte. But Plinie ſayeth, it was vſed in the tyme of kyng Numa, yt reigned CCC. yeres afore Alexander, & his bookes, whiche were found in a cheſt of ſtone in fyld by L. Pitilius a Scribe, were writen in paper. In proceſſe of tyme paper, that we vſe nowe, was inuented:Paper. it is made of lynen clothe beaten together in mylles made for that vſe Parchement, as Varro wytneſſeth, was found in Pargamus,
                  Parchement. albeit the writers of Hebrewe ſtories, as Ioſephus ſheweth, vſed parchement: they wrote alſo in goate ſkynnes & ſhepe ſkynnes, in olde tyme as Herodotus declareth. There be diuerſe maner of papers, as paper royal,Diuerſe maner of Paper paper deinye, blottyng paper, matchaūtes paper. The vſage of writyng by caractes is very auncient, and was found by Tyrotullius freman as Euſebius ſuppoſeth, and Iulius Caeſar vſed it muche in ſecrete and preuy counſels. The arts of memorye was founde by

                  Simonides in Thaſſalye: For what tyme he was boden to a banket at a noble mannes houſe called Scopa,
                  Arte of memory. it chaunſed that he was ſente for to ſpeake with .ii. yong men at the gate and ſtraight waye the bankettyng houſe fel and deſtroyed al the geſtes: Then he, becauſe he remembred in what order and place euery man ſate deliuered euery man his frende to be buried. By that facte bothe he perceiued the order of the art of memory and what commoditee came to the remembraunce of man by ſuche places and images as bee conteyned in that feate. In memory e
                     •
                  celled Cyrus kyng of Perſye,Men of great memory. whiche could call euery man in his hooſt by name. Cyneas the ambaſſadour of Pyrrhu
                        •
                     
                   the day after he came to Rome ſaluted euery order of nobles by their proper names, Mithridates could ſpeake x
                     •
                  ii. languages. Iulius Caeſar could wryte, reede, endite, and heare a tale al at ones. Adrianus the emperour could do the ſame.
            
            
               
               The .vii. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of warre with other thynges concernyng the ſame.
               
                  
                     CHIVALRY,
                  Mars authoure of chiualrie. wherein is declared the manly corage of noble captaynes, was deuiſed, (as Tully ſayeth) by Pallas, as Diodorus thynketh, the maner of warre was found out by Mars. Albeit Ioſephus telleth that Tubalcain,
                  Tubalcain. whiche was afore the flud dyd fyrſt practiſe feates of armes, whereby it appeareth that ye vſe of warres is of great antiquitie, but it is vncertayne who was the fyrſt warrior. Afore the findyng out of weapons, menne vſed to fight with theyr fiſtes, feete, and bityng. And thus beganne battaile, as Lucretius writeth.
               
                  Handes gripen, fote, tothe, & nail
                  VVere firſt vveapons vſed in batail
               
               Afterwarde they beganne to fight with ſtaues and clubbes.Staues. And therfore they aſſigne to Hercules a ſtaffe and a Lyons ſkynne. For men in the beginnyng vſed ſtaues to reuenge their iniuries and quarels, & couered

theyr bodyes with ſkynnes of wylde beaſtes in ſtead of armoure.
                     Palamedes. array.
                     Watches. Wardyng. Watche wordes.
                   
                  Palamedes ordered and ſet men fyrſt in aray appointed watches and wardyng to be kepte, and watche woordes in the battaile of Troy. At the ſame tyme Synon excogitated bekons and fyres Plinie ſaieth that the Pheniciens inuented fyrſt the polycies of warre: Diodorus affyrmeth that Mars forged fyrſt weapons, and armed ſouldiers with thē, and therfore the findyng out of thē is attributed to him: but the inſtrumentes of warre were foūd by diuers men at ſundry tymes.
               
                  Helmettes. Swerdes. Speares. Targettes.Helmettes, ſwordes, and ſpeares, the Lacedemonians founde: yet Herodotus ſuppoſeth the tergattes and ſalettes to be the inuencion of the Egyptians, and ſo to haue comen into Grece.
               The haberion was deuiſed by Midius Meſſenius,
                  Haberion. Shyldes. ſhyldes by Pretus and Acriſius as they fought together.
               
                  Leggeharnes Iauelynes Dartes.¶Legge harnes and criſtes of ſalettes were inuented by the Cariens, Iauelynes Etolas, Dartes with thonges or ſtrynges by Etolus
                  
ſonne to Mars, billes by the Thraciens,
                  Iuſtyng ſpeares. Moreſpikes. iuſtyng ſpeares and moreſpikes by Tyrrhenus: they were vſed firſt in the ſiege of Capua, that Fulgius Flaccus laied to it. pentheſilea imagined poulaxes,
                     Polaxes. Huntyng ſtaues. Bowe and ſhaftes. Sithes.
                   and Piſeus huntyng ſtaues: bowe and ſhaftes, ſithes Iupiters ſonne inuēted, although Diodorus aſcribeth the inuencion of thē to Apollo. Notwithſtandyng, Artapanus, whō 
                  Euſebius reciteth ſaieth that the inuencion of Armour, began by Moſes, whiche beyng very young acheued the firſt hardy enterpriſe againſt the Ethiopians. Of all enginnes of warre, the Cretians founde firſte the croſſe bowes,Croſebowes Quarrelles. Boltes Brakes and ſlynges. the Sirians quarelles, or boltes, and the Phaeniciens found brakes and ſlinges: howbeit, Vegetius holdeth opinion that Baleares, a people whiche dwell in the Spaniſhe ſeas, ordained ſlinges. Cranes,Cranes or Vernes. or vernes to wynde vp great weightes were the deuiſe of Cteſyphon. The rammar called in latyn Aries,
                  Rammer. wherwith walles be ouerthrowen, was made by Aepeus at Troy. Thei ſought a tertiſe called in latyn Teſtudo too myne walles,Sough. 
                  Artemon

Clazemonius inſtituted. But of all other that euer were deuiſed to the deſtruction of man, the gōnes be moſt deuiliſhe,Gunnes. whiche was perceiued by a certaine Almaine, whoſe name is not knowen: After this ſorte, it chaunced that he had in a morter pouder of brimſtone that he had beatē for a medicine, and couered it with a ſtoone, and as hee ſtrooke fyre it fortuned a ſparke to fal into the pouder: by and by there roaſe a greate flame oute of the morter, and lyfte vp the ſtoone, wherewith it was couered a greate heyght: And after hee had perceiued that, he made a pipe of yron, and tempered the pouder, and ſo finiſhed this deadly engyn, and taught the Venetians the vſe of it, when they warred againſt the Genuates, whiche was in the yere of our lord .M.ccc.lxxx. For this inuencion he receiued this benefit that his name was neuer knowen leſt he might for thys abhomynable deuiſe,What yere gūnes were found. haue bene curſed and euil ſpoken of whileſt the worlde ſtandeth. The waye to reclayme and ryde horſes after ye iudgement of Plinie Bellerophon taught fyrſt:Reclaymyng of horſes. whiche rodde

the ſwyfte Pegaſus into a mountain of Libie called Chimera, as Diodorus ſuppoſe it was Neptune.
                  Brydels by
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     es. Brydels, bittes, horſeharnes or trappers the Peletronians a nacion of Theſſalie found, and as ſome thinke the caſt to breake wyld horſes, was lerned of thē. Alſo the Numidians rode their horſes without ſadles. Cartes with two horſes and waggons the Phrigians vſed fyrſt chariotes Richthonius diuiſed fyrſt in Grece,Waggons. Chariotes. Fightyng on horſebackes. fightyng on horſebacke the Centaures found in Theſſalie. Notwithſtandyng all the cōmodities of ſuch beaſtes, as horſes Mules, Aſſes, and all other bearyng and drawyng beaſtes were at the beginnyng. For it is manyfeſt that the Egyptians, and Hebrues, Aſſirians and Arabians vſed them: but the glorious Grecians vſurpe all to theyr owne glorye and ambiciouſe praiſe & commendacion.
            
            
               The .viii. Chapiter. ¶The inſtitucion of Olimpiades with other ſhewes and games.
               
                  
                  Plaies or ſhewes.
                  
                     OF Plaies or ſhewes in Grece there were foure principall, whereof the moſte principall was Olimpiades: whiche were kepte euery .v. yere in the mounte Olimpus, and ordaigned by Hercules. one of the fiue brethren named Idaei Dactyli, in honour and remembraūce of Iupiter. In this game Corilus an Archadien wan firſt the price as Euſebius ſaieth.Corilus. 
                  Plinie affirmeth that Hercules ſonne of Alcumena obtained the victory there firſt. Ther was wreſtlyng, runnyng with horſes and on foote,Exerciſes vſed in the Olimpiades. turnyng, lepyng, courſyng, with chariotes: contencion of poetes Rhetoriciens, Muſiciens, and diſputacions of Philoſophiers, and great aſſembles out of all Grece. The manet was then too proclaime warres, or entre leages of peace: the rewarde of the victoures was a garlande of Oliue,The rewarde of the victors whiche tree grew ther beſide. By this thei counted their yeres, as the Romanes did bi Luſtra and their counſailes. The ſeconde ſhewe was Pithii, whiche were in honour of Apollo, and made by Apollo hymſelf,

in memoriall of his actiuitie, in vanquiſhyng the greate dragon Pithon, that was ſente by Iuno to perſecute his mother Latona. The third game was Iſthmij deuiſed by Theſeus in ye worſhep of his father Neptunus, as Hercules had dooen to Iupiter: Thei had the name Iſthmij of the narrow place in Grece that Corinth ſtode in where the plaies were celebrated beſide an olde temple of Neptune enuironed with a darke woodde of peche trees. Thei that wā the maſtery, had a garland of pine tree. The .iiii. game was Nemei,
                  Nemei. named of ye foreſt Nemea Theſe feaſtes the Argiuans kepte ſolemnely in reuerēce of Hercules, that ſlewe there the mightie Lion, whoſe ſkynne he ware for his coate armour Pirrhus daunce was a kind of dauncyng, wherin the Lacedemoniās practiſed their youth, from thei were .v. yere of age as a preparatiue to greater affaieres of warre. It was firſte inſtituted in Crete by one Pirrhus yt was one of ye 
                  Cibilles prieſtes.Pyrthus daunce. Thei daunced it in armour and with weapons on horſebacke, as Solinus teſtifieth.Naked games. Naked games wer firſt inuented

by Licaon:Funeral plaies. Wreſtlyng. Dyce. Tables. Tennys. and funeral plaies by Acaſtus, wreſtlyng by Mercurie, dice tables, tennys, and cardes were foūd of the Lidians a people of Aſia, and begonne not for any lucre or pleaſure but for a common wealth. For whattyme their countre had great ſcarſenes & want of corne, inſomuche that it was not able to ſuffice the people, they mittigated & ſwaged theyr hunger and ſcarſitie in this wiſe, one day they toke theyr meat moderatly, & an other day by courſe thei applied ſuch ſportes and paſtimes to dryue away the tediouſnes of theyr famine & hunger.Cheſſe. The cheſſe were inuēted the yere of the world .iii.M.CCCCCC.xxxv. by a certaine wiſe mā called Xerxes,
                  Xerxes. to declare to a tyranne that maieſtie or auctoritie without ſtrength, aſſiſtens, and healpe of his men & ſubiectes was caſual, feble, & abiect to many calamities of fortune: his entent was to breke the fierſe cruelte of his heart by feare of ſuche daungers as might chaunce or come to paſſe in the lyfe of mā. There is a game alſo that is played with the poſterne bone in the hyndre foote of a ſhepe,Talus. oxe, goate

fallow or redde dere, whiche in latin is called Talus. It hath .iiii. chaunces, the ace point,Canis. Chaunces. Venus. that is named Canis or Canicula, was one of the ſides he that caſt it leyed doune a penye or ſo muche as the gamers were agreed on, the other ſyde was called Venus that ſignified vii. he yt caſt the chaūce wan .vi. and all that was leyd doune for the caſtyng of Canis. The two other ſydes were called Chius and Senio:Chius. Senio. he that dyd throwe Chius wan iii. And he that caſt Senio gained .iiii. This game (as I take it,) is vſed of children in Northfolke, and they cal it the chaunce bone,Chaunce bone. they playe with iii. or .iiii. of thoſe bones together: it is either the ſame or very lyke to it.
               There was in olde tyme a game at the dyce called Vulturſii,
                  Vulturcii Hercules Baſilicus. and Hercules Baſilicus, that Plautus maketh mencion of: but the inuentor of thoſe games be yet vnknowen, albeit▪ it ſemeth to be a deuiſe of the Romaines, And likwiſe the auctour of the game named odde or euen,Odde & euen. and holdyng vp of handes or fyngers is vncertayne.Palamedes. There be ſome yt refer the fīdyng of y• cardes & cheſſe to ye noble Palamedes
               
            
            
               
               
                  ❧The .ix. Chapiter. ¶Certain plaies of the Romaines.
               
                  Lupercal
                        •
                     a.
                  
                     LVPERCAL was a Caue at the foote of the Mounte Palatine halowed to Pan a miſticall God of the Archadiens, where the cuſtome was to ſacrifice a Goate, (as Plutarche reporteth) a Dogge, bycauſe he ſhould kepe the Wolfe from their foldes. The oblacion was made in February aboute the .xv. kalendas of Marche after this rite & faſhion. The yong menne all naked ranne and courſed aboute wantonly and laſciuiouſly in honor of Pan,
                  The rites of theſe feaſtes. with whippes or ſcourges in their hādes: And the women offered theimſelues to bee beaten with their ſcourges, ſuppoſyng that it helped to the fruitfulneſſe of children: This paſtyme was inſtituted by Euander, that came out of Archadia, Marcu
                        •
                      Antonius in this plaie naked ſet the Diademe on Iulius Caeſers hedde.Circences. There was alſo another ſhewe called Circenſes whiche were celebrated in a place walled aboute named

                  Circus, where was vſed fightyng, & courſyng of horſes & runnyng with charettes.
               
                  THE Circus that we name liſtes or tiltes were of greate length, and had barres where the raſe ſhould begynne and at the other ende was the wager ſette, that thei ranne for: ther was vſed in the ſame place tournyng Theſe were long vſed ſolemnely of the Romaines and had the title of greate plaies or games. The thirde kinde of plaies wer Saturnalia,
                  Saturnalia. whiche continued fiue daies in December, and were kepte verye coſtly and ſumpteouſly with greate ſporte and gladneſſe, and mutuall feaſtes, and preſented ordinarely one another wt gyftes. It was alſo the maner in thoſe feaſtful daies that ſeruauntes ſhould haue equal power in thynges and like aucthoritee and ſitte at the table with their maiſters bycauſe in Saturnus tyme all thynges wer vſed in common. Ianus ordaigned them in honour of Saturnus (as Macrobius declareth) and ſome ſaie thei began in Athens.
                  Sweard
                        •
                      pla
                        •
                     ers. There was alſo another game of ſwearde plaiers vnarmed:

the occaſion of their beginnyng becauſe the Romayns when they went to warre ſhould ſe fightyng, woūdes and ſweardes to thentēt yt they ſhuld be ye leſſe afrayd of their enemies armed or be diſcouraged when thei ſaw blody woundes in the felde, therfore the chiefe capitayne or Lyuetenaunt of the hoſt ſhould exhibite to the people a game of fēce or ſweard plaiers.
            
            
               The .x. Chapiter. ¶Who found truſ
                     •
                  , leages, ſundrye kyndes of makyng it, triumphe and ouacions.
               
                  Truſe.
                  
                     TRVSE, that is called a couenaunte of peace for a ſeaſon was inſtituted by Licaon: it was takē ſomtyme for yeres, as ye Romanes toke truſe with the Veientes for .cl. yeres,Truſe for yeres. with the Cerites for an hūdreth: Sometyme truſe was made for houres as Caius Pontius a Samnite required of the dictator of Rome truſe for .vi. houres.Houres. 
                  L
                        •
                     ages. Cryes.Leages of peace and cryes in cōmon places Theſeus dyd ordeyne in Grece, but Diodorus aſſigneth it to Mercurie. Neuertheles

they were in frequent vſe long afore that tyme in Aſſirie and Aegipt, and namely among the Hebrues▪ For Iacob made a leage with Labā.Iacob made a leage with Laban. And Moſes offered cōdicious of peace to the prynces of the coūtries by whom he paſſed:Iehoſuah wt Gabaonites. and after him Iehoſuah ſtroke vp a bonde of peace, and made a loue day wt the Gabaonites. Therfore it is a great difficultie to appoīct the inuentor of it. Ther were diuerſe faſhions of makyng leages, as the Romanes maner was of this faſhiō. The Heraulde of armes at the commaundemente of the kyng tooke and ſmit a hogge appointed for that purpoſe, ſaiyng:The Romaynes leage. ſo let Iupiter ſmyt him that diſanulleth this holye leage, as I ſtryke this hogge. But Polibius wryteth that the herolde toke a ſtone in his hand and ſayd: If I performe and ſtande to the couenaunte of this leage without gyle or fraud, the goddes geue me all thynges proſperous: If I either do or thinke the cōtrary, I pray God that I alone be deſtroyed and caſt away, as I caſt this ſtone from me, and furth with he threwe doune the ſtone.
               
                  When the Arabiens make a leage of peace, ther ſtandeth one betwene the twoo parties yt cutteth with a ſharp ſtone the holowe of the hande of the cōfederates, and with the blode, that iſſueth out, he anoynteth with ragges taken out of their garmentes .vii ſto
                     •
                  es that ſtande betwene them and inuocateth Dioniſius and Vrania their goddes: then the ſoliciter and entreater for the peace findeth ſuretie for the ſtraunger or citezen that was partie. The like order was vſed in amities made emong frindes.
               
                  THE Scythiās made leages after this maner:The Scythians leage. thei filled a bowlle of wyne, and mingled it with the bloud of theim that ſhould enter the bonde of peace, and then thei weete in the boule their arrowes, axes, halbardes and dartes that dooen, thei with many wordes vowed and curſed thē ſelues and ſo dronke the wyne bothe thei and all the nobles preſente. The ſame vſe was emong traitoures in their cōſpiracies at Rome.Barceans leage. The Barceans cōſented on their leages thus Thei made their loue daye ouer a depe Caue verye priuie, and ſo long

as the yearth continued, ſo the pacte endured. Dioniſius, whiche was repleniſhed with the ſpoyles of many countrees led the firſt triumph,Triumph. and afterward, it was receiued of ſundry nacions, as ye capitains of Carthage when thei ſped well, triumphed. In Rome Romulus, after he had conquered Acron Kyng of the Ceninens, crouned with Laurell and caried in chariot with foure horſes entred into the citee triūphantly. And dedicated his praie and ſpoyles to Iupiter as Dioniſius writeth. Albeit, Eutropius ſaieth that Tarquinius Priſcus firſt triumphed of the conqueſt of the Sabines.
                  Camillus. 
                  Camillus ledde the firſt ſolemne triumphe with white horſes▪ and a gilded chariot, and a garlande of gold, with all the captiues folowyng the chariot with themes and fetters aboute their neckes. And the ſenate goyng before into the Capitole to Iupiters temple, where thei offered a white Bull and then returned. It was lawfull for none to triumph but ſuche as were dictatour, conſull, or pretor, albeit, Cneius Pompeiu
                        •
                     
                   beeyng but of the ordre of knightes,

triumphed as Cicero telleth. Ouacion is a leſſe royalte then triumphes and was the worſhip of ſuche as had ended any battel or acheued any feat wtout blodſhedyng, or when ye battel lacked any of the due cyrcumſtances of apointyng, they that came into the cytie with that pompe, were crouned with a garland of myrtyl. And went a foot into the capitole, al the ſenate folowing him, & there offered a ſhepe The fyrſt yt had any Ouatiō was Poſthumius Tubertus.
                  Poſthumius Tubertus. The offering of the Lacedemonians. The Lacedemonians when they vāquiſhed theyr enemies by craft, policie, or deceit offred a bul: when thei did valiantly ſubdue thē by force of armes, they ſacrificed a cocke, of ye maner of triumph, reade Appianus Liuius or Iulius Capitolinus.
               
            
            
               The .xi. Chapiter. ¶Garlandes or crounes, the diuerſity of them, & of oyntmentes.
               
                  
                     PLINIE teſtifyeth that Liber Bacchus did firſt inuent and ware a garland made of Iuye on his heade:Garlondes. Bacchus. and after it was taken in a cuſtome

that when they ſacrificed to anye of the goddes, they ſhould bee crouned with a garland, and ye oblacion likewyſe.
               Notwithſtandyng I fynde that the vſe of garlandes or crounes is of more antiquitie then Liber Bacchus For Moſes, that was manye yeares afore him,Moſes. made manye crounes and garlandes of golde. At the fyrſt the maner was, in all playes and ſacryfices to wynde garlādes of boughes of trees. And after they were garniſhed with varietie of floures amōg the Sicyomans by Pauſias and Glycera his lemmanne.Pauſias. Not long after the wynter garlādes that be called Egyptian,Wynter ga
                        •
                     
                     landes. whiche are made of woode ſplytters or Iuery dyed with manye coloures, beganne to be had in quotidian vſage.
               And in proceſſe they made crounes of braſenne plates gylted,Crounes of braſen plate. or couered with ſyluer, called for theyr thynnes garlandes. Laſt of all Craſſus, the ryche did fyrſt ſet furth in his games and ſhewes, crounes with ſiluer and golden leaues.
               And cōſequently there were inuēted

many maner of crounes. As the triumphant croune that the Emperour or graunde capitain ware in this triumph,Corona triumphalis. this was firſte made of Oliue and afterward of golde.Muralis. The murall or wall croune, that was giuē to him that ſcaled firſt the walles. The cāp croune, that was the reward of hym that entered firſte in armes into the campe of his enemies. Nauall or ſea croune,Naualis. whiche was ſette on his hed that firſt borded his enemies ſhippe. And all theſe wer of gold. The Obſidionall croune,Obſidional. yt was worne of hym, that deliuered a citee beſieged, and was made of graſſe. There was alſo a ciuil croune,Ciuilis. whiche was a ſouerē
                  tie that a citizē gaue to him that had valiantly preſerued hym from his enemies, this was made of Okē branches. And this maner of croune the Atheniens did firſte diuiſe and gaue it to the Pericles.
                  Pericles. There wer moreouer crounes of pearles, trenche crou
                     •
                  nes, and garlandes compoſed of the eares of corne, whiche as Plinie witneſſeth was firſt in vſe emōg the Romanes.Garlandes of Sinamome. But garlādes made of Cinamome, wouen & imboſſed wt gold VeVeſpaſianus
                  
dyd fyrſt conſecrate in the capitolie in the tēple of peace. In ſpace of yeares the exceſſe of crounes was ſuche that the Grecians in their bākettes crouned both theyr heades, and cuppes alſo, wherof the Iomās were auctours.Cuppes were crouned. By this ſort of crounes Cleopatra empoyſoned Antony as Plinie writeth, and Artaxerxes vſed crounes or garlādes in his feaſtes, to thys Virgill alluded in his Aeneidos.
                  
                     They ſet furth their goldē goblettes
                     And crouned them vvith freſhe chaplettes.
                  
Oyntmentes (as Ioſephus writeth) notwithſtandyng that Plinie ſayeth the contrary,Oyntmentes were vſed long afore ye battaile of Troye, for Iacob ſente to his ſonne Ioſeph in Egypt oyntmentes: And Moſes, that was .CCC.l. yere afore the ſiege of Troy, maketh mencion of oyntmentes concernyng the ſāctificacion of the tabernacle, & prieſtes of the olde teſtament: Albeit it is not knowen who was fyrſt diuiſer of them. Plinie & Solinus reporte that Alexander when he wanne the campe of Darius, found among other

iewels and ſpoyles a caſket of oyntmētes, that muche pleaſed him: But Herodotus doth declare that it was in frequent vſe afore Darius tyme. For Cambyſes Cyrus ſonne ſent ambaſſadours to Aethiopus kyng of the Macrobians with great preſentes,Athiopus diſpiſed oyntmentes. wherof a bore of oyntmētes was parcel. When the kyng had learned the maner of ye confection of it, he cōtemned and neglected it as a thyng of no value. It is not certayne when they came into Rome: But I fynd in Plinie that the .CCCCC.lxv. yere of the cytie Antiochus beyng vanquiſhed, & Aſia ſubdued and conquered P. Licinius Craſſus and Iulius Caeſar then Cenſours cōmaunded that no forrein nor ſtraunge confection of oyntmentes ſhould be ſold in the cytie.Oyntmentes might not be ſolde.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧The .xii. Chapiter. ¶Who found out metals, ſmith
                     •
                  s toles, fyre, candels, and belowes.
               
                  
                     OF al metal, wherin worldly ſubſtaunce conſiſteth▪
                  Golde, gold, that all men ſo ſore couer to haue, is the moſt preciouſe. For the deſyre

herof they haue digged into the depe botomleſſe abi
                     •
                  ſe of the yearth, & at ye length (as Phaletius ſayd) they wyl digge Pluto out of hel for it. And Diogenes what tyme he was aſked why gold loke ſo pale, anſwered very wel ſaiyng, becauſe it hath many that lye in wayte for it. Cadmus, as Plinie affyrmeth,Cadmus found gold. foūd it in the moūt Pāgaeus in T
                     •
                  race, or as ſome thynke, it was Thoas and Eaclis that inuented it in Panc
                     •
                  aia. Syluer Erichthonius of Athens or Ceacus foūd out. I thinke they reporte that gold was found in Pangaeus, becauſe there is great plē
                  tye in that hyl,Syluer. as Herodotus dothe write. The fyue brethren named Idei Dactyli found yron in Crete.Yron. Leade. 
                  Midac
                        •
                     itus fe
                     •
                   leade out of the Ilelandes againſt Spayne called Caſſitrides, as Strabo declareth. Braſſe was foūd by Ciny
                        •
                     as in ye ile of Cypres,Braſſe. & Solinas 
                  
                     •
                  ayeth it was found in Crete. Ciny
                        •
                     as alſo deuiſed the tōges,Tonges. Leuer. Stithe. fyle or tape, leuer, and ſtythe. Notwithſtandyng Clement ſayeth that Selmētes and Damnameneus two Iues foūd yron fyrſt in Cypres, & the Pānoniās braſſe. Ariſtotle holdeth opiniō
                  
that Lydus a Scithian fyrſt taught to melte & worke braſſe,Meltyng braſſe. 
                  Theophraſt thinketh it was Delas a Phrigian. Strabo writeth that a certayne people named Telchines wrought yron and braſſe fyrſt, & they made a ſwerd named Harpe, which they gaue to Saturne.
                  Harpe. Smythesforge. The ſmithesforge ſome thinke the Calibians found, & ſome ſuppoſe it were the Ciclopes, whiche fyrſt vſed the ſmithes craft. Diodorus holdeth the opinion that Idei Dactili & Vulcanus were auctours of fyre,Idei Dactili. yrō, braſſe, ſyluer, gold, & al yt is wrought with the fyre.Sotheryng of yron. Sotheryng of yron Glaucus founde, and Cadmus meltyng of golde. Neuertheleſſe I take it that all theſe afore named foūd the vſe of ſuche thinges in their coūtries where they were inhabitauntes. For the vſe of al ſuche metal was perceyued in the beginnyng of the worlde by Tubalcain whiche was ſonne to Lamech and occupied ſmithe crafte.Tubalcain. 
                  Clement referreth the temperyng of yron to Delas. Fyre is ſuppoſed to be the inuencion of Vulcanus: Victriuius ſayeth that the trees toſſed and ſhaken with wyndes, by beatyng together

of theyr boughes excited fyre.Fyre. But it had bene more conuenient to haue aſcribed the gyfte of it to God, whiche gaue it to man to be remedye againſt the daūger of colde.Pyrodes ſtroke fyre out of flinte. Matches. 
                  Pyrodes fyrſt ſtroke fyre out of flinte, Prometheus taught fyrſt to kepe it in matches: Plinie telleth howe the ſpyes in armies and campes,Smityng fyre with wood. or els the ſhepardes diuiſed to ſmyte fyre by rubbyng of two peces of wood together. Laurel and Iuye be beſt for that vſe. Belowes were found by Anacharſis as Strabo wytneſſeth:Belowes. Candels. Candels the Egyptians inuented.
            
            
               The .xii. Chapiter. ¶Who ordeyned coynes, lokyng glaſſes, rynges with preciouſe ſtones.
               
                  
                     COYNAGE,
                  Mony. of what metal ſoeuer it was made, as it maye appeare by Ioſephus, is verye auncient: For Cain Adames ſonne was very gredy in gatheryng together of mony. Herodotus wryteth,Lydians. that the Lydians fyrſt coyned ſyluer and gold to bye and ſel

with. For afore the ſiege of Troy as wytneſſeth Homere, menne vſed to chaūge ſtuffe 
                     •
                  or ſtuffe. Albeit in the tyme of Abrahā there was mony currant, for he bought the duble caue, to burye his wyfe Sata of the Hethi
                     •
                  e Ep
                        •
                     ron for .CCCC. ſycles of ſyluce,Sycles. whiche was afore the ſiege of Troye many yeres. In Rome the fyrſt coine of gold was ſmitten the .ccccc.clvii. yere of the cytie.Golde in Rome. And it was named a ducate, & after it beganne to be vſed in many places at ſundry tymes. Phaedon begāne ſiluer coyne in ye ile Egina.
                  Phedon. Syluer was coyned in Egina. It was minted in Rome .cccc.lxxxiiii. yere after the cytie was builded, the printe of it was a Chariot wt two horſes & ſome with foure.Ianus coynes of braſſe. 
                  Iänus dyd cauſe braſſe to be coyned with a face on the one ſyde & a ſhyp on the other ſyde, to ye entent to gratifye Saturnus (whiche arryued there in a ſhip) by ſettyng furth his memory to their poſteritee & ſucceſſours.Seruius Tullius. 
                  Seruius Tullius fyrſt coined braſſe with an Image of a ſhepe and an oxe, as Plinie writeth. Lokyng glaſſes of ſiluer were diuiſed by Praxiteles in ye tyme of Pompeius Magnus.
                  Lokyng glaſſes. There were

alſo inuēted lokyng glaſſes of ſteele, leade, chriſtal, glaſſe, & mingled ſtuffe wherin we behold our viſages. Albeit it is vncertayn who dyd fyrſt fynd thē,Sydon. ſauyng that Plinie ſaieth one Sydon imagined thē of glaſſe.Rynges. Rynges wt a pece of ſtone wrought in them be reported of Plinie to haue bene made of Iupiter for to kepe in memory ye puniſhement of Prometheus,
                  Prometheus for that he deluded the goddes of the element of fyre, & did traduce it to mans vſe, but that is a fable of ſmale credite. For ye vſage of rynges & preciouſe ſtones is of great antiquitie, for I rede in Geneſis that Iudas gaue his doughter in law Thamar a ryng, & broches, as pledges of his promiſe. And Moſes yt was CCC. yere before the battaile of Troy ſpeaketh of rynges & preciouſe ſtones for makyng of the arke & veſtures of Aaron, as onyches & ſmaragdus or emrode. In Rome at the fyrſt they vſed rynges of yron euery mā ſauyng the tribunes.Rynges of yron. It was lōg afore the ſenatours had any ringes of gold and as Macrobie writeth, they vſed thē not ſo muche for trimmyng & decking of thē ſelues,Rynges ſerued to ſeale letters. as bicauſe to ſeale

letters wt thē:A man might haue but one ryng. inſomuche that it was not permitted to any man to haue mo then one, & that was allowed in none but fre men. Afterwarde they began to graue ſeales in preciouſe ſtones.Rynges were worne on the left hand. And, leaſt thei ſhould be broken with ſtreſſe, they ware them on the fynger of the left hand, that is next the lytle fynger, becauſe the lefte hand is not put to muche labour as the right hād or els as Macrobie ſayeth, becauſe there goeth a vayne from that finger to the heart.Knightes ware rynges. for a differēce Rynges alſo were vſed and worne of the knightes of Rome that by them they might be diſſeuered and knowen from the cōmon ſort of the people.
            
            
               The .xiiii. Chapiter. ¶The original of glaſſe, Ambre, Vermilon, Mirrha, and Chriſtal.
               
                  
                     IN PHENICE whiche is a parte of Syria, marchyng on Iurye at the foote of the mounte Carmel, there is a pole called Candebea, whereof the riuer Belus ſpringeth, in the whiche glaſſe as Plinie writeth,Glaſſe. it engendred For it is reported that on a time whē
                  
a marchaūtes ſhyp, that was freghted wt ſaltpeter (for ſo ſome expound nitrum) arriued there.Nitre. And as they romyng on the ſādes & ſea bākes prepared theyr meate, It fortuned that bycauſe they had no ſtoore of ſtoones to bere vp theyr veſſels, wherin they ſodde theyr meate, they tooke out of their ſhyp great peces of Nitre to ſet on theyr victuals, whiche after they chaūſed to be on fyre & mingled with the ſand, there rāne bright flakes of this preciouſe lycoure. By this riuer is Memnō
                   his toumbe, & as Ioſephus writeth, ye nature of that water is to turne & trāſforme other metals into glaſſe. Ambre,Amber. as Diodorus wytneſſeth, was foūd in ye Ile Baſilia, whiche lyeth againſt Scithia aboue Galatia in ye great Ocean, where it was fyrſt caſt vp, and was neuer ſeene nor found in any other place before.Vermilon. Vermilon or red lead was foūd in Epheſus by Callias an Athenien: And it was in Rome coūted & taken for holy inſomuche yt on theyr feaſtfull daies, they paīted ye face of Iupiters Image with it, & the bodies of them that triumphed, & Camillus triūphed ſo, as

                  Plinie wytneſſeth.Mirrhe. Mirrhe, which is an humoure cōgeled and conſtipated together with heate, cōmeth out of ye eaſt parties & namely out of Carmania: Pompeius in his triumph of the pyrates & robberson the ſea brought it fyrſt into Rome.Chriſtal. Chriſtal is a ſtone that is congeled of pure water not wt cold, but by a power diuine of heate, wherby it reteineth his hardnes, and neuer relēteth or melteth, & receiueth diuerſe colours, & this is ye mynde of Diodorus. But Plinie holdeth opinion that it cōmeth of the yſe, extremely froſen. Neuertheleſſe it is vncertaine yet who found it.
            
            
               The .xv. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of Imagery, and of Alexanders Image.
               
                  
                     CONCERNYNG the vſe of makyng Images,Images. from whence it came auctours diffre and vary. For Macrobius citeth one Epicadus that ſayeth it beganne of a ſuperſticion of Hercules,
                  Hercules. whiche accordyng to the nomber of his cōpanions

whom he loſt in his voiage into farre countrees: When he came home into Italy made Images of thē & caſt thē doune at ye bridge Sublicius into Tibre, to thentent they ſhould de caried into theyr natiue coūtries, thinkyng that to be a iuſt pa
                     •
                  entacion for their funerals. Neuertheleſſe he taketh it that they came rather of ye cuſtome of the Archadians,The Archadians maner. which as Diodorus writeth, in their wāderyng abrode repared into Italy, & builded a chapel to Pluto & an alter to Saturne, where they pacified Pluto wt the heades of men, & burned the bodies to Saturne. For ſo they expounded their oracle.An oracle.
                  
                     Et capita inferno et patri trāſmittite lumen,
                     Geue heades to Pluto the god infernal,
                     And Saturne his father the fire luſtral.
                  
¶The ſacrifices that were offred to Saturne were named Saturnalia, After Hercules as he paſſed through Italy, when he had cōquered & ſubdued Ger
                     •
                  on, aduertiſed thē to chaūge that vnlucky ſacrifice into fortunate oblacions, and taught them to make Images of lytle boones and to offer

thē to Pluto: And to light tapers of waxe in honoure of Saturne. Lactantius ſayeth,Prometheus made ymages 
                  Prometheus made fyrſt Images of ſoft clay, & taught ye way to make ſtatues: Some ſay, as Diodorus writeth, that the Ethiopians foūd the fyrſt vſe of Images, & of thē the Egyptiens learned. Notwithſtā
                  dyng I fynd that Images were long afore that tyme: For Rachel when her huſbande fled out of Meſopotamia, from Laban his father in lawe, dyd ſteale away her fathers goddes, and therfore it appeareth that Imagery is of an auncient beginnyng. And ſome there be yt thynke men toke occaſyon of God to make Images, whiche willyng to ſhewe to ye groſſe wyttes of men ſome perceiueraūce of him ſelfe, toke on him the ſhap of mā, as Abraham ſawe him & Iacob alſo. And the ſcripture ſemeth in ſundrye places to attribute to him handes, feete, eyes and eares, whiche be partes and mēbres of men. And by this meanes men gathered ye maner of making ymages of God, bicauſe to kepe him in freſhe memory. And this is the true original of Imagery. Spurius

Caſſius made in Rome ye image of Ceres of braſſe.Ceres ymage of braſſe▪
                   Afterwarde were made ſtatues of men to excite & encourage valiant heartes to high enterpriſes. And for yt cauſe ye Atheniens ſet vp ye Images of Armodius & Ariſtogitō
                   that ſlewe & expulſed the tyrannes. Leontinus Gorgias made him ſelfe an Image of pure gold not hollowe fyrſt and ſet it at Delphos ye .lxxviii. olympiade.Leontinus gorgias made him ſelfe an ymage of golde. 
                  Pharnaces cauſed one to be made of ſiluer like him ſelfe, whiche Pōpeie in his triumph remoued. In Italy M. Attilius Clabrio made the fyrſt ſtatue of gold on horſebacke in remembraūce of his father:M. Attilius made the firſt ymage in Rome of golde. There were alſo images made of braſſe, yuory, woode, & marble. The maner of ye Romaynes was to ſet vp their Images couered, but the Grecians vſed to forme thē naked, & the Romaynes alſo had a rite to brēne encenſe, & light tapers afore them. In this art many were very expert, as Plinie reherſeth But Phidias of Athens paſſed thē al. In Rome the kyndered & familye of the Macrians were accuſtomed to were on thē the image of Alexander ye great grauen:Phidias. as mē in gold or ſyluer

women in calles & tynges: becauſe it was reported, that he ſhould acheue wel in al affayres whiche did bere on him Alexāders Images either in gold or ſyluer.Auguſtus ſeale. And therfore Auguſtus Caeſar 
                  
                     •
                  ſed long the Image of him in ſealyng his letters.
            
            
               The .xvi. Chapiter. ¶Paintyng, and pott
                     •
                  rs crafte, or work
                     •
                  ng in y
                     •
                  arth.
               
                  Paintyng.
                  
                     PORTATVRE, Gyges a Lidian, as Plinie thinketh, dyd fyrſt inuēt and diuiſe it in Egypte. In Grece Pyrrhus ye coſyn of Daedalus, after Ariſtotles mynde. But Theophraſtu
                        •
                     
                   ſaieth that Polygnotus an Athenian found it,Polygnotus yet Plinie agreeth nether wt 
                  Theophraſt, nor yet wt him ſelfe: for in his .
                     •
                  xxv. booke he ſaieth that Polygnotus a Thaſian dyd fyrſt paynt women in ſingle apparel, & trimmed theyr he
                     •
                  des wt calles of ſundrye colours, & ſet furth pictures to the ſhewyng more decente, in openyng their mouthes, and made theyr tethe to be ſightly, & the viſages more fauourably

to behold, but who found it, it is vncertayne. For the Egyptians ſaye they had that arte .vi.M. yeres afore it came in Grece: And they of Grece affyrme it was begōne by the Sicyomans, & ſome of the Corinthians. Albeit all cōfeſſe it begāne of the drawyng of a mā with lynes.The beginnyng of paintyng. In ꝓceſſe of time it waxed more ſumptuouſe wt colours. Drawyng pictures with lines or ſhadowes Philodes an Egyptian or Cleantes a Corinthian diuiſed. Thelephanes a Sicyonian & Ardices of Corinthe vſed fyrſt this arte without colours, and Cleophantes of the ſame countries inuēted fyrſt colours.Cleophantus inuented colours. Penſyl. 
                  Apollodorus obtayned muche praiſe with the penſyl. In this excelled Tymagoras, Pythys Polygnotus Agla
                     
                        •
                     phon wt other that Plinie reciteth in the .xii. boke: And Raphael Sanctus and Vr
                     •
                  inate, is very excellent in expreſſyng of liuely Images of men in this faculte. The potters occupacion that worketh all thinges in clay and yearth,Potters crafte, 
                  Chorebus an Athenian foūd as Plinie in his .vii. booke telleth. In his .xxxv. booke he aſcribeth ye original of it to Dibutades at Corinth,

which by helpe of his doughter inuē
                  ted this craft,Debutades worker of clay. for after ſhe vnderſtod that a yong man her louer ſhould depart into a ſtraūge nacion for the tender loue yt ſhe bare to him, ſhe drewe his Image on a wal after ye patron of his ſhadow by cādel light, which her father fylled & faſhioned wt clay, and made it into a figure & reſēblaunce of his body, & dried it wt the fyre & ſet it in ye 
                  
                     •
                  ōmon hoote houſe where ye maides & women kept bathes: And there it remayned tyl Mummius deſtroyed Corinth.Mummius deſtroyed Corinth. Some ſay it was found by Rhetus & Theodorus in ye Ile of Samos, And Demaratus father to Tarquinius Priſcus kyng of the Romaines brought it into Italy,Demaratus. & after him Eucirapus & Eugrāmus amplified ye ſcience more coptouſely. Makyng of mouldes, & the way to worke images in thē 
                  Liſiſtratus a Sicioniā inuēted The potters whele or frame,Mouldes 
                  Potters frame. as Ephorus ſaieth Anacharſis a philoſopher of the coūtree of Scythia foūd: Some ſay it was Talus Dedalus ſiſter ſōne The ſpecial workemen in this arte were Dimophius and Gorgaſus.
               
            
            
               ❧Here endeth the abrydgement of the ſecond booke.
         
         
            
            The third booke.
            
               The fyrſt Chapiter. ¶The inuencion of huſbandry with other thinges concernyng the ſame.
               
                  
                     HVSBANDRY or tyllynge the ground Diodorus ſayeth,Huſbandry. was excogitat by Dioniſius amonge the Egyptians,Dioniſius. In Grece & Aſia by Triptolemus: as Iuſtine writeth,Triptolemus in Italy Saturnus: but Virgil wytneſſeth, that Ceres was fyrſt inuentrice of it. Neuertheles Ioſephus declareth that it was perceiued and founde by Cain Adams eldeſt ſōne.Cain. In the beginnyng men liued by Acornes,
                     Men liued by acornes.
                     Ceres.
                     Corne ſowyng.
                   and other frutes of the yearth tyl Ceres, as Plinie telleth, taught thē of Athens, Italy, & Sicilie to ſowe corne, whiche afore grewe among other herbes. Diodorus referreth the inuencion of it to Iſis. Albeit, Iuſtine affyrmeth that Triptolemus found it in the tyme of Herichtheus kyng of Athens, but Diodorus
                  
ſaieth he lerned of Ceres, and had commaundemente to teache it abroade. In Italy Saturne inſtituted ſowyng as Macrobie teſtifyeth, Pitumnus taught men fyrſt to mucke & compaſſe their land, and his brother Pilumnus taught menne to bake and grynde,Bakyng and grindyng. but Plinie ſaieth that Argeus a kyng in Grece taught menne to dunge their lādes in the tyme of Homere.
                  Dungyng land. And Hercules afterwarde publiſhed it in Italy. Diodorus witneſeth that Dioniſius the ſeconde yoked oxen to the plough fyrſt, wheras afore it was laboured by hande,Yokyng oxen 
                  Briges an Athenien, or as ſome reporte Triptolemus, & ſome ſay one Oſiris found the plough: Trogus dyd ſaye that it was Habis kyng of Spayne that taught fyrſt to plowe and ſowe.Plough. Inſtrumentes of huſbandry, as Virgyl ſuppoſeth Ceres founde out,Inſtrumētes of huſbandry but we muſt take it that theſe men afore reherſed dyd teache it fyrſt in ſundry places, for it is manyfeſt that afore their tyme the Hebrues and Egyptians had knowledge of this ſcience, As Iacob, when there was a greate derth of corne in Canaā, ſent his ſonnes

into Egipt to bie grain. And therfore without doubt the Hebrues dyd fyrſte fynde out the waye of tyllyng corne, grindyng with other ruſtical inſtrumentes: Syues & ſarces of here we
                     •
                  e found in Fraunce,Siues and ſarces. as Plinie telleth, and bultres of linnen in Spaine In Egipt they were made of fenne riſhes, and bulriſhes.
            
            
               The .ii. Chapiter. ¶Wyne, oyle, honye, cheſe, and ſtrange trees brought into Italy.
               
                  
                     DIODORVS ſaieth yt 
                  Dioniſius dyd fyrſt perceiue the nature of the vyne,Wyne. and taught men af Grece to plant it, and to preſſe wyne out of the Grape as Saturnus dyd in Italye: Some ſaye it was Icarus father of Penelope that founde it in Athens,Icarus. And was afterward ſlain of the huſbandmen, when they were dronken. Athenaeus in one place writeth that Oreſteus ſonne to Deucalion fyrſt foūd the vyne about the moūt Aetna in Sicilie: In another place he ſaieth that it was found at ye cytie Plithina in Egypt.Oreſteus. 
                  Aruntes
                  
a Tirhene baniſhed out of his coūtre by Lucinon,
                  Aruntes brought into Fraunce. whō he brought vp of a chyld, caried fyrſt wyne into Fraūce Seculus the ſōne of Ventus inuented the fyrſt food of men of the trees, and Eumolphus an Athenian taught the maner of orderyng of them, but afore all theſe Noe was the fyrſt that either tylled the lande,Noe planter of the vyne or planted the vyneyarde. And when he had dronke of the fruit of ye grape, he was dronken. Wyne tauernes were ſet vp fyrſt by the Lidians a people of Aſia,Wyne tauernes. whiche alſo foūd diuerſe games. Staphilus (as Plinie ſayeth) deleied wyne fyrſt.Deleiyng of wyne. Drynke that is made of barlye whiche we cal ale, and was the common drynke of the Egyptians, was diuiſed by Bacchus: And he taught it to ſuche nacions, as had no grapes growyng. And for yt cauſe England, Scotlande, Irelande, Fraunce, and Germany, and all that border on the weſt and north ſeas vſe this drynke, Albeit, the Germanes put hoppes in it, and cal it bere. In Grece, as Diodorus holdeth opiniō 
                  Pallas ſhewed the Oliue,Oliue oyle. Makyng cheſe. and the way to make oyle. And Ariſtaeus gathered fyrſt ye cruddes

of mylke, and made cheſe, honye. And the oyle mylle, as Plinie witneſſeth, notwithſtandyng the Oliue was afore Noes fludde, and Moſes ſpeaketh of oyle that was vſed in ſacrifices, wherby it may be perceiued that oyle was inuented of the Iewes Iuſtine ſayth Gargorus kyng of Curetes found the faſhion of gatheryng of honye,Gargorus. 
                  Gatheryng of honye. he dwelled in the forreſt of Carcheſia in Spain. Ther grewe no Oliue in Italy, Spayne, nor Affrike In the tyme of Tarquinius Priſcus the .C.lxxiiii. yere of the cytie. And afterwarde ye .cccc.xl. yere of the cytie there were ſome, howbe it they were nere the ſea. But in dede honye was gathered fyrſt of the Hebrewes ſhepherdes.Chery trees. The cheritres L. Lucullus brought out of Ponthus the yere of the Cytie .vi.C.lxxx. Zinzipha & Tuberes .ii. kyndes of appletrees S. Papinius cōueighed out of Siria and Affrike into Italy in ye tyme of ſ. Auguſtine. The Plane tree, the Laurel tree, the Fygge tree, & apple trees, wt other which is not nedeful to reherſe wer brought in by diuers men, whoſe names are not ſpoken of by any auctours.
            
            
               
               The .iii. Chapiter. ¶Who named beaſtes, inſtituted ſacrifices, huntyng, fait, pultries.
               
                  Adam named beaſtes.
                  
                     BEASTES after they were all created in theyr kynde were named by Adam with the ſame names, that they bee nowe called:Hiperbius. 
                  Hiperbius ſonne to Mars killed them fyrſte, but I had rather referre that to Abel Adams ſonne: for he dyd fyrſt offre to God the fyrſt begotten of his flocke,Abel. and from him it ſpredde abroad among the Hebrues, and alſo other countries.Swyne was moſt cōmēded in ſacrifices. Of al other ſwyne were the fyrſt that were ſacrificed of the Gentiles. In the ſacrifices of Ceres godeſſe of corne, as Va
                        •
                     
                     ro witneſſeth. In leages of peace, & in Mariages: At lengthe they came to ſuche outragious crueltee, that they ſacrificed mē.Eatyng of fleſhe. Fleſhe was not vſed to be eaten vntyl the tyme of Noe: and then God permitted it, but many coū
                  tries long after that, forbare & kepte great abſtinence from fleſhe: As in the golden world vnder Saturne men

onely lyued by fruytes of the yearth. The prieſtes of Egypt refrayned frō fleſhe, egges, and mylke, bycauſe,Prieſtes of Egypte. Egges. Mylke. as they thought, egges were but tendre and ſofte fleſhe, and mylke was blod ſauyng that the coloure was turned. And the Eſſenes in Iurye, & Iupiters prieſtes in Crete eat neuer fleſhe. Bā
                  kettyng dyſhes and delycates were made in Ionia,
                  Bankettes. and then the euyl cuſtome was takē vp by other coūtries: Albeit there were lawes made in Lacedemony by Lycurgus, and in Rome by Fannius. For the aboliſhyng of ſuche exceſſiue feaſtyng, I would ſome good man would preſcribe now a daies a lawe to be preciſely obſerued of all men, for I thynke there neuer was ſuch riot in feaſtyng as ther is in this tyme.Huntyng. Fiſhyng. Salte. Huntyng & fiſhyng the Phenicians found. Salt and the vſe therof was perceiued by Miſor & Selech. In Rome Q. Hortenſius did fyrſt ſetfurth a Pecocke at ye 
                  Augurs feaſt.Pecocke. Pultries. Pultries of al kynd of foules were inſtituted by Marcus Laelius Strabo a knight of Brunduſie. And Alexander Emperour had alſo ſuche pultries. Warrens and parkes

wer made fyrſt by Fuluius Hirpinu
                        •
                     
                   And now they be euerywher vſed but moſt cōmonly in Englād to the great domage of good paſtures, that might feed other cattel. The Wolfe, ye minotaure,Beaſtes that be badges. the horſe, the bore, were cogniſaunce of the Romanes armies: And Caius Marius in his ſeconde conſulſhyp appointed the Egle for a badge of his armye and legyon, with many other nowe a daies, whiche be in cote armours of noble men.
            
            
               The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶Who found flaxe and wolle with ſuche inſtrumentes and artes as long to the ſame, and ſylke.
               
                  Lynnen.
                  
                     LYNNEN or Flare, as Plinie ſaieth, was found by the beautyfull Ladye Arachne of Lidia, & ſhe taught alſo the waye of knyttyng nettes to take beaſtes,Arachne. 
                  
                     Knittyng nettes.
                     Spinnyng Weuyng.
                   fyſhe, & foules, Minerua inſtructed the people of Athens fyrſt in ſpinnyng & weuyng wolle: but in one place Plinie ſemeth to aſcribe ye feate of weuyng to ye Egyptians. The walkers

or fullers craft was inuēted by Nicias a Megarien:Fullers craft D
                        •
                     yng wolle Spindels. The Lidians in Sardes died wolle fyrſt.
               ¶Spindels for wolle were fyrſt inuented by Cloſter ſonne to Arachne. ¶Hangynges of arryſe whiche be vſed in halles or chambers Attalus king of Aſia, deuiſed:Arriſe clothe. & Pallas taught the vſe of clothyng or apparel, as Diodorus writeth, & Euſebius ſayeth one Vſo a Silician borne,Vſo. Apparel. made fyrſt clothyng & apparel for men of beaſtes ſkinnes: but in dede Adam whō God dyd fyrſt create,Adam made the fyrſt coat of lether. made the fyrſt lether coates for himſelfe & his wyfe Eue our old mother, leauyng therby a patron to al his poſterite of that crafte.
               The ſhomakers art one Boethoius found.Shomakers craft. 
                  Attalus taught men fyrſt to weue golde in clothes. And the Phrigians inuented broderyng.Enbrodryng. The Grekes deuiſed the mantyle,Mantyle. and the Hetrurians found the roobes of eſtate. And mynglyng of diuerſe colours in apparel,Motleys. was the inuēcion of the Babilonians. Sylke,Sylke. whiche in al countries is occaſion of muche diſſolut be hauour in apparel, was found of the Cerites growyng on theyr trees, and

with wetyng they combe it of and make it fyt for their vſes.
                     Spinnyng and weuyng of ſylke.
                     Pamphila. Purple colour.
                     Hercules. Tyro.
                   Spinnyng and weuyng of ſicke that commeth of wormes, Pamphila the doughter of Platis diuiſed it the Ile Coo. Purple colour was found as Pollux witneſſeth by this occaſion. As Hercules beyng in loue with a beautyfull lady named Tyro, walked on the ſea clyffes, his greyhound chaunſed to fynde a ſhel fiſhe called a purple, and when he had eaten it, the oryent coloure of the blodde remayned on his ſnowt: whiche freſhe colour the lady eſpiyng threatened Hercules that he ſhould neuer company with her more oneleſſe he brought her a clothe died with that preciouſe coloure. Then Hercules willyng to accompliſhe his ladies wyll ſought the purple fyſhe, and caried the blod to his ſouereigne lady. And thus beganne the purple colour among the Tyrians.
            
            
               The .v. Chapiter. ¶Buildynges made of clay, bricke, ſtone, with other matters.
               
                  
                  
                     MEN at the fyrſte lyued lyke wyld beaſtes in caues and wyldernes, and alſo fed on fruytes and rotes of the yearth: but after they had perceiued the commoditie of fyre, and felte therby a great comforte agaynſte the vehemencye of colde:Houſes. ſome beganne to edify cotages of boughes of trees, and ſome digged caues in the mountaynes, and by often experiencyng of ſuche meanes they attained to a greater perfection in buildyng. And afterward (as wittes of men be inuentiue) they learned to faſhion buildyng with walles that they ſet vp with long proppes.Making walles of houſes And dyd wynde them aboute with ſmale roddes and ſo dawbed them: and to kepe out the ſtormes, they couered them with reede, boughes or fenne ſedges. Thus in proceſſe of time they came to the arte of buildyng,Pallas inuented buyldyng. whiche as Diodorus ſaieth, is aſcribed to Pallas: but I can rather thinke that either Cain or els Iobal ſonne of Lamech found out this craft.
               Houſes of claye, Doxius ſonne of Gēllius dyd fyrſt inuent and ſet vp,

takyng example at the ſwallowes neſt.Brykeworke. Brycke buildynges were inuented by Euryalus and Hyperbius two brethrē of Athens, as Plinie iudgeth, albeit Diodorus referreth it to Veſta daughter of Saturnus. Epimenide
                        •
                     
                   of Crete fyrſte vſed to hallowe his houſe and feldes with expiations.Bleſſyng of houſes. Tyle and ſlate to couer houſes were the inuencion of Sinyra ſonne of Agriopa in the Ile of Cipres.Tyle & ſlate. 
                  Stone delues Stone delues or quarels were foūd by Cadmus in Thebes, or as Theophraſt writeth in Phoenice. Albeit I thinke the inuēcion of ſuche artes may more iuſtly be aſcribed to Cayn or the poſterite of Seth:Fyrſt pillers. whiche did make two pillers one of brycke and another of ſtone, and wrote in them al the art of Aſtronomy, at which tyme I ſuppoſe pillers and brycke were fyrſte made, wherby it appeareth that the caſt of buildyng hath bene from the beginnyng of the worlde. Neuertheles, I denye not but theſe afore named dyd begyn edifiyng in ſundry countries.
               
                  Marble.Marble was vſed in buyldyng at Rome of riche men to ſhew their ſūptuouſe magnificence. As M. Scaurus
                  
beyng aediles cauſed .ccc.lx. pillers of marble to be caried to the makyng of a ſtage wheron an Enterlude ſhould be played: but Lucius Craſſus was fyrſt that had pyllers of Marble. M. Lepidus made the gates of his houſe with Marble of Numedie,
                  Gates of marble. not without reproche. He was conſul the yere of the cytie .cccccc.lxxvi. Mamurra a knight yt was maſter of Iuli.
                  
                     Mamurca pinned his houſe with marble.
                     Grauers in marble.
                   
                  Caeſars workes in Fraunce, pynned fyrſt the walles of his houſe with brokē marble. In grauyng Marble Dipoenus Scylus borne in Crete floryſhed fyrſt, afore kyng Cyrus reigned in Perſie.
            
            
               The .vi. Chapiter. ¶Who made the fyrſt citie, tentes, temples, and pyttes.
               
                  
                     WHEN men wer ſomwhat clamed of their vplādiſhe behauoure by reaſon yt thei were refreſhed of their extreme colde by fyre & ſuche houſes as they had deuiſed,Occaſion of making cities they gathered them ſubſtaunce & goddes to the ſuſtentacion of their houſholdes and families.

But after they perceyued that mightie and ſtrong men did inuade and diſpoile them of ſuche ſtuffe as they had they knytte them ſelues together in a companye, and dwelled in one cir
                  
                     •
                  uite, whiche they walled about and named it a cytie. Notwithſtandyng, there is muche diuerſitie of opinions among writers whiche was fyrſt. For Plinie ſayeth Cecrops buylded the fyrſt Cytie, and called it by his owne name Cecropia,
                  Cecropia. whiche was afterwarde called Athens.
               
                  Strabo writeth that Phoroneus builded fyrſt Argos:Argos. Dioſpolis, The Egyptians ſay, that Dioſpolis in their countrie was long afore: whiche is credible to be ſo bycauſe they be a verye auncient nacion. Trafon fyrſt made walles: towers, (as Ariſtotle ſaieth,) the Cyclopians edifyed:Walles. Towers. but Theophraſt thynketh the Phenicians buylded them.
               And Vergil referreth that feate to Pallas. But to ſay the trueth Cain (as Ioſephus declareth,) made the fyrſt Cytie,Enochia. and named it Enochia after his ſonne Enoch. And the yong men that came of Noe his linage by

the aduyſe of Nembroth buylded the fyrſte towre of an exceadyng heyght whiche was called afterwarde Babylon.Babilon. Tentes.
               
               Tentes Iobal ſonne of Lamech inuented, notwithſtandyng that the Phenicians affirme that the nepheues of Seculus found them.
               Temples,Temples. as Diogenes ſuppoſeth were found by Epimenides in Crete. But Victruuius affyrmeth that one Pythius a Carpenter made the fyrſte Temple in Prienne in the honoure of Pallas:
                  Pithius. 
                  Herodotus ſaieth that the Egyptians inſtituted the temples fyrſt In Rome, Romulus builded the fyrſt temple in the worſhyppe of Iupiter Seretrius.
                  Salomon. To almightie God Salomon kyng of the Hebrues builded the fyrſt temple thre thouſande, an hundreth and two yeares after the creacion of Adam in Ieruſalem.
               Pyttes Danaus dygged fyrſt, as Plinie teacheth, after he came out of Egypte into Argos a countrye of Grece.Egyptians. Neuertheleſſe to tell the verye origynall of them, Iſaac hys ſhepherdes dygged the fyrſte pyttes,Pittes. as appeareth in Geneſis. And Moſes
                  
cauſed pittes to be digged in the wildernes when he dyd conduct the Iſraelites out of Egypte,Iſaac digged pittes. Moſes. whiche was. ccc.lxxxxiii. yere afore that Danaus, came into Argos, neither was it Danaus but his doughters that dygged the pytte at Argos.
            
            
               The .vii. Chapiter. ¶The Laborynthes, turrettes, ſundry faſhions of burials.
               
                  Laborinthes.
                  
                     LABORINTHES which we may cal Maſes, were certain intricate & wyndyng workes with many entries and dores, in ſuche ſort that yf a mā were once entred, he could not yſſue oute, without ether he had a perfect guide or els a clewe of thredde to be his cō
                  ducte. There were foure of them mooſt notable as it is reported:Foure laborinthes, The fyrſt was in Egypte, and was called of ſome the palace of kyng Motherudes, of ſome the ſepulthre of Meres: but there bee other that ſaye, it was buylded in honoure of the ſonne by

kyng Peteſucus or Tithoes, albeeit Herodotus ſaieth it was the commō toumbe of the kynges of Egipt: this ſtoode a litle from the Poole of Myrios.
                  Crete. Dedalus. The ſecond was made in Crete by Daedalus at the commaundement of kyng Minos, wherein Theſeus of Athens ſlewe the Minotaure. The third was wrought in the Iſle Lemnos by Zmilus, Rhodus,
                  Lemnos. and Theodorus carpēters of the ſame countree
               The fourthe Porſena kyng of the Hetrurians cauſed too bee made and ſette vp in Italy for his ſepulchre,Porſena. it was all of free ſtone & vaulted. The high ſteples or turrettes that the Egipciās cal Pyramides, wer betwene Memphis and Delta twoo citees of Egipte, of ſuche highte,Piramides. that it was meruaill how the ſtone and morter could be caried ſo high. One of them that was greateſt, was the worke of three thouſande and .lx. menne. in .xx yere, at the coſte of kyng Chemis,
                  The greateſt ſpire Chemis made. whom Herodotus nameth Cheopis, Chabreus brother to the ſame kyng made the ſecond turret not equall in hight. The thirde, kyng Mycerinus cauſed to bee wrought .xx. 
                     •
                  ote ſhorter

then his fathers was.The cauſe of makyng the ſpires. The occaſiō that thei wer made, as Plinie telleth, was leaſte the people ſhould bee idle, and Ioſephus ſaieth the Egipcians enforſed the Hebrues to buylde thoſe Pyramides, bicauſe thei ſhould bee in ſubieccion too theim, and that thei might bee made ſlaues and drudges: or els leaſte the kynges ſhould leaue ſo muche treaſure to their ſucceſſours, that it might moue them to ſedicion or treaſon. Mauſoleum that was the toumbe of Mauſolus kyng of Caria,
                  Mauſoleum 
                  Artemeſia. his wife Artemeſia builded moſte ſumteouſly, and for that faithfull loue that ſhe bare to hym, ſhe remaigned a widowe all her life tyme. The maner of buriall in diuerſe coū
                  trees is of ſundry faſhions:
                     Rites of buriyng.
                     Maſſagetes.
                   as ye 
                  Maſſagetes & Derbians iudge theim that die in ſickeneſſe verie wretches, and therfore when their parentes, & kinſfolke waxe aged, thei ſtrangle theim and eate theim, ſuppoſyng that it is better that thei ſhould eate them, thē ye wormes.Albanes. The Albanes, that dwell by the mount Caucaſus, take it to be a mortall crime if thei regard or once name theim that bee ded. The Thracians
                  
kepe ſolemnely the funeralles of the ded corps of men with greate ioye & ſolace:Thrariēs faſhion. bicauſe thei bee diſpatched by the death of the miſeries humane, and reſt in felicitee e
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ne: and cōtrariwiſe at the birth of their children thei make greate ſorowe and lamentacion, bicauſe of the calamities that thei muſt ſuſtain in this miſerable life. The women of Inde take it for a greate honeſty and triumphe if thei maie bee buried with their houſbande:Women of Inde. for it is graunted to her that loued hym beſte, there bee other diuerſe maner of buriynges emong the Paganes and Heathen people, whiche for ſo muche, as thei excede the bondes of humanitie, & haue in them no hope of reſurreccion at this preſente I omit and ouer paſſe thē. The Romaines,The Romaines burned their dedde bodies bicauſe the dedde coarſes that died in externe battaill were after their buriall digged oute of the grounde, inſtituted the maner of burnyng the carcaſes of menne departed whiche rite was executed on Sylla chief of al the houſe and kyndrede of the Corneliās,
                  Sylla. whiche feared leſte he ſhould bee ſerued as he had vſed Marius.
                  
Thei had alſo in Rome a maner of deifiyng or hallowyng their emperoures ded bodies,Deifiyng of the emperour after this ſorte Whē the emperour was ded and his body reuerently buried with greate exequies, thei fourmed an Image of the emperour, pale as though he wer ſicke, and laied it at the gate of the palace in a bed of Iuory,Herodian. and the phiſicions reſorted thither to the bed .vi daies continually, the lordes of the ſenate, and noble ladies and matrōs ſtādyng on euery ſide of the bed. The ſeuēth daie the young lordes and nobilitie bare hym on their ſhulders in the bed▪ firſt into the old place of iudgementes called Forum Vetus and then into the felde named Campus Martius where thei choſe their magiſtrates and highe officers: where thei laied hym in a tente buylded for the nones, like a towre and filled it with drie woode and ſwete oyntemē
                  tes, and after thei had finiſhed the rites and ceremonies of their lawe, he that ſhould ſuccede, in the empire put a fire brande to the tente, and then other laied to the fire good plēty. And by and by after all was burned, thei

let flie an Egle out of the top of the turret, whiche, as thei ſuppoſed, caried the ſolle of the emperour to heauen, and from thence furth thei honored hym as a God. Commendacions to the worſhip of ded bodies at funerales,Commendacions. 
                  Valerius Publicola firſt made in ye praiſe of Brutus, and that was long afore the Grekes had any, notwithſtandyng Gellius writeth that Solon ordained that lawe in Athens in the tyme of Tarquinnins Priſcus.
                  Solon. The Romaines vſed to praiſe the women at their burialles bicauſe on a time thei wer contented to giue their goldē iuelles to make a boulle to ſēd to Delphos, to the God Apollo.
                  Women had commendacions in Rome
               
            
            
               The .viii. Chapiter. ¶Who made ſpires called Obeliſti, the markes of the broches, the Egipcians letters, firſte Sanctuary.
               
                  
                     OBeliſti,
                  Obeliſti. Broches. whiche maie bee called lōg bruches or ſpires, wer great and houge ſtones in Egipte made of maſons from the botome ſmaller and ſmaller of a large lēgth, and were conſecrated to the Sonne, bicauſe thei bee long muche like the

beames of the ſonne. The firſt of thē was inſtituted by Mitres,
                  Metres. whiche reigned in Heliopolis, beyng commaunded by a viſion too make it, and ſo it was recorded and writtē in theſame. Kyng Sothis ſet vp foure that were euery of theim,Sothis. xlviii. cubites long: Ramiſes (in whoſe tyme Troy was deſtroyed) reared vp one fourty cubites of length,Ramiſes. & another of eight hundred and nyntene foote, & euery ſide was foure cubites broade. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus made one at Alexandria of foureſcore cubites.Prolomeus. And Phaeron ſet twoo in the temple of the Sonne of an hundred cubites length a pece and foure cubites broade,Pheron. on this occaſion: It fortuned that this kyng for a greate cryme that he had committed, was ſtryken blynde, and cōtinued ſo tenne yeres, and after by reuelacion at the citee Bucis it was tolde hym that he ſhould receiue his ſight, if he waſhed his yies with the water of a woman, that was neuer defiled with any ſtrange manne, but was alwaie contente with her houſbande. Firſte he tried his owne wife, and afterward many other til at the

laſt he receiued his ſight, and maried her by whoſe vryne he was healed, and recouered his ſighte, and all the other with his firſt wife he cauſed to bee burned at once. Then for a remē
                  braūce he made his oblaciō with the twoo foreſaied ſpires in the tēple of the Sonne.Auguſtus Ceſar remoued twoo. 
                  Auguſtus Caeſar brought two of theſe broches into Rome and ſette one in the greate Tilte yarde or Liſtes, if I maie call Circus in thoſe termes, the other he ſette in the felde called Campus Martius: In theſe broches for the moſte parte wer written Images of beaſtes,The maner of writyng in egipte. wherby their poſteritie and ſucceſſoures mighte perceiue the renowme of ſuche princes, and the maner of their vowes and oblacions.
               
                  FOR the Egipcians vſed the Images of beaſtes in the ſteade of letters, and as Cornelius writeth,Emblemes. thei declared their myndes by the figures and ſhappes of beaſtes, as by the Bee they ſygnified a Kyng rulyng his commons with greate moderaciō and gentleneſſe,A Bee. 
                  Goſhauke. by the Goſhauke thei mente ſpidie perfourmaunce of their affaires.
               
                  
                  Sanctuaries Neuewes of Hercules.Sanctuary (as Stacius writeth) made firſte by Hercules neuewes in Athēs, and was called the temple of mercie. From thence it was not lawfull to take any manne violētly, that repared thither for ayde and comfort notwithſtādyng Moſes whiche was lōg afore Hercules did inſtitute three franchiſed tounes,Moſes. wither it was permitted for theim to go, that had doen any murther vnware or by chauncemedly. Next after hym Romulus ordained a ſanctuary in Roome to encreaſe his citezens,Romulus. and to haue more numbre too buylde the citee. There was a ſāctuary in the Iſle Calauria dedicated too Neptune,
                  Calauria. and another in Egipte at Canobicus conſecrated to Hercules,
                  Egipte. & another to Oſyridis, & in Siria one halowed to Apollo. And there bee many at this daie in chrſtē
                  dome, and namely in Englande: but now the libertie and numbre of them is ſore miniſhed,Sanctuaries in Englande. bicauſe thei wer occaſion of greate crimes & enormites.
            
            
               The .ix. Chapiter. ¶Of Theatres, and Amphitheatres, and Bathes.
               
                  
                  
                     THEATRES wer certain places,Theatres. as ſcaffoldes with pentiſes, wherin the people of Athens ſtoode to beholde the enterludes that were ſhewed, and thei were made like halfe a circle with benches one aboue another, that thei might without any impedimente ſee the places.Dioniſius. 
                  Dioniſius did firſte inſtitute theim in Athens: in the middes of the ſcaffolde or theatre ſtoode the ſtage, wherin Comodies, Tragedies, with other ſhewes were exibited too the common ſorte. Of theim the Romaines toke example to make ſuche ſcaffoldes: whiche Quintus Catulus cauſed to bee couered with linen clothes, and hanged it with ſilke,Coueryng of ſcaffoldes. where as afore thei had no vaulte to bere of the ſonne or raine. But Marcus Scaurus beeyng Aedil, that is,Edili
                        •
                     . hauyng the ouerſight of all publike and priuate buyldynges, made the firſte in Rome that endure
                     •
                   for the ſpace of thirtie daies, it was made vp with pillers of Marble.Caius Curio 
                  Caius Curio at his fathers buriall builded twoo theatres of timber after ſuche a faſhion that

thei might in time of enterludes ſtād one cōtrary to another in ſuche wiſe that neither plaie ſhould diſturbe other: and whē it liked hym he turned theim together and made an Amphitheatre,
                  Amphitheatres. whiche was a roūde ſcaffold full of benches of diuerſe hightes: wherin he ſet furth a game of ſwerde plaiers. Pompeius Magnus made ye firſte ſtandyng Theatre of free ſtone, after the patron that he ſawe at Mitylene, when he had ſubdued Mithridates Kyng of Pontus. Caius Iulius Caeſar buylded the firſte Amphitheatre in the felde conſecrated to Mars,
                  
                     Iulius Ceſar buylded an Amphitheatre.
                     The vſe of the Amphitheatre.
                   In this were ſette furthe ſhewes of wylde beaſtes, and ſwearde players: for the maner was that ſuche, as wer condemned too deathe, or taken priſoners in warre ſhould bee caſt there to the wylde beaſtes to bee deuoured and ſlayne. It was ſtrawen with ſande,Sand was ſtrawen in the Amphitheatre leaſte the bloude of thoſe that were ſlayne ſhould defile theim that foughte, or diſcourage their heartes: and therefore, there were certayne appoyncted too toſſe and ſtrawe the ſande.Circus. The place called Circus, that wee maie call Liſtes or Tilte yardes

wer places walled about with ſtone of a greate length, wherin was vſed courſyng and Iuſtyng, and tourneyng on horſebacke and on foote by champions and chalengers: thei wer firſte named in Tarquinius Priſcus reigne, and that was called the greateſt.Circus Maximus. After that twoo other wer made one by Flamminius, and the other by Nero.
               
               
                  THE firſte courſyng, Iuſtyng, and runnyng with other exerciſes in the Liſtes were what tyme Spurius Marcius,
                  Firſt iuſtyng in Rome. 
                  Philippus wer conſuls the yere of the citee fiue hundred threeſcore and ſeuen.
               
                  HOATE Bathes or Stues wer vſed firſte priuately of all menne accordyng to their degree and habilite bycauſe of the preſeruacion of helth as thei pretended:Bathes pryuate. but in proceſſe thei buylded common Bathes and hoate houſes too ſweate in,Commō Bathes. and the nobles did Bathe and waſſhe with the commōs, and finally without any ſhame menne and women were permitted moſte laſciuiouſly to bathe together moſte notable bathes were thei that

                  Agrippa,
                  Notable bathes and Nero, and Titus Veſpaſianus with other Emperoures made, as Iulius Capitolinus wryteth, thei were bothe greate and alſo gorgeouſly dreſſed like citees & bigge tounes with all places of oportunite too mainteigne exceſſiue riote in all ſortes of menne.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .x. Chapiter. ¶Who founde the Carpenters craft, and inſtrumentes of theſame, Veſſelles of diuerſe meaſures.
               
                  Carpentars arte.
                  
                     OAEDALVS, after the mynde of Plinie, firſte inuented the art of Carpentrie, with theſe inſtrumentes folowyng, the Sawe, Chippe axe,Sawe. Chippe Axe. Plomlyne. Wymble. Glewe. Squire. Lyne. Shaue. and Plū
                  line, wherby the euenes of the Squares bee tried whither thei batter or hang ouer, the Augore, or Wymble, and Glewe to ioyne bordes togither. The Squire, the Line, the Shaue, the Pricker or Punche were deuiſed by Theodor a Samian. Notwithſtandyng Ouide writeth, that Talus Daedalus ſiſter ſonne inuented bothe the Compaſſe,Compaſſe. & alſo faſhioned the Saw

after the patron of the backe bone of a fiſhe:How ye ſawe was founde. or as Diodorus ſaieth by the exāple of the chawe bone of a ſerpent he founde alſo the Shaue, & for ſuche benefites, as he did ſhewe & beſtowe to the vſe and profite of men, he was highly commended:
                     Dedalus ſlewe his neuewe for enuie.
                     Pythagoras rule.
                   but Daedalus enuiyng that a boye beyng but his prē
                  tiſe ſhould excell his maſter, caſt hym doune out of a towre (as Ouide witneſſeth) and ſlewe hym. Pythagoras a Samian diuiſed alſo another maner of rule or Squire, then this that wee vſe commonly, fitte for all maner of buildynges as Victruuius declareth in the .ix. booke.Pentheſilia. Axe. 
                  Pentheſilea quene of Amazons is reported to haue found the Axe. Albeit I thinke the inuenciō of this arte is more worthy to bee referred either to the Hebrues, whiche occupied ſuche artes afore Daedalus tyme and in ſpecially in makyng of the tabernacle whiche was curiouſli wroughte, or els to the Tyrians, that were in that faculty farre aboue the Hebrues.Tyrians wer connyng carpentars. For whiche cauſe Salomō wrote to the kyng of Tyre for worke men to buylde the temple. Makyng of hollowe veſſelles as Barelles or

hoggeſheddes Speuſippus imagined veſſelles of Oſiare or wicker as baſkettes,Barelles. Speuſippus Baſkettes. Ceres. hāpers with ſuche like Ceres did firſt diuiſe as Seruius writeth.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapiter. ¶Who ruled firſte on the ſea, founde ſhippes, marchandiſe.
               
                  
                     STRABO writeth that Minos Kyng of Crete had the firſte rule of the ſea:Who was ruler on the ſea firſte. but Diodorus ſaith that Neptunus had the Empire of it afore hym,Neptune. for he inuented the feat in rowyng in boates,Rowyng in boates. and made a nauie, and was made Admirall of it by his father Saturnus. And Plinie reporteth that Kyng Erychthras diuiſed boates firſt and rowed in theim in the red ſea,Erichthras diuiſed boates. ſome ſaie thei were ordaigned by the Troianes in the narowe ſeas called Helleſponrus, ſome thynke thei were inuented in the Engliſh ſea,Engliſh ſeas and couered with lether and hides of beaſtes. Danaus was the firſte that vſed any ſhippe when he ſailed oute of Egipte into Grece:Firſte ſhippe. as Plinie recordeth, although ſome ſuppoſe the Samotraciens, and ſome Atlas that founde it. But too

ſpeake the trueth Noha was the firſt that made the ſhippe wherein he preſerued from daunger of the water al the liuyng creatures that wer ſaued too multiplie the worlde:Noha made the firſt ſhip. and that was the patron that all other made their ſhippes after. Iaſon firſte made the Galey,Galey. whiche Sefoſtris kyng of Egipt vſed after hym, and Erythaeus made the Barge with twoo ordre of Dores on a ſyde,Barges. 
                  Amocles or Corinthe, that with three courſe of Dores on a ſide: the Carthagiens, that with foure, & Helichthon of Salamis, that with fiue dores on a ſide, whiche the Romaines made in the firſte battaill Punike Zenazoras Syracuſane diuiſed that, with ſixe rowe of dores. Hippius a Tyrian conceiued the makyng of the lighter or marchauntes ſhippe the Cirenens inuented the Noye or Gallion.Lighter. Howe. Keele. Brigantyne. Barke. Boates of one pece. 
                  Phoenicians the keele or demie barke, the Rhodians the brigantyne, Ciprians the barke. Germanes the boates of one pece, Illirians the Cocke boate or Lighters. Rudders wer founde by the Copians, and the broade Dores the Plataeans diuiſed. Sailes Icarus foūd, albeit Diodorus
                  
ſaieth it was Aeolus:
                  Corke 
                        •
                     oate. Rudders. Sayles. Maſte. Croſſe pece. Ferry boates Ancores. 
                  Daedalus fo
                     ••
                  e the Maſte, and the croſſe pece where vnto the ſaile is faſtened. Fery boates the Atheniens or the Salaminiēs founde, cloſe galeres were founde by the Thaſians, the Tyrrhenes diuiſed ye ancores, and Eupalamius made it with twoo pointes or tethe, but ſome referre it to Anacharſis, whiche alſo inuented the Grapull or Tacle of a ſhip.Grapull. Stemine. Sterne The ſtemme of the ſhip Piſaeus imagened. Tiphys founde the ſtrene after the example of the Kyte, whiche in her fliyng turneth al her body with the turnyng of her taile. Minos made ye firſt battaill on the ſea.
                     Battaill on the ſea.
                     Marchādiſe.
                   Marchandiſe was firſte inſtituted for too certifie menne of neceſſaries, by the waie of exchange: but after, whē money was coyned, it was occupied more for mennes priuate welth then for any cōmon profite, and for yt cauſe Cicero calleth it a vile and ſeruile crafte.Philoſophiers wer marchantes. Albeeit Plutarche witneſſeth that Thales, Solō, Hippocrates, and Plato 
                  
                     •
                  erquented this art. The Cartagiēs found it,Cartagiens firſte marchantes. as Plinie writeth in the .vii. booke, but Diodorus ſaieth it was Mercurie that founde it. And

                  Plinie in the .x. booke ſaieth that Liber otherwyſe called Dioniſius inuē
                  ted the trade of marchaūdiſe,Dioniſius taught the trade of marchaundiſe. & therfore it is to be thought that the Cartagiens lerned the caſt of marchaundiſe of Dioniſius. But the Hebrues (as Ioſephus witneſſeth) vſed biyng and ſellyng in the tyme of Noe,
                  Hebrues dyd bye and ſel. & Ioſeph was ſold to marchauntes, & caried into Egypte. The Lidians were fyrſt mercers & cariers abrob of ſtuffe as factours and brokers do with vs.Lidians. Mercers.
               
            
            
               The .xii Chapiter. ¶Who inſtituted ſtewes, diyng of heare, barbours with other thinges.
               
                  
                     VENVS,
                  Venus a common woman which was begotten of the froth of the ſea (as Poetes fame) was a common harlot, and brothel of her body, and had many children by ſundry men, as by Mars ſhe had Harmonia, by Mercury, Hermaphroditus, by Iupiter, Cupido, by Anchiſes, Aeneas: And bycauſe ſhe alone wold not ſeme to be an hore,Stewes. ſhe ordeyned in Cypres that women did proſtitute thē ſelfes

for mony to al that came. And Iuſtine telleth, that the maner of the maides of Cypres was to get their mariage good,Maydes of Cypres. by ſuche fylthy baudry. And to helpe furth the matter, one Melāpus brought out of Egypt into Grece the rites of Bacchus ſacrifices, wherein men vſe to company diſſolutely with women in the nyght,Bacchanalia in ſuche wyſe that it is ſhame for chriſten menne to ſpeake of, muche like oure ſhewes or daunces called maſkes in Englande & bonefyres,Maſkes. Bonefyres. Spu. Poſthumius abrogated Bacchus feaſtes. as they be vſed in ſome partes of the realme. But Spu. Poſthumius, Albinus, and Q. Martius, abolyſhed thoſe feaſtes, I would all maſkes and bonefyres were likewiſe baniſhed from among vs chriſtians. Albeit cōmon women wer long afore Venus tyme.Cōmon women were of long tyme. For it appeareth in Geneſis, that Iudas ſōne to Iacob medled wt Thamer his doughter in law, bycauſe he ſuppoſed ſhe had bene an hoore by reaſon of her apparel. But to let that paſſe, yet it is pytie to ſe among chriſten men ſtewes & baudrye maynteyned, as though it were for a cōmon weale: & honorable matrimony ſo neglected & polluted without any

feare of God. This is a doctrin of the deuil, if there be any. In Moſes lawes an aduontrer was ſtoned to death, and in Grece,Puniſhment for aduoutry▪
                   in Rome and in Arabia, and diuerſe other countries he was puniſhed by deathe, & among chriſtiēs it reigneth vnpuniſhed: God wyl ſtrike ones for al, therfore let the miniſters of the law prouide a godly remedy. I would wiſhe that women would folowe the pagane Lucretia, or Hebrue Suſanna, and men Ioſeph,Lucretia. Suſanna. Ioſeph. Diyng of heare. Medea found the diyng and coloryng of heare, and our women of England haue not forgotten it, and beſide that make their foreheades by theyr medicines broder then God made them,Brode foreheades. with other enormities, wherein ſome of the phiſicians be greatly to blame, that teache ſuche thynkes to ye frayle creature.Bunglyng Phiſicians are blamed. They be aſhamed of Gods creacion & handy worke in thē ſelues or els they would nor amend it.
               Barbours to ſhaue and roūd, were inſtituted by the Abantes,Barbours. bycauſe theyr enemies in warre ſhoulde haue no occaſion to plucke them by y• heare P. Ticinius Mena brought them into Rome the .CCC.liiii. yeare of theP. Ticinius Mena.
                  
buildyng of the cytie afore they were vnſhauen. Africanus was wonte to be ſhauen euery day. There be many other thynges,Thynges whoſe auctours be not knowen. whoſe auctours for antiquitie can not be knowen, & ſome bicauſe of the negligence of men that wyl not write ſuche thinges.
               As no man can tel who beganne clockes, belles, the ſhypmans compaſſe, the gonnes ſtyrops, cappes or bonettes, for that is but newely inuented: bycauſe in olde tyme men wente bare heade,Atheneus in the .iiii. booke ſayeth that C
                        •
                     eſſebius a barboure of Alexandria foūd out the orgānes, and bringeth the teſtimony of Ariſtotle. water mylles, organnes, & claricymbals, talowcandels, reclaimyng of haukes, rynges, with many other, whiche for the auncientie, or ouerſight of men be in extreme obliuion.
            
            ¶The ende of the abrydgement of the third booke.
         
         
            
            The fourth booke.
            
               The fyrſt Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng, and encreaſe of Chriſtes religion.
               
                  
                     CHRISTES religion,Our religion beganne of the Hebrues. wherin onely reſteth ye whole hoope of our ſaluacion, beganne of the Hebrues, whiche were ſo named of Heber, and liued very deuoutly, afore there was any law written, onely by a natural inclinacion, & highe corage excited to enſue trueth and iuſtice.
               The fyrſt that called on the name of God, was Enos, then Enoche,
                  Enos called fyrſt on God. 
                  Noe And afther him Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob, whiche bycauſe he had ſene God was named Iſrael,Iſrael. and of him the Hebrues were ſurnamed Iſraelites Of the iſſue and linage of his .xii. ſonnes there came .xii. tribes or generations of Iewes,xii. tribes. euery tribe bering the name of one of thē:Iob. 
                  Iob alſo was a perfecte godly man, albeit an heathen,Ioſeph. and Ioſeph was a myrroure of

chaſtitee. To theſe men the wyl, promiſes, and reuelacions of God were ſhewed fyrſt. Notwithſtandyng thei dyd not long perſeuer in that perfect innocencye of liuyng, but partly for theyr corruptible & poyſoned nature prone to vice, and partly by reaſon of the acquayntaunce, that they had wt the Egyptians,Egiptians ſuperſtitiouſe a kind of people very ſuperſticiouſe & geuen to muche Idolatry, fel from the puritie into ſuche extreme blindnes of hart, ignoraūcie of God, & idolatry, that they differed in nothyng from the Gentiles & heathen. But God, as he is al mercyful and long ſufferyng, after .CC.v. yeares that Iſrael came into Egypt, and cccc.xxx. yeares after Abrahams goyng thither, by the valiaunt captayn Moſes deliuered thē out of the thral dome and bōdage that they were in & brought them through the red ſea & wyldernes,Moſes deliuered the Iſraelites from bondage. into the land of promiſe, the fruitful land of Canaan: And yet they vnkyndly forgat all thoſe benefites, and returned to their old wretchednes, and ſinful abhominacions. Laſt of all, God cōſideryng yt neither lawe of nature,Gods mercy is ſhewed. nor lawe written, nor

his great benefytes, nor preachyng of ſundry prophetes, whom thei moſt truelly muthered, could turne them from theyr ſtefnecked, and ſtubburne obſtinacy:God is made man. To ſhewe al kyndnes poſſible, ſente his onely begotten ſonne equal to him in eſſencial power, to be incarnate of a pure mayde, that at the laſte they might by his example and prechyng haue an obedient heart towarde their creatour, whiche was borne (the yere of the world .v. thouſande .C.xcix. and the .xli. yere of the reigne of Auguſtus Caeſar) of the virgyn Mari to be oure ſauiour,What yere Chriſt was incarnate. and interceſſour for vs afore the iudgement ſeate of the father, as his name Ieſus doth pretend vnto vs.
               He by his example, teachyng, and miracles, ſhewed the pathe of ſaluacion,Chriſt was perſecuted to death. but they enuiouſely dyd perſecute him to the vile death of ye croſſe: neuertheleſſe by his diuine power he roaſe the third day in the .xviii. yere of Tiberius the emperour his reigne and after .xl. daies he aſcended to the right hande of God,The yere of Chriſtes deth & reſurrection leauyng power and auctoritie with his Apoſtles to eſtabliſhe the cōmon welth & religion

of chriſtians and the .x. day after his aſcencion he ſent the holy ghoſt into their heartes to ſtrēgthen and teache thē al trueth:The holy goſt is ſent. This was .xxxiii. yeres & thre monthes after his incarnaciō. Thus oure religion had it oryginall, and the Apoſtles by their preachyng amplified & enlarged it very muche. For Peter fyrſt preachyng to the Iewes in Hieruſalem of the cruel murther, that they had cōmitted againſt Chriſt Ieſus, conuerted and baptiſed in one day thre .M. men and women.Peter conuerted, iii.M. And by the myracle of healyng the lame mā at the beautyful gate of the temple he ſtayed and confirmed them ſtrongly in the fayth, albeit he ſuffered perſecucion greatly for the ſame: And Stephyn for his faythful teſtimony was ſtoned to death.Stephyn is martyred. Philippe. Philip conuerted and baptiſed the Samaritanes, and a certaine eunuche of Candaces quene of Ethiopia, the eunuch turned the quene with her famylye, and a great parte of that countree to the fayth of Chriſt.Men were fyrſt called chriſtians in Antioche. After in Antioche the faythfull named them ſelues Chriſtians.
               Thomas preached to the Parthians,

Mathew in Ethiopia,Thomas. Mathewe. Bartlemewe Andrewe. Bartholomew in Ynde, Andrew in Scytia, Iohn in Aſia, Peter in Galatia, Pontus, & Capadocia. Peter was borne in Bethſaida a cytie of Galile, & brother to Andrew.Peter biſhop of Atioche. He was by ſhyppe of Anthioche .vii. yeares, and conuerted many people of Aſia: and after went to Rome in the tyme of Claudius, & there ſhewed the Goſpel with great encreaſe, at the ſame tyme Mari the virgine,Mari the virgyn died. and mother of oure ſauioure Ieſus Chriſt dyd chaunge her lyfe, and was Aſſumpted into the nombre of bleſſed ſpirites, whiche was the yere of our ſaluacion .xlvii. Not long after Paule beyng conuerted from his phantaſticall tradicions to a preacher of Chriſtes Goſpel,Paule is conuerted. was brought to Rome, where he preached boldly the Goſpel, notwithſtandyng the great perſecutions that he ſuffered for it,Paule was headed. Peter was crucified. and afterwarde ſuffered death by the way of headyng, at the cōmaūdement of Nero, the ſame day that Peter was crucified on a croſſe. Thus dayly the cōgregacion of chriſtians encreaſed more and more, as the Actes of the Apoſtles and other

hiſtories doth declare at ful. Albeit there was great trouble and perſecucion in euerye place, yet God by his power contrary to theyr expectacion turned theyr cruelnes to the furtheraunce of his worde, confirmacion of the faythfull, and confuſion of them that vſed tyranny.
            
            
               The .ii. Chapiter. ¶The inſtitucion of circumciſion and baptiſme.
               
                  
                     GOD, whiche hadde made promyſe to Abraham, yt he ſhould be father of many nations, and that al the world ſhould be bleſſed in his ſeede (that Chriſt) willyng to ſtay his farth in ye ſame promiſe appointed the couenāt of circumciſion betwene him & Abraham:Circumciſiō. ſaiyng, euery male ſhalbe circū
                  ciſed, and the fleſhe of his fore ſkinne ſhalbe cut round about, for a ſigne of the leage & confederacy that I make with the.Abraham. circumciſed. Vpon this cōmaundement Abraham then beyng .xcix. yeares of age dyd cut his fore ſkyn, & his ſōne

Iſmales beyng then .xii. yeares olde, whom he begatte by Agar his bondmayde, and al his men ſeruauntes: For this cauſe (as ſ. Cyprian ſaieth) that he might haue the fyrſte fruites of the blod,Why ye blod was ſhed. whiche ſhould afterward ſhede his holy blod for the redemption of manye, yea of all that beleue in him. The faſhion of it was to cut the fore ſkynne of a mānes yarde with a knyfe of ſtone, as God commaunded Ioſue that he ſhould make knyues of ſtone to circumciſe all the Iſraelites the ſecond tyme,The ſecond circumciſion. and Moſes dyd circumciſe his children with a ſharpe ſtone. Chriſoſtome calleth circumciſion the fyrſt and moſt auncient commaundement, for there is no nacion,Circumciſiō. that gaue any preceptes or rules to lyue by afore Abraham or Moſes: & therfore it is to be ſuppoſed that other countries toke example at the Hebrues to circumciſe their chyldrē,Other countries do circumciſe. as the Pheniciens, and Arabiens, the Sarrocenes, the Ethiopians, the Egyptiens, and the Colchians.
               This circumciſion of ye fleſhe was a fygure to vs of the circumciſion of the heart,What circū
                     ciſion ſignifieth. and cuttyng away of al ſuperfluouſe

luſte, carnal deſyres, and importeth a moderacion and mortifiyng of the affectes & concupicences of the olde Adam I meane the ſinnefull body: he that had not this ſigne was baniſhed out of the nōber of the people of God, & had no par
                     •
                   in the promyſes made to Abraham. Baptiſme wherein is lefte to vs a ſignificacion bothe of the mortificacion of ye fleſhe and diyng to the world,Baptiſme. that we may walke in a newe lyfe, and alſo of the waſhyng away of our ſinnes by Chriſtes blod, and is the token that we be of the body of the cōgregacion of the faythful,Iohn Bapteſt auctoure of baptiſme. was inſtituted by ſ. Iohn, ſonne of zacharye, the .xv. yere of the Emperoure Tyberius reigne, in the wyldernes beſyde the famooſe riuer of Iordane, wher he baptiſed muche people. This baptiſme and waſhyng was in the water to ſignifye the waſhyng away of our ſinnes that ſhuld be by Chriſt, whiche baptiſed in the holy ghoſt & fyre. There was ſignes of baptiſme in the olde lawe, as the cloud,Signes of Baptiſme. the red ſea, ye riuer of Iordain. The fyrſte that was chriſtened of the heathen was Cornelius of Ceſaria,
                  
and the eunuchus of quene Cādaces.
               Chriſtenyng of enfantes was inſtitute among vs,Chriſtenyng of enfantes. as cyrcumciſion of chyldren was of the Iewes celebrated the eight day. Iginius biſhop of Rome ordeyned fyrſte that chyldren, whiche ſhould be Chriſtened, ſhould haue a godfather and a godmother, for to be wytneſſe of the ſacrament yt it was receiued.Godfather & godmother. And Victor biſhop there dyd inſtitute that one might be chriſtened either by a lay man or woman in tyme of neceſſitie,When lay men may chriſten. bycauſe enfantes were often in daunger. There be thre maner of baptiſmes (as Cyprian diuideth it). One in water,Thre baptiſmes. wherof Iohn was auctour, another in the holy goſt & fyre, wherof Chriſt was inſtitutour, the third is in blod, wherein the children yt Herod ſlewe, were Chriſtened. It was alſo the maner in old tyme,The olde cuſtome of baptiſyng. that they whiche were growen in age ſhould be baptiſed in white apparel, and that was wont to be at Eaſter or Whitſonday only neceſſitie cōſtrayned otherwiſe: In the meane tyme tyll thoſe daies came, they were taught the miſteries of the religion of Chriſt, whiche they

ſhould profeſſe. Of that cuſtome I ſuppoſe the ſondaye after Eaſter is called the white ſonday.Whitſonday
               
            
            
               The .iii. Chapiter. ¶Of the prieſthod of the Hebrues, and degrees of the ſame.
               
                  
                     LYKE as in ye chriſten cō
                  mon welth there be two ſortes of men, one called the laytie, to whō apperteyneth the miniſtracion of the publike wele,Laytie. and all temporl affayres: the other is the Clergie, to whō belongeth the cure & charge of miniſtryng ye word of God,Clergy. ſacramentes, & other decent ceremonies: ſo in the olde lawe of ye Hebrues there were two iuriſdictions, one of thē was capitaynes & gouernours of the cōmons: the other was the prieſthod that did offre vp the ſacrifices, & other oblacions.Prieſthod. Of this degree of prieſtes, Aaron and his ſonnes were the fyrſt,Aaron fyrſt prieſt. ordeyned and cōſecrated by Moſes at the cōmaūdement of God. The maner and faſhion of halowing of thē and their veſtures is declared at large in the booke of Exodus: As

for Noe, whiche made the fyrſt alter,Noe made the fyrſt alter. Melchiſedech, Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob dyd make their offeryng rather of a naturall deuocion then any prieſtly auctorytee. After that the Leuites whom we vſe to cal deacons were created by Moſes to miniſter & ſerue Aaron in al ye ſacrifices,Leuites. to beare the arke and tabernacle, the holy veſſels, and pitche the campe, and were diſcharged of al extreme affayres.
               Nexte them were choſen the miniſters,Miniſters. whiche dyd make redye the ſacrifice, as Calues, Oxen, ſhepe with ſuche other thynges, at the cōmaundement of the Leuites, theſe we may cal ſubdeacons. Certeyne other were elected to light the tapers and lampes named accolytes.Subdeacons
               
               The Sextyns or porters were appointed to kepe out all prophane and vnclene people:Sextyns. And readers to preache and reade the law and prophetes on their ſabboth daies.Readers.
               
               There were moreouer chaunters & ſyngers to ſyng the Pſalmes in the temple,Chaunters. whom Dauid and Aſaph did inſtitute.
               Coniurars were ordeyned by SalomonConiurars.
                  
to driue euil ſpirites out of men.
               Al theſe offices went by ſucceſſion, neither was one promoted frō one to another.Succeſſion in prieſthod. Thus was the leuitical prieſthod appointed, whiche was but a ſigne & ſhadowe of thinges to come that is Chriſt, in whō reſteth the perfection and cōplete fulfillyng of the lawe.
            
            
               The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶Of our prieſthod, howe it is double, what laiyng on of handes meaneth.
               
                  Chriſt auctor of our prieſthod.
                  
                     CHRIST Ieſus our ſauiour, whiche was kyng & prieſt after the order of Melchiſedeche, in the newe teſtament hath inſtituted among vs a prieſthod to offre and do the functions of this newe law: And it is of two kyndes or ſortes. The one is a ſpirituall prieſthod to offre ſpiritual ſacrifices,Spiritual prieſthod. in this kynde Chriſt offered and gaue vp him ſelfe a conſummate oblacion for the ſinnes of the whole world as Peter ſaieth, Chriſt died ones for our ſynnes, he beyng righteouſe for vs

vnrighteous, that he might gyue vs vp to God mortified as touchyng the fleſhe but liuyng in the ſpirite.
               
                  OF this prieſthode bee all chriſten menne,All chriſten menne are prieſtes. whiche after the example of Chriſte muſte offer our praiers, thankes gyuyng, and oure bodies mortified: wee bee all of the degree of this kyngly preſthode as Peter and alſo Ihon in the Apocalipſe dooe beare witneſſe.
               
                  THE ſeconde prieſthode is a miniſtery,Second prieſtehode is a miniſtery. that Chriſte did ordain foloyng the ordre of the lawe, that wee might haue our teachers to enſtructe vs in the Goſpell, as the Iewes had their ſcholemaſters in the lawe. He did elect twelue biſhoppes, whom he called by a newe name Apoſtelles bicauſe thei wer appoincted to bee embaſſadoures into all partes of the worlde,Apoſtles. with the mightie woorde of his power the glad tidynges of his Goſpell. He aſſigned alſo .lxx. diſciples,Diſcip
                        ••
                     s. to whō he gaue the charge and office of preachyng & teachyng, whiche in ſteade of Aarōs ſonnes, ſhould be emong vs as inferior prieſtes,Prieſtes. and ſ
                     ••
                  oures of congregacions: and of

theſe beganne the ordre of our Prieſtes,Biſhoppes. as our biſhoppes had their originall of the Apoſtelles. As for the Apoſtelles and diſciples, whiche wer miniſters and diſpoſers of the miſteries of GOD, had no other maner of conſecratyng, but onely the vocacion and eleccion of Chriſte into the office And ſo was Mathias choſen in the Actes into ye roume of Iudas,The maner of conſecratyng in the apoſtles time ſo wer the ſeuen deacons choſen to miniſter too the poore people of the congregacion. And Titus did choſe in euery toune and citee of Crete prieſtes by the laiyng on of handes, whiche was a maner of admiſſion withoute any further ceremonies,Laiyng on of handes. wherby authoritie was gyuen them ouer the congregacion, and boldnes to execute erneſtely his office with the aſſiſtence of the holy ghoſte. And therefore in the beginnyng of the churche when a biſhoppe was conſecrated there was vſed no other rites or amabges,The faſhion of the primatyue churche. but onely the people, to whō the eleccion of the biſhop belonged, ſhould praie: and after the ſenioures or prieſtes by laiyng on their hādes admitted hym too that degree. Of theſe Peter was

called chief and firſt bicauſe bothe of his auncientie, and alſo for ſomuche as he was firſte elected.A biſhoppes office. A biſhoppes roume is not ſomuche an honour, as it is an heuye burden, not ſo muche a laude, as a lode. For his deutie is not onely to weare a mitre and croſear, but alſo to watche ouer the flocke of the Lorde vigilantly, to teache with the woorde diligently, with example honeſtly, and in all thynges too go afore theim vprightly, and leade them in the waie of trueth, that thei maie folowe the patron of his Godly lyuyng, and there as it were in a myrroure beholde howe thei oughte too refourme and confourme their lyuyng.Scripture 
                        •
                     ereth theſe. And this office of the biſhopricke & deacons wer inſtituted by the ſcripture onely, for prieſtes in ye primatiue churche & biſhops wer al one
               
                  BVT the biſhoppes of Rome folowyng the ſhaddowes of the olde abrogate lawe of the Hebrues haue ordained a ſwarme of diuerſe other orders, as porters, or ſextens,Rome made mo orders. reders exorciſtes, accollites, ſubdeacōs, deacons, priſtes, biſhoppes, archebiſhoppes, as a certain degree one aboue another,

wherby thei ſhould aſſend to the higheſt dignitie. Caius biſhoppe Rome did begyn the orders firſte, yet ſome ſaie: Iginius did ordayne thoſe degrees long afore Caius tyme. And I graunte well that Iginius mighte bee the firſt diuiſer of theim,Iginius did diuiſe firſte orders. & afterwarde Caius accōpliſhed the worke, & brought it to a finall conſūmacion.
               
                  The office of a prieſte.
                  THE office of a prieſt (as Chriſte ordained it) was too teache, baptiſe, and miniſter the Sacramente of the alter, and thankes gyuyng, bynd and loſe, and iudge of doctrynes. Therefore, lette theim take hede that admit ſuche too bee prieſtes, as cannot perfourme the deutie of the miniſtery. For many ſuppoſe if thei can mumble vp a paire of Matyns and ſaye Maſſe thei bee perfecte prieſtes.
            
            
               The .v. Chapiter. ¶The maner of ſhauyng prieſtes crounes, who maie no
                     •
                   be prieſte, what age he muſte bee of.
               
                  
                     THE common and generall badge of al Prieſtes is ye ſhauen croune,The ſhauen croune is the preſtes badge wher by the Clergie is deſſeuered from the Layitee,

and bee putte in remembraunce by it how thei ought all together to relinquiſhe and diſpiſe all carnall pleaſure, and worldely treaſure, and enſue after heauenly thynges, whiche bee eternall. This as Beda writeth,Occacion of ſhauyng crounes. grewe into a cuſtome, and was decreed by a conſtitucion, to the entente that the thyng whiche was before approbrious, might growe to honour and comelines. For Peter what time he preached at Antioche,
                  Peter was mocked for his baldneſſe was ſcorned and mocked bycauſe of his balde hedde, or ſhauen croune, and it was a contumeliouſe thyng bothe emong the Romaynes and Lumbardes too bee ſhauen. I thynke the originall cauſe of it did proceade of the ceremonies of the Nazarees,
                  Shauē crounes came of the Nazarees which whē thei had liued lōg tyme) as Ioſephus telleth verie deuoutly), thei ſhaued their heddes and ſacrificed the heire in the fire too God whereby thei ſygnified that thei did dedicate theim ſelfes wholy to liue in a Godly perfeccion. Samuel was a Nazaree, and Samſon alſo. I ſuppoſe,Prieſtes of Egipte wer ſhauen. that this rite of the Nazarees came oute of Egipte where the Prieſtes were cuſtomably

ſhauen in token of ſorowe and heuineſſe for the deathe of their God Apis. And thei were alſo ſhauen daily bycauſe thei ſhould bee withoute filth in their quoridian ſacrifices.
               
                  THE ſignificacion of the prieſtes crounes is to declare that thei ought to reiecte terrene and yearthely ſubſtaunce,What the croune ſignifieth. reſeruyng to theimſelfes only a compitente ſufficience.
                     Anacletus forbade prieſtes too haue beardes.
                     Siricius decree of theim yt were twyſe maried.
                     Lame mēne maie not be prieſtes.
                   
                  Anacletus firſt forbad prieſtes to haue beardes, or long ſide heire.
               
                  Siricius decreed that all thoſe men that were twyſe maried, or wedded a widdowe ſhould bee no prieſte. Anaſtaſius cōmaunded that none that was lame or maymed ſhould bee admitted to bee a prieſt. Bonifacius inſtituted that no manne could bee a prieſt afore he wer thirty yeres olde,The age of prieſtes. for that was the age of priſtes in the olde lawe: But the counſail of Laterane thought it ſufficient if he were xxv. yeres olde, after the example of the Leuites, whiche at that age miniſtred in the tabernacle.Stallyng a biſhoppe. 
                  Anacletus alſo appoyncted that euery Biſhoppe ſhould bee ſtalled and conſecrated of their other auncient biſhoppes.
            
            
               
               ¶The .vi. Chapiter. ¶Who diuiſed Pariſhes, and Dioceſes the order of Cardinalles, Notaries and Chamberlaynes.
               
                  
                     AFTER that the prieſthod was ordaigned, bothe leaſt the cure ſhould bee ouer greate, and alſo that euery manne mighte know what his charge was, and how farre his office extended,Dioniſius. 
                  Dioniſius y• yere of our lorde cc.lxvii. deuided bothe in Rome and other places, churches,Churches. Churcheyardes. churcheyardes, and pariſhes to curates, and dioceſes to biſhoppes, and commaunded that euery manne ſhould bee contented with his preſcript bondes.Pariſhes. Dioceſes. But a fore that Euariſtus appoin
                     •
                  ted titles of cures to ye prieſtes in Rome, whoſe dutie was to chriſten all that wer cō
                  uerted from Paganiſme to chriſtē religion,Cures in Rome. and reſorted thither to receiue the faith, and to bury the dedde. And afterwarde Marcellus decreed that there ſhould bee .xxv. in number.Cardinalles,
               
               
                  THESE bicauſe thei wer ye chief prieſtes in Rome, and had the prerogatiue

afore the reſt wer named Cardinalles and of them without doubt the ordre of Cardinalles ſprong firſt whiche for ſomuche as thei were in daiely preſence with the biſhoppe of Rome, that then had the primacie of chriſtendome, wer had in great reputacion and reuerence. And Innocencius the fourth of that name,Innocencius whiche was aboute the yere of our lorde. M twoo hundred fiftie and foure, willyng to augmente and auaunce their dignity,Cardinalles ride. commaunded by decree, that from thencefurthe thei ſhould ryde when thei came to the biſhoppes palace,Cardinall hattes. and were a redde hatte, wherby was mente that thei oughte to bee in ar
                     •
                  dineſſe too auenture theimſelfes for the lawe of religion, and ſpende their bloudde in Chriſtes cauſe: And Paulus biſhoppe ordained that thei ſhould haue ſcarlet roabes or kittelles.Scarlet roabes. This order ſtandeth of three ſortes, for ſome bee biſhoppes and be in numbre ſixe. The Cardinalles of Hoſtia,
                  Order of cardinalles. 
                  Sabine, Portua, Tuculane, Praeneſtine, and Albane, the other were either prieſtes or deacons, albeeit, in no certain or ſpeciall numbre. But

there is another order in Roome of Notaries,Notaries. Who ordayned notaries. whiche were appoyneted by Iulius the firſte of that name, too write the actes of all godly martyrs, and confeſſoures and regiſtre theim for a perpetual example of conſtante & verteous liuyng: Albeeit, I thinke it rather to bee the inuencion and diuiſe of Clemente, whiche ordained ſeuen Notaries too enrolle the notable deedes of Martyres. And Antherius after did more firmely ratify it. Alſo Leo the firſte a godly and well diſpoſed manne, ſeyng the people repaire thither from all partes of the worlde for pardon, appoyncted certain officers of the prieſtes, whom he named Chamberlaynes,Chamberlaines. too kepe the toumbes and ſepulchres of the Apoſtelles and Martyres, that thei perceiuyng the holy reuerēce aboute the Apoſtelles graues mighte bee more enflammed with deuocion.
               
                  BVT all ſuche offices bee nowe peruerted and turned frō that godly purpoſe to vain worldely oſtentacion and pompe,Offices bee ſold in Rome & bee redy marchandiſe in Rome, the promocions be ſo great.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧The .vii. Chapiter. ¶The prerogatiues of the biſhoppe of Roome and his eleccion.
               
                  
                     ONE ſpecial prerogatyue and preuiledge of ye biſhopp of Rome is,The biſhoppe of Rome mai chaunge hys name. yt he maie chaunge his name, if it ſeme to hym not very pleaſaunte too his ear
                     •
                  s: As if it bee a malefactor, he maie call his name Bonifacius, if he bee a coward, he maie be called Leo, for a carter Vrbanus, and for a cruell manne, Clemens. This was the ordinaunce of Sergius,
                  Sergius inuē
                     ted the chaū
                     gyng of his name. and thei ſaie thei dooe it after the example of Chriſte, whiche chaunged Simon Bariona his name into Peter: And of this it came too paſſe that euery biſhoppe, when he was elected, choſe the name of one of his prediceſſoures.
               
                  Biſhoppes of Rome be borne on mennes ſhulders.
                  THE biſhoppe of Rome is alſo borne on mennes ſhulders, whiche cuſtome came of the eleccion of Stephanus the ſeconde, whom the people for his greate vertue, and godlineſſe, with muche ioye of the eleccion bare on their ſhulders: The maner

of the pompe of bearyng was admitted, but the counterferryng, and folowyng of his vertue and ſyncere liuyng was omitted. Albeeit it mighte ſpryng of a gentle cuſtome, that was 
                     •
                  mong the Romaines, that euery riche manne or highe poteſtate ſhould bee borne of h
                     •
                  s ſeruauntes in a bed.
               
                  THE authoritee too choſe the biſhoppe of Rome belonged firſte too the Emperoure of Conſtantinople,Eleccion of the biſhoppe of Rome. & the deputie of Italy, till the tyme of the Emperour Conſtantyne, whiche licenced the Cardinalles and the people of Rome to elect hym. This was aboute the yere of Chriſt, cccccc. foure ſcore & fiue.The Empire is remoued in to Fraūce by biſhoppes of Rome. A fewe yeres after Gregory the thirde with other his ſucceſſoures, when thei were vexed by the Lumberdes, ſeyng thei could not haue redy helpe of the Emperoure of Cōſtantinople, required aide of Charles Marcel
                     •
                  e, Pippin, and Charles the great kyng of Fraunce. For whiche benefites Leo the thirde made and denounced Charlemayne Emperoure, and gaue hym authoritee to ratify and confirme the elecciō of the biſhop of Rome: but Nicolas ye ſecōd

reſtrayned the eleccion onely too the Cardinalles,The cardinalles choſe hym nowe. whiche cuſtome remaineth at this daie.
               
                  THE greate poſſeſſions that the biſhoppes of Rome hath contrary to the example of Chriſte, whoſe vicars thei name theimſelfes, and Peters pouertie their predeceſſoure, wer gyuen them by Charles and Lewes emperoures.Charles gaue the lādes to ye ſea of Rome. And yet, notwithſtandyng all that large benignitee, and kyndeneſſe ſhewed too hym and his auncetoures,Otho a Germain is made Emperoure. 
                  Ihon the twelfe made Otho kyng of Germany Emperoure and afterward Gregori the third a Germaine borne, bycauſe too gratifie the Emperoure his countree manne, decreed that the biſhoppes of Magunce, Treuerence, and Colyne, the Merques of Brandbrough,
                  
                     Princes Electoures.
                     Decre by the Biſhoppe of Roome.
                   the countie Palatyne, Duke of Saxone, and Kyng of Boemie ſhould haue ful power to choſe the Emperoure. Aboute the yere of our Lorde one thouſande and twoo.
               
                  THVS the biſhoppes of Roome haue been enhaunced in worldly power that thei thynke theimſelfes equall with Princes, Kynges and

Emperoures: But as it was falſely vſurped, ſo ſhall it by the woorde of GOD bee roted out and extirped as an vnprofitable tree.
            
            
               The .viii. Chapiter. ¶The deuidyng of Prieſtes into ſūdry degrees, a maner of ſweryng, and excomunicacion.
               
                  
                     GREGORY ſurnamed the greate, where afore tyme, Prieſtes and chiefe Prieſtes were onely vſed in the congregacion, firſt deuided theim into Patriarches and Archebiſhoppes. Patriarches at the firſte were of Roome, Antioche,Patriarches Alexandrie, Hieruſalem, and Conſtantinople: Archbiſhoppes had their title to bee called Metropolitaines,Archebiſhoppes. bycauſe their ſea was in the mother citee of the prouence. Clement the firſt ordaigned that all Patriarches, and Archbiſhoppes ſhould weare a paule whiche dooth ſignifie mekeneſſe and iuſtice,The paule is decreed to the patriarches. wherwith thei ſhould ſpecially bee garniſhed. Then alſo the inferior orders begonne too bee deuided,Archdeacons. as that the Archedeacon ſhould bee

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
aboue Deacon, and Arche-prieſte aboue the prieſte, and ouer theim the Deanes, and then wer ordained cannons, that ſyng in cathedrall churches Antherius permitted that a biſhoppe might chaunge his biſhoppericke,Chaungyng of biſhopprickes. for another vpon an honeſte cauſe, if he wer thought ſufficient to diſcharge a greater, for his learnyng and Godlineſſe. Caius firſte made a ſtatute, that a prieſte might not bee conuented afore a temporall iudge:A prieſt might not bee conuented. but leaſt any manne ſhould bee circū
                  uēted by fraude or gyle, Entichianus inſtituted that the accuſacion ſhould bee putte in writyng afore the iudge. Likewiſe Cornelius decreed that a manne ſhould not take or require an othe of a prieſt: but onely in matters concernyng our religion and faithe.An oth might not bee required of a prieſt
               
               
                  THE maner of ſwearyng was in old time of this ſorte: He that ſhould ſweare, tooke a ſtone in his hande, & ſaied, if I deceiue you to my knowledge,The maner of ſwearyng. 
                  Iupiter baniſhe me out of all good mēnes compaignie, preſeruyng the reſte of the citee, as I caſt awaie this ſtone from me. And (as Plinie dooeth write) it was not lawfull for

any manne too beare an office fiue daies onleſſe he wer ſworne. In like maner our biſhoppes, kynges, Prieſtes, and other officers ſweare afore the
                     •
                   bee admitted to the office.
               
                  Iuſtinianus emperour appoyneted firſte that menne ſhould ſweare by the Goſpell,Sweryng by the Goſpell. and now a daies al that ſweare laie their hande on the booke and kiſſe it ſaiyng, ſo helpe me God and the holy Goſpell, bycauſe as the Goſpell of our religion and faithe maie for no cauſe bee violated, ſo an othe in no caſe maie bee broken.
               
                  THE faſhion of excomunicatyng menne that bee obſtinate and diſſobediente too the officers:Excomunicacion. Or common tranſgreſſours came, as ſome thinke out of the rites of the Iewes, whiche baniſhed out of their Sinagoge all thoſe that ranne in obſtinacy againſt their tradicions.
               
                  AND ſome ſuppoſe it ſprong of the religiouſe folcke in Fraunce named Druides,
                  Druides. whiche (as Caeſar recordeth) If ether a priuate mā or officer wer not cōformably ordered after their ceremonies, excluded hym out

of their compaignie.
            
            
               The .ix. Chapiter. ¶Conſecratyng Nunnes, takyng of our cappes, kiſſyng the Popes feete, and waſhyng of feet.
               
                  Nunnes.
                  
                     THE cuſtome to conſecreate Virgyns makyng a vowe of chaſtitee was firſt found by Pius the firſt whiche inſtituted▪ alſo yt none ſhould bee made afore ſhe were twenty and fiue yeres olde:
                     The age of Nunnes at their profeſſion.
                     The tyme of profeſſyng.
                   and that thei mighte bee conſecrated at no tyme but in the Epiphanie or twelfe daie, Eaſter euen and on the feaſtes of the Apoſtelles oules it were when any vnprofeſſed wet in poyncte to die. And Sotherus cauſed that a decre was made that no ſuche profeſſed ſhould touche coape,
                     Nunnes might touche no coape nor encenſe.
                     When it beganne.
                   or put e
                     •
                  ſence into the Cenſoures, the yere of our Lorde GOD an hundred thre ſcore and fiftene: It ſemeth too haue begonne of the Apoſtelles, whiche is proued by Paules woordes, wher he ſaieth: Lette no widdowe bee choſen afore ſhe bee three ſcore yeres of age with diuerſe like ſaiynges.

                  Linus byſhoppe of Rome commaunded that no woman ſhould entre into the congregacion or temple with her heade bare,Women may not be bare headed in the churche. whiche appereth to haue bene taken of the Hebrues: for the biſhoppe in the olde lawe might not vncouer his head, and in Arabia & Cartage it was takē for an vnhoneſt, and vnreuerent thyng if a woman ſhould vncouer her head & go bare. The takyng offe of our cappes to our ſuperiours ſignifieth yt wee ſhould diſcloſe and ſhewe them all ſuche thynges as we haue in our cuſtodie.Takyng offe of cappes. The rite diabolike of kiſſyng the byſhoppe of Romes feete, tooke it originall of the maner of the Romaynes, whiche in their Paganite vſed to kiſſe the feete of their prieſtes and other nobles,Kiſſyng the biſhop of Romes feete. in token of obedience: as Seneca telleth howe Caius Caeſar ſtretched out his left foote that Pompeius a Carthagien might kiſſe it: Pōponius Laetus writeth that the Emperours vſed to gyue their handes to be kyſſed of the nobles, and then to take them vp to kyſſe their mouthes, and the cōmons kyſſed their knees, but Caius Caligula and Diocleſianus made them to

ſtoupe to their feete. This Pagane example oure chriſten biſhop and Goddes vicar, ful vngodly and vngoodly doeth counterfet. Al other biſhoppes vſed to deliuer their right hand to be kyſſed of ſuche as came to ſalute them:Right hande. for the right hande, as Plinie ſaieth in the leuenth booke, hath in it ſelfe a certain religion, and therefore we make all couenaunces and promiſes with it.Salutyng with kiſſes. The maner of ſalutyng with kyſſes is verie auncient, for it was the vſage of the Hebrues to kiſſe ſtraungers at their fyrſt metyng, as Iacob kyſſed Rachel afore he broke vnto her that he was of her kyndred, and Laban, after he knewe him to be his ſiſters ſonne, embraced him with his armes & kiſſed him. And the Romaynes cuſtome was to kyſſe theyr kinſfolke, but afterward it was extē
                  ded to further familiaritie, & is now frequented very laciuiouſly. Albeit in Rome it was an ordinaunce that women ſhould kyſſe their kinſefolke bycauſe that yf ſhe had dronke any wyne,Law for drinkyng wyne. contrarie to the lawe made againſt the women for drinkyng of wyne, by ſuche meanes ſhe might be

eſpied.Waſhyng of feete on maū
                     dy thurſday. Waſhyng of feet on Maundye thurſday, that the prieſtes vſe among them ſelfes, and nobles to inferiour perſons, is a counterfeete of the inſtitute of Chryſte, whiche to ſhew them a patron of humilitie and mekeneſſe, waſhed the Apoſtles feet. The kynges and quenes of England on yt day▪ waſhe the feete of ſo many poore menne and women as they be yeres olde,Kynges and Quenes of England. and geue to euery of them ſo many pence with a gowne, and an other ordinary almes of meate, and kyſſe their feete, and afterward geue their gownes of their backes to them that they ſe moſt nedy of al the nomber. It is a godly inſtitute, I would there were mo ſuche ceremonies to helpe the poore. For they be now neglected & not regarded, but lye dead often in the ſtretes for lacke of ſuſtenaunce.
            
            
               The .x. Chapiter. ¶The inſtitucion of prieſtes called Flamines, with other religions of the Romaynes.
               
                  
                  
                     NVMA Pompilius the ſeconde kyng of Rome, willyng to reclayme yt fierſe nacion frō warre and chiuarie, to the regarde of iuſtice, and kepyng of peace ordayned to the highe God Iupiter a ſacred perſone called Flamen Dlalis,
                  Flamen Dialis. that is Iupiters prieſt And to aduaunce the order he ſet him in a chariot of Iuorie, and a coſtely robe: but ſo ſone as his wife was diſceaſed he was diſcharged and gaue ouer his office. He neuer rode out nor might not lie one night out of ye citee, leſt any ſacrifices ſhuld be neglected by ſuche abſence. Sweryng was cleane forboden him, bycauſe an othe is a maner of puniſhement to any fre borne manne, and namely to a prieſt whiche hath charge of all diuine obſeruaunces: For his worde ſhould haue the weight of an othe. I would wiſhe yt our biſhoppes would marke and folowe bothe thoſe properties of theſe Heathe
                     •
                   religiouſe for then the ſtate of our religion ſhould be in better caſe then it is, and other would not enforſe ſo lightely a prieſt to the

neceſſitie of an othe, whiche ſhould haue no other termes, but yea & naye to confirme or denie their ſaiyng. Beſide this Flamen, yt was called Dialis bicauſe he was conſecrated to Iupiter, there were by the ſame Numa ordeyned two other, one to Mars and another to Quirine, albeit Plutarche ſaieth it was Romulus that inſtituted prieſtes to Iupiter and Mars. Virgyns veſtals were of his bringyng in alſo,Veſtals. and founded in honour of Veſta daughter to Saturnus. The fyrſt that euer was choſen in to ye religion, was called Amata,
                  Amata. and of her al were named, likewyſe, a mayde might not be vnder ſixe yeres of age, nor aboue ten if ſhe were created of this religion. Theſe continued in their profeſſion xxx. yeres, whereof the fyrſt ten they ſpent in learnyng the rites, the other ten they miniſtered, & the laſt of their yeres they taught other nouices, and when her terme of yeres was expired ſhe might marie, or tarie in that religion ſtyl. They were foūd at the charges of the common cheſte, and yf any of them committed any carnall acte with any man, ſhe was borne in the

ſight of all the people out of the cytie and at the gate named Collina was buried quicke. They roade in a wagō and other magiſtrates roaſe to them, and if they came by in tyme of execucion, the condemned was quite deliuered.Pontifex maximus. This religion begāne at Alba by the inſtitucion of Aſcanius, & was renued in Rome by kyng Numa. A highe biſhoppe was alſo deuiſed by him to haue the chiefe ſtroke in al ceremonies of ſacrificyng, and he preſcribed the daies and places, of ſacrifices and in what fourme thei ſhould be done. He ordeined alſo to gradiuus Mars twelue prieſtes named Salii,
                  Salii. bicauſe they daunſed in a ſolemne maner, and went aboute the cytie with ſonges: they weare a brodered coate, with a braſen breſtplate, and a round tergate. It ſemeth that Numa toke this rite of the Hebrues, for Dauid went afore the Arke of the lorde daū
                  ſing. Heraldes of armes whiche wer called Facialis Sacerdotes were inuented by him to haue charge to prouide that no battaile were vniuſtely taken in hande,Faciales Sacerdotes. they alſo made leagues, ſtabliſhed peace, or if it wer not

duely made he myght breke it, & offer oblacion, for the offences of the capitain and the whole armye.Pater Patratus. 
                  Pater Patratus was an officer that made all leagues or bondes, and was created by ye Heraldes, as Marcus Valerius firſt Herald ordeined Spurius Fuſius fyrſt into ye offyce of Pater Patratus. After the expulſyng of kynges, was an office called Rex Sacrificulus appoincted,Rex Sacrificulus. whiche ſhould do all ſuche cuſtomable obſeruaunces as the kinges ſhould do, albeit he was vnder ye high prieſt or biſhoppe, the fyrſt that did beare that office was Marcus Papyrius.
                  Epulones. 
                  Epulones had the office of appointyng feaſtes and ſolemne bankettes to Iupiter & the other goddes:Sodales Titii. theſe were alſo called Sodales Titii, whiche were ordayned by Romulus after he ioyned felowſhyp with Titus Tatius.
               
            
            ¶The ende of the abrydgement of the fourth booke.
         
         
            
            The fifth booke.
            
               The fyrſt Chapiter. ¶Of the deckyng of churches on holy daies, offeryng of Images of waxe and tables of miracles, ſolemniſyng firſt maſſes of prieſtes.
               
                  
                     THERE be many ſuperſticious cuſtomes crepte in among the Chriſten congregacion, whiche came of a gē
                  tile opinion: & bicauſe they could not altogether be aboliſhed and extirped, at the leſt way they were tranſpoſed to a better vſe, and remoued from Idolatrie to the garniſhyng of churches and temples of the faithful people.Deckyng of churches. As trimmyng of the temples with hāgynges, floures boughes, and garlo
                     •
                  des, was taken of ye heathen people, whiche decked their Idols & houſes with ſuche array.Offeryng Images of waxe or tapers. In like maner it is to be thought of the rite of hangyng vp Images of waxe, & tapers afore ſainctes, or as aften as any membre is diſeaſed,

to offre the ſame in waxe, as legges, armes, feete, pappes, oxen, horſe, or ſhepe, whiche were hāged vp in the churche afore that ſaincte, by whom (as they beleued (they had obtaigned health of the ſayd membre or beaſt: For this came of an olde Paynyme faſhion of ſacrifices, that the Paganes offered to Saturnus & Pluto in an Iſle of Italy named Cotyllia, wherof I ſpake afore. I thynke the beryng of candels, that we vſe on the feaſt of the Purificacion of oure Lady called Candelmasday,Candelmaſſe day. came of this gentile rite alſo, that in burnyng them we might worſhip the ſainctes as they honoured their falſe God Saturne.
                  
                     Lampes. Hangynges. Lightes.
                     Writyng tables of miracles.
                   It ſemeth that lampes & hangyng lightes beganne of the candels that Moſes ſet vp to burne in the tabernacle. The faſtenyng vp of tables wherin the miracles are written for a monumente and teſtimony to the poſterite, came of a cuſtome, as Strabo writeth, that is vſed in Grece, where the maner is, that whoſoeuer was releued of any ſickeneſſe or maladye, ſhould hang vp a table conteignyng the recouerye of his health, in the tē
                  ple

of that God that had preſerued him, and ſpecially there were many ſet vp in Aeſculapius temple at Epidaurus. The vſe of feaſtyng on holy daies,Fyrſt Maſſe of prieſtes. and at the fyrſt Maſſe of prieſtes was borowed alſo of Gentilitee, whiche honored the day of conſecratyng their religiouſe as ſolemnely, as the day of their natiuite, with denoute and religiouſe breakfaſtes and feaſtes, callyng it the natiue daye of theyr ſacred parſonages: wherof Apuleius, maketh mencion. And it is a good vſage, bycauſe the daye of the birth bringeth but onely life, the day of conſecratyng a prieſt bryngeth or els ought to procure a good and godly life.D
                        •
                     inkyng on Maundy thurſday. Albeit on Maunday thurſday hath bene the maner from the beginnyng of the church to haue a general drinkyng, as appeareth by ſ. Paules writyng to the Corinthians, & Tertuliane to his wyfe.
            
            
               The .ii. Chapiter. ¶The maner of caſtyng mony to the people, Newyeres giftes, daunſyng, Ma
                     •
                  
                  yng, Chriſtenmas lordes.
               
                  
                  
                     IT ſmelleth alſo of gē
                  tilite, that the biſhop of Rome, emperours, and Kynges at theyr coronacion are wont 
                     •
                  o ſcatre mony amōg the commons,Caſtyng of mony abrode & make royall feaſtyng, whiche is a pretence or comforte of the benificence or liberalitie, that is to come afterwarde. For the old Romaynes vſed the ſame order and inſtitucion in their triumphes, games, and funeral, as Suetonius recordeth.Newe yeres gyftes. Geuyng of newyeres giftes had it original there likewyſe for Suetonius Tranquillus reporteth that the knightes of Rome gaue yerely on the calendes of Ianuary a preſēt to Auguſtus Caeſar, although he were abſent. Whiche cuſtome remayneth in England, for the ſubiectes ſend to their ſuperiours, and the noble perſonages geue to the kynges ſome great gyftes, and he to gratifye their kyndeneſſe doeth liberally rewarde them with ſome thyng again. But I commende more the maner of the Italians,The laudable maner of the Italians. for there the richeſt and moſt noble geue to the poore inferiours,

it is a ſignificacion of good & proſperous fortune of al the whole yere then folowyng.
               
                  Daunſyng.
                  THE vſe of daūſyng Liuie ſaieth came from the Hetruſcanes to Rome whiche we exerciſe muche on holye daies as they did, not without ſlaunder of our religion, and hurte and damage of chaſtitee, as for maſkes they be ſo deuiliſhe that none honeſty can be pretended to coloure them:Maſkes. 
                  Zacharias biſhoppe of Rome made a decree againſt it, but that auaileth nothyng. At the calendes of Maie the youthe aswell menne as women are wonte to go a maiyng into the feldes and bryng home boughes & floures to garniſhe their houſes and gates,Maiyng. and in ſome places the churches, whiche faſhion is deriued of the Romaynes, that vſe the ſame to honor their godeſſe Flora with ſuche ceremonies whom thei named godeſſe of fruites.
               
                  Chriſtenmas lordes.
                  THE chriſtenmas lordes, that be cōmonly made at the natiuitee of our lorde, to whom all the houſholde and familie with the maſter him ſelf muſt be obedient, began of the equabilitie that the ſeruauntes had with their

maſters in Saturnus feaſtes, that wer called Saturnalia: wherin the ſeruaū
                  tes haue like autorite with their maſters duryng the tyme of the ſayde feaſtes.
               And this furniſhyng of our bellies with delicates,Faſtins euen. that we vſe on faſtingham tuieſday, what tyme ſome eate tyl they be enforſed to forbeare all again, ſprong of Bacchus feaſtes, that were celebrated in Rome with great ioy and deliciouſe fare.
               
                  AND oure Midſomer bonefyres may ſeme to haue comne of the ſacrifices of Ceres goddeſe of corne,Bonefyres. that menne did ſolemniſe with fyres, truſting therby to haue more plenty and aboundance of corne: And the diſguiſyng and mummyng that is vſed in chriſtenmas tyme in the Northe partes came out of the feaſtes of Pallas,
                  Diſguiſyng. that were done with viſars and painted viſages named Quinquatria of the Romaynes.
            
            
               The .iii. Chapiter. ¶The maner of annoyntyng prieſtes, kynges,, them that be chriſtened, confirmed or ſore ſicke.
               
                  
                  
                     WHAT TYME Moſes had buylded the tabernable, he was cōmaunded to make a confection of holy oyntmēt, wherwith bothe ye worke, the veſſels, prieſtes, and alſo kynges whiche be called to that office or dignitie,Kynges and prieſtes were anoynted. ought to be enoyled: So that it came to paſſe that the annoyntyng was the very token & difference wherby kynges were knowen among the Hebrues,
                     Anointyng is the token of kynges.
                     Purple robe is the difference of the Emperoure. Aaron and Saul fyrſt anoynted.
                   as ye Emperours in Rome were knowen by their purple robes. Aaron and his ſonnes were the fyrſt annoynted prieſtes, and Samuel enoyled Saul fyrſt kyng ouer Iſrael, and ſo conſequentely it grewe into a cuſtome that prieſtes & kynges were annoynted. By whiche thyng is ſignified that they be ſpecially fauored of God, and like as oyle lyeth a lofte on the water,The nature of oyle. or other liquore, ſo the offyce of a Prieſt and dignitie of a Prince ſurmoūteth all other degrees of miniſters, both y• in actiue and alſo contemplatiue lyfe.
               
                  
                  Silueſter biſhoppe of Rome ordayned fyrſt that al that were chriſtened, churches, and chalices ſhould be annoynted with oyle. Our oyle,Anoyntyng of children chriſtened, Churches, Chalices. The cōfection of our oile that is nowe vſed is made of oyle Oliue, and natural Balme, Fabianus commaunded that it ſhould be renewed euery Maundy thurſeday.
               
                  Clemente the fyrſte ordayned that all children and other that were chriſtened ſhould be annoynted agayne with Criſme, and he inſtituted alſo the ſacrament of Confirmacion,Chriſme. Cōfirmacion ſuppoſyng that no manne were a perfect chriſten manne, yf that rite and ceremonye were by negligence omitted. For this cauſe, that the holy Ghoſt might more plentyfully be geuen to them by the handes of the biſhop.
               This thyng beganne of the example of the Apoſtles, whiche ſent Peter & Iohn into Samarie to lay their handes on them, that they might receyue the holy Ghoſt. It is onely miniſtered by a byſhoppe in this wyſe,The maner of confirmyng. fyrſt he aſketh the name of the child & then maketh the ſigne of the croſſe in his forehed with the C
                     •
                  iſme: ſaiyng, I ſigne the with the token of ye croſſe

and confirme the with the criſme of ſaluacion. In the name of the father the ſonne and the holye ghoſt, yt thou maye be repleniſhed with the holye ſpirite and haue euerlaſtyng life, ſobeit. And then he ſmiteth the cheke of the child ſoftely, but if it be of a great age, he geueh a ſharpe ſtroke, that he may remembre that miſterie, ſaiyng, peace be with the.Felix. 
                  Felix the fourth did inſtitute that ſuche aswere in extremes ſhould be enoyled, folowyng the example of the Apoſtles,Exteme vnction. whiche, as Marke witneſſeth, cured manye diſeaſes by annoyntyng them, and ſaint Iames ſpeaketh of a like thing in his Epiſtle.
            
            
               The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of mariage of prieſtes, when it was forboden, with other lawes touchyng mariage.
               
                  
                     MOSES the miniſter of God amonſt the Iſraelites, whiche were deſirouſe to augmente and amplifie their iſſue, ordayned that all menne indifferently, as well prieſtes as laie

people ſhould take wifes, leaſt the debarryng theim from Matrimonie, might bee occaſion of greater enormitie and inconueniencie emong thē. Albeeit bycauſe of the dignitie of the order of prieſthode he made reſtraint that thei ſhould mari none,Whē a prieſt mighte not mary. that was taken priſoner, bonde woman, or deuorſed from their former houſebandes, and the biſhoppes might not bee maried but too maydes. As concernyng our prieſthod,
                     Silueſter. Biſhoppes maried maides.
                     A prieſt might but mary on
                           •
                        
                     
                   
                  Silueſter the firſt after the texte of ſainct Paule, commaunded that a prieſte ſhould mary but one wife, and after to liue ſole alone: As Paule had a wife, as maie appeare in his Epiſtles too the Philippians and Corinthians. And Clement biſhoppe of Alexandria and Ignatius whiche was in Paules time witneſſe theſame.Paule.
               
               
                  PETER and Philip had wifues and doughters,Peter & Philip had wifes whom thei beſtowed honeſtly in mariage to houſebandes. And ſainct Peter ſeyng his wife led to death for the profeſſion of Chriſte, with greate reioyce of her conſtancie ſaied, wife remembre the lorde. This ordre the Grekes, and all the Eaſte

partes of Chriſtendome vſe, whiche would not conſent to the counſail of Nice, wherein it was propounded that the prieſtes ſhould forſake their wifes:Panu
                        •
                     ius withſtode the counſaill of Nice. And namely Panutius the holy and chaſte biſhoppe that came out of the borders of Egipte withſtoode that decre very earneſty. Siricius the firſt forbade the prieſtes of the Weſt parties and deacōs to mary, the yere of our Lorde thre hundred thirty and ſeuen. He inſtituted alſo that he that either wedded a widdowe, or tooke a ſecond wife, could not be made prieſt. Pelagius the ſecond enforſed the ſubdeacons,Subdeacons forſake their wifes. to forſake their wifes. And Gregorius, bicauſe he thought it violent to deuorce theim ordained that from his tyme none ſhould bee ſubdeacon on leſſe he vowed chaſtitee before. Notwithſtandyng the lawes afore made toke no effect emōg ye prieſtes of the Weſte parties vntill the tyme of Gregory the ſeueth whiche was the yere of our lorde .M.lxxiiii.Gregory ſtabliſhed the ſingle life of priſtes.
               
               
                  AND here Polydore proteſteth that the ſyngle life of prieſtes dooeth more harme to the religion, ſhame to the ordre, and griefe to honeſt menne,

then their conſtrained chaſtite profiteth: if thei wer reſtored to the libertie, and choſe it were no preiudice to the chriſten common wealth, and honeſty for the ordre. In the beginnyng menne maried their ſiſters and kinſwomen,Degrees of kindred inhibited. but Moſes reſtrained theim of the Hebrues from the firſt and ſeconde degrees, and Fabianus forbad the third and fourth whiche cuſtome ſtādeth now in effect. Theodorus did inhibite firſt that a manne might not mary that mayde,God brother & God ſiſter. to whō his father was a godfather. It was confirmed firſte by Gregory and after by Alexander the third, that no man ſhould mary his brothers wife leſt it ſhould bee thought to be a counterfet of the Hebrues.Lamech had twoo wifes. 
                  Lamech was the firſt that euer had two wiues, whoſe example many other enſued afterwarde. The cuſtome of purifiyng was taken of ye Hebrues,Purificacion of women at child beryng. but there is no daie or time appoincted for it. Neuertheleſſe for an honeſt order, thei vſe cōmonly not to be purified afore the moneth daie, & then with a few honeſt matrōs ſhe cōmeth accompained to the church, & offereth a waxe taper & the chriſome.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧The .v. Chapiter. ¶Of the temples, churcheyardes, when the croſſe was firſte had in reuerence.
               
                  
                     IN the old teſtement, Moſes ſette vp a tabernacle curiouſly edified to God wherin ſupplicacion and interceſſiō was made to hym for the ſinnes of the people.Moſes buylded a tabernacle. And in that he made the Arke of couenaūt in the whiche he put the twoo tables of ſtone,The Arke. conteignyng the lawe of the ten commaundementes, Aarons rod, and the potte of Manna. After hym Salomō kyng of the Hebrues made at Hieruſalē a temple of coſtly araie and ſumptuouſly wrought.Salomon made the firſt tēple to God I cannot (to ſaie trueth) perfectely tell where the firſte churche of chriſten menne was buylded,The firſte churche of chriſtians. but by all coniecture it ſemeth that it was made of the Apoſtles, either in Ethiopia, where Matthewe preached, or in lower Inde, where Bartholomewe taughte, or in Scythia, where Andrewe ſhewed the worde of God. Where thei doubtles either cauſed newe churches too bee edified, or els tranſpoſed the idolles temples to ſerue the chriſten mennes

vſe, aboliſhyng ſuperſticion, & plantyng the true religiō of Chriſt. Albeit it were not againſt reaſon to ſuppoſe there was a temple or hous of praier appoyncted by Iames at Hieruſalē.
               
                  IN Rome the firſt that I reade of was cōſecrated by Pius biſhoppe of Rome in the ſtrete called Patricius at Nouatus bathes in honour of the virgin Prudentia,
                  Firſt churche in Rome. at the requeſte and ſuite of Praxedis her ſiſter. And after Caliſtus made a temple to the virgin Mari in a place beyōde Tyberis, and inſtituted a churcheyarde in Appius ſtrete,A churchyard and called it after his owne name:Abraham ordaigned the firſte place of buriall. notwithſtandyng Abraham was the firſt that made any place of buriall in Hebron, where he bought of Ephron an Hethite ye double caue for thre hundred ſicles of ſiluer with the grounde aboute it, and ther was Sara his wife and he himſelf buried.
               
                  NOHA buylded the firſte alter,
                     Noha buylded the firſt alter.
                     Bonifacius cauſed alters to be couered with lenyn clothes.
                   and offered vpō it a burned ſacrifice to the lord. And Bonifacius the third cauſed that thei wer couered with linen clothes. Conſtantinus when he had wonne the battaill againſt Maxentius, by reaſon of a viſion that he

ſawe of the croſſe the daie of the battaill,Cōſtātine for bade puttyng too death on the croſſe. ordained that from thēce furth no manne ſhould ſuffre death on the croſſe. And ſo in proceſſe of tyme it was had in muche reuerēce and worſhip. And Theodoſius made a lawe that there ſhould no Image of the croſſe bee grauen in ſtone,
                     No Image of the croſſe mighte not bee grauen in yearth.
                     Helene found the croſſe.
                   marble, or in yearth, leſt men ſhould tread on it. Helene Conſtantines mother a verie vertuouſe woman repaired too Hieruſalem, to ſeke the croſſe of our lord where with greate laboure and diligence ſhe found it, and with it the other twoo whereon the theues were hanged, but it was eaſy to perceiue Chriſte his croſſe by the title, whiche then did remain, albeeit ſore waſted and corrupted with antiquitee.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. Chapiter. ¶Of the auncient rite of ſacrificyng, feaſtfull daies, dedicatyng temples, the miſtery of Fire, holy Water.
               
                  Cain and Abel ſacrificed firſte.
                  
                     CAIN and Abell the two ſonnes of our firſt father Adam offered in ſacrifice to GOD the firſte fruites of their goodes. Abell his oblacion

was milke. Cain his gyfte was corne. Afterward, whē the prieſthode was ordained, Aaron and his ſonnes offered diuerſe thynges with ſundry ceremonies, whiche be ſhewed at large in the boke of Leuiticus. The Gē
                  tiles almoſte all ſacrificed to ye idols men or women after ſundry rites,Menne were ſacrifyced by the Gentiles. as appeareth in the hiſtories & Gentile auctours. And if it fortune that thei omitted any ſuche abhominable idolatry, thei had greate puniſhment,Puniſhmētes that thei ſuffred for omittyng the oblacions. deſtrucciō of their fruite, corrupcion of their waters, infeccion of ye aire deth of catel, greate droughtes, womē had eiuill deliueraunce, with many ſuche plages, as Dioniſius Hilicarnaſſeus witneſſeth, which the ſpirites of the aire procured to delude & ſeduce men and confirme theim in their errour.
               
                  THE holy daies emong the Iewes were diuerſe,Holy daies. as the Sabboth daie, the feaſte of ye newe Moone, the paſſeouer, the feaſte of ſwete breade, Pentecoſt, the feaſt of Tabernacles, the dedicaciō daie: whiche bee al ſhewed largely in the olde Teſtament.
               The vſage of dedicating churches is of great antiquitie,Dedicatyng of churches. for Moſes did

ſacrifice the tabernacle, & Salomon conſecrated the temple that he buylded at Hieruſalem. And Eſdras after, when thei returned from the captiue of Babilō hallowed the temple newe again. Of them we receiue our rite of hallowyng of churches, albeit we haue mo ceremonies thē thei had.
               
                  Fire.
                  FIRE was kepte continually on the alter by the prieſtes, for without it and ſalte could no ſacrifice bee duly made or ordinarely offred, and we in oure Maſſes haue euer a taper of waxe burnyng. And the emperoures of Rome had Fire bourne afore thē,Emperoures of Rome had fire bourne afore theim. & the Veſtales had euer perpetual Fire in the tēple where thei ſerued Veſta.
               
               
                  THE ſpirites of ye aire, that gaue doubtfull anſweres to them that required any queſtion of theim, wer at the commyng of Chriſte all deſtroyed For what tyme he was caried into Egipte,Oracles ſeaſed at Chriſte his comming whiche is a countree full of ſuperſticion and Idolatry, all the Idoles of that region wer ouerthrowē & fell to the ground at his commyng thither. And in the tyme of Adriane the Emperoure, bothe the wicked ſacrifices wer abholiſhed, and alſo the

oracles of Apollo at Delphos, Iupiter Hammon in Egipte, with like vanities wer ſubuerted bi the power of God through his ſōne Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  HOLY water was ordaigned by Alexander the firſt to be conſecrated to driue away ſpitites,Holy Water and was commaunded that it ſhould bee kepte as well in churches, as in priuate houſes for theſame vſe: whereof are growen emong the commō people many ſuperſticiouſe erroures contrary to the woorde of God, and therefore it wer no harme if the fourme of conſecratyng therof wer redreſſed, & chaū
                  ged into a more godly faſhion.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .vii. Chapiter. ¶Who ordaigned praiyng, why wee loke Eaſtward, preachyng the Sacramente of the alter.
               
                  
                     FOR ſo muche as wee are created of God after his owne Image, for the entente to honoure and ſerue hym▪ and ſo finally too enioye the eternal enheritaunce of heauen,Praier. whiche we muſte attain to by praier acknowledgyng

oure owne infirmitie, and referryng vs to the mercie of our moſte louyng father. It ſhall bee conuenient therfore to declare ye inſtitucion of praier.
               
                  Prayer was at the beginnyng.
                  PRAIER therefore was frō the beginnyng, as Abel praied, Noha, Abrahā, Iſaac, Iacob, with other Patriarkes praied to GOD in all their doubtfull affaires, & gaue thankes for the good acheuyng of theim Moſes & Aaron with other as Anna the wife of Helcana ſhewed vs example of praier:Chriſt preſcribed a praier. But Chriſt is the firſt that did ſhewe to vs any ſpeciall fourme of praier, as appeareth in the Goſpel of Matthew. Afterward, when men began to coumpte & reken their praiers, as though God were in our debt for often beggyng of hym, there wer diuiſed by one Petrus Heremita a Frenchman of the citee of Amias bedes to ſaie lady pſalters on,Beades. the yere of our Lorde a thouſande .xc. that is foure hundred .lvi. yeres ago. The maner of turnyng our faces into the Eaſte when wee praie,Turning our faces Eaſtewarde. is taken of the old Ethnikes, whiche as Apuleius remēbreth, vſed to loke Eaſtwarde and ſalute ye ſonne: we take it in a cuſtom

to put vs in remembraunce yt Chriſte is the ſonne of righteouſnes, that diſcloſeth all ſecretes. But that was not lawfull for the Hebrues as maie ſeme to vs by the ſettyng of ye tabernacle, & thei muſte euer looke toward the temple as the ſtory of Daniell declareth. Moſes whē he had receiued the ten cōmaundementes, aſſembling the people together ſhewed them the will of God, and that was the firſte ſermon or preachyng:Preachyng. and the prophetes had without doubt open collacions:Ihō Baptiſt. And afterwarde Ihon Baptiſte in the wilderneſſe of Iury preached, and ſo did Chriſte hymſelf and gaue autoritie to ye Apoſtles & diſciples by ſpecial cōmaundemēt to do theſame.
               
                  THE bleſſed ſacramēt of the alter was inſtituted by our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt,The inſtituciō of the ſacrament. a litle before his paſſiō in Hieruſalē at his ſupper, whē he had ended ye Paſchal lābe, in this wiſe: He toke bread, & after he had giuen thankes, he brake it, & gaue it to his diſciples ſaiyng, take and eate, this is my body yt ſhalbe giuen for you: And takyng the cup gaue likewiſe thākes, & toke it to theim ſaiyng, drynke all of

this, for this is my bloudde of the newe teſtamente, whiche is ſhed for the remiſſion of ſynnes. This vnder the fourme of breade & wyne he gaue to theim particularely his body and bloud ſanctified in and by the word? And gaue commaundement that like ſacrifice ſhould bee made in remembraūce of hym.Alexander decreed that the Sacramente ſhould be conſecrated of ſwete breade. 
                  Alexander the biſhop of Rome did ordain that this oblaciō ſhould be made of ſwete bread, wher afore it was leuened breade. And he commaunded that water ſhould bee mixte with wyne in the cuppe.
            
            
               The .viii. Chapiter. ¶Who ſacrificed firſt after Chriſtes tradicion, and encreaſed the partes of Maſſe.
               
                  
                     EVERY thyng at the firſt in the miſtery of the lordes ſupper was plain ſincer and without any miſture of ceremonies,The olde rite of conſecratyng. conteinyng more vertue then ſolemnite. For it is manifeſt that Peter, whiche either firſt of all, or els with the reſt of Apoſtelles did conſecrate often tymes after the rite

that he had receiued of Chriſt by and by after the conſecraciō ioyned to the Lordes praier or Pater noſter: And I ſuppoſe it was not muche differyng from the Maſſe that is vſed in the churche on good Frydaie. Celeſtinus ordaigned the praiers that the prieſt ſaieth when he reueſteth hymſelf to Maſſe or at puttyng on his clothes, that begynneth Iudica me deus. &c.
                  
                     Iudicame deus.
                   Albeeit it ſemeth by the woordes of Chriſoſtome in ye .xi. homely on Mathewe that it was taken of the churches of Grece and Aſia, whiche vſed to ſyng pſalmes while the people aſſembled together. Damaſus inſtituted the confeſſion at the beginnyng of Maſſe,
                     Confi
                           •
                        eor.
                   and ſome referre it to Pontianus. Kyrië eleëſon was frequēted in Grece firſt,
                     Kyrie eleeſon.
                   and Gregorius cauſed it to bee ſaied nyne tymes in the latine churche.
                     Gloria ī excelſis
                   
                  Gloria in excelſis is aſcribed of ſome too Teleſphorus, of ſome to Hylarius, of ſome to Symmachus, and the counſaill of Toletane thynketh that the doctoures of the churche made it:Collectes. Collectes Gelaſius & Gregory gathered.Grayle. And the grayle was appoyncted by theim alſo.
                     Alleluya▪
                     
                   
                  Alleluya
                  
was trāſlated from Hieruſalē to the latyne churche in the tyme of Damaſus. The tract Durandus ſaith was diuiſed by Teleſphorus, and ſequences were inuented firſte by one Nothgerus an Abbot.Sequences. Epiſtle. Goſpell. The Epiſtles and Goſpell were (as Hierom wryteth) vſed in the Eaſt churches of verie auncient tyme, wherefore I ſuppoſe wee had the maner to reade the Epiſtle & Goſpell of thoſe churches: albeit ſome ſaie Teleſphorus ordaigned theim,
                     Saincte Hierome did deuide the Epiſtles and Goſpelles.
                     Standing at the Goſpell.
                   & ſome ſuppoſe that Hierom at the requeſt of Damaſus did diuide theim, as we reade them now at this daie. Anaſtaſius commaunded yt we ſhould ſtand at the Goſpell in tokenyng that menne ſhould be in a redineſſe to defend the doctryne of the Goſpell.
                     Credo.
                   The firſt part of the Crede Marcus ordaigned to bee red, after it was made by the coūſaill of Nicene: And the ſecond part Et ſpiritum ſanctum, that the counſaill of Conſtantinople compoſed Damaſus cauſed to be read in ye churche. Entichianus inſtituted the offertory to bee ſongen whileſt the people offred ſuche thynges, as wēt to the relief and comfort

of the poore:Offertory. The offertory remaigneth, but the pouertie is forgotten as though thei had no part in Chriſt and were vile abiectes of the worlde.
               
                  Gelaſius made the prefaces,Prefaces. howbeeit in the beginnyng thei vſed but one preface. And Sextus putte to the ſanctus out of the Prophete Eſaias. Waſhyng of handes beganne either of the olde teſtament,Waſhyng of the handes. where thei did nothyng with vnwaſhed handes, or els of the Gētiles, whiche afore their ſacrifices vſed too waſhe their handes, as Heſiodus witneſſeth.
               
                  BVRNYNG of encenſe,Enſence. yt was occupied in the old teſtament by Aaron and of the Panimes in their ſuperſticiouſe rites, Leo ye third ordaigned to be had in the latyne churche. The priuitie of the Maſſe called the Canon was made by diuerſe perſones, as Gelaſius made Te igitur.
                  Canon. 
                  Sitirius added Communicātes, and Alexander the firſte, that was long before them, made Qui pridie,
                  
                     Qui pridie.
                   and that was the beginnyng of the Canon before that tyme. For Alexander was three hundred .lx. yeres & more before Gelaſius. Hanc igitur Leo ioyned,
                     Hanc igitu
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
and Gregory annexed three peticiōs in theſame Dies
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      noſtros, and ſo furth. Innocentius the firſt inſtituted that prieſteſt in the vpper part of the churche, called the Chanſell or quire ſhould kiſſe one another, and that Pax bourne ſhould be bourne to the people.Pax. 
                  Bleſſyng with chalices Bleſſyng with hādes and Chalices came oute of the Hebrues ceremonies: For Aaron after he had ſacrificed, bleſſed the people. And Chriſt at his aſſencion bleſſed his diſciples.
                     Agnus dei.
                   
                  Sergius ordained the Agnus dei ſeuen hundred yeres after Chriſte to bee ſong of the Clergy at the tyme of the cōmunion. The often turnyng of the prieſte at the alter,Turnyng aboute of the prieſte. when he ſaieth Dominus nobiſcum or Orate fratres, came of the Hebrues rites, wherein ſacrifice tyme the prieſt turneth hym to caſte the bloudde of the ſacrifice on the people, and the Ethnikes vſed theſame faſhion in their ſuperſticions, and therfore doubtles we had theſe ceremonies of theim.
            
            
               The .ix. Chapiter. ¶Why wee ſaie Ite miſsa est, whereof the worde maſſe and ceremony came, the firſt maner of takyng the Sacramente.
               
                  
                  
                     WHEN Maſſe is ended the Deacon turnyng to the people ſaieth, Ite miſſa eſt,
                  Ite miſſa eſt. whiche wordes are borowed of the rytes of the Paganes, & ſignifyeth that then the cōpany may be dimiſſed. It was vſed in the ſacrifices of Iſis, that when the obſeruaū
                  ces wer duely and fully perfourmed and accōpliſhed, then a ſcrel or miniſter of the religion ſhould geue warnyng or a watche worde what tyme they might lawfully departe: And of this ſprong oure cuſtome of ſyngyng Ite miſſa eſt, for a certayne ſignificaciō that the ful ſeruice was finiſhed.
               Maſſe is an Hebrue word (as Reucline ſaieth) and ſignifyeth an oblacion or ſacrifice with all circumſtances concernyng the ſame.Maſſe.
               
               ¶The Romaynes called all ſuche ſeruyce, as appertained to their goddes,Ceremonies. in one general name ceremonies bycauſe a certaine people named Cerites, whiche receyued deuoutely the reliques, and other obſeruaunces of the Romaynes religious, and preſerued them, for when the Frenchemen

by the valiauntnes of their captaine (Brennius that was an Engliſhe-man) had wonne the Cytie, for whiche benifyte al the rites of their goddes vniuerſally were named ceremonies.
               
                  Alexander inhibited prieſtes, that they ſhould not ſacrifice, but once on the day,
                     One Maſſe on a day.
                     Thre Maſſes on Chriſtmas day.
                   and Teleſphorus permitted them to ſaye thre Maſſes on Chryſtmaſſe day: Fyrſt at mydnight what tyme Chryſt was borne, the ſeconde in the mornyng, when the ſhepherdes viſited him, the thyrde at further of the day, where afore tyme it was not lawfull to celebrate afore the thyrde houre of the day.
               
                  Felix the fyrſt decreed yt no Maſſe myghte be ſayde but in places conſecrated,Maſſe muſt be ſayd in places cōſecrated ſauyng in the tyme of neceſſitie, and that none but prieſtes admitted ſhould intermeddle with the miſteries of conſecracion, bycauſe that auctoritie was onely geuen to the Apoſtles at the beginnyng, by whom prieſtes be ment and vnderſtand.
               
                  Corner maſſes be forbodden.
                  Anacletus ordained that no Maſſe ſhould be done, but in the preſence of two at the leaſt, leſt the prieſt ſhould

ſaye in vayne to the walles Dominus vobiſcum, when none were preſent, and therfore they do euyl that conſecrate in corners alone. Albeit, Gratianus referreth that to Soterus whiche perchaunce dyd renewe that conſtitucion.
               The Sacrament was vſed of oure predeceſſours in the primatiue churche euerye daye as Luke wytneſſeth in the Actes of the Apoſtles,Dayly communion. and Anacletus cauſed it to be renewed by a decree vpon payne of excomynicacion: And Victor denounced that thoſe ſhould be interdited from al ſeruices,Vncharitable perſons were interdited from ſeruice. that when they ſhould receiue the Sacrament wolde not be reconciled to their neighbours of all grudges hatreddes, and diſpleaſures.
               
                  Zepherinus an hundreth yeare after Anacletus commaunded that all that ꝓfeſſed Chryſt or bare the name of Chriſtians, beyng of the age of .xii. or .xiiii. yeres ſhould at the leaſt once in the yere at Eaſter receyue the bleſſed Sacrament.Takyng of the houſel at Eaſter. 
                  Fabianus decreed that they ſhould receyue it thryſe in the yere.
               
                  
                  Innocentius the thyrde decreed that the Sacrament ſhould be kept in the Churches,Kepyng the Sacrament in Churches. to the intent to be in a redyneſſe at all tymes, leſt they that were ſycke ſhould want that ſpiritual comfort in that troubleſome tyme of death, and Honorius the third confirmed the ſame.
            
            ¶The ende of the abrydgement of the fifth booke.
         
         
            
            The ſixt booke.
            
               The fyrſt Chapiter. ¶Auricular Confeſſion.
               
                  
                     ALBEIT man redeamed with the precyouſe blod of our ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus is fully recōſiled to God,We be reconciled bi Chriſt and all the heauyneſſe of hys diſpleaſure be appeaſed: yet the poyſoned nature of mā is ſuche, the occaſions of ſynne be ſo many and great, that in this ſlipper way of worldely lyfe we muſt nede, our infirmitie enforcyng vs therto, fal into the ſnares of the deuyl and ſynne. But God, as he is all mercy,Repentaunce a remedy of ſynne. willyng the death of no ſynner, but that he conuerte and lyue, hath lefte vs the comfortable ſalue of repentaunce, as a preſent remedy againſt all ſuche incurſions of oure enemye, or fragilitye of bodye) whereby we maye with a good hope cal to our heauenly father for the forgeuenes of oure offences and treſpaſes. For as the prophet Ezechiel recordeth,

what houre ſoeuer the ſinner doth lament and is repentant for his ſinnes, god (for his ſōne Ieſus ſake) wil no lēger 
                     •
                  ere thē in remēbraunce Therfore whoſoeuer with concupiſcence vanquiſhed,Deſperacion is forbodden. or by luſt inforced by errour diſceyued, or by force conſtrained doth fal to any ſpice or kynd of iniuſtice, let him not diſpair in his owne conſcience, or miſtruſt the bottomles mercy of God, but with good corage repair to this medicine repentaunce and cōtricion of heart. Conſequently it ſhalbe the penitētes offyce and dutie, after ſuche heuines taken, as it were by a vomit, to ſpue out of his cōſcience al ſuche vnholſome thinges as might remayne ſtyl, engendre deſperacion, or imbecil his hope in ye promiſes of God.Auticular Confeſſion. For this cauſe confeſſion named auricular, that is made to the prieſt, was at the beginnyng inſtituted: that men might therin open their heartes to their curates and receiue at their handes the oyle of the Goſpel of Chriſt to ſupple their rawe & ſtarke ſores. It was the inſtitucion of Innocentius the .iii. that ſo many,Innocencius dyd ordayne confeſſion to the prieſt. as were by age ſubiect or in daunger

to cōmit ſinne, ſhould at ye leſt once in the yere be cōfeſſed to their curates, to whō it cōcerneth to knowe the behauour of his pariſhners, forſomuch as he muſt rēdre a ſtrait accōpt of his cure. And therfore it is euil in myne opiniō to haue theſe comon penitēciaries, whiche be occaſion,Common penitencers. that both curates geue not their coūſel wher nede is, & alſo men therby be more bold to ſynne ſeyng they ſhal not be rebuked of ſuche common confeſſours, but for their monye haue redy abſolucion wt ſmal exhortacion to amend their ſinfulnes. This cōfeſſion is proued of ye text of ſ. Iames where he ſaieth confeſſe your ſinnes one to another,Textes prouyng confeſſion. and one pray for another, & alſo of the .xx, chapter of Iohn, wher Chriſt ſaieth, receiue the holy ghoſt. Whoſe ſinnes ſoeuer you remitte, they are forgeuen them, and whoſe ſynnes ſoeuer you reteine, they are reteined. Therefore we muſt receiue confeſſion for the abſolucion ſake, that is geuen into the handes of the miniſters.
            
            
               The .ii. Chapiter. ¶Matyns, ſingyng of pſalmes by courſe, Legendes of ſainctes.
               
                  
                  Matyns Pryme and houres.
                  
                     MATINS with Pryme and houres wer appointed fyrſt by Hierom, for one Euſebius of Cremona & diuerſe other, that liued with him, to ye entent that they might haue certain laudes and praiſyng of God to ſyng in the churches And the fathers and old gouernours of congregacions receyued them folowyng this verſe of Dauid in the .c.xix. pſal. Seuen tymes in ye day haue I geuen and ſong praiſe to the. Cipriane writeth that the Pryme and other houres toke their originall of Daniel. Whiche after the cuſtome of his countre, thriſe in ye day, mornyng noone, & euenyng, on his knees vſed to praye. It was alſo the rite of the Heathen to haue mornyng prayers,Apuleius de aſino aureo libro .xi. for Apuleius ſaieth that their religious, when all thynges were duely finiſhed, ſong ſalutacions of the newe light, and ſhewed that it was Prime of the daye, where he meaneth by ſalutacions the mornyng ſonges that we cal Matyns, and there declareth howe the houres of the day were ſorted and deuided for ſacrifices & prayers.

                  Pelagius the ſecōd was the fyrſt that cōmaunded prieſtes to ſay them daily,Pelagius charged prieſtes to ſay maryns daily that like as the iuſt mā falleth vii. tymes on the daye, ſo by inſtante & continual praier he might as often ryſe and amende. Gregorius put to the beginnyng of euery houre,
                     
                        Deus in adiutorium was added by Gregory.
                     Lady matyns
                   
                  Deus in adiutorium, and Gloria patri. &c.
               
                  Vrbanus the ſeconde ordayned the lady Mattyns to be ſayd dayly, and cōfirmed them in the counſel, whiche he had at mount Clare in Fraunce.
               The diuiſion of Dauids pſalter in to .vii. partes called nocturnes,Nocturnes. accordyng to the .vii. dayes in the weke, was the worke of Hierome at the requeſt of Damaſus biſhoppe of Rome, whiche alſo gaue cōmaūdement that it ſhould be redde ſo in the churches, and added Gloria patri to the end of euery pſalme.Who made Gloria patri.
                   The Gloria patri was made in the counſel of Nicene.
               
                  Damaſus alſo inſtituted that the pſalmes ſhould be ſong and ſayd by courſe,Syngyng Pſalm
                        •
                     s by courſe. Albeit ſome ſay Ignatius did deuyſe that afore his tyme, whiche thyng was learned of Dauid or Aſaph, for in the olde ſinagoge they vſed to ſyng their pſalmes after that

ſorte, but oure ſingyng is farre from their maner. For our ſingers cry out ſo loude, that we heare nothyng ſaue a noyſe, and thoſe that be preſent can not be edified with the word. It wer great furtheraunce to the religion, if thoſe ſingers not far vnlike to Iaies were either vaniſhed out of the temples,Our cōmon ſingers be rebuked. or elles their ſyngyng were ſo modifyed with more ſoberneſſe, that the wordes myght be vnderſtande to the edifiyng of the layitie, whiche is ſore blinded with ſingyng and ſound of inſtrumentes, that be not fyt to edifye but to delight the eares. This modeſt ſingyng was vſed by the holy Athanaſius byſhop of Alexandria through all his prouince and dioceſe,Athanaſius as Auſten witneſſeth.
                     Libro confeſ. and .x.
                     The Crede was ſayd euery houre. Tunes of the hymnes.
                     Legendes.
                   
                  Damaſus commaunded that the cōmon Crede ſhuld be ſayd at euery houre. Vitalianus inuented the decente tunes, wherein the hymnes be ſong, and ioyned the Organs to them. Legendes of ſainctes were made the yere of our lorde D.ccc. by Paulus Diaconus and Iſuardus a monk at the deſire of Charles the great.Common Legendes. And forſomuche as the perſecucions wer ſo great that in the

time of Diocleſian ye emperour there died .xvii.M. chriſtē men within .xxx. daies ſpace, thei could not particulerly write al their lyues, but made certaine general Legendes of martyres, Cōfeſſours, virgyns, whiche we now cal the cōmon, & the fathers cōmaunded thoſe to be red in ye churche on ſuche ſainctes daies. Afterward many, thinkyng that they ſhould be hearde rather for their muche bablyng ſake, deuiſed ſundrye maners of praiyng & diuerſe vſes:
                     Vſes in the ſeruice.
                     Benettes vſe.
                   as Benettes mōkes had one vſe, Barnardes another, and Domynickes brethren had one order by thē ſelues, & euery prouincial byſhop made a ſeueral vſe in his dioceſe, and all were confirmed by the biſhoppes of Rome.
            
            
               The .iii. Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of faſtyng, almeſſe, Aduent, Lent, Embryng daies.
               
                  
                     FASTYNGE and Almeſſe deedes be as ſainct Auſten ſaieth, the two wynges of praier, wherewith it is made ſtrōger and lighter to flye into ye
                  
preſence of God, and be more acceptable in his ſight.Faſtyng. Faſtyng hath bene vſed frō the beginnyng of the worlde What tyme the fruite of the tree of knowing good and euyl was forbodden to our fyrſt parentes in Paradiſe bycauſe by ſuche abſtinence thei myghte obteyne and enioye the felicitie euerlaſtyng.Almeſſe. Almeſſe in lyke maner ſprong of the infirmitie and nedines of the nature of men: for as thei felte hunger, colde, nakednes, and ſuche other calamities, as be in our mortall lyfe, thei were conſtrayned to deſyre aide and ſuccour of other men, and of almes.Moſes made the fyrſt lawe of Almeſſe. Albeit Moſes was fyrſt that euer preſcribed any lawe of gyuyng almes, as apereth in the boke of Deutronomie. Thys charitable almes, muſt bee ſo freelye gyuen, that we exempte none from the vſe and part takyng of it, and as the ſcripture ſayth without reſpecte of parſonnes.
               As for faſtyng of that original proceded further,Fleſhe was not eaten before Noe. for the vſe of fleſh and wyne from Adam tyl the time of Noha was vnknowne. And Moſes forbare meate fortie dayes, and Helias dyd lykewyſe: Our ſauioure Chriſte

faſted the ſame ſpace. And God pardoned the Niniuites of their crimes becauſe they faſted with repētaunce.Example of faſtyng.
               
               The Iewes alſo in their lawe, ſo ofte as they either aſked any benifite of God, or would pacifie his wrath, or render thankes for his benefytes, or kept any ſolemne feaſtes vſed commonly to faſt. And certees he kepeth, 
                     〈◊〉
                   the true faſt,True faſt. whiche forbeareth 
                     〈◊〉
                   or forgoeth his ſupper, but he that mynyſheth his affections, abateth his anger, ſwageth hys pryde, modifieth his deſires, mortifieth his luſtes, ſuffereth paciently all aduerſitie, that chaunſeth to him, that mā is the true faſter, Albeit the other is a coadiutoure to that thyng and helpeth muche that purpoſe. Therfore to the intent we myght reclayme ſuche corrupcions of oure olde Adam, The Apoſtles dyd ordeyne the faſt of Lente,Lent. as Hierome in a piſtle to Mercella doth playnely declare. Wherfore they that referre it to Teleſphorus, be foulye diſceyued,Teleſphorus didappoint it afore Eaſter. for he dyd not inſtitute it fyrſt but appoint that it ſhould be kepte afore the Eaſter. And added another weke to it, that

we cal Quinquageſima. This weke he commaunded prieſtes to faſt more then the layitie,Quinquageſima. bicauſe yt thei, which ought to be holier then the reſt, ſhuld in this ordinarye faſt ſhewe more abſtinence thē other. The Apoſtles alſo inſtituted that .iii. wekes afore ye Natiuite of our Lord,
                     
                        ••
                     uent. named Chriſtmas ſhuld be ſolemnely faſted, which cōſtitucion was a while kept vniuerſally but afterward it was reſigned to the monkes and religious perſons. Caliſtus or as ſome thynke Vrbanus dyd begyn the Embringdaies quarterly for the preſeruacion and amplificacion of fruites ordayned for the ſuſtenaunce of man and beaſt.Embryngdaies. Albeit, I cā rather take it to be an imitacion of ye olde Romayne feaſtes,Romaynes had thre ſacrifices for fruites. whiche thriſe in the yere had ſacrifices for the proſperous ſucceſſe of their corne, one Vinalia for their wynes, the other Robigalia for all their grayne, leaſt it ſhould be mildued. The third Floralia for all their fruites. Theſe vayne ſuperſtitious old biſhoppes of Rome turned to a godly vſe,Superſticion turned into religion. and trāſpoſed their feaſtyng into faſtyng, that the rather at the contemplacion of oure

praiers and faſting, God might proſper the increſe of al the fruites to the ſuſtentacion of his creatures.
            
            
               The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶Watches were turned into faſtes, faſtyng of Fridaies and Wedneſdaies, namyng the daies of the weke in ſundry wiſe.
               
                  
                     IT was the maner, from the begynnyng of oure chriſten faith, that for ſo much as it pleaſed our ſauioure to be borne in the night,Watches. prieſtes dyd ryſe in the nighte ſeaſon, and ſong the houres canonical otherwyſe named the Matyus: & the laye people was accuſtomed on thoſe ſainctes euens, that were any ſolemne feaſtes, to watch at the tombes of Martyr spraiyng and ſingyng holy pſalmes. Which thing the teſtimony of Plinie doeth well approue, wher he writeth in a piſtle to Traiane, how that much nomber of people was ſlaine, in whom he could neuer eſpye any faulte, ſauyng that afore daye at certayne tymes and feaſtes

they aroſe, and ſong of cōmendacion of Chriſt, whom they called God. But as tyme is corrupter of al thynges worldely, in proceſſe as deuocion beganne to abate, in ſtead of hymnes they ſong diſſolute balades, & praier was turned into wanton daliaunce.
               The youth went about lyght amorous companye, the eldeſt perſonnes practiſed baudry, women were not aſhamed to geue them ſelues to be corrupted in al kynd of whordome. Vpō this occaſion the olde fathers, ſeyng leaſt it myght growe to a further in conuenience turned the Vigilles into faſtyng dayes.Vigilles wer made faſtes. Notwithſtandyng the prieſtes vſed their ordinarye tymes of ſeruyſe, as they were wont to do, and ſuche feaſtes were called by the name of Vigilles, and obſerued with no leſſe reuerence then the faſte of Lent. This remedy was prouided after ſainct Hieromes tyme, whiche died the yere of oure Lorde .cccc.xxii. when Bonifacius the ſeconde was biſhoppe of the ſea of Rome.
               The lyke cuſtome was alſo obſerued among the Egyptians,Egyptians rite in watches. whiche on the euens of theyr hyghe feaſtes

faſted, and after thei had ſlepte thei offered a cowe:Nighte ſacrifices ar abholiſhed. all ſuche night ſacrifices and obſeruances for like cauſes wer by a perpetuall lawe in Grece abrogated by Diagundas a Thebane. The faſte of wedneſdaie and Fridaie was cōmaunded by the fathers,Diagundas. Wedneſdaie Fridaie. bicauſe on the one daie Chriſt was crucified, and on the wedneſdaie Iudas purpoſed in his minde to betray him as Apolonius the eloquent oratoure ſuppoſed. Silueſter the firſt, biſhoppe of Rome,Daies were turned into feries. abhorryng the memorial of the vain Gentile godes, decreed that the daies of the weke, whiche had afore the names & titles of the Sonne Moone, Mars, Mercury, Iupiter, Venus, and Saturne, ſhould be called the firſt, ſecond, third, fourth, fifth, ſixte, ſeuenth ferie: in ſemblable maner as the Iewes coumpted their daies frō the Sabboth daie. He did alſo call ye firſte ferie Dominicus dies,
                  
                     Dominicus dies. Sundaie. Sabbatum.
                   that we name Sonday, and called Saturday Sabbatum of the olde holy daie and reſt of the Hebrues: al theſe thynges wer dooen at the ſute of Conſtantine then Emperour. Albeit the Apoſtles afore that tyme had conſecrated the

Sondaie to the Lorde, bicauſe that daie he roſe from death, & the Iewes Sabboth was turned into it, as maie appere by the decree of Pius, that ordained the Eaſter to bee kepte on the Sundaie,Eaſter is appointed on ye Sundaie. and therfore I thynke Silueſter did but onely renewe theſame acte of the Sundaie. It was the inuencion of the Egiptians yt the daies wer firſte named after the ſeuen planetes,Dayes were called of the Planetes. as Diodorus recordeth. Sācte Gregory was the authour that neither fleſhe, nor any thyng that hath affinitee with it,White meates is forbodē of faſtyng daies. as cheſe, milke, butter, egges ſhould bee eaten on ſuche daies as were faſted. Wee haue alſo a maner vſage of hallowyng the table, and meate afore wee bee ſet, that begonnen of the imitacion of Chriſt, whiche vſed theſame faſhiō ouer the fiue loues in the wilderneſſe, and at Emaus alſo he did inſemblable wiſe conſecrate the table in the preſence of his diſciples: ſo was the fourme of ſaiyng grace after ſupper taken like wiſe of the cuſtome that Chriſte commonly kept at his ſuppers.Grace at meate. 
                  Readyng the bible at meat The maner to reade apart of the Bible at dyner tyme hath been of long continuance,

and did proceade of the Godly doctryne, that Chriſte inſtructed his diſciples in at all tymes, but namely at his laſt ſupper, wherein he treated of ye perfecciō of al ye miſteries of our religiō. And thus our fathers, to kepe in memory ſuche an holſom inſtituciō did bryng in this maner of readyng the ſcripture at meate or meale tyme.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .v. Chapiter. ¶The originall of holy daies, Paſchall candelles, birthe daies.
               
                  
                     LYKE as the Iewes had in their law, whiche was but onely a ſhadawe of thynges too come, holy daies appoyncted for the execucion of the miſteries of their religion, whom thei in one generall terme named Sabboth dais,
                     Sabboth dayes of the Iewes.
                     Holy daies.
                   of the reſt and vacaſiō that thei had from bodely labours: ſemblably our fathers haue ordaigned feſtiuall daies in the new teſtament, wherein Chriſten men (all profane buſineſſes, and eiuil maters laied aparte) might wholy apply and bend themſelfes to Godly and ſpirituall meditacions.

As the peruſyng and readyng of ſcriptures,Workes due for ye holidaie heryng of deuoute ſermons, renderyng honor to God by ſacrificyng, praiyng, and well dooyng, bee woorkes fete and conuenient for the holy daie, and alſo reuerencyng the memoriall of ſainctes on ſuche daies as bee aſſigned to that purpoſe, is on the holy daie laudable. For oblacion is onely due to God as Paule & Barnabas did openly teſtifie at Liſtra. For whē he had commaunded by the power of the worde of God, that the man, whiche was lame from his mothers wombe ſhould ariſe and walke the people for wonder and maruaile of the miracle would haue dooen ſacrifice to them, but thei renting their clothes departed out of the preſe and with ſharpe woordes rebuked their enterpriſe, as a thyng vnmete to bee dooen to any mortall man, or worldly creature. Firſte of all the feaſte of Eaſter was inſtituted by ye Apoſtles,Eaſter is inſtituted bi the Apoſtles. and preſcribed by Pius the firſt to be ſolemniſed on the Sondaie. Afterward as it chaunſed that alteracion of that matter aroſe.Victor. 
                  Victor that was biſhop of Rome aboute the hundred

nynetie and ſixe yere of our lord decreed that it ſhould altogether bee kepte and celebrated on the Sondaie frō the fourtene daie of the firſte moneth, that was Marche,Eaſter is too bee kepte in Marche. vntill ye .xxii of the ſame, leaſt our ordre & coumpte ſhould agree with the Iewes, whiche kept it ſomewhat ſoner then that appoyntemente ſpeaketh of: albeeit many foreyne biſhoppes at the firſte refuſed that cōſtitucion, bicauſe thei thought it not out of caurſe or amiſſe to kepe that feaſte after the precident of ſaincte Ihon the Apoſtle,Sainct Ihon kept ye Iewes Eaſter. whiche renued euer the rite of the Iewes in the feaſt of Eaſter.
               
                  THE cuſtome of hallowyng Paſchall candelles on Eaſter euen was commaunded by Zozinus to bee frequented in euery churche.Paſchal candelles.
               
               
                  THE maner of kepyng holy the birthe daie of euery manne was muche vſed in Rome,Birthe daies albeit the Perſians had that vſage afore theim, for there it is the faſhion that euery manne after his habilite
                     •
                   ſhould with many obſeruances, and greate dentie feaſtes worſhip the daie of their birthe, and of theim the Romaines receiued

that ſuperſticion.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .vi. Chapiter. ¶Of the inſtitucion of holy daies, and canoniſyng.
               
                  AS you haue hearde ye ſanct Ihon the Apoſtle did celebrate the feaſt of Eaſter,Eaſter. euē ſo the other Apoſtles as it is ſaied wer authores not onely of the ſame Eaſter feaſt, but alſo ordained thoſe daies, wherin our ſauiour had doen any miſtery concernyng out ſaluacion or informaciō, ſhould be kept holy, and to the entent thei might be more reuerenced of their poſteritee, thei themſelfes kepte theim duryng their life very deuoutly: as the Sondaies.Feaſtes inſtituted by ye Apoſtelles. Aduent, the Natiuitee, Circū
                  ciſion and Epiphanie of our Lorde, the Purificacion of our lady called Candelmas, Lente, Palme Sondaie, Maundy Thurſdaie, when Chriſt after ſupper waſhed his diſciples feete Goodfridaie, Eaſter, the Aſcenſion, and Witſondaie. As for the feaſte of Pentecoſt was afore vſed of the Hebrues:
                     Pentecoſt.
                   for .l. daies after that the lābe

was ſacrificed in Egipt,, ye law written by the handes of God was giuen by Moſes in the Mount Oreb in the wildernes of Sinay. And .l. daies after the death of Chriſt, whiche like a lambe was offered of the Iewes for our Paſchal, the Apoſtles receiued ye lawe of the ſpirite. The feaſt of tranſfiguracion came alſo of the Iewes:Trāſfiguracion. for like as Moſes his face was tranſpoſed into a perfect brightnes, after he had commoned with GOD in the Mounte, ſo nowe after the ſhadowe and vaile wer taken awaie by Chriſt his comyng, it pleaſed God to ſhewe to his diſciples his tranſfiguracion, as a declaracion of the ſhadowe paſt and a figure or ſignificaciō of the immortalite to come. In conſideracion wherof the holy fathers perceiuyng the vſe of ſuche holy daies cōfirmed and ratified theim by a decree made in the coūſaill had at Liōs in Fraūce & furthermore commaunded that ſuche daies, as either our holy ſainctes departed this life, orels wrought ani miracle or did any notable deede to ye encreaſe of our religiō ſhould be kept holy, bycauſe chriſten people mighte

haue more oportunitee too heare the woorde of God, and more deuoutely ſerue hym in an vniforme ordre.
               
                  Feſtes inſtituted at the coū
                     ſaill of Liōs.
                  THEN were inſtituted the feaſtes of ſaincte Stephen, Inuocentes, Silueſter, Ihō Baptiſt, the Apoſtles daies. Conuerſion of Paule, our lady daies, Laurence, Michell, Martyne, and generally of all ſainctes,Alhallowday whiche was the conſtitucion of Bonifacius the fourth. For he cauſed that the tē
                  ple whiche Marcus Agrippa did edifie in honoure of all the Romaynes Idolles, as the name Pantheon doth pretende was by the licenſe of Phocas then Emperoure turned into the churche of all Hallowes, and conſecrated the twelfe daie of Maie:Gregori chaū
                     ged Alholow daie. and Gregory the fourth afterward willed it too bee kepte the firſte daie of Nouember.
               
                  Croſſe daies. Corpus Christi daie.
                  
                  THE feſtes of the inuencion and exaltacion of the croſſe, and Corpus Chriſti daie were dedicated by Vrbane the fourthe, and denounced for holy daies.Lāmas daie. 
                  Silueſter at the ſu
                     •
                  e and inſtance of the Emperou
                     ••
                   
                  Conſtantine aſſigned the daie of ad Vincula ſancti Petri called commonly Lammas

in memoriall of Peters paines, perſecucion, and puniſhment that he ſuffered for the religion. Felix ye firſt of purpoſe to magnifie the gloriouſe commendacion of Martyres,Memory of Martyres. made a ſtatute that yerely oblaciō ſhould be had in memoriall of theim: and Gregory would that Maſſe ſhould bee ſa
                     •
                  ed ouer their bodies, whiche thing Vigilantius thought woorthy to bee reiected, & refuſed, albeit the reporte goeth that Anacletus was of this cō
                  ſtitucion the firſt authour. The ſame Felix inſtituted firſte that the daie whereon any temple was dedicated,Dedication daies. ſhould bee hallowed of that village or toune, and made alſo a lawe that ſuche churches,Reconſiliacion of Churches. as menne doubted of whether thei wer conſecrated or no, ſhould be hallowed again. And Felix the fourth did ordain that biſhoppes onely ſhould dedicate them, and that the ſame dedicacion daie ſhould bee kepte holy yerely afterwarde.
               
                  THE faſhiō to deifie menne that had dooen any benefites to the common wealth,Deifiyng of ded menne or women. is one of the moſte auncient vſages, that I reade of. For antiquitee euen frō the beginnyng was

accuſtomed to make goddes of their kynges, whiche either by aboundāce of benefites, or notable qualites, and prowes had wonnen the heartes of their cōmons. And ſpecially the Romaynes did that with greate pompe of circumſtaunces: and many obſeruaunces as I did declare afore in the thirde booke out of Herodiane. Of theim our biſhoppes learned as by a paterne their rite of canoniſyng ſanctes,Canonyſyng of ſainctes. and the yerely ſacrifices, that Gregory and Felix appoyncted, cō
                  cerned nothyng els but too declare that thoſe Martyres were ſainctes and of the houſholde of God. Laſt of all Alexāder the third ordained that no ſuche diuine ſolemnitee ſhould be giuen to any man openly without he wer canoniſed,The Pope muſt alowe ſainctes, and admitted to bee a ſaincte by the biſhoppe of Rome his bulle, bicauſe no manne ſhould choſe hymſelf any priuate ſainct, or committe any peculiare Idolatry.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .vii. Chapiter. ¶Inſtitucion of yere daies or Obites, and the maner of Mournyng.
               
                  
                  
                     FVNERAL exequies,Diriges or exequies. that be dooen ouer ded bodies, were the inſtitucion of Pelagius albeeit Iſidorus aſcribeth the originall of it to the Apoſtles, and he hymſelf did augmente the rites, that wee vſe in this tyme. Ambroſe ſuppoſeth that it proceaded of the cuſtome of the Hebrues, whiche lamented Iacob fourty daies, and Moſes the ſpace of thirty daies, for that tyme is ſufficient for the wiſe to wepe in. It was alſo ye vſage of auncient Romaines to mourne:Mournyng. For Numa Pompilius aſſigned oblacions to the infernall goddes for the ded, and did inhibite that a childe vnder the age of three yeres ſhould bee bewayled,Lawes of mournyng and that the elder ſorte ſhould be mourned no mo monethes then he had lyued yeres. But commonly the lōgeſt tyme of a widowes mournyng was but tenne monethes,Tenne monethes was the commō tyme of weddyng. and if any were maryed within the ſpace agayne, it was coumpted a greate reproche, wherefore NVMA ordaygned that ſuche as had mourned vp

afore the daie limited,Expiacion of haſtye mariages. ſhould offer a cowe, that was greate with calfe for an expiacion. Neuertheleſſe if that rite wer vſed now a daies and namely in Englande, we ſhould haue ſmal ſtore of veales, there be ſo many that mary within ye tyme preſcribed. Plutarch writeth that the womē in their mournyng laied a parte all purple,Apparell in mournyng. gold, and ſumpteous apparell, & wer clothed bothe thei and their kinſfolk in white apparell, like as thē the ded body was wrapped in white clothes The white coloure was thought fitteſt for the dedde,White coloures for mournyng. bicauſe it is clere, pure, and ſyncer, and leaſte defiled, and when the tyme of their wepyng was expired, thei put on their other veſtures. Of this ceremonie, (as I take it,) the Frenche quenes toke occaſion,Frenche quenes in theyr widowehode weare white clothyng. after the death of their houſebandes the kynges too weare onely white clothyng, and if there bee any ſuche widdowe, ſhe is commonly called the white quene. The Iewes ended their mournyng after .xxx. daies and Engliſhe men kepe the ſame rite.Blacke garmentes of mournyng. The mournyng garmentes for the moſte parte bee altogether of blacke

colour, and thei vſe to weare theim a whole yere continually, onleſſe it bee bicauſe of a generall triumphe or reioyſyng, or newe magiſtrate choſyng orels when thei bee toward mariage. But the cuſtome of mournyng is no other thyng then mere ſuperſticion,Mournyng is ſuperſticiō & Hypocriſie. ſpecially if womē or men haue a 
                     •
                  ouryng loke, and a laughyng herte. For all ſuche lamētaciō helpeth nothyng the dedde corps or ſolle of the deceaſed, and diſquieteth ſore the liuyng.
               
                  THE maner of waſhyng ded bodies, and ſpecially of noble men,Waſhyng dedde bodies. and anoyntyng thē, was receiued of our auncetrie, whiche vſed to waſhe the bodies of the dedde, and it was the office of theim, that wer nereſt of his kyndred, to dooe it.Solle Maſſe daie▪
                   Solle Maſſe daie that is the ſecond daie of Nouember was begon by Odilo that was Prouoſte or Prouinciall of the Monkes of Cluniacenſes order,Odilo. vpon the occaſion that he heard about Aetna the moūtain of Sicilie oftentymes great wepyng lamentacion, & criyng: whiche he ſuppoſed to bee the yellyng of eiuill ſpirites, that bewailed bicauſe the ſolles of dedde menne wer taken

from theim by the peticions, and ſacrifices of wel diſpoſed chriſten people therfore he perſwaded his couēte in the tyme of Ihon biſhop of Rome to make a generall obite of all ſolles the daie next after the feaſt of al ſainctes. Aboute the yere of our lorde. M and twoo our fathers receiued it as a godly inſtituciō full of pitiful charitee: & thus by proceſſe of this Monkes ſuppoſicion, ſprong muche vain ſuperſticion.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .viii. Chapiter. ¶Of the ſeuenth daie, thirty daie, old maner of buriall, hallowyng chalices, prieſtes garmentes with other thynges.
               
                  
                     HORATIVS the Poete and Seruius write that the Romaynes vſed cuſtomably ye nynth daie after the buriall to renewe the ſacryfices and ſolemne rites of the funerall whiche thei named in latyne Nouemdialis:
                     Nouemdialis.
                   of this we in our religiō haue gathered the faſhion of kepyng the ſeuēth daie with exequies and other ordinary oblacions.Seuēth daie. And in England

the cuſtome is to kepe the thirty daie or moneth mynde with like Obites,Thirtie daie. as were dooen on the buriall daies. Or els it mighte ſeme that this kepyng of the ſeuēth daie was brought vp after theſame ſort emong vs, as in mariages thei vſed in old tyme to renewe their vowes the ſeuenth daie.Mariage vowes renued. For like as that daie was the ſolēne beginnyng of encreaſyng the iſſue of mankynde, ſo theſame daie of burial is or ſhould be the complet finiſhyng and ende of euery thyng.
                     Buriall is an ende of all thynges.
                     Maſſiliens vſage at buryalles.
                   The Maſſiliens in Fraunce paſſed and ſpente the daies of their burialles, with priuate oblacions, and feaſtyng of their kinſefolke without any maner lamē
                  tacion or ſorowe, whiche thyng the Engliſhe at this daie vſe commonly to dooe. In burials the old rite was that the 
                     •
                  ded corps was borne afore,Rite of buryalles. and the people folowed after, as one ſhould ſaie, we ſhall dye and folowe after hym, as their laſte woordes to the coarſe did pretende. For thei vſed too ſaie, when it was buried on this wiſe, fare well wee come after thee, and of the folowyng of ye multitude thei were called exequies.Fare well we ſhal come after. Albeeit

thei vſed at kynges, and noble mennes funeralles to goo afore with tapers▪ whiche cuſtome we kepe ſtill.
               
                  Chalices of woode.
                  CHALICES, wherin the bloud of Chriſte is conſecrated, were at the firſt of woode, and that was the inſtituciō of the Apoſtles, whiche would preuent all occaſiō of auariſe in prieſtes: but Zepherinus afterward commaunded that thei ſhould conſecrate in a veſſel of glaſſe. Notwithſtādyng in proceſſe that cuſtome was broken.Chalices of Glaſſe. And Gratianus decreed yt thei ſhould ſaie Maſſe and conſecrate with chalices of ſiluer or golde,Chalices of ſiluer or gold orels if thoſe mighte not bee gotten, in chalices of tynne, albeit ſome referre this to Vrbane the firſte. Sextus the firſte commaunded that the corporaces ſhould bee of linen clothe onely and that of the fineſt,Corporaces. and pureſt: and he forbade that any laye manne ſhould handle the hallowed veſſels and namely womē wer inhibited. The hallowyng of prieſtes veſtures,Hallowyng of clothes of prieſtes. and altare clothes, with other ornamētes of the churche and the diuerſitee of veſtures of ſundry orders was taken out of the Hebrues prieſthod, & vſed in our churche

fyrſt by Steuen biſhop of Rome fyrſt of that name. For at the beginnyng prieſtes in their maſſyng vſed rather inwarde vertues of ſolle then outward apparel of the body, whiche is rather a gloriouſe gaſe, then any godly edifiyng. Sabinianus decreed fyrſt that the people ſhould be aſſembled together to heare ſeruice at certayne houres of the day by ringyng of belles:Ringyng to ſeruice. And Iohn the .xxii. ordeined that belles ſhould be tolled euerye daye thriſe in ye euenyng, & that then euery mā ſhould ſay thriſe the Aue maria.
                  Tollyng the Aue belle. Vſe of belles came of the Hebrewes.
               
               The vſe of belles came fyrſt of the Hebrues, wher ye high prieſt or biſhop had in the ſkyrtes of his vppermooſt veſtures litle belles to ryng, when he was in the holy place within ye vaile. And euen the vayle, hangynges, candelſteckes, with other veſſels that we vſe in the churche came alſo of theyr ceremonies. The baners that be hanged abroad in the eaſter tyme may be vſed to declare the triumph of Chriſt ouer death, the deuil, and hel,Baners. & were taken of the heathen, whiche in their victories did beare baners to declare & ſignifye ye cōqueſt of their enemies.
            
            
               
               The .ix. Chapiter. ¶Of vowes, goyng barefoote, Letanies, praiyng for them that neeſe, croſſyng the mouth when men yawne.
               
                  WHen we be brought into any extreme calamytie, or daūgerouſe aduē
                  ture, yt can by no mans power or prouiſion bee releued, the vrgent neceſſytie cōſtrainyng vs, we fal to praiers, and vowes makyng, as when we promiſe to ſet vp cādels,Vowes. Images of waxe, or ſiluer, wt other lyke, ſuppoſyng therby to obteine remedy of our grief. This cuſtome was borowed of the Hebrues,Vowes came of ye Hebrues whiche vſed to make ſuche vowes to God: & diuerſe other coūtries of the Gētiles vſed ye ryte to their falſe gods. In like maner goyng barefoote was taken vp of the Iewes faſhion:Goyng barefoote. whiche in their ſickenes & other miſfortunes were wōt to pray cōtinually .xxx. dayes, forbeare wyne, ſhaue their heare, and after go barefoote to the temple & make oblacion. This maner of vowe was ſo erneſtly vſed in the tyme of ye emperour Nero, when Florus was preſident

of Iurye,Bernice ſiſter of Agrippa. ye Bernice ſiſter to kyng Agrippa went her ſelfe barefote to the tēpte of Hieruſalem, to obteine ſome gētlenes for her coūtremen at Florus his hādes, but al in vaine, for his auarice was ſo vnſaciable yt no lowlines could pacifie it. Euen ſo we in any of our afflictions, ſickenes or other heuines make vowes to God & his ſainctes, & performe thē goyng to ye place barefoote in ſēblable maner as ye Iewes did.Supplications. Supplicacions were ordeyned in a great yearth quake by Mamercus biſhop of Vienne in the tyme of Leo the fyrſt. Theſe be called of ye Greke worde Letanyes,Letanies. & are cōmonly named proceſſions, becauſe the people procede furth a long in array .ii. & ii. together, and go frō place to place praiyng loud. They be called the leſſe Letanyes. And Agapetus, as it is reported▪ fyrſt appointed thē to be ſong euery ſōday in or about the churche: although it ſeme by Tertulians word
                     •
                  s, yt they haue be vſed frō the beginnyng of ye churche, & therfore it maye be ſuppoſed that Mamercus did only renew ye cuſtome. Afterward Gregory ordeined the great Letanies called

                  ſeptiformis letania,
                  Letania maior. ye ſame time that muche people in R. periſhed through a great plage of ſwellyng of the preuy mēbres, whiche came of a corrupt ayre, that was poiſoned with adders and ſnakes, that were caſt out of Tyber at a merueilous high tyde.
               
                  Neſyng.There was another plage wherby many as they neeſed dyed ſodeynly, wherof it grewe into a cuſtome, that they, that were preſent when any mā neeſed ſhould ſay,Why we ſay Chriſt helpe. God helpe you.
               A like deadly plage was ſometyme in yawnyng, wherfore menne vſed to fence them ſelues with the ſigne of yt croſſe:Yawnyng. 
                  croſſyng of our mouth. bothe whiche cuſtomes we reteyne ſtyl at this day. In al other extreme affayres, that we go about we vſe to ſigne our ſelfes with the tokē of the croſſe. And this hath bene the vſage frō the beginnyng of ye church.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .x. Chapiter. ¶Of Images, tithes, and who permitted the Clergye to haue poſſeſſions.
               
                  
                     AT the fyrſt there was no Imagery nor pictures in the churches, but all occaſions of Idolatry were withdrawen

accordyng to the cōmaūdement of the olde lawe.Images. Notwithſtandyng it crepte in among chriſtans by lytle and lytle, and men made Images of Chriſt on the croſſe after the example of Moſes whiche ſet vp yt braſen ſerpent,Abagarus. and Abagarus duke of Ediſſemans a nacion beyond the riuer Euphrates ſente a Painter to drawe the Image of our ſauiour Ieſus, but for ſomuche as he could not beholde the brightnes of his face, Chryſt layde a napkyn on his face, wherin he by his diuine power prynted the reſēblaūce of his viſage, and ſent it by the painter to the duke. A lytle napkyn was geuen by him (as it is ſayd) to a woman, that had the blody flixe, whoſe name newe writers ſay was Veronica,
                  Veronica. and Luke the Euangeliſt had the Image of Mari the virgyn in a table painted. And in the ſixt coūſel had at Conſtantinople by the cōmaundemēt of Cōſtantine & Iuſtiniane, the ſecond his ſonne,Images were cōmaunded to be honored it was decreed that Images ſhould be receyued into the churches, and worſhypped with great reuerence, as a thing wherby the laitie might be inſtructed, as in ſteade of

ſcripture, and that encenſe might be burned, and tapers lighted afore thē. This was about the yere of our lord vi.C.xxxii. or as ſome take it aboute the .vii.C.iii. yere of our lorde, what tyme Agathus was biſhop of Rome. Afterward Conſtantine biſhop there confirmed that decree, and cauſed Images in the churche of ſainct Peter and pronounced Philippe the emperour an heretike,Philip emperour is proclamed an heretike. bycauſe he had ſhauen & ſcraped away y• Imagery that was in ſainct Sophies temple. Not long after they were ratified & eſtabliſhed in the counſel of Nice where were aſſembled by the procurement of Hyrene mother of Conſtantine the ſixt .CCC.l. byſhoppes.Hyrene. The great prophet of God Moſes, and his ſucceſſour Ioſue diuided the land of Canaan among ye Iſraelites, aſſignyng no parte therof to the tribe of Leuye, becauſe they were the lordes por
                     •
                  ion ſauyng that he gaue thē habitacions in euery tribe,Tythes. and a lytle paſture for their nee
                     •
                  e, ſhepe, and other cattel. Therefore, becauſe they m
                     •
                  niſtred in the tabernacle of the lord, and executed ſuche ceremonies, as apperteined

to theyr religion, he appointed for them the fyrſt fruites and tenthes to liue on. And after this ſorte begāne the paiyng of tithes by the inſtituciō of Moſes.
               And Origene on the boke of Numery affyrmeth that this commaundement is to be obſerued of vs after the letter,Origenes opinion of tithes Homelia .xi. without any allegory or miſtical interpretacion.
               And it appeareth by Chriſtes wordes,Luke .ii. Chriſt alloweth tythes. that he alloweth the litterall ſenſe of the olde lawe, wher he ſayth in ye goſpel, wo be vnto you Scribes and Phariſes, ye that tythe Mynte and Rue, and al maner of Herbes, & paſſe ouer iudgemēt & ye law of God, theſe ought to haue bene done, & not to leaue the other vndone, where you maye perceyue howe that as he commaundeth one, ſo he would not haue the other omitted, that be ſignified there litterally, Eutichianus, bicauſe in the olde teſtament the fyrſt fruites were offered to the lorde, ordeyned that corne ſhould be conſecrated on the alter: as Oyle and encenſe was burned in the Hebrues Synagoge, and that decree remayneth ſtyl in

effect in ſome places. But ſo the prieſtes vertue is ſo olde, and mennes deuocion waxeth ſo colde, that in ſtead of the fyrſt fruites, nowe a daies the people vſe to bryng on the ſondaies a fewe loaues of bread, in ſome places two or thre as they bee diſpoſed,Holy bread. and thoſe the prieſt conſecrateth, and parteth by peeces among the people, that where as in time paſt they vſed to receyue the ſacrament on thoſe dayes, now they eate this bread halowed in memorial of it. And this they do after the paterne of Chriſt, whiche was euer wōt to halowe bread afore he either eat it or gaue it to his diſciples. Other naciōs alſo vſed to offer their fyrſt fruites & tithes,Fyrſt fruites were offered of diuers countries. as the Romaynes offered to Hercules, and Bacchus offered to Iupiter, Mars gaue to Iupiter the tenth of his pray of Lydia. Vrbanus a man of godly liuyng, and ſingular learnyng aboute the yere of our lord .CC.xxii. decred that it was lawfull for prieſtes to receyue ſuche rentes or landes,Poſſeſſions are permitted 
                        〈◊〉
                      the clergy. as were geuen thē: Albeit there was nothyng priuate to any man, but cōmon to all. And thus by lytle & lytle the ſpiritual poſſeſſions

were enlarged, and biſhoppes of Rome were greatly enriched. Lucina an holy mayd of Rome made Marcellus byſhyp there, her heyre and executour, and afterward Conſtantine dyd largely endowe the ſame biſhop.
            
            
               ❧Here endeth the abrydgement of the ſyxt booke.
         
         
            
            The ſeuenth booke.
            
               The fyrſt Chapiter. ¶The beginnyng of the ſolytary lyfe of religiouſe perſons.
               
                  
                     THE MATTER hath bene long in controuerſy who fyrſt begāne to enhabite wildernes, for ſome (as ſ. Hierome witneſſeth) that haue ranſaked ye vttermoſt, ſay that Helias and Iohn Baptiſt were auctours of the life ſolytary, but as ye one was more then a prophete, ſo the other was aboue the ſtate and condicion of Monkes.
               
                  Beginnyng of religions.Some aſſigne the original of it to Antony, other referre it to one Paule a Thebane ſurnamed Heremite, bycauſe he laide the foūdacion of ye maner of liuyng ſolytary. Neuertheles for ſo muche as euery mā may ſpeake his phantaſye in a thing doubtful, I thynke ye inſtitucion of this monaſtical life to haue proceded of ye Eſſees,Eſſees. a religiouſe brotherhod among ye Hebrues, that liued after a greater perfection then the Monkes did in their ſuperſticiouſe & phātaſtical tradiciōs as appeareth by the .viii. boke of Euſebius

de preparatione euangelica.
               
               Of their precedence Antonye, and Paule the Thebane toke example of orderyng the rules and preceptes of theyr religiouſe ſcolars. Albeit,Paule the hermite. it ſhal agre of good right to aſcribe the oryginal of it to Antony, whiche, although he were not the fyrſt, yet he did ſpecially encorage the endeuours of al other to lead that lyfe, and aucthoriſed the diſcipline of Monkes in Egypt: And afterwarde Baſilius in Grece, and Hilarion in Syria dyd muche augment & amplifie that purpoſe.Hilarion. For this Hilarion a man of great vertue, by callyng on the name of Ieſus, healed at the cytie of Gaza the ſonnes of a noble woman, whervpon the brute of him was ſo noyſed that many out of Syria & Egypte repayred vnto him, & he foūded abbeys in Paleſtine, & inſtructed thē wt rules of liuyng.Antony
                        •
                     s perfection. As for Antony he liued in the wildernes of Thebais in Egypt, & builded there an abbeye, where he him ſelfe, wt 
                  Sarmatas, Amatas, and Macarius his diſciples liued in ſo erneſt contemplacion and praier▪
                  Diſciples of Antony. that they liued onely with bread and water:

his holynes was ſuche, that Helena, mother of Conſtantine dyd commende her ſelfe and her ſonne to his praiers, He dyed in the wyldernes, when he was an C.v. yeres olde,Antony liued an C.v. yere. the yere of oure ſaluacion .CCC.lxi. his diſciples Amatas and Macharius encreaſed muche the religion after his death, & Sarmatas was ſlayne by the Saracenes.Religiō hath growen to ſuperſticion. The inſtitucion of this ſtate of liuyng came I graunte of a good zeele to godlynes, but the deuil peruerter of all good thynges dyd ſo empoyſone the heartes of them, that folowed, that they had more truſt in their workes, then fayth in Chriſtes blod, & then euery man beganne new rules of workes to be theyr owne ſauiours, and went ſo ſuperſticiouſely to worke, that al was out of rule and abhominable in the ſight of God.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .ii. Chapiter. ¶The diuiſion of monaſtical life into ſundry ſec
                     ••
                  s and 
                     •
                  actions.
               
                  Benet,
                  
                     AN hundreth .lxvi. yeare after ye death of Antony, Benet an Italiā borne at Nurſie in Vmbria, when he had

liued long in ſolitarines, reſorted to a cytie of Italy named Sublaque a cytie of the Latines forty miles from Rome. And forbecauſe he was greatly delited with wyldernes, and alſo the people preaſed there muche to ſee and heare his preachynges, he departed thence to Caſſine. And in ye tyme of Iohn the fyrſt about ye yere of our lord .CCCCC,Benet builded an abbay at Caſſinum. xxiiii. he buylded ther an abbey and aſſembled the Monkes that were diſperſed alone in diuerſe places, into one couente, and ordered them with inſtructions of maners, & rules of liuyng confyrmed with thre vowes, that is chaſtitee, wylfull pouertie, and obedience, becauſe they ſhuld al together mortify their owne wyl and luſtes.
               Theſe thre forenamed vowes Baſilius biſhop of Geſaria did fyrſt inſtitute and publiſhe in the yere of oure lorde .CCC.lxxxiii.Thre vowes Baſilius ordeyned. And alſo aſſigne the yere of probacion or trial, that religiouſe perſons had afore they were profeſſed.The yere of probacion.
               
               The order of Cluniacēſes were ordeyned by one Odon an abbotte at Maſticenſe, a village of Burgundie,Cluniacēſes▪
                  
                  
And Williā duke of Aquitany gaue them on houſe, the yere of our lorde. ixC.xvi. in the tyme of Sergius the thyrd. Not long after the religion of Camaldimenſes was begōne by Romoaldus of Rauenna in the mounte Apenninus,Camaldimenſes. the yere of our lord .viii.C.l. they kept perpetual ſilēce, euery wedneſday & friday they faſt bread & water, they go barefoote, & lye on the ground. In a part of the ſame mountayne called Vallis Vmbroſa or the ſhadowed valey in ye yere of Chriſtes incarnacion M lx. vnder Gregory ye vi. Iohn Gualbert begāne a new ſect of Monkes,Shadowed valle order. & named thē of the place where the abbey ſtode, the ſhadowed valie order. The Monkes of Oliuere ſprong vp as a fruite of diſcorde the ſame yere that the variance was amōg the thre biſhops,Monkes of Oliuere. & were inſtituted by Barnardus Ptolomeus ye yere of Chriſt M.cccc.vii. vnder Gregory the .xii. The faction of Grandimontenſers beganne by Steuen of Auerne in Aquitany or Guyen the yere of our lord .M.lxxvi. vnder Alexander the ſecond,Grandimontenſers. & had theyr tytle of ye mountayne where their abbey ſtode.

A litle after ye ſame tyme Robert abbot of Moliſme, in Ciſtercium a Foreſt of Burgundie dyd inſtitute ye order of Ciſtercians,Ciſtercians order. albeit ſome aſcrib this to one Ordingus a Monke, that perſuaded Robert to the ſame, aboue the yere of our lord: M.xcviii. vnder Vrbane the ſecond: Of this religion was the great clerke ſ. Barnarde. Almoſt an .C. yere after this in ye yere of our lorde .M.C.lxvi. The order of Humiliates was diuiſed by certeine perſons exiled by Fredericus Barbaruſſa, which,Humiliates. when thei were reſtored to theyr coūtre, apparelled the ſelfes in white, & liued by a kynd of vow, in praiers, penury, & workyng wulle, & were admitted by Innocentius the thyrd, and other his ſucceſſours. Celeſtines were founded by Celeſtinus the fyfte of that name biſhop of Rome in the yere of our lorde .M.C.xcviii.Celeſtines. In England ſaint Gylbert at Tyrington, & Sempringham begāne an order called after him Gylbertines in the tyme of Eugenius the fourth,Gilbertines. the yere of Chriſtes incarnacion. Mcxlviii.
               The Iuſtinianes were inuented byIuſtinians.
                  
Lewes Barbus a religiouſe man of Venice. In the abbey of ſainct Iuſtine at Padway, the yere of our ſaluacion .M.CCCC.xii. in the daies of Iohn the .xxiii.
               There were alſo orders of Nūnes diuiſed after the ſame rules of ſuperſticion,Nunnes. as the other be.
            
            
               
                  ❧The .iii. Chapiter. ¶Of the Hierominians, Chanons, Chatterhouſe Monkes, Whyte frears, Crouchefryes with other.
               
                  
                     HIERONIMIANS had theyr beginnyng of ſ. Hierome,Hieronimians. whiche leauyng his natyue coūtre went into Iury, and ther not farre frō Bethlehem builded him an houſe where he liued very deuoutly the latter ende of his life, in the tyme of Innocentius the .vii. The yere of our lorde .M.CCCC.v. After his example other counterfetted a reſemblant of perfeccion namyng thē ſelues Hieronimians, wearyng their cloothes of whyte, and a coope playted aboue

ouer their coate girde with a leather gyrdel.
               There were alſo certayne Heremites called Hierominians of the foundacion of one Charles Grauel of Florence,Heremites Hicronimiās which made him ſelfe an Hermite of the ſame religion in the moū
                  taynes of Feſſulus: other there be, yt ſay one Redo earle of mount Granel did inſtitute them in Feſſulus in the tyme of Gregorye the .xii. Yet there be, that ſay that the originall of this brotherhod was inſtituted of Hierom in deſerte, & that Euſebius of Cremona with other deuoute and holy men,Euſebius Cremonēris. whiche kept conuerſacion with him did enlarge and augment the familie of that profeſſion.
               As concernyng the Channons reguler, ther be two opinions:Chānon reguler. for ſome ſaye that Auſten by and by after he was created byſhoppe broughte hys Chānons in this rule and fourme of liuyng, wherin they haue bene ſo lōg trayned and noſeled vp: other ſome bragge and make their vaunt, that it was deuiſed of the Apoſtles, and of this opinion was Thomas of Aquine But howſoeuer the matter go: Auſten

was doubtles ether the inuentour of the ſecte, or renewer of it, and therfore maye be iuſtlye taken for an autoure of that faction, and ſo was he likewyſe of Auguſtines Hermites. The Chanons clothyng was a white cote,Chanons apparel. & a linnyn rochet vnder a blacke coape with a ſcapuler to couer their head and ſhoulders:Hermites Auguſtines. The Hermites haue a contrary veſture, a blacke coat with alike ſcapuler and another coat of whyte, & a lether gyrdle. Of theſe there be diuerſe orders. As ye order of ſ. Sauiour of the ſcopettines,The order of Chanons or Hermites. Scopettines. whiche wer ordeined by one Steuen & Iames two men of Senes in the tyme of Vrbane the .v. the yere of Chriſt .M.ccc.lxx. and Gregory the .xi. by his conſent confirmed thē in their hipocriſie
               The Friſonaries is another brood which began among the Hetrurians in the countie of Luces,
                  Friſonaries. that is other wiſe called lateraneuſe, by the diuiſe of Iames Britiane in ye tyme of Ihō the .xxiiii. the yere of Chriſt .M.cccc.xii. & thei were amplified & encreaſed bi Eugenius the .iiii. The .iii. order is titled ye brethred of ſ. Gregory,Brethren of ſaint Gregory de Alga de Alga, this was ordeyned at Venece by

                  Laurence Iuſtinian in the time of Innocencius the .vii. ye yere of our lord. M, cccc.vii. with diuers other orders whiche forſomuche as they riſe ſodē
                  ly like toad ſtoles in a raine, I wyl omit thē. Bruno of Colen, ye red ſometime the philoſophi lecture at Paris did inſtitute the Charterhouſe monkes in the dioceſe of Gracianopolis,
                  Charterhous monkes. at a place named Cartuſia in the yere of our lord .M.lxxx. vnder Gregorye the .vii. their life was outwardly ful of painted holines, in forbering fleſh faſting bread and water eueri friday, ful of ſolitarines, muche ſilence, euer pinned in, and women were baniſhed out of the houſe, with other ſemblable ceremonies. The Carmelites or white friers wer,Carm
                        •
                     lites. as ſome ſay begon in mount Carmelus after the example of Helias ye prophet, which liued their lōg ſolitary, they wer fyrſt aſſē
                  bled together by Almericus B. of Antioch, ye yere of our lord .M.clxx. in ye time of Alexander the .iii. & they wer ſo called our Lady friers of a chapel of our lady yt was in ye hil Carmelus. Neuertheles vpon .cccc. yeares after in the tyme of Innocentius the third

they were reformed by Albartus byſhop of Hieruſalem,Carm
                        •
                     lites clothyng is chaunged. accordyng to the rule of Baſilius, and the colowre of their coape was turned into whyte by Honorius the third where afore it was ruſſet.
               The order of Pemōſtratenſes was inſtituted in the dioceſſe of Laudune by Northbergus a prieſt,Piemonſtratenſes. and the preceptes of that couent were gathered out of ſ. Auſtens rules, and admitted for good by Calixtus the ſeconde, in the yere of our lorde .M.C.xx.
               The Crouch or croſſe Friers began about the yere of our lorde .M.cc.xv. by the diuiſe of Cyriacus biſhoppe of Hieruſalem,Crochfriers. whiche ſhewed Helene mother of Conſtantine wher ye croſſe lay hyd: And in memorial of ye croſſe, he cauſed this brotherhod & colledge of Friers to beare the croſſe, And yet they neuer knew what ye croſſe weied in their bodyes or in their heartes, & forſomuche as they were ſore waſted Innocentius the .iii. renewed the religion.
            
            
               The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶Blacke, and Gray friers, the Trinite order, Brigidians, Ieſuates, new Hermites and Bonhomes.
               
                  
                  
                     ABOVTE the tyme of Innocentius the third aroſe two famouſe founders of two ſuperſticious ſectes,Dominicke. Fraunces. I meane Dominicke the Spaniarde, and Frauncis the Italian, of the countrie of Vmbria.
               
               Dominicke at the fyrſt was a Chanon,Friers Dominickes. but bycauſe he could not ſuffre to haue a ſuperior, and was alſo wery of the cloyſter, he inuented a newe fraternite named Dominicans, black Friers, or Friers preachers, bycauſe they had the charge to preache ye Goſpel, without mixture of any phariſaical leauen. The newe guyſe of their veſture made innocente Innocentius to wonder.
               But Honorius the .iii. by his bulle honorably admytted them,Dominicke is canoniſed. the yeare of our lorde .M.CC.xx. and Gregory the ninth putte the matter out of all doubt canoniſed Dominicke, and by his bulle vnder lead alowed him for a ſainct.
               Fraunceſſe,Fraunces. that was fyrſt of ye friers Auſtens, thinkyng that ſecte not to be ſufficiently furniſhed with hipocriſie,

beganne a newe trade of liuyng in the mounte Appoeninus in a place named cōmonly Iauerna doubtles a ground worthy for ſuche a foū
                  dacion, as was beſyde the worde of God, it was ſet vp in the tyme of Honorius aforeſayd. They were named Minores of the humilitie & lowlynes of hart that thei ſhuld haue,Minorites. but that was ſmally regarded & furtheſt from their ſtudy. Two yeres after, yt was the yere of oure Lorde .M.CC.xxix. Fraunciſſe was ſanctified by Gregory,Fraunciſſe is made a ſainct & made a ſainct, Fraunciſcanes afterward fel at cōtencion for the rules of their profeſſion. They that fayled ſomewhat of ye vnperfecte perfection of them, retayned the name of Minorites ſtyl, the other titled them ſelues obſeruauntes more worthy to be called obſtinate.
               
                  Obſeruātes.The latter felowes were broughte into England by kyng Edwarde the iiii. & were greatly enhaunced by the famouſe prince kyng Henry the .vii.
               
                  Clara.At the ſame tyme was Clara the Vyrgyn, countrie woman to ſayncte Fraunciſſe, whiche was a great foundreſſe of Nunnes of ye ſame rule that

Fraunceſſe gaue his couent: of them ſprōg the baſterde penitencers in the dayes of Iohn the .xxii. and the yere of our lord .M.CCC.xv.Penitencers.
               
               The order of the Trinite vnder the ſayd Innocentius was begonne by Iohn Marta,Order of the Trinite. and Felyx Anachorita in Fraunce, in the countrie of Meldine. Then alſo was founded, or els not long after in the tyme of Martin the fourth the brotherhod of Mayres ſeruauntes by one Philip of Florencia a Phiſician, and Benedicte the .xi confirmed it in the yere of our Lorde M.CCC.lxxxv.
               The order of Brigidians was inſtituted by Brigidia a wyddowe,Brigidians. that was princeſſe of Sueta vnder Vrbane the .v. in the yeare of oure Lorde .M.ccc.lxx. it was aſwell of men as women, albeit thei dwelled ſeuerally by them ſelues.Ieſuites. The familie of Ieſuites was the inuēcion of Iohannes Colū
                     binus in the citie of Senes in the time of the ſame Vrbane, the yere of oure lord .M.ccc.lxviii. they were no prieſtes nor conſecrated perſons, but wer men of the laye ſort geuen & addicted to praiers, & had the name of Ieſuites
                  
bycauſe the name of Ieſus ſhould be often in their mouth, they be muche like to our bedemen in England.
               
                  Newe hermytes.The ſecte of new Hermites began in Vrbine a cytie in Italy in the coū
                  tre of Vmbria, where Polidor Vergile was borne, and was the deuiſe of one Petrus an Hetruriane, and they had in the ſame cytie a goodly hoſpital or guylde hal.
               
                  Bonhomes.The Bonhomes were inſtituted in England by Edmunde ſonne of Rychard erle of Cornewel, whiche was brother to Henry the .iii. and was elected kyng of the Romanes, & heyre apparant to the Empyre by the princes electours aboute the yere of oure Lorde .M.CC.lvii. The ſpecial head place of that religion was Aſtrige, wher the noble kyng Henry the .viii. hath nowe a goodly Palace. This Edmund brought the blood of our ſauiour, as it was ſayd into the realme
            
            
               The .v. Chapiter. ¶The original of ſacred knightes and white ſecte.
               
                  
                  
                     WHILEST the cytie of Ieruſalem, afore our chriſtenmen had cōquered it in ye yere of our lord .M.xcix. was in ſubieccion to the Saracēs,Grauekepers or ſepulchre knightes. the Latine chriſtians, that liued ther tributaries, purchaſed a lycence to buylde nere vnto the holye ſepulchre dwellyng houſes, and among other they made an hoſpital of our lady to receyue the ſtraunge pilgrimes, and appoincted a prouoſt to entertain thē This was in Silueſter the fyrſt hys tyme, the yere of our Lorde .ccc.xiiii. and renewed the yere of Chrſt .M.ccc xcvii. in the tyme of Celeſtine the .iii. biſhop of Rome.
               After the paterne of this houſe was deuiſed a like houſe of virgyns in me mortal of Mari Magdalen,Magdalene ſyſters. to receiue the women that reſorted thether. It beganne in the .ii. Vrbanes daies, the yere of our Lorde .M.lxxxxix. Notwithſtandyng becauſe the multitude of latine pilgrimes waxed very great they builded thre hoſpitals of ſ. Ihō Baptiſte, as ſome ſaye, albeit, ſome

thynke it was of Iohn Eleemoſinarius, that was the patriarke of Alexandria in the reigne of the emperour Phoca. This ſecte one Gerardus adourned with a white croſſe in a black veſture: grand captain of theſe knightes was Ramundus,
                  Ramundus. when Clement the .v. had the ſea of Rome, about the yere of our Lorde .M.ccc.x. yet ſome affirme that the beginnyng of them was in the .iii. Alexanders dayes, the yere of Chriſt .M.c.lxxix. and they be called of ye order of ſ. Iohn,Knightes of the Rhodes. or knightes of the Rhodes, becauſe thei wāne the Rhodes from the Turkes, which afterwarde they loſt againe in Ianuary, in the yere of oure ſaluacion .M.CCCCC.xxiii. albeit, they dyd long defend it manfully.
               The templers order was begon in Gelacius the .ii. his daies,Templer knightes. in the yere of Chriſtes incarnacion .M.C.xxviii. by Hugo Paganus, and Gaufradus de ſancto Alexandro: they were named templers, bycauſe they kept in a parte of the buyldynges neare to the temple, they kepte Barnardus rule in their liuyng. But Clement the .v. depoſed thē partly for that they renoū
                  ced

the faith, & conſpired wt the Turkes, & partly forother notable crimes
               The order of Tentonickes or dutch Lordes beganne in Hieruſalem by a Dutche manne whoſe name is not knowen:Duch lordes. Their office was to fight againſt the enemies of Chriſtes croſſe, it began in the dayes of Clement the third, the yere of Chriſtes incarnacion .M.C.xc. Petrus Fardinandus a Spaniarde began the order of ſainct Iames knightes,Knightes of ſainct Iames that lyued after ſ. Auſtens rule, vnder Alexander ye .iii. and in the yere of our lord .M.c.lx.iii the ſame biſhoppes daies.
               ¶Sāctius a kyng ordeyned the factions of Calatrauean knightes, which profeſſed the rule of ye 
                  Ciſterciences.
                  Calatrauean knightes. Of the ſame profeſſion be they of the order of Ieſus Chriſtes knightes,Knightes of Ieſus Chriſt. whiche were inſtituted by Iohn the xxii. biſhop of that name in Portingale to reſiſt the Saracens.
               
                  Alexandrians brotherhod of knightes in the realme of Caſtel,Alcantarian knightes. yt begonne in Gregories tyme the .ix. aboute the yere of oure ſaluacion M.CC.xl. but who was auctor of thē is vncertaine. Iames kyng of Aragonia dyd foūd

ii. ſectes of knightes, one named of ſ. Mari,Knightes of ſainct Mari de Mercede Mounteſiās 
                  de Mercede of thoſe the office was to raunſom ſuche as were taken priſoners in warres againſt the Turkes: The other ſect is called Montaſian knightes, and they were a redde croſſe, both theſe orders Gregory the xi. did alowe the yere of our lord .M.
               
                  Minimes.The order of Minimes or leſt brethren were founded by one Franciſcus Paula a Silician after the example of Fraunciſſe his Mmorites.
               
                  Apoſtolike br
                        •
                     thren.The Apoſtolike brethren begāne in the yere of our lord .M.cclx. by the inſtitucion of Gerardus Sagarelus in the toune named Perma in Lōbardie in the tyme of Alexander the fourth.
               
                  Whyte ſecte.The whyt ſect ſprong vp in the Alpes, & deſcended into Italye hauyng aprieſt for their captayn. But Bonifacius perceiuyng they ſhould do no good to his honourable eſtate if they continued, cauſed their captain to be headed at Viterbium, as attainted of ſome hereſie, the yere of our lord .M.cccc. They wer a great nomber, & dyd no other thyng but lamēt the ſtate of mākynd, & bewayle the ſinnes of the people. Theren as of this faſhion

both men & women, & were called the whit ſect, becauſe they weare whyte clothyng.
            
            
               The .vi. Chapiter. ¶The Niniuites, Aſſirians, Antonians, and Ceretanes.
               
                  
                     NO leſſe ſuperſticion is in the fraternite of the Niniuites,Niniuites. although they auaunce thē ſelues to haue receyued their maner of liuyng of ye Apoſtles: for the end of their doynges is to worke their owne ſaluacion by dedes ſatiſfactory to God, wher in dede they derogate the effecte and power of Chriſtes blod. The rites be ſpecified with outward holines:Rites of Niniuites. as often aſſēblyng to praier hiryng of chauntry prieſtes ſupportyng pouertie, & be clothed in ſackcloth and ſcourge one another wt whippes. Of this painted penaunce they call them ſelues Niniuites, as though they appeaced Gods wrathe in the ſame wyſe, as they of Niniuie dyd, where in deede they had heartie cōtricion for their offēces, theſe haue but pretenced holines and penitence: they beganne vnder Clement the .iiii.

the yere of our lorde a thouſand two hundreth threſcore and fiue.
               The maner of theyr whyppyng came of the Romayne ſacrifices and Lupercalia,
                  Whippyng whēce it came Lupercalia whereof I ſpake afore, for thei vſed the ſame cuſtome of a ſuperſticious opinion: Or if a manne wold be curious in boultyng out the original of their beatyng, it may appeare to haue proceded of an obſeruaūce of the Egyptiens. For ye vſage was there,An vſage of the Egiptiās that whileſt they offered a cow with many ceremonies to their gret Idole, as Herodotus witneſſeth during ye burnyng therof, they ſhuld, one beate another miſerably with wandes or roddes. The title of their fraternitie came of the Romaynes, whiche had diuers felowſhyppes as Sodales Titii,
                  Fraternities. and Fratres Aruales that ſacrificed to Ceres Goddeſſe of corne. Another ſort there is not onely idle, but alſo theuiſhe, & they be called Aſſirians, the ſame that we name commonly Egyptians:Aſſirians. Theſe, as all men haue hearde,Egyptians. and many haue by experience proued, be ſo lyght fyngered, and ſuche rigbies chyldren, that they wyll fynde two thynges, afore

they loſe one.
               The men by ſuche pyllery, thefte, and playne ſtealyng, and women by palmeſtrye, bleſſynges,Craftes of ye Egytians. with lyke other ſorcery, and wytchecrafte furniſhed with lyes, ſeduce and deceyue a great nomber of ſymple people in euery country and region.
               And bicauſe they ſhould haue more libertie to ſpede their purpoſes,The Egyptians excuſe. they ſaye, it is their vowe, and penaunce is geuen them to go in continual pilgremage. Fye on that pylgremage, that is mayntayned by pickyng, and redoundeth to the profit of none, but to the extreme loſſe of manye as well countries as men.
               The occaſion that theſe vacabundes ſtray thus abrode came of an old Idol that they worſhypped in their Paganiſme named the goddeſſe of Siria:
                     Goddeſſe of Siria.
                     Libro .viii. de aſmo aureo.
                   wherwith they vſed to gadde frō place to place to begge monye, wyne, mylke, cheſe, corne, and other ſtuffe as Apuleius writeth.
               The ſame people nowe thei be chriſtened, playe theyr partes in like maner with ſundry ſubtilties: and that they get by liyng, pickyng, ſtealyng,

brybyng, they make monye of, and ſo returne home laughyng to ſcorne all thoſe ſymple perſons, that they haue thus deceyued.
               Seyng all other ſuperſticions be aboliſhed and roted vp, it is pitie that this ſhould take ſtyl effect, and be vnpuniſhed. The Antonians were a counterfect of Antonies perfection,Antonians but they differ as muche frō his holynes as whyte frō blacke, they haue a The token of Antonians. on their breſt, that meneth Tolle, teaching them to take what they can get be it cowe, oxe, calfe, or pigge, for they offer ſwyne to him, as they dyd ſacrifice ſhepe to Bel in Babilon, thei were inſtituted in the yere of Chriſt .CCC.xxiiii.
               
                  Ceretanes.The Ceretanes began in Ceretum a cytie of Vmbria, & euer they vſed to go a beggyng at the latter end of harueſt when the barnes were ſtuft with corne, and ſo like drones deuour that that other haue gottē with the ſwet of theyr browes.
               Of theſe valiant beggers there be in euery place mo then a great meny:Ceretanes play in ſomer and begge in wynter. but I cānot tel what tyme they were inſtituted, and howe ſone they be put doune it ſkylleth not.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧The .vii. Chapiter. ¶The originall of Mahometes ſect
                     •
                  .
               
                  
                     OF all theſe ſuperſtic
                     •
                  
                  ouſe ſectes afore reherſed ther is not one ſo diabolicall, as the ſect of Mahometanes as well for the filthineſſe of al vnlawfull luſtes,Mahometanes. as other outrageouſe naughtineſſe, that thei occupie daily, to the greate endomagyng of chriſtendome, and encreaſe of their owne infidelite
               
                  OF this vnreuerent religion,Mahomete. 
                  Mahomete a noble manne, borne in Arabie, or as ſome reporte in Perſie was authoure: & his father was an Heathen Idolater, and his mother an Iſmaelite, wherfore ſhe had more perceueraunce of ye Hebrues lawe. This wicked plante brought vp and foſtered vnder his parentes, and enſtructed like a mungrel in either of their lawes: be came experte, and of a redy witte: And after the deathe of his father and mother, he was in houſhold with one Abdemonaples an Iſmaelite,Abdemonaples. whiche putte hym in truſte with

his marchandice, and other affaires, and after his deceaſe he maried his maſtreſſe a widdowe. There he fel in acquaintaunce with the Monke Sergius an heretike of Neſtors ſect,Sergius. that fled from Byzans into Arabie: and by his counſaill and aduiſe this Mahomete aboute the yere of our Lorde ſixe hundred and twentie, and the .xii yere of the reigne of the Emperoure Heraclius began in Arabie to found a newe ſecte,Mahomete preached ſediciouſly. & by ſedicious ſermons ſeduced muche people and many coū
                  trees. He conquered by helpe of the Arabians diuerſe landes, and ſubdued theim as tributories, and compelled theim too liue after the tradicion of his lawes, that he gathered out of the newe, and olde Teſtamentes, and diuerſe hereſies of Nicolaires, Maniches, and Sabellians. He died the fourtie yere of his age,When Mahomete died. and his body was caried by the Saracenes into a citee of Perſia called Mecha,
                  Mecha. Caliphas. and laied in a coffyne of Iron. Caliphas ſucceded Mahomete but he was depoſed for his ſuperſticiō, and another of the ſame name was ſubſtituted in his roume.Homar. 
                  Homar was the

thirde,Homar wan Hieruſalem▪
                   that reigned and he after the conqueſt of the Perſians, wanne Hieruſalem, and all Siria, the yere of our Lorde fi
                     •
                  e hundred and foureſcore in the tyme of Agathö biſhop of Rome and Conſtantyne the fourthe Emperoure. This ſecte waxeth daily bigger and bigger, partely throughe the diſcorde of Chriſten princes, and partely by reſon of our ſynfull liuyng, y• daily groweth to greater enormities, that deſerue the heuy hande of GOD ouer vs.
            
            ¶Here endeth the abridgemente of the ſeuenth booke.
         
         
            
            The eight booke.
            
               
                  ❧The firſte Chapiter. ¶Of Reliques, ſtacions, the yere of Iubilie, Pardons.
               
                  
                     NOT LONG after the martyrdome of Peter and Paule,Reliques. bothe many, & that of diuerſe ſortes as well men as women 
                     〈◊〉
                   the example of their conſtā
                  cie, were encoraged to ſuffre ſundery kindes of tormentes in ſeuerall partes of ye world for the mainteignance of Chriſte his religiō.Many biſhopes of Rome ſuffered mar
                        •
                     tyrdome. But namely in Rome muche murther of innocente bloudde was committed of tyrantes by many maner of puniſhementes, and a greate number died in Chrſtes cauſe, emong other certain biſhoppes to the ſoume of thirty and twoo were ſlain by extreme perſecuſion, onleſſe it were ſeuen of theim, whiche by deathe were preuented afore thei attaigned the croune of Martyres. Therefore conſideryng

that muche martyres bloud was ſpente, & that ſpecially in Rome and many from other places wer cō
                  ueighed thither, Cletus and Anacletus biſhoppes there did ſeriouſly go about to reuerence them. For the one appoin
                     •
                  ted a place,Martyres wer ſeuerally buried. where Martyres ſhould ſeuerally haue their ſepultures aparte from the laye people, and the other by degree denounced hym accurſed as a ſacrilege, that by word or deede hyndered mennes deuocion from viſityng the toumbes of the Apoſtles. Vpon this occaſion Caliſtus the firſte buylded beyonde Tyber a churche in honoure of our Lady,Churches of our Lady. and Conſtanſtyne Emperoure edified to Peter, Paule, and Laurence temples This matter was by Gregory the ſainct ſette forwarde to the encreaſe of ſuperſticious deuocion:Peters churche. For he appoyncted theſe Letanies of ſainctes with Ora pro nobis too bee ſongen with Maſſes on certayne ſolemne daies in the chief temples of the citee promiſyng theim▪
                  Letanies. that repaired thyther at ſuche ſolemne feaſtes cleane remiſſion of ſynnes by his pardone. And he named the pompouſe ſacrifices

ſtaciōs bycauſe thei wer celebrated on certain daies limited and preſcribed by ſtatute.Stacions. Bonifacius the eight in the yere of our Lorde a thouſande three hundred, appoyncted the yere of Iubile, or grace, to bee kepte euery hundred yere with cleane remiſſion A pena & culpa to all theim that viſited the temples of the Apoſtelles Peter & Paule.Iubile euery hundred yere. And this was taken vp of the example of the Hebrues, albeet thei did kepe it euery .l. yeres or els as ſome thynke be aſſigned the yeres accordyng to the olde feaſtes of Apollo and Diana whiche the Romaynes Heathen ſolemniſed euery hundred yere, and of that thei were called Ludiſeculares. Aboute fifty yeres after.
                     Ludiſeculares.
                   
                  Clemente the ſixte decreed that it ſhould bee celebrated euery fifty yeres as the Hebrues rite was,Iubile at fifti yeres. bycauſe no manne was able to attain the olde iubile of an hundred yeres. Laſte of all Sextus the fourth reſtraygned the yere of grace to the xxv. yere,Iubile at .xxv yeres. and he hymſelf kepte it at that daie, whiche was in the yere of Goddes grace ſhewed by his ſonne Ieſus Chriſte too the worlde a thouſande

foure hundred three ſcore and fiftene.Pardons. Aboute the ſame tyme Pardons were very 
                     •
                  ief, and muche vſed but who was the firſte authoure of theim I haue not redde in any wryter, ſauyng that ſaincte Gregory (as I ſaied a fore) proclaymed Pardons as a reward for theim,Pardōs wer profitable to the purſe. that came too his Stacions. This ſeede ſowen by Gregory grewe too a ripe harueſt in the tyme of Bonifacius the .ix. whiche reaped muche money for ye chaffe. After this Alexander the ſixte that was in the yere of our Lorde a thouſande fiue hundred aſſinged the Iubilee and Stacions to bee had inſundery prouinces and countrees,Iubylee was ſente into all countrees for money. to the entent that leſſe thrōg of people and more thrifte of money might come to Rome, and ſo the people ſhould only loſe their money and ſaue their laboure.Moſes was firſt authour of the Iubilee But Moſes was the firſte authoure of the Iubilee, as appeareth by Ioſephus in the olde Teſtament.
            
            
               
                  ❧The ſecond Chapiter. ¶The biſhoppe of Romes titles Collages of Scribes, ſealyng Bulles with Leade, Annates,
               
                  
                  Titles of the Biſhoppes of Rome.
                  
                     FOR ſomuche as nothyng is ſo decent for a prieſt as gentleneſſe nothyng ſo fitt as lolineſſe, nothyng more comly thē humblenes according to ye ſaiyng of our ſauioure, lerne of me for I am meke and loly in herte, nor nothyng more againſt their ordre then pride & arrogauncie:
                     
                        Diuus Gregorius.
                     
                     
                        Seruus ſeruorū dei.
                     
                   
                  Gregory the ſainct, biſhop of Rome named hymſelf ſeruus ſeruorū dei, whiche thyng he did not onely vſurpe in title but alſo expreſſe in deede. This name & preface was receiued a
                     •
                  d vſed of his ſucceſſoures, but his hertie mekeneſſe was refuſed, as a thyng that diminiſhed their pontificall eſtate. Cle
                        •
                     us added to ſalutē & Apoſtolicam benedictionem,
                  
                     Salutem & Apoſtolicam benedictionem.
                   as a ſalutacion condigne and apperteinyng to the vertue & godlineſſe and a reſemblāt to Chriſtes gretyng, whiche was peace bee vvith you,
                  Chriſtes gretyng. or of the Hebrues, that vſed too ſaie in their metynges peace bee vvith thee:The Hebrues ſalutyng. And this all our biſhoppes haue reſerued to them ſelfes as a peculiar
                     •
                   ſalutyng.
               
                  Scribes.
                  AS concernyng the Scribes, that

vſed to write the letters Apoſtolicall where afore tyme thei were wont to write for nothyng, or els aſked verie litle, Ihon the .xxii. deſirouſe too encreaſe & enlarge his ſubſtaunce founded a co
                     •
                  lage of Scribes that ſhould write & endite letters of their owne deuiſe, and doo other offices,Collage of Scribes. but thei muſt be choſen out of his owne clearkes, and muſte paie and bee diſmiſſed of money, afore thei could bee admitted to ye roume. He did alſo inſtitute the taxe or ſubſidie, yt thei paie,Taxes of ben
                        •
                     fites. whiche haue benefites of his gifte & preſentacion. All ſuche thynges, as belong to the Apoſtolicall penetencers,Penitencers. 
                  Benet the .xii. diuiſed firſt,Price of all wryttes. and determined the price of al writtes & bulles The cuſtome of ſealyng the biſhop of Romes bulles with lede was taken vp by Stephen the third and Hadrian the firſt to the entent thei ſhould endure longer,Bulles ſealed with leade. where afore tyme the vſage was to ſele in waxe with a ring. And this was the yere of our Lorde vii.c.lxxii. at whiche tyme Hadriane was biſhop afore thoſe daies I finde no mencion of ſealyng with leade, as afore Carolus Magnus none of the

Romaine Empiroures ſealed letters with gold.Carolus magnus ſealed firſt wt golde Breuiatours 
                  Pius the ſecond did create Breuiatours, and ſet thē in an order, whiche Paule depoſed, but Sextus afterward renewed the roume, as commodious for the purſe: and alſo inſtituted the new collage of Solicitours and proctors,Solicitours. by whoſe counſaill and aduiſe all bulles and grauntes were made and ratified. He alſo ordayned i
                     •
                  . Notaries of the treaſure Apoſtolical,Notaries. & aſſigned to euery of them certain fees and profettes, that he mighte haue ſpedy vtteraunce of the roumes Innocencius that ſucceded next Sextus diuiſed ye collage of Secretaries, and Alexander the ſixt encreaſed the number of writers of his Breefes to the ſume of foure ſcore and aboue.Collage of ſecretaries.
               
               
                  Somoners.
                  THE Somoners, and catchpolles that wer hangers on to thoſe breuiators were by Nicolaus the third put out of office, leaſte all the poore ſhepe ſhould be 
                     •
                  leied to the quicke. But al this riffe raffe filled not ſo muche the popes cofers in ſeuē yeres as his Annates did in one.Annates. 
                  Annates he calleth the yerely reuenewes or half part of the fruites of a benefice or ſpirituall

promocion, that he receiued of the newe Incumbentes. Theſe beganne firſte at his owne benefices whereof he was patrone, and Clement the .v. generally decreed it,A general decree of Annates. in ye yere of oure lorde .M.CCC and v. Bonifacius the ix. and Ihon the .xxii. renewed the decree for feare of forgettyng bycauſe it helpeth muche the purſe.
            
            
               
                  ❧The thirde Chapiter. ¶Of the ſecte of Symoniakes, Heretikes, Schiſmes.
               
                  
                     PHILIPPE the deacon, what tyme he had by his preachyng conuerted theim of Samaria to Chriſtes religiō, emong many other he turned one Symon a Magicien and inchāter, and baptiſed hym.Simon Magus. In ſhort ſpace after, Peter and Ihon wer ſent thyther to confirme thē in the faithe by gyuyng theim the holy Ghooſte throughe laiyng on of handes, this Symon perceiuyng the feat of Peter that he could by laiyng on of handes giue the holy ghoſte,Simō profered monei for too haue power too gyue the holi ghoſt profered to giue a large ſume of money too haue that power taught him, wheras he ſhould

rather haue obtained it by faith and godlines. Peter moued at thoſe wordes, with anger ſaied, th
                     •
                   money ſhal turne to thy deſtrucciō, bicauſe thou ſuppoſedeſt the gyftes of God to bee boughte with money, neither ſhalte thou haue one porciō or doale of this charge, for thy herte is not vpright afore God. Thus reiected of his ſute he became a greate enemie to Peter, and in Rome ſeduced by his magike muche people in ſomuch that he was taken, and proclaimed by Nero his charter a god with this title,Symon was made a God. 
                  Simon deus ſanctus. But Peter with the ſwerde of Goddes worde, after long conflicte of woordes, and contencion of miracles, betwene the Capitoly or counſaill chamber and the Mounte Auentine cauſed that, as he was by his Magicall exorciſmes lifted vp, & fliyng in the aire,
                     Simō did fly in the ayre.
                     Symō brake his legge.
                   he had ſuche a fall, that he brake his legge & it coſte hym his life in Aretia, wher he laie at ſurgery for the healyng of his legge. Of hym al, that buie or ſell the gyftes of the holy ghoſte, and ſaie the worlde was not of the creacion of God, but proceded of a power aboue, were named

                  Simoniakes,
                  Simoniakes and ſo we cal them that bie or ſell benefices and ſpirituall promocions, whiche thyng (although it bee often vſed) is playnely forboden by the ſcriptures. Next Simon ſucceded his diſciple Menander a Samarytane borne,Menander. Samaritanꝰ whiche called hymſelf a ſauiour ſente from heauen to preſerue and ſaue menne, and promiſed theim▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   receiued his baptiſme ſhould liue immortally, he did more harme, and peruerted more then his maſter Simon had doen. In theſame tyme the hereſie of the Nicolayans beganne,Nicolaians. whiche taughte that wifes ſhould bee vſed in common as the Anabaptiſtes dooe nowe at this tyme. Then alſo Corinthus enterpriſed to mixte the newe lawe with the olde,Corinthus. affirmyng that circumciſion oughte too bee obſerued and kepte, and that after the reſurreccion menne ſhould liue a thouſande yeres in carnall luſtes and pleaſures.Hebion. Ihō did write his Goſpell againſt Hebiō
                   At thoſe daies Hebion his hereſie broke oute, whiche ſaied that Chriſte was not afore his mother, agaynſte this felowe Ihon wrote his Goſpell laſte of all the Euangeliſtes. Aboute that tyme were

other diuerſe heretikes,Baſilides. as Baſilides that affirmeth there wer twoo beginnynges or principall cauſes of thynges contrary, & his ſcholer Marchion a Stoicien,
                  Marchion. that denied Chriſte to bee the ſonne of GOD,Valencianus and Valenciane, that ſaied Chriſte tooke no fleſhe of the virgins body, but paſſed through her, as it were through a pipe or condute,Montanus. thē alſo Montanus named hym ſelf, the comforter or holy ghoſte. Apelles was then alſo,Apelles. whiche ſaied Chriſte was but a phantaſie in the ſight of men,Sabellius. and Sabellius, that ſaid the father, the ſonne, & the holy ghoſt wer but one perſone, and Paulus Samoſatenus,
                  Paulus Samoſatenus. whiche denied the twoo natures to bee in Chriſte, and that he beganne but of his mother, and that ſhe had after hym mo children by Ioſephe. And thus beganne heretikes firſte to ſpryng vp. As for Schiſmes, whiche ſprong of ſuche hereſies and erronious opinions,Schiſmes. 
                  Nouatianus 
                  Nouatianus a prieſte of Rome was authoure of the firſte in the yere of our Lorde twoo hundred fifty and fiue in the tyme of Cornelius biſhoppe of Rome:Mundi. he named his diſciples Mundi that is pure

and cleane, and offēders he affirmed that thei ought not to bee admitted, but reiected although thei wer penitente for their ſynnes: whiche openiō the Anabaptiſtes now maintain. He was condemned 
                     •
                  i Cornelius biſhop of Rome as an heretike with all his adherentes. Aboute foure ſcore yeres after in the reigne of Conſtantine the greate Arrius a prieſt of Alexandria was the beginner of a ſecte & ſchiſme that denied the ſonne too bee of the ſubſtaunce of GOD the father,Arrius. but this was conuicte in the counſaill of Nicene, albeet not extincted.A Schiſme,
               
               
                  THE thirde Schiſme was when Damaſus was biſhop of Rome, wher in thei contended not onely with voices and woordes: but alſo with violence and weapons, by reaſon of the ambicion of the biſhoppes there aſſē
                  bled.Schiſme of a later tyme. Other Schiſmes haue ſprōgen in our tyme to the great diſquietnes and confuſion of Chriſten religion, & deſtruccion of common welthes, wh
                     •
                  
                  che I praie God maie bee redreſſed & ſtaied to the honor of hym, to the confirmaciō of ye faithfull, to the ſubuerſiō of hipocriſy, to the auanncemēt of

Goddes woorde, too the mitigatyng of the trouble of poblike weales, too the eſtabliſhement of perpetuall vnitee of herte, and continuall peace, all diſcencion and warre extinguiſhed.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. Chapiter. ¶When the firſte generall counſaill was kepte, and whiche wer alowed by the fathers.
               
                  Counſailes.
                  
                     THE cuſtome of aſſembling coūſelles, to take deliberaciō of thynges doubtefull, or matters ſeriouſe, is of a greate ancientie aſwel emong the Hebrues, as other nacions: And by ſuche a maner counſail was Matthias ſurrogated and ſubſtituted in the ſteade of Iudas,Matthias elected by a counſaill. into the number of the Apoſtelles. And by a counſaill holden at Hieruſalem the Apoſtles diſcharged the Gentyles of Moſes lawe.Corneliꝰ called the firſte counſaill. 
                  Cornelius was the firſt, as plainly appeareth, that called to gether any counſaill and that was in Rome of ſixe hundred biſhoppes, as many prieſtes, with a greate multitude of deacons, In this counſail the hereſie of the Nouatianes was cōuicted, and

at theſame tyme ſatte alſo a counſail at Carthage where ſainct Cypriane was biſhoppe.Counſail of Cartage. 
                  Euſebius writeth alſo that once in the dayes of Dioniſius, and likewyſe in ye tyme of Felix, the fathers ſomoned another counſail at Antioche to condemne Paule Samoſatene,
                  Counſail of Antioche. whiche denied the two natures of Chriſt, as is aforeſayd.
               
                  FIVE other counſailes wer celebrated in the reigne of Conſtantine the Emperour,Counſail of Nicea. and al were in Grece one at Nicea a cytie of Bithine, wher were gathered thre hundreth & .xviii. biſhoppes to confu
                     •
                  e Arrius and his ſecre. This was the yere of Chriſt thre hundreth twenty and foure, the ſame tyme that Silueſter ye fyrſt was biſhoppe of Rome.
               
                  THE ſeconde was at Conſtatinople,Counſail at Cōſtātinople when Damaſus was biſhoppe of Rome, wherein Macedonius and Eudoxus wer cōdemned bicauſe thei dyd deny the holy ghoſt to be God.
               
                  HHE thirde was at Epheſus Celeſtyne the fyrſt,Counſail at Epheſus. then occupiyng the ſea of Rome. There was Neſtor his hereſie abholiſhed, that ſayd Mari the virgyne was mother of Chriſt a

man, but not as he was of God, and that the perſone of the God hede and his manhod wer .ii. ſundry perſones.
               
                  Counſail at Chalcedonie.
                  THE fourth was at Chalcedonie vnder Leo the fyrſt, where Entiches an heretike was improued: theſe .iiii. ſainct Gregorye thought worthye to be admitted and allowed to the eſtabliſhyng of our religion.
               
                  THE .v. was ſolēnely kept at Byzance at the cōmaundement of Vigilius biſhop of Rome:Counſail at Byzance. and in this was Theodorus reaſoned with, whiche affirmed that Marie dyd beare onely a man and not God and man: For that cauſe the counſail there, then decreed that Chriſtes mother ſhould be called Theotocos or Deipara that is bearer of God,
                     Deipara.
                   and the actes of this counſail were receiued by Gregorye.
               
                  THE ſixte counſail, Conſtantine the fourth, at the requeſt and ſuite of Agathon, called alſo at Byzance, where two hundreth biſhoppes condemned Macarius of Antioche.Another coū
                     ſail at Bizāce This counſail was accepted by Hadriane the fyrſt.No counſaill may be called without the popes cōſent That no counſail might be legitimate, or lawfully aſſēbled without the biſhoppe of Rome his conſent

and aſſente was the conſtitucion and decree of Marcellus the fyrſt, and afterwarde, Iulius, Damaſus, and Gregorie ratified the ſame.
               
                  Martine the fifth made a law that euery tenth yere the biſhop of Rome,Counſailes ſhould be called euery tēth yere. and al Chriſten princes ſhould meete together to conſulte of matters concernyng our religion, & chriſten faith. It was decreed at the counſail of Nicene that euerye biſhop ſhould twiſe yerely haue a ſinode or ſenes general within his dioceſe to correcte and refourme ſuche thynges as were out of order.Senesin euery dioceſe. But now the matter is ſo handeled that ſenes be onely courtes to gather their ſenage and proxie with a proceſſion, and a ſermon that the half vnderſtand not: other correction I heare of none.
            
            
               The .v. Chapiter. ¶Of the fyrſt perſecutours of the chriſten, and fyrſt Martyres.
               
                  
                     CHRISTE,
                  Chriſt was a witneſſe of the trueth. whiche came into this worlde, and was incarnate to beare witneſſe vnto the trueth, had for his trewe teſtimonie greate enuye of the

Iewes, inſomuche that they perſecuted him to the vile death of the croſſe for his earneſt recorde and reporte of the trueth: and they dyd no leſſe purſue ye Apoſtles and meſſengers of the trueth. For when they folowyng the example of their maieſter did openly declare the worde of trueth, and namely Peter dyd ſore rebuke the wickedneſſe of the Iewes in puttyng to death Chriſt the authoure of life, aduertiſyng them to repente & amende: the Iewes were ſo furiouſe & woode, that fyrſt they murthered Steuen, as the Actes of the Apoſtles teſtifie, bycauſe he was a vehement witneſſe of the trueth. This Shephyn dyd two yere continually after Chriſtes death diſpute with all the learned menne of Alexandria,
                  Stephyn diſputed with al the learned men of Iury. 
                  Cirene, Cilicia, and Aſia, and by heauenly wiſedome confounded their worldely reaſons and humayne learnyng. Wherfore they wer ſo ſore vexed with heate and malice againſt him, that they violently thruſt him out of the cytie,
                     Stephyn is ſtoned to death.
                     Stephin firſt open defēder of oure faith.
                   and then cruelly ſtoned him to death: Thus Stephyn was the fyrſt open mainteyner & defender of our chriſten religiō
                  
Afterward, as Luke telleth, ſo bitter and ſharpe perſecucion dyd braſt out agaynſt the Chriſtians that were in Hieruſalem, that they were enforſed to ſtraye abrode, and were ſcattered throughout all Iurye and Samarie, ſauyng that the Apoſtles remaygned & ſoiourned ſtil at Hieruſalem. Notwithſtandyng, this perſecucion was the occaſion of great furtheraunce of the Goſpel, by reaſon they ſeaſed not but preached ſtyll the worde euerye where with great encreaſe, and augmentyng of the faithful nomber.
               Among the Heathen nacions Nero was the fyrſt prince that perſecuted oure religion vniuerſally:Nero fyrſt perſecutour of al the heathen princes. and putte Peter and Paule to death, and conſequently many other innocentes were ſlain cruelly. For when of a deuiliſhe minde that he had, he could not ſpare euen his countrie, but either for diſpleaſure of the ruinouſe houſes whiche greued him to beholde, or els deſirouſe to ſe a reſemblant of the burnyng of Troye, he ſet on fire the more parte of the cytie of Rome, with ſo houge a flame,Halfe Rome was burned by Nero▪
                   that it burned ſixe daies and ſixe nightes cōtinually, to

the impoueriſhyng of many thouſād riche citezens. Then to mitigate the ſhamefull & abhominable deede, and to ſtinte the brute and ſlaūderouſe reporte that went on him for that flagiciouſe fact, there were forged falſe witneſſes to ſay the chriſten men dyd this act, and ſo many ſimple innocēt ſmarted for that tirannes pleaſure: And to obdurate him ſelf in miſchief, he proclaimed an open perſecucion againſt all, that profeſſed the name of Chriſt.Perſecucion done by the Emperour. Not long after Domitiane renewed afreſhe another affliction of the chriſtians, & Traianus rayſed the fourth, Marcus Antonius & Lucius Aurelius Commodus ſtired vp the v. perſecucion. Aelius Pertinax moued the ſixte. Maximinus procured the ſeuēth, Decius the eight, Valerianus the .ix. and Aurelianus cauſed the .x. And Diocleſianus began the .xi. whiche was ſoreſt,Diocleſiane made the greateſt perſecution. ſharpeſt, and of longer cōtinuance then any of all the reſt: in ſuche ſorte, that ſcripture bokes wer burned and churches plucked doune, chriſten magiſtrates that dyd beare any office, were depoſed, ſouldiours were enforſed to denye their faith, or

els forgoo their goodes and forbeare their liues by a general proclamaciō. Neither were the thre cruel tyrānes, Maxentius, Licinius,
                  Maxencius. and Maximianus behynde with their partes, but were as buſie as the beſt, to procure trouble to the chriſten people.
               
                  Conſtantinus borne in Englande,Conſtātinus firſt ſtaied the chriſten faith was the fyrſt chriſten emperour, that auaunced and defended the cauſes of our religion, & preſerued chriſten men in peace & quietneſſe. In al theſe perſecucions manye dyd ſuffer martyredome, as diuers hiſtories recorde, but Stephyn was fyrſt martyre of ye new teſtament.Stephyn was the fyrſt martyre. For Iohn Baptiſt died afore the cōſummacion of the old law. After his example many other enſued and ſuſteined like croſſes for the trueth ſake, whiche al now reigne with God, to whom alone be al glory, honour, & praiſe worlde without ende. Sobeit.
            
            ¶The ende of the abridgement of the eight and laſt booke of Polidore Vergile.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧A Table by the whiche ye❧ maie lightly fynde euery ſpecial matter or ſentence conteined in this booke.
            
               
                  
                     AARON and Saul fyrſt anoynted. C.iii.
               Abbeyes. C.xxxv.
               Abel. xii. and .lxvii.
               
                  Aborigines, vi.
               Abraham. xxvi.
               Abraham taughte the contentes of Geometrie to the Aegiptians xxix.
               Abraham is circumſited. lxxxv.
               Abraham ordained the firſt place of buriall. C.vii.
               Adam the firſt man. vi.
               Adam named beaſtes. lxvii.
               Adam made the firſte coate of lether. lxix
               Aduent. C.xix.
               Aduoutrie▪ ix.lxxxi.
               Aelas. xxv.
               A
                     •
                  olus obſerued the wyndes. xxvii.
               Aeromancia. xxxiiii.
               Aethiopus diſpiſed oyntmentes. lvii.
               Age of prieſtes▪ x
                     •
                  i.
               Aire. iiii.
               Alhalow daye. C.xxiiii.
               Almoſe. C.xviii.
               Amber. lxi.
               Amphion. xxiii.
               Amphitheatres. lxxvii.
               Anacletus forbad prieſtes to haue beardes. xci.
               An
                     •
                  xagoras. ii.
               Anaximander. ii.vi.
               Ancors. lxx
                     •
                  .
               Andronicus. xxvii
               Annates. C.xii.
               Anoyntyng is the tokē of kynges. C.iiii.
               Anoyntyng of childrē. Ibidem
               Antioche. lxxxiiii.
               Antoninus Enipho a ſchpie maiſter. xv.
               Apollo. ii.
               Apollo God of medicines. xxx.
               Apoſtles lxxxiiii & lxxxix
               Apparel. lxix.v.v.
               
                  Apparel in mournyng. c.xxvi.
               April. xlii.
               
                  Apuleius de aſino aurco▪
                   c.xvi.
               Arrabians. viii.
               Archadiens. xxii.
               Archadiēs brought inſtrumentes into Italy, xxiiii.
               Archadiens maner. lxii.
               Archagathus the fyrſte phiſician in Rome. 
                     •
                  xx.
               Archebiſhoppes. xcv
               Archedeacons. Ibidem
               Archelaus xix.
               Archilaus. xviii.
               Archilocus founde Iā
                  bus. xvii.
               Archimedes diuiſed the ſpere. xxvii.
               Ariopagites iudged in the night. xxxix.
               Arreſe cloth lxix.
               Ariſtocracie. xxxviii.
               Ariſtotle had the fyrſte liberary. xlvi
               Arithmetike. xxix.
               Arke. c.vi.
               Arte of memory. xlvii.
               Artificial. xx
                     •
                  v.
               Aſ
                     •
                  lepiades abboliſhed phiſicke. xxxii.
               Aſſinius Pollo had the fyrſt librarye at Rome. xlvi.
               Aſtrologie. xxvi.xxvii.
               Athanaſius. c.xvii
               Athēs made many bokes. xlvi▪
               
               Atlas. xxv.xxvi.
               Atomes or motes. iiii.
               Authours of the names of countries. vii.
               Auguſtus ſeale lxiii.
               Auriculer cōfeſſion. xcv
               Axe. lxxix.
            
            
               B
               BAbilon. vii.lxxii.
               Bacchus. lv.
               Bakyng▪ lxv.
               Balme an herbe. xxxii.
               Baners. c.xxix
               Bank
                     •
                  ttes. lxviii
               Bapteſme. lxxx
                     ••••
                  .
               Barbours. lxxxii.
               Barchian league. liiii.
               Barges. lxxx
               Barkes. Ibidem.
               Baſkettes. lxxviii
               Bathes. Ibidem.
               Battayle on the ſea. lxxx.
               
                  Beades. c.ix.
               Beaſtes that be badges lxviii.
               Bedel denoūced noone xliiii.
               Beholding the bowels of beaſtes. xxxv.
               Belles. c.xxix
               Belowes. lix.
               Belus ii.xi.
               Bennettes vſe. c.xxvii.
               Byble. c.xxi.
               Biyng of wyfes. ix.
               Birdes. xxxv.
               Birth daies. c.xxiii.
               
                  Biſſextus. xliii.
               
               Biſhoppes. lxxxvi.xc.
               Biſhoppes of Rome may chaunge their names. xciii.
               Biſhoppes of Rome be borne. Ibidem.
               Biſhops maried maydes. c.v.
               Blod lettyng. xxxii.
               Boates. lx
                     •
                  ix.
               Boltes. xlix.
               Bonefires. lxxxi.C iii.
               Bondage. xxxix.
               Bookes. xlv
               Bowe and ſhaftes. xlix
               Bowelles of beaſtes. xxxv.
               Brakes & ſlynges. xlix.
               Braſen trumpe. xxiiii.
               Braſſe. lviii.
               Bricke worke. lxx.
               Bridel bittes. l
               Brigantine. lxxx.
               Broches. lxxv.
               Buildyng. lxx
               Bulles of leade. C.xlix.
               Burial is the end of al thinges C.xxviii.
               Buriyng. lxxiii.
               Buriyng of an Emperoure. lxxiiii
               Burnyng dead bodies Ibidem.
            
            
               C
               CAdmus. xii.xiii.
               Cadmus wrote the firſt ſtorie of Cirus. xix
               Cadmus found golde. lviii.
               Cain. xii.lxv.
               Cain and Abel ſacrificed fyrſt. C.vii.
               Caius Claudius. xvii.
               Calendes xliii.
               Camillus. lv.
               Cancer. xxxii.
               Candelles lix
               Candelmas day C.
               Canis. lii.
               
                  Canoniſyng of ſaīctes c.xxv.
               Cappes. xcvii.
               Cardinalles. xcii.
               Carpēters arte. lxxviii.
               Cartagens were fyrſt marchauntes lxxx.
               Caſtyng lottes. xxxv.
               Caſtyng mony abrode. C.ii.
               Cecrops. viii.xii.
               Centaurie was found by Chiron. xxxii.
               Ceres. xxxvii.
               Ceres Image. lxiii.
               Ceremonies why they were ſo named. C.xiii.
               Chaldees. xxi.xxvi.
               Chalices of wood. C.xxviii.
               Chalices of ſiluer and golde. Idem
               Chamberleines. xciii.
               Chariotes l.
               Charmes. xxxiii.
               Chaunces. lii.
               Chaunters. lxxxviii
               Chery trees. lxvii.
               Cheſe makyng. lxvi.
               Cheſſe. li.
               Chippe are. lxxviii.
               Chiromancie. xxxiiii.
               Chiron auctour of ſalues. xxxi.
               Chitteryng of byrdes. xxxv.
               Chius. lii.
               Chriſippus ii.
               Chriſme c.iii.
               Chriſt authour of our prieſthod. lxxxviii.
               Chriſtal. lxi.
               Chriſtmas lordes. c.ii.
               Chriſtenyng of infantes. lxxxvi.
               Churches and churche yardes. xcii.c.
               Cicero xxi.
               Circenſes. lii.
               Circumſion. lxxxv.
               Ciuil croune. lvi
               Ciuil law▪ xxxvii.
               Cleanthes. ii.
               Cleophantus inuented colours. lxiiii.
               Clergie. lxxxvii.
               Clockes. xliiii.
               Cocke boate. lxxx.
               Coynyng. lix
               Collage of ſecretaries c.xlix.
               Comedies. xviii.
               Cōmēdacions to dead bodies. lxxiiii
               Cōmon welth. xxxviii.
               Cōmon women. lxxxi.
               
                  Communion. c.xiii.
               Compaſſe. lxxviii.
               Confeſſion. c.xv.
               Confirmacion. c.iiii.
               Coniurers. lxxxviii.
               Conſtantine forbadde putting to death of the croſſe c.vii.
               Conſtantyne borne in England, fyrſt chriſten emperour. c, lvi.
               Conſuls of Rome. xl.
               Corax gaue rules of Rhethorike. xxi.
               Corne ſowyng. lxv.
               
                  Corona triumphalis. lvi.
               
               Corporaces. c.xxviii
               Corpus Chriſti daye. c.xxiiii.
               Couering of ſcaffoldes lxxvii.
               Counſailes. c.lii.
               Countyng by nayles. xxix.
               Cranes or vernes. xlix.
               Cratus taught grammer in Rome. xv
               Cries. liii.
               Croſſe bowes. xlix.
               Croſſe daies. c.xxiiii.
               Croſſe forboden to be made. c.vii.
               Crounes of braſen plate. lvi.
               Crounes of diuers ſortes. lvii.
               Cuppes were crouned. lvii.
            
            
               D
               DAies of euerye moneth. xliii.
               Dayes turned into feries. c.xxi.
               Daies named of ye planetes. Ibidem.
               Dayly communion. c.xiiii.
               Daphis foūd the ſhepherdes earolles. xvii.
               Dardanus Crezenius xxiiii.
               Dartes. xlviii.
               Dauid ſong in metre. xxiii.
               Daunſyng. li.c.ii.
               Decking of churches. c
               
                  Declamator. xxi.
               
               Decrees. xl.
               Dead bodies. lxxiiii. and .c.xxv.
               Dedalus ſlewe his neuewe.. lxxix.
               Dedicaciō daies. c.xxv.
               Dedicatyng of Churches. c.viii
               
                  Degrees of kynred inhibited to mary. C.vi.
               Deifiyng of the Emperour. lxxiiii.
               Deleyng of wines. lxvi
               Demaratus taught the Hetruriās letters. xiiii.
               Demaratus. lxiiii.
               Democratia begāne in Rome. xli.
               Democracie. xxxviii.
               Democritus. vi.
               Demoſthenes. xxi.
               Denoūcyng the Dictator. xl.
               Deſeaſes. xxxi.
               De
                     •
                  any. xxxii.
               Deuiſiō of naciōs. vii.
               Deuorcement. x.
               Diagoras. ii.
               Dialles. xliiii.
               Dialoges. xxvi.
               
                  Debutades. lxiiii.
               
               Dyce. li.
               Dictatoures fyrſte in Rome. xl.
               Dictatours office. Ibi.
               Diyng of wolle. lxix.
               Diyng of heare. lxxxii.
               Dioceſſes. xcii.
               Diocleſian a great perſecutour. C.lv.
               Diodorus. xii.
               Dioniſius. lxv.
               Dirceus captaine of ye Lacedemonians. xxiiii.
               Diriges or Exequies. C.xxvi.
               Diſguiſyng. C.iii.
               Diuerſe deuiſions of the yere.. xlii.
               Diuerſe deuiſions of the day. xlv.
               Diuerſe kyndes of meter. xvii.
               Diuerſe maners of paper. xlvii.
               Diuerſitee of ſpeches. vii.
               Diuiſions of the night xlv.
               Dreames. xxxvi.
               Drinkyng on maundy thurſday. C.i.
               Druides. xxv.
               Drumſlades in warre xxiiii.
               Dulcymers. xxiiii
               Dungyng land. lxv.
            
            
               E
               EAſter. C.xix.
               Eaſter appointed to be kept on the Sonday C.xxi.
               Eaſter inſtituted by the Apoſtles. C.xxii.
               
                  Eaſter is to be kepte in Marche. C.xxii.
               Earyng of fleſhe. lxvii.
               Eclipſe of the Sunne and moone. xxvii.
               Egges. lxviii.
               Egiptiās. ii.xxvi.lxxii.
               Egyptians are ſuperſtitious lxxxiii.
               Egyptians letters. xii.
               Egiptians foūd Geometry. 
                     •
                  xviii.
               Egyptians founde the yere. xlii.
               Election of the biſhop of Rome. xciiii.
               Electoures of the Emperour. Ibidem.
               Eliazer driueth out ſpirites. xxxiiii.
               Elymnete. lx.
               Embryng daies. C.xix.
               Embroderyng. lxvii
               Ennius called the Poetes holy. xvi.
               Empedocles. vi.xxi
               Endimion perceiued ye courſe of the Moone. xxvii.
               Enos. xii.lxxiii.
               Epicarmus. xiii.
               Epicurus. ii.
               Epicurus taught grā
                  mer fyrſt. xv.
               Epulones. C.
               Ethiopians. xii.
               Ethiopians opiniō of man. vi.
               Euander broughte letters into Ital. xiiii.
               Euen and odde. lii
               Eumolphus xiii.
               E
                     •
                  comunicacion. x
                     •
                  vi.
               Exequies or Diriges. C.xxvi.
               Exerciſes. l.
               Extreme vnction. c.iiii.
            
            
               F
               FAmous Phiſicians. xxxi.
               Fanes. xx
                     •
                  viii
               Faſtyng. C.xviii.
               Faunus. i.
               Feaſtes inſtituted by ye Apoſtles. C.xxiii.
               Feaſtes inſtituted at ye counſail of Lyons. C.x iiii.
               Februarie. xliii
               
                  Fac
                        •
                     ales Sacerdotes. xcix.
               
               Fedyng of birdes. xxxv
               Fery boates. l
                     •
                  xx.
               Fetters. xli.
               F. was taken of ye Ay
                     •
                  
                  lians. xiiii.
               
                  F. for .v. cōſonant. xiiii
               Fidlers & pipers. xxiiii.
               Fightyng on horſebacke. l.
               Figures of Arithemetike. xxix.
               Fyre. iiii.lviii.c.viii.
               Fyre and water gyuen in token of chaſtitee. x.
               Fyrſt maſſe of prieſtes c.i.
               Fyrſt churche of ye chriſtians. c.vi.
               Fyrſt churche in Rome c.vii.
               Fiſhyng. lxviii.
               Fleſhe was not eaten before Noe. c xviii.
               Fliyng of birdes. xxxv.
               Fyue partes of Philoſophi. xxvi.
               Foreheades lxxxii.
               Frederike Feltrius liberary. xlvi.
               Fullers crafte. lxix.
               Funeralles. lxxiiii.
               Funeral plaies. li.
            
            
               G
               GAley. lxxx.
               Games. li
               Garlandes. lv lvi.
               Gates of marble. lxxi.
               Geomancie. xxxiiii.
               Gymnoſophiſtes. xxv.
               Glaſſes to loke in. lix.
               Glaſſe. lx.
               Glewe. lxxviii.
               God his nature. iii.
               God made made. vi.
               God what he is. iiii.
               God was the authour of lawes. xxxvii.
               God is made manne. lxxxiiii.
               Gods mercy. Ibidem.
               Goddeſſes of fauoure. xxiii.
               God father and Godmother. lxxxvii.
               Godbrother and godſiſter. c.vi.
               Golde. lvii.lix.
               Gonnes, & when they were fyrſt made. xlix.
               Good angelles. i.
               Goſhauke. lxxvi.
               Grace at meate. c.xxi.
               Grāmer .ii. partes. xv.
               Grauers in marble. lxxi
               Grecians lerned in Egypt. xxvii.
               Gregory ſtabliſhed the ſingle lyfe of prieſtes. c.v.
               Greke ſtories. xx.
               Grindyng. lxv.
            
            
            
               HAberion xlviii.
               Allowing of prieſtes veſtures Cxxviii.
               Hampers lxxviii.
               Hangynges. lxix.
               Harneis xlviii.
               Harpe lviii.
               Harpe who found it. xxiii.
               Hebrue letters xiii.
               Hebrues were authores of Poetry xvi.
               Hebrues were authores of philoſophi. xxv
               Hebrues after Ioſephus founde Geometrye xxix.
               Hebrues ordaygned Democracie xxxviii.
               Hechwall xxxi.
               Helene founde the croſſe Cvii.
               Helmettes xlviii.
               Herbe called balī. xxxi
               Herbes were created for manne. Ibidem.
               Hercules baſilicꝰ. lii.
               Hercules lxi.
               Heretickes. Cli.
               Heroicall verſe xvii.
               Hiperbius. lxvii.
               Hippocrates xxx.
               Hiſtories. xix.
               Hoye lxxx.
               Holy breade. Cxxxii.
               Holy daies. Cviii. and Cxxii.
               Holy water Cix.
               Hony lxvii.
               Horſſes xlix.
               Hoſtanes wrote bokes of magike xxxiii
               Houres. xliii.liii.
               Houſes lxx.
               Huntyng lxviii.
               Huntyng ſtaues xlix.
               Houſbandry lxv.
            
            
               I
               IAcob made a league liiii.
               Ianuarie. xliii.
               Ianus xii.
               Ianꝰ coines of bras. lix.
               Iauelyns. xlviii.
               Icarius lxvi.
               
                  Idei dactili. lviii.
               
               Ides xliii.
               Idolatry xi.
               Iehoſuah liiii.
               Iginius made firſte orders xc.
               Ihon Baptiſt Cx.
               Ihon Cuthenbergus found printyng. xlvi
               Images lxi.cxxxi.
               
                  Images of kynges. xi
               Images of waxe. C.
               Inſtitucion of wedlocke. viii.
               Inſtrumentes of huſbandry. lxv.
               Inſtrumentes of phiſicke. xxx.
               Iob. xvi.
               Ioſeph. lxxxii.
               Iron. lviii.
               Iſaac digged pittes. lxxii.
               Iſis. i.
               Iubile. C.xlvii.
               Iulius Ceſar made the yere perfect. xliii.
               Iupiter. ii.
               Iuſtes ī Rome. lxxii.
               Iuſtyng ſpeares. xlix.
            
            
               K
               KEele. lxxx.
               Epyng ye ſecramēt in churches. cxiiii
               Kyngdome beganne in Egipt. xxxviii.
               Kynges how thei behaued thēſelfes. Ibi.
               Kīges of Rome. xxxix
               Kynges and Quenes of Englande. xcviii.
               Kynges and prieſtes wer anoynted. C.iii.
               Kynred inhibited too mary. C.vi.
               Kiſſyng the biſhop of Romes feete. xcvii.
               Knightes weare rynges for difference lx.
               Knightes of the Rhodes. C.xli.
               Knightes of ſaincte Iames C.xlii.
               Knightes of Ieſus Chriſte. Ibidem.
               Knittīg nettes. lxviii.
            
            
               L
               LAborinthes. lxxii.
               Aborers paſſe the time with ſōges. xxii.
               Lacedemonians maner of warre. xxiiii.
               Lacedemonians offerynges lv.
               Layitee lxxxvii.
               Lamech had two wiues. C.vi.
               Lame mēne maie not bee prieſtes xci.
               Lammas day. c.xxiiii.
               Lampes Ci.
               Latyn ſtories. xx.
               Lawe. xxxvi.
               Lawe for drynkyng of wyne xcvii.
               Law makers. xxxvii.
               
                  Lawes of mournyng C.xxvi.
               Lawes natural. xxxvi
               Leade. lviii.
               Leagues. liii.
               Leape yere xliii.
               Legendes C.xvii.
               Legge harneis. xlviii.
               Lent C.xix.
               Leoncious Gorgias Image. lxiii.
               Letanies. C.xxx.
               Letters. xii.
               Letters too coumpte with all xxix.
               Lettyng of blod. xxxii
               Leuer lviii.
               Leuites lxxxviii.
               Libertie of ye old Satyres xix.
               Libraries xlviii.
               Licinius Caluus. xli.
               Lycurgus xxxvii.
               Lidians lix.
               Lighter lxxx.
               Lyne lxxviii.
               Lynnen lxxii.
               Linus xvi.
               Liuius Andronicꝰ xvi
               Lookyng glaſſes. lix.
               Lottes. xxxv.
               Lucrecia lxxxvii
               Lupercalia. lii.
            
            
               M
               MAgiciens. xxv.
               MAgi. xxxiiii.
               Magike xxxiii.
               Mahometes ſect. cxlv
               Maydes of Cipres. lxxi.
               Maydes of Rome and Grece. x.
               Maiyng. C.ii.
               Maioram xxxii
               Malcolme kyng of Scottes ix.
               Maners of diuerſe nacions in mariages. viii.
               Maner of rekenyng yeres. xxix.
               Mantill. lxix.
               Manumiſſion. xxxix.
               Marble lxx.
               Marchaundiſe. lxxx.
               Marche xli.
               Marcus Cato baniſhed phiſicians out of Rome. xxxi.
               Marcus Tuditanus xvii.
               Marcus Valerius ordaigned a Diall in Rome xliiii.
               Mary the Virgyn died. lxxxv.
               
                  Mariage beganne in paradiſe viii.
               Mariage of diuerſe nacions. Ibidem
               Mariage of prieſtes. Ciiii.
               Marius xli.
               Mars author of cheualry xlviii.
               Martyres Cxlvii. and C.liiii.
               Maſkes lxxxi.Cii.
               Maſſagetes viii.
               Maſſe ye partes therof C.x.C.xiii▪
               
               Maſtes lxxx.
               Marches lix.
               Matyns, Prime and Houres Cxxvi.
               Meaſures and weightes xxix.
               Meates forbidden on faſtyng daies Cxxi.
               Meliſſus xi.
               Meltyng braſſe. lviii.
               Memory. xlvii.
               Memorye of martyres Cxxv.
               Menander xix.
               Menne drified i.
               Menne liued by acornes lxv.
               Menne of greate memory xlvii.
               Menne wer firſt called chriſtians in Antioche. lxxxiiii.
               Menne were ſacrificed by the Gentyles Cviii.
               Menne wrote in plates xlvi.
               Menon xii.
               Mercury xxvi.
               Mercury founde the concordes xxii.
               Mercury founde the Harpe xxiii.
               Mercurius Trimegiſtus appoyncted twelfe houres in the daie. xiiii.
               Metalles lviii.
               Meter, diuerſe kyndes therof xvii.
               Mice engender of the mudde v.
               Milke lxviii.
               Miniſters lxxxviii.
               Minos. xxxvii.
               Minos had the firſte rule on the ſea lxxix.
               Mirre lxi.
               Moly xxxii.
               Monarchie xxxviii.
               Monethes xliii.
               
                  Monethes myndes. Cxxviii.
               Money lix.
               Monkes Cxxxv.
               Moriſpikes xlix.
               Moſes. xiii.xvi.lvi. and lxxii.lxxvi.
               Moſes did prouulgate the firſt lawes. xxxvii.
               Moſes did write the firſte ſtory xx.
               Moſes founde the trompe xxiiii.
               Moſes ordaigned deuorcementes x.
               Moſſolanus xxxv.
               Motleis lxix.
               Mouldes lxiiii.
               Mournyng C.xxvi.
               Mournyng is ſuperſticious Hypocriſy. Cxxvii.
               Mummius deſtroied Corinth lxiiii.
               Murall croune lvi.
               Muſicke xxii.
               Muſicke maketh a man effeminate. xxiii
            
            
               N
               NAbles xxiiii.
               Aked games. li. and lii.
               Naſamones ix.
               Naturall xxxv.
               Nature gaue muſike to menne xxii.
               Nature of oyle Ciii.
               Nauall croune lvi.
               Necromancie xxxiiii.
               Nemi li.
               Neptunus 
                     •
                  .
               Neptunus had the Empire of the ſea. lxxix.
               Nero firſte perſecuter Clv.
               Neſyng Cxxx.
               Nettes lxvii.
               Newe yerares gyftes C.ii.
               Night ſacrifices are abholiſhed Cxx.
               Nilus dooeth ouerflowe Egipt xxviii.
               Ninꝰ did enlarge his Empire xxxviii.
               Noha made the firſte aulter lxxxviii. and Cvii.
               Noha planter of the vine lxvi.
               Noone xliiii
               Noones xliii.
               Notaries xcii. and Cxlix.
               
                  Numa added too the yere. xiii.
               Numbers. xxix.
               Nunnes. xcvi.
            
            
               O.
               
                  OPeliſti. lxxv,
               
               Obſeruyng of dayes. xxvi.xxx.
               Obſeruyng of dyete was beginnyng of phiſicke. xxx.
               Ob
                     •
                  idionall crowne. lvi.
               Occaſion of Idolatrie. xi.
               Ochus xxv
               Odde and euen lii.
               Offeryng. C.
               Offices ſold ī Rome. xciii.
               Oyle. C.iii.
               Oyntementes. lvii.
               Olimpiades. l.
               Oliue oyle lxvi.
               One God. iii.
               Opinion of philoſophiers. ii.
               Opinion of the birth of manne. v.
               Oracle lxii
               Oracles doubtfull. i.
               Oracles ſeaſed at Chriſtes commyng. C.viii.
               Oratour. xxi.
               Order of Cardinalles. xcii.
               Order of manumiſſion. xxxix.
               Oreſt
                     •
                  us. lxvi.
               Organes. lxxxii.
               Organie xxxiii.
               Orpheus. xii.xvi.xxi. and xxv.
               Original of Heathen goddes. i.
               Otho a Germayne made emperour. xciiii.
            
            
               P
               PAyntyng. lxii.
               Alamedes araye. xlviii.
               Pallas. ii.
               Pamphilia. lxix.
               Panace. xxxii.
               Panci
                     •
                  s lvi.
               Paper xlvii.
               Parchement. Ibidē.
               Pardons. C
                     •
                  lvii.
               Pariſhes xcii.
               Partes of Rhethoricke. xxi.
               Partes of the nighte xlv
               Parthians. xxxii.
               Paſchall Candelles. C.xxiii.
               Pater patratus. C.
               Patriarches. xcv.
               Paule is conuerted. lxxxv.
               Pecocke. lxviii.
               Pelagius cauſed ſubdeacons to forſake their wifes. C.v.
               Peniten
                     •
                  ers C.xlix
               Penſill. lxiiii.
               Pentecoſt. C.xxiii.
               Perſecutors. C.liiii.
               Peter and Philippe had wifes. C.v.
               Peter crucified. lxxxv
               Peter conuerted thre thouſande. lxxxiiii.
               Phedon lix.
               Pheriſides. xx.
               Phidias lxiii.
               Philippe Emperour proclaimed an hereticke. C.xxxi.
               Philoſophie xxv.
               Philoſophie in three or fiue partes. xxvi.
               Phirrhus daunce. li.
               Phiſicions famouſe. xxxi.
               Phiſicians. lxxxii.
               Phiſike xxx.
               Phoroneus. xxxvii.
               Pillers lx
                     •
                  .
               Pipers & fidlers. xxiiii
               Pirodes ſtroke fire out of flinte. lix.
               Piromancie xxxiiii.
               Piſiſtraius made the firſt booke. xlvi.
               Pithagoras called hym ſelfe a philoſophier. xxv.
               Pithagoras obſerued the day ſterre. x
                     •
                  vii.
               Pithagoras rule. lxxix.
               Pittes who firſt digged theim. lxxii.
               Plaies or ſhewes. l. and lii.
               Plato v.
               Plinie xiii.
               Plough. lxv.
               Plucking out of teth xxx.
               Poetes. vi.
               Poetes bee called holy of Ennius xvi.
               Poetry xv.
               Polares. xlix.
               Polignotus. lxiii.
               Poniſhement for aduoutry. ix.lxxxi.
               Poniſhemēt for omittyng oblaciōs. cviii.
               
                  
                  Pontifex Maximus xcix.
               
               Poſſeſſions permitted too the clergi. C. and xxxii.
               Poſthumius lv.
               Potters crafte lxiiii
               Potters frame. Ibi.
               Praier. Cix.
               Preachyng Cx.
               Price of writtes. C. and xlix.
               Prieſtes xcv.
               Prieſtes firſt Maſſe C.i.
               Prieſtes forbidden to mary Cv.
               Prieſtes of Egypte. lxviii.
               Prieſtes of Egypte. wrote ſtories xx.
               Prieſthode lxxxvii. and lxxxviii.
               Primatiue churche. lxxxix.
               Prime xliiii.
               Princes Electoures. xciiii.
               Printyng xlvi.
               Priſones xli.
               Prognoſticacions. xxviii.
               Promotheus. lx.lxii.
               Propheſiyng xxxv.
               Proſe xx.
               Protagoras ii.
               Pſalter of Dauid. xvi.
               Pſammaricus v.
               Ptolomeus libraries xlvi.
               Pultryes lxviii.
               Puniſhement for aduoutrie viii.
               Purificacion of women Cvi.
               Purple coloure. lxix.
               Purple roabe. Ciii.
            
            
               Q
               
                  Q Letter xiiii.
               Varelles xlix.
            
            
               R
               RAmmers xlix.
               Eaders lxxxviii.
               Readyng the bible at meate C.xxi.
               Reclaimyng of horſſes xlix.
               Reconynges xxix.
               Reconſiliation of churches C.xxv.
               Regalles xxiiii.
               Religion vii.lxxxiii.
               Religions from the Cxxxvii. too the. C. and xiv. lefe.
               
                  Reliques C.xlvi.
               Repentaunce a remidy for ſynne Cl.
               Rewardes, l.
               
                  Rex ſacrificulus. C.
               
               Rhethorician. xxi.
               Rhethoricke xx.
               Right hande xcvii.
               Rynges. lx.
               Ryngyng to ſeruiſe. C.xxxi.
               Rites of buriyng. lxxiii.
               Rites of mariage. x.
               Royall ornamētes. xli
               Romaynes burned their dedde bodies. lxxiiii.
               Romaynes league. liiii.
               Rome made orders. xc
               Romulus xxxvii.
               Romulus ordered the yere. xlii.
               Rowyng in boates. lx.ix.
               Rudders lxxx.
               Rue xxxiii.
               Rulyng cōmon welth xxxviii.
            
            
               S.
               SAbbothe daies of the Iewes. C.xxi.
               Sacramente of the aulter Cx.
               Sacrifices lxii.
               Sayles lxxx
               Salomon. xvi.lxxii.
               Salomon made the firſt temple C.vi.
               Salte lxviii.
               Salutyng with kyſſes. xcvii.
               Sanctuaries lxxv.
               Sand diall. xliiii.
               Satyres. xviii.
               Saturnalia games. liii.
               Saturnus father of the goddes ii.
               Sauery. xxxii.
               Sawe. lxxviii.
               Scaffoldes lxxvii.
               Scarlet roabes xcii.
               Schiſmes. C.lii.
               Scithians league. liii
               Scotlande vſe. ix.
               Scribes Cxlviii.
               Secretaries. C.xllx.
               Sectes from the .C.
and .xxxiiii. too the C.xlv. lefe. 
               Selandyne xxxii.
               Senio. lii.
               Seruius Tullius lix.
               Sethis poſterite. xxvii
               
                  Sextyns. lxxxviii.
               Shaftes, xlix.
               Shalmes xxiii.
               Shauen crounes. xc.
               Shildes. xlviii.
               Shippes lxxx.
               Shomakers crafte. lxix.
               Shroue
                     •
                  weſday. ciii,
               Sycles lix.
               Silke lxix.
               Silla xli.
               Siluer lviii.
               Siluer coyned in Egina. lix.
               Silueſter commaunded that a prieſte ſhould haue but one wife. C.v.
               Simony. C.l.
               Simonides iii
               Singyng pſalmes by courſe. C xix.
               Syngyng to the lute. 
                     •
                  xiiii.
               Syngle liuers ix.
               Sithes. xlix.
               Siues & ſarces. lxvi.
               Slynges xlix.
               Smityng fire with woode lix.
               Smithes forge. lviii.
               Socrates xxiii.
               Solicitours. C.xlix.
               Soll. xliiii.
               Solle maſſe daie. C. and xxvii.
               Somners. C.xlix.
               Sōnes of Noha. vii.
               Sōnes of Seth foūd the letters xiii.
               Sotheryng of Iron. lviii.
               Speares xlviii.
               Speakyng of the nature of God is daū
                  gerous. lii.
               Spyndelles. lxix.
               Spinnyng lxviii.lxix.
               Spirites xxxiii.
               Spirituall prieſtehod lxxxviii.
               Spurius Caruiliꝰ. x.
               Squire lxxviii.
               Stacions. C.xlvii.
               Stallyng a biſhoppe. xci.
               Sta
                     •
                  es. xlviii.
               Steples. lxxiii.lxxiiii.
               Stephen is martyred lxxxiiii.
               Sterres of what power thei bee. xxvi.
               Stewes lxxxi.
               Stithee lviii.
               Stockes xli.
               
                  Storye of a Kynges daughter. ix.
               Strikyng of ye clocke xliiii.
               Subdeacōs. lxxxviii.
               Subſydes and taxes xli.
               Succeſſion in prieſtehoode lxxxviii.
               Sundery deuiſion of the daie. xlv.
               Superſticion turned into religion C.xix.
               Supplicacions. C.xxx.
               Suſanna. lxxxi.
               Swearyng xcvi.
               Swyne commended in ſacrifices lxvii.
               Swordes. xlviii.
               Sworde plaiers. liii.
            
            
               T
               TAbles. li.
               Akyng of houſell at Eaſter C.xiiii.
               Talus li.
               Tapers C.
               Targettes. xlviii.
               Taxes or Subſidye that thei paie which haue benefices. C.xlix.
               Taxes or Subſidies xli.
               Teleſphorus did appoyncte Lente to be kepte afore Eaſter. C.xix.
               Tennis. li.
               Tentes lxxii.
               Textes prouyng confeſſion C.xvi.
               Thales ii.xlii.
               Theatres lxxviii.
               Themiſtocles. xxiii.
               Theodoſius cōmaunded that no Croſſe ſhould be grauen on the grounde. C vii.
               Theſeus firſt tyrante xxxix.
               Theſſaly vſed Magike. xxxiii.
               Thraciās faſhion of buriyng lxxiii.
               Thre ſtrynges in the harpe. xxiii.
               Three partes of philoſophie. xxv.
               Thre maſſes on Chriſtemaſſe daie. C.xiii.
               Three partes of phiſike. xxx.
               Thre kyndes of lawes. xxxvi.
               
                  Three powers of the ſtarres. xxvi.
               Tyle and ſlate. lxx.
               Tyrians were connyng Carpenters. lxxix.
               Tyſias gaue rules of Rhethorike. xxi.
               Tithes C.xxxii.
               Titles of Biſhoppes of Rome C.xlviii.
               Tonges. lviii.
               Towers lxxi.
               Tragidies. xvii.
               Tragos. xvii.
               Tranſfiguracion. C. and xxiiii.
               Tribunes xl.
               Triumphes lv.
               Tryx. xviii.
               Trewe faſte. C.xix.
               Truſe for yeres. liii.
               Tubalcain. xxii xlviii and lviii.
               Turnyng oure faces Eaſtward C.ix.
               Two kyndes of propheſiyng. xxxv.
               Twoo partes of grā
                  mer. xiiii.
            
            
               V.
               VEnus lii.
               Enus a commen woman. lxxxi.
               Vermilion. lxi.
               Vigilles C.xx.
               Viſers wer found by Echilus xviii.
               Voyces. xxxix.
               Vowes. C.xxix. and. C.xxxv.
               Vſe of Scotlande. ix.
               Vſes in the ſeruice. C.xviii.
               Vulcanus. lviii.
               Vulturſii. lii.
               
                  Vxor ab ungendo. x.
               
            
            
               W
               WAggons. l.
               Alles of houſes. lxx. and .lxxi.
               Waſhing of feete on maundy Thurſday xcviii.
               Waſhyng dedde bodies. C xxvii.
               Watche woordes. xlviii.
               Watches, Wardes. xlviii.C.xx.
               Water is cauſe materiall. iiii.
               Water diall. xliiii.
               Weightes and meaſures. xxix.
               
                  Weuyng lxviii.
               Wethercockes. xxviii
               Whitſondaie. lxxxvii
               What men were deified. i.
               Wymble lxxviii.
               Wyndes. xxvii.
               Wine lxvi.
               Wyne tauernes. Ivi.
               Winter garlādes. lvi.
               Wolle lxix.
               Women had commēdaciōs in Rome. lxxv.
               Women maye not bare their heddes in the churche xcvii.
               Women of Inde lxxiiii.
               Woorkes due on the holy daies. C.xxii.
               Worlde made of naught. iiii.
               World was made by meter. xvi.
               Wreſtlyng. li.
               Writyng in Egypte. lxxvi.
               Writyng tables. C.i.
            
            
               X.
               
                  X Letter. xiiii.
               Xamolxis. xxv.
               Xerxes. li.
            
            
               Y
               YAwnyng. C.xxx.
               Ere, who founde it. xlii.
               Ymages. lxi.
               Ymages of the wyndes xxviii.
               Ymages of waxe. C.
               Yokyng oxen. lxv.
               Yron. lviii.
               Yuye. xxxii.
            
            
               Z.
               ZEno. vi.
               Oroaſtes found Magike. xxxiii.
            
            
               ❧The ende of ❧ the Table.
         
         
            
            IMPRINTED at London vvithin the precincte of the late diſsolued houſe of the grey Friers, by Richard Grafton Printer to the princes grace, the .xvi. daie of Aprill, the yere of our Lorde. 1546.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
   