
      
         
            
            
            THE BEAME OF BRIGHTNESSE.
            Or The three faire Siſters of Chriſtendome.
            Containing: A Diſputation betweene the three famous Citties in Europe.
            Viz. Venice, Paris and London, with their differences.
            Compoſed by William Venner, Gentleman.
            AT LONDON Printed for Iohn Wright, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Newgate Market, neere Chriſt-church. 1611.
         
         
            
            
            To the right VVorſhipfull Sir John Watts, Knight, one of the prudent fore-ſeeing Aldermen of this honorable and famous Citty of London.
            
               IN the time of your honorable gouernment in this Citty, it was my chance right worſhipful to rime before you, and being more worthilie eſteemed, then my deſerts could merit, I did thinke it a point of my duty, to dedicate this worthleſſe worke, onely to ſhew a kind of thankfulnes, aſſuring my ſelfe that ſince I receiued grace for extempore, this poore Inuention ſhall ſcape free from diſgrace, hauing ſo worthy a Patron to defend it, Thus commending a ring poſie rather then an Epiſtle I end, wiſhing your Worſhips endleſſe felicity.
            
               Your worſhips at all duty William Ʋenner.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the courteous, not captious Reader, health.
            
               I Make no doubt, but there are many of my countrymen which haue ſeene the beautie and riches both of Paris and Venice, who may happily blame me for my breefe deſcription. But gentle reader I anſwere it thus, I could Willingly haue giuen them a larger praiſe, had their merrit beene equall with Londons: And this moreouer I deſire thoſe which ſhall miſlike my Labour to mend it, and none ſhall be more willing and ready to applaude them then my ſelfe. I haue begun the foundation, if any pleaſe to build vppon it, I ſhall thanke him for beautyfiing my rough building, But hoping they will iudge of me, as I would doe of them in this caſe, I leaue it to their mildeſt and moſt fauourable cenſure.
            
               Your friend, VV. V.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The three faire Siſters of Chriſtendome, conteining a Diſputation of the three famous Citties in Europe, and their differences: viz. Paris in France, Venice and London.
            
               Paris to London.
               PRoud Engliſh Siſter fall vpon thy knee,
               and aske forgiueneſſe of my angry gate:
               Thy ſhining beauty hath diſhonored mee,
               thy fained loue deſerues my mortall hate.
               Know I am Paris that doth check thee ſo,
               Whoſe fame & beauty through the world doth go.
            
            
               London to Paris.
               Faire famous ſiſter, 'tis no ſwelling pride,
               that makes me term'd the beautie of the earth:
               What all men giue, thy enuie cannot hide,
               although thou ſeek'ſt for to aduance thy birth,
               Thus much Ile ſpeake without reproche to thee,
               Thou knowſt when thou waſt ſeruant vnto me.
            
            
               
               Venice to London.
               Peace prating girle, call her not thy inferior,
               ſhee hath that in her, thou canſt not obtaine:
               Both I and ſhee, will now be thy ſuperior,
               to call thee Siſter now we both diſdaine.
               I am ingirt with Seas, ſhee with the land,
               And what canſt thou haue more at thy command?
            
            
               London to Venice.
               Venetia's virgin maske thy bluſhing face,
               thy walls ſalt water are, ſalter's thy ſinne:
               Thy common Curtizans ſheweth thy deep diſgrace
               though by their luſt thou doſt much profit winn.
               Thou harboureſt murther, rape, and iealouſie,
               My maiden-ſtreetes doe ſcorne their company.
            
            
               Both to London.
               Dooſt thou accuſe vs of ſo ſmall abuſes,
               we can condemne thy ſtreets of twenty more:
               Firſt thy Stage Players ſeruing for no vſes,
               but to inrich themſelues to make thee poore.
               Next couſning wits that on poore guls are whetting
               And all thy ſhops polluted are with cheating.
            
            
               London to both.
               
                  Bluſh both with ſhame, for this you haue reported,
                  ſince I am gouerned with the ſword of right:
                  
                     True Iuſtice in my maiden Towne is ſeated,
                  whoſe honor makes my beauty ſhine more bright:
                  My wedded Lord doth ſit in Iuſtice chaire,
                  For to aduance me, thrice honored Lord Mayor.
               
               
                  And for thoſe players that do ſo offend you,
                  they can lay open all your ſecret vices:
                  And for your vertues they likwiſe wil cōmend you,
                  you ſpeake but what foule enuie you intiſes:
                  Within my maiden walls I ſcorne to heare them.
                  Yet all the world for action comes not neere them.
               
               
                  But to come to, a neare particular,
                  chant out your worthes wherwith you are indued:
                  When you haue done with tearmes familiar,
                  Ile ſhew you what within me may be viewed.
                  She that her fame with truth doth moſt make gliſter
                  Shall be eſteemed for the worthieſt Siſter.
               
            
            
               Both to London.
               Wee are content, thy motion's reaſonable,
               beſhrew the heart of them that would deny it:
               And let it be recorded in a table,
               that all may read our praiſes that paſſe by it.
            
            
               Paris.
               Pray ſiſter peace (if I be not miſtaken,)
               Hir pride and ſtate ſhall by my worth be ſhaken.
            
            
               
               Venice.
               
                  Paris begin, and London liſten to it,
               her faire diſcription will force thee looke pale:
               If not, then London know, Venice will do it,
               yet will we both vouchſafe to heare thy tale.
               Chearly ſweet London, do not looke ſo thin,
               Me thinkeſt thou faint'ſt before our tale begin.
            
            
               London to both.
               Stretch out your fame vnto the largeſt bower,
               Ile ſit and heare your praiſe with patience:
               Know worthy ſiſters, that it is my order,
               to grace a ſtrangers words with audience,
               Report the truth, and then my griefe is cured,
               Ile ſpeake no falſhood, be yee both aſſured.
            
            
               Paris deſcription of her ſelfe.
               
                  My name is Paris, London view my face,
                  know I am Grand-mother to mighty France,
                  And am well ſcituated in a place,
                  where gods and goddeſſes may ſeeme to dance.
                  In me there flowes faire fountaines & ſweet ſprings,
                  I am the ſeate of the firſt Chriſtian Kings.
               
               
                  My riches paſſeth all my skill to tell,
                  yet thus much to report I may be bold:
                  
                     What other Cities haue, I haue to ſell,
                  from meaneſt mettall, to the pureſt gold▪
                  
                  Orrenges, Limmons, White and Clarret wine,
                  London, thou borroweſt from my tree and Vine.
               
               
                  I want for nothing that the earth can yeeld,
                  my gouernment is ciuill, rich, and faire,
                  I ſtand on drye ground in a pleaſant field,
                  the heauens breath in me, their wholſome ayre.
                  Except ſweet Venice, none in Europs horrizon,
                  Compares with Paris, Paris without compariſon.
               
               
                  For my religion, 'tis the Romaine faith,
                  in me the holy Monkes and Friars ſing:
                  The holy Vicar, much good of me ſaith,
                  whoſe loue I do eſteeme aboue my King.
                  Rich in religion, rich in wealth and all,
                  Laſt; whiles the world ſtands, Paris cannot fall.
               
            
            
               Venice to London.
               How likes faire London of the French maids words
               I am aſſur'd I ſhall not neede to ſpeake:
               I ſee thy heart is cut as twere with ſwords,
               and thou for Lady Paris art too weake.
               Therefore I count my ſpeeches ſhould be vaine,
               Vnleſſe thy pride ſhould ſtir me vp againe.
            
            
               
               London to both.
               Pardon me both, I was almoſt a ſleepe,
               to heare the ſinging of the holy Fryars,
               Me thought their bells ſuch ratling did keepe,
               within my eares: yet grant me my deſires.
               Faire Venice ſpeake your worth, Paris defend it,
               And when you both haue done, Ile helpe to mend it.
            
            
               Venice deſcription of her ſelfe to London.
               
                  I know that I thy patience ſhall diſturbe,
                  but yet poore Londō, thou of force muſt heare me,
                  Know I am Venice, miſtreſſe of the Orbe,
                  no humaine force on th'earth, ther'is can feare me.
                  My walls are mighty galleis on the maine,
                  I feare not Roome, nor ſtand in awe of Spaine.
               
               
                  No ratling Cart or Waggon runnes in me,
                  but gentle Gundels ſwimming ore the ſtreame.
                  I am admired for my courteſie,
                  great Dukes do quaile, if I of anger dreame.
                  Ile beg for no Kings loue, deride all hate,
                  I'me more then Venice, the Venetian ſtate.
               
               
                  In rich attire all my men goe clad,
                  my women masked from the ſcorching ſunne,
                  To trade with me all forreners are glad,
                  I gaine by all, and all by me haue wonne.
                  
                     Each Curtizan that doth in me remaine,
                  Doth tribute pay out of the gould they gaine.
               
               
                  Thus doe I dwell ſecurely in the ſea,
                  what I can wiſh is brought me by the maine:
                  And though ſalt water comes in euery where,
                  yet all my welles ſweet water doe containe,
                  Of all the world my ſtate is holden wiſe,
                  All call me the faire flower of marchandiſe.
               
               
                  For my religion Paris, tis like to thine,
                  I loue the Pope and ſeeme not to gainſay him:
                  But if he once command the leaſt of mine,
                  Ile ſmile at his command, and not obay him.
                  Thus doe I liue a famous Virgin free,
                  Commanding all, yet none commandeth me.
               
            
            
               Paris to London.
               I wounded thee but this faire Queene hath ſlain thee
               her royall praiſe hath ſtrucke thee to the heart:
               And London know we euer will diſdaine thee,
               if thou from vs in this dumbe ſhew depart.
               Therefore lets heere what you can briefly ſay,
               Although you beare your ſhare of ſhame away.
            
            
               London to both.
               I muſt confeſſe you are exceeding faire,
               and both your largeneſſe farre ſurpaſſeth mine:
               
                  
                  Paris is ritch, Venice is full of ware,
               and both well ſtor'd with fruite and choiſeſt wine:
               Since this and more my eye in you doth ſee,
               giue leaue, Ile ſhew you what there is in me.
            
            
               Both to London.
               Speake free thy mynde for we ar both content,
               and will acknowledge thou art wonderous kind.
               Sith that thy Iudgment is ſo frendly ſpent,
               vpon our worthes, our fauor thou ſhalt finde.
               We long to heare thy worth what it may be,
               If thou canſt equall ours weele all agree.
            
            
               Londons Deſcription.
               
                  Firſt Lady Paris I adreſſe to you,
                  you ſtand on Champion ground and ſo do I,
                  No ſtately ſhipping comes vnto your view:
                  thankes be to heauen my dwellings not ſo drie,
                  
                     Paris wants ſeas, Venice wants hills of chalke,
                  London wants neither water, nor ſweet walke.
               
               
                  At both your riches London doth not grudge,
                  if thou deſire ſome of my wealth to ſee,
                  Walke but directly ouer my faire bridge,
                  to my exchange and then youle honor me,
                  From thence to Paules, & more wealth ſhal be ſpied,
                  But winke not with your left eye in Cheapſide.
               
               
                  
                  My honorable Lord doth gouerne me,
                  with his wiſe brethren and a worthy ſhrieue:
                  Where equity and Iuſtice you ſhall ſee,
                  in larger meaſure then you can beleeue,
                  As wide as is the world my fame doth ring,
                  I am a ſeate for Prince for Queene and King
               
               
                  I am arts Miſtris and the tradſmans nurſe,
                  I am the high way to Pernaſſus mount:
                  How many ſtrangers come with loden purſe,
                  to buy the water of my Nimphy fount.
                  For trades I am a plaine community,
                  For art a tenfould Vniuerſity,
               
            
            
               Both to London.
               Peace ſpeake no more, our anger is abated,
               No more weele ſtriue for ſoueraignity:
               Thy worth of vs is now beloud, not hated,
               giue vs thy hand weele ſweare true amity.
               
                  Venice is faire, Paris is large and wide,
               London is ritch it cannot be denyed.
            
            
               London to both.
               
                  You interrupt me ere my tale is done,
                  foure Tearmes are holden in me euery yeare:
                  My countrymen vnto me ride and runne,
                  and doe inritch me, yet I am not deare,
                  
                     Yet this is nothing to that I now ſhall tell,
                  By which you both ſhall ſay I doe excell.
               
               
                  My maiſters can command their ſeruants ſo,
                  they muſt fulfill it without all replie:
                  If they command, their men with ſpeed to goe,
                  with willing mind all ſloath they doe defie.
                  Yet giue me leaue I muſt ſpeake one thing more,
                  More worth then all, that I haue ſpoke before.
               
               
                  For my Religion it is profound,
                  in Ieſus Chriſt I build my cheefeſt hope:
                  Gods word, the ſacred ſcripture is my ground,
                  and not the diueliſh doctrine of the Pope.
                  You both are blinded with his falſe illuſion,
                  which not foreſeene will worke your own confuſion.
               
            
            
               Both to London.
               Sweete ſiſter peace for you haue ſham'd vs both,
               and prickt our conſciences with endleſſe griefe:
               We muſt giue thee the beſt, though we are loath,
               yet haſt thou got it and thou muſt be cheefe
               Thinke kindly of vs, worthieſt of the three,
               And let our Trafficke with thee ſtill be free.
            
            
               London to both
               
                  Thinke you of me, as I will doe of you,
                  no pride nor enuie dwelleth in my heart:
                  
                     You gaue me that which is mine owne by due,
                  yet ſtill with me you ſhall haue ſiſters part:
                  Vſe me for trafficke and tranſporting ſtill,
                  My heart is free to thinke the leaſt of ill.
               
               
                  Now farewell Siſters England calls me hence,
                  and I muſt goe, good haps betide you both,
                  Yet thus much vnderſtand without offence,
                  to change my wealth with both I would be loath.
                  Yet will I yeeld the beſt on this condition,
                  That you caſt off your grounded ſuperſtition.
               
            
            
               Paris to both.
               Farewell ſweet London thou haſt conquered me,
               I now muſt take my leaue and flie for France:
               
               My ſtudie ſhall be to ſpeake well of thee,
               thy words haue ſtrooke poore Paris in a trance,
               Faire ſiſter Venice thriſe farewell to thee,
               But to braue London I muſt ſeruant be,
            
            
               London to Paris.
               Nay ſay not ſo, no ſeruant you ſhall be,
               
                  Dublin and Edenborough my faire handmaids are,
               Faire Hollands Girles their duties ſhew to me,
               tis I deliuered them from hand of war,
               
                  Paris, in loue, faire London takes thy hand,
               To thee vnited in a true-loues band.
            
            
               
               The Beame of Brightneſſe. Paris adiew.
               Much honored Maide, eterniz'd be thy fame,
               may Paris liue to doe thee ſeruice ſtill:
               Heauens plague on them, that ſeeke to worke thy ſhame,
               or haue intent to wroke thee any ill.
               The winde is Nore, and I will poſt to France,
               Where Londons name, I Paris will aduance.
            
            
               Venice to London.
               
                  Paris is gone to France, but wretched I,
               will haſt vnto the Adriattick ſea:
               My ſtreets ſhall ſalt teares weepe, and nere be dry,
               ſith that I am conſtrained to obay.
               Yet louely London, this report of mee,
               I am the ſecond, worthieſt next to thee.
            
            
               London to Venice.
               Be ſure me Venice, but I will report,
               thy fame and credit may coequall mine:
               Yet one thing there is wanting in thy Court,
               which I containe, that is Gods word deuine.
               Yet truly Venice, this Ile ſay to thee,
               I loue thee, and thou ſhalt haue peace with mee.
            
            
               Venice farewell.
               More louely then my loue can ſet thee forth,
               more famous far, then fame hath skill to call thee:
               
                  My might is much, but little to thy worth,
               and thus I wiſh all endleſſe ioyes befall thee.
               London command mee, where thou wilt and when,
               God proſper thee, thus Venice ſayes Amen.
               
            
            
               Londons Concluſion.
               
                  They both are gone, and left me heare alone,
                  I wiſh them well, though firſt they enuied mee,
                  I euer ſhall enioy my natiue home.
                  to let my country-men my beauty ſee.
                  
                     Venice commands the Seas, Paris the land,
                  
                     London, both ſea and land, at her command.
               
               
                  Great God preſerue my royall Emperour,
                  the Queene, the Prince, the Councell, & my Lord,
                  His worthy brethren, and each venturour,
                  that can for them and me their loue affoord.
                  Plant Preachers in me, to beate vices downe,
                  Laſt with thy hand defend my maiden towne.
                  
                     Amen.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   