
      
         
            
            
            THE MEMORABLE, AND TRAGICAL HISTORY, OF THE PERSECVTION IN AFRICKE: vnder GENSERICKE and HVNRICKE, Arrian Kinges of the Vandals.
            WRITTEN IN LATIN BY the bleſſed Biſhop VICTOR of Vtica, who perſonallie (as alſo S. AVGVSTINE the famous Doctor) endured his part thereof.
            WITH A BRIEFE ACCOMPLISHMENT of the ſame Hiſtory, out of beſt Authors: togither vvith the life and acts of the holy Biſhop Fulgentius, and his conflicts vvith the ſame Nation.
            Nothing newe vnder the Sunne. Eccleſ. 1.
            
            The Spirit and the Spouſe ſay, come, and vvho heareth let him ſay, come. Apoc. 22.
            
            
               Printed with Licence. 1605.
         
         
            
            In the margent P. S. importeth the edition of Paris by Sonnius.
            In the margent P. F. importeth the edition of Paris by Fremy. ANNO. 1569.
            In the margent B. importeth the edition of Baſil. ANNO. 1541.
         
         
            
            TO THE VERTVOVS, AND DEVOVTLY AFFECTED, HIS DEARE MOTHER: PERSEVErance in the paths of Godlines.
            
            
               THERE want not (Deare Mother) vvho vvith their newe gifts, wil impart to you the hopes of an happy yeare: vveary I no leſſe then your ſelfe, of nouelties, preſent you rather with a jewell of no leſſe antiquity, then price: which long hath vnworthely layen hid, when moſt of all ſtood the vertue thereof in requeſt. Stale it is not, neither doth the age thereof diminiſh the eſtimation, but enhaunce it: quality of writers

and Authors being now at that paſſe, that by proportion of antiquity their value commeth to be rated. No otherwiſe then as in pretious ſtones and gold is commonly accuſtomed, the firſt whereof the more families they haue enriched and beautified, leſſe are held in ſuſpect; the later, howe much farther yeares it pretendeth in the ſtampe, fayrer currence it commonly findeth in the exchaunge, countenance being deriued from the continuance. Meruaile not if to you a woman, I tranſlate a Diuine; to one nothing curious in controuerſies, ſend a Father of the primitiue Church. No Author this aboue your reach; no high diſcourſe of difficile queſtions: but being deliuerer of a playne hiſtory, fuller of excellent examples, and pithy motions to perfection, then of ſubtle points or intricate matters; I judged nothing more worthy on which you might employ your vacant houres, or I my time and trauaile. Great plenty of things deſeruing mature cōſideration herein you haue: peruſe them, vſe them, print them in your minde; and what you admire in others, apply to your ſelfe.
            
               R. Y. S. M. L. A. D.
            
         
         
            
            
               THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR.
            
            
               
                  BY that which I found in my ſelfe, when I hapned to reade this tragicall hiſtory, and by well peyſing the ſubſtance of this Author, it was not hard for me to perceiue, that if he ſpake Engliſh, he might worke meruails in ſoules. To inſtruct the vnderſtanding, to moue the will, to illuminate the hart, to enkindle the minde, to remoue the miſts of ignorance from mens wits, to enflame the right beleeuing ſoule vnto zeale, I ſawe matter more then ſufficient. Let me deſerue the blazon of a lyar, if reading this diſcourſe, the attentiue and impartiall vmpeere admire not, to ſee howe like euermore thornes are to thornes; and grapes vnto grapes; wheat vnto wheat; & chaffe vnto chaffe; ſheepe vnto ſheepe; both children of darkenes & of light to their forefathers. If therein the weake in faith finde not aſſurance of Gods aſſiſtance; the tempted, diſcreete meanes of reſiſtance; the ſound

conſolation incredible; the corrupted their ſoules touched to the quicke. If herein be not many notable ſingularities of Hiſtoricall antiquity, and ſo many paſſages of points Eccleſiaſticall, that the faith and face of the vniuerſall Church of Christ, at thoſe dayes may moſt liuely thereby be deſcribed; the beliefe, rites, ordinances, and gouerment thereof: euen at thoſe dayes, when the three famous and chiefeſt Doctors, Hierome, Ambroſe, and Auguſtine, had immediately before together flouriſhed. Argument and forme of the perſecution, was no other, then this which followeth. After the Vandals had as an vncatar acted torrent, or mercyleſſe inundation, ouerrunne France and Spayne, they paſſed into Africa, wreſted the ſame from the Roman Empire, there eſtabliſhed the ſeate of their Kingdome, and iealous of their newe conquered Dominion, deemed nothing more ſecure then as the Mediterrane Sea did by vaſt and boyſterous waters ſeuer them from the Empire: ſo by diſſonant & irreconciliable opinions, to deuide the peoples harts from all ſociety with the ſame, to alienate them from the communion in beliefe with Greece & Italy. Whervnto, when the Arrian hereſie (which had already infected the Vandals, and in Africke had long ſince canker-wiſe crept into many harts) ſeemed moſt proper; Genſericke their King by

terrour of lawes gaue countenance to the ſame, & enterpriſed the vtter extirpation of the faith. Not in deede vrging in expreſſe tearmes to deny Chriſt our Lord to be equall to his Father, or to confeſſe any point of Arrianiſme againſt their conſcience (for it had beene too palpable abhomination euen to the ſimpleſt ſenſes) but only importuning for conformity ſake, to ſuffer themſelues to be ſprinckled with water of the Arrians handes, vnder certayne forme of wordes different from the Catholike manner, and at leaſt-wiſe to forſake the accuſtomed ſacrifice of the Church, and reſort to their pretended prayers. For recuſancy of which ſacrilegious impieties, ſuch thinges endured the Godly of thoſe times, as haue ſcant beene heard of: whoſe calamities make the ſubiect of this booke. But no wiſdome is there againſt the wil of the higheſt, nor counſaile againſt his determination, nor preuc̄tion againſt his prouidence, nor machination against his might; who firſt by horrible famin and mortality eaſed for a ſeaſon the yoke of his afflicted, and finally after foure-ſcore and tenne yeares, ſubduing the Vandals by the hand of the valorous Beliſarius, reunited the Prouince both to the Roman Empire and communion of the true faith: Full is the hiſtory Eccleſiaſticall; full are Euſebius, Sozomen, and Theodoret, of the perſecutions rayſed by Iewes and Infidels, against the

               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               ſmoothly deliuered as might be required: the law of a Tranſlator abridging my liberty. For had I not in this caſe choſen rather to be ſeene Religious i
                  •
               ſiſter, then 
                  •
               ond licētiate Paraphraſt, more could I haue beautified and graced my labour, to the Reader perhaps, but not to myſelfe, who hold preciſe truth to be the very beauty as of hiſtory, ſo of tranſlation. Neither becōmeth it me to excuſe the harſhneſſe of the African names, which Pliny aduertiſeth ſcarcely able to be committed to letters. In the edition of Baſil, two bookes of the three are by chapters diuided, but ſo vnfittingly to the context of the matter, that a dimme iudgement may apparantly diſcerne, that neither Victor, nor yet any man of learning was deuiſer of ſuch diſorderly order, and confuſed diſtinction. The whole haue I digeſted into chapters alſo, but in a more proper and conuenient ſort: as combination of the ſeuerall matters beſt diſpoſed. At places of marke, or elſe of ſpeciall difficulty, by the Authors wordes inſerted in the margent, ſhall the iudicious reader be vnpreiudiced of his owne ſenſe. The care of whoſe commodity might haue further extended my preamble to ſo important an Author; but that litle ſaid ſooner findeth pardon, then doth prolixity.
            (*⁎*)
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE.
            
               
                  CHAPTER. I. The horrible cruelty of the Vandals, vpon their firſt arriuall in Africke.
               
               
                  THE ſixtith yeare (as isAn Chriſ
                        ••
                      427. apparant) hath nowe his courſe, ſince the cruel and ſauage Nation of Vandals ſet foote into the boundes of Africke, croſſing ouer with eaſie paſſage at the ſtrait, where betweene Spayne and Africke, this great and large Sea preſſeth it ſelfe into the narrowe diſtance of twelue miles. Their whole power then paſſing ouer, by policie of ali. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                      & Agat. Trizeric 
                  Genſericke the Captaine, it was forthwith (for greater terrour of their name) ordered,

that the whole multitude ſhould be nūbred, as many as their mothers wombe had vntill then brought forth, amounting old and young, ſeruants and maſters, to foureſcore thouſand. Which number being doubtfully publiſhed, is euen at this day thought to be ſo great of men of armes, whereas the number of ſuch is now but ſmall and weake. Finding therefore a peaceable and quiet Prouince, their wicked troupes did on all coaſts ſet vpon the flouriſhingſt part of the land: who waſted, deſtroyed, and with fire and ſword conſumed euery thing, not ſparing ſo much as the ſhrubbes and buſhes which bare any fruit, leaſt thoſe, whome peraduenture dennes in the mountaines, ſteepe cliffes of the earth, or other bard places did hide in ſecret, might (being fled away) ſuſtaine themſelues with ſuch forrage. Thus while with cruelty they raged, no place remayned free from their vexation. In Churches eſpecially and Baſilicis Sanctorum Temples of the Saints, in Church-yardes and Monaſteries more villanous was their furie, & with greater flames they burnt downe houſes of prayer, then they did Cities and Townes. Where by happe they founde

the gates of Gods honourable Palace ſhutte, with ſtrokes of their Dext
                        •
                     
                     um, 
                        〈◊〉
                      may alſ
                        •
                      Gauntl
                        ••
                      Pſal. 73 Maces they forciblie made entrie: ſo that it might rightly at that time be ſaid. As if they had beene in a woode of trees, ſo hewed they downe with axes the gates thereof: in the axe and hatchet they threwe it downe. Thy Sanctuary in earth they burned with fire; they contaminated the Tabernacle of thy name. Howe many excellent Biſhoppes, and Nobi
                        •
                      ſacerd
                        •••
                     
                   noble Prieſts were by diuers kindes of paines made away, being tortured to deliuer vp what gold or ſiluer ſoeuer they had, either of their owne, or appertayning to the Church. And that all which was extant might through conſtraint of paine be vttered, they vrged the offerers afreſh with torments, pretending part only, not the whole to haue beene deliuered. The more alſo that any man rendred, more they thought he reſerued. Mouthes of ſome they opened with poles and barres, thruſting in ſtinking mire and dirt to extort confeſſion of mony. Some they tormented with wreſting their foreheads & legges with ſinewes, Rem
                        •
                     
                     entib
                        •
                     
                     uis. vntill they twanged with ſtretching. To very many (as if they had beene pitched or rozend veſſels)

they vnmercifully powred in at their mouthes ſea-water, vinegre, dregges of oyle, greaſe, with many other matters of torment. Neyther weakeneſſe of ſex, nor reſpect of gentrie, nor reuerence of Prieſthood mitigated their fierce mindes. Nay, there did their fury moſt abounde, where appeared any dignity or worthineſſe. Howe many Prieſts, and how many notable perſonages they charged with mighty loades, as if they had beene Cammelles, or other beaſts of burden, able I am not to declare: nor yet thoſe whome with gaddes of iron they haſtened forward: ſome of which pittifully vnder burdens yealded their ghoſt. Aged grauity, and reuerend gray haires, adorning the head like woole, found no priuiledge of mercy: guiltleſſe infancie felt their barbarous rage, which daſhed them againſt the ground, violently pulling the little ones from their mothers breſts: others wide ſtretching their tender legges, tore them a-ſunder from the fundament. Captiue Sion might then ſing in her gates. The
                  
                     
                        •
                     udith. 16. 
                  enemy hath reſolued to fire my territories, to ſlay my infants, and that he will daſh my babes againſt the ground. In ſome edifices of the

greater buildings and houſes, where fire could leſſe ſerue their malice, demoliſhing the roofes & walles, they left their beauty equal to the earth. So that now the auncient ſtatelines of the Cities, which was in time paſt, no more is to be ſeene, then if it had neuer beene: yea moſt Townes haue few or no inhabitants. For euen at this day what ſo may be found remayning, B. deſolabantur. P. S. P. F. deſolantur. are eftſoones laid waſt & deſolate: as they vtterly haue in Carthage ruinated the Theatres, the Temple Memory, with the paſſage ſurnamed An Idoll of the Africans, of vvhich mention, Tert. Proſp. Am. 
                  Celeſtis. And to ſpeake of thoſe thinges which touch vs neareſt, the chiefe Church where lie entombed the bodies of the holy Martirs Perpetua and Felicitas, that other of Celerina, of the Scillitans, & the reſt of the Churches vnſubuerted, Suae religioni licentia tyrannica mancipauerunt. they by licentious tiranny enſlaued vnto the ſeruice of their owne religiō. But where any munitions were, whereunto their laberous furie could not by aſſault attayne, innumerable multitudes being brought togither round about ſuch Caſtles, with deadly weapons they ſlue them, to the intent that by ſtench of putrifying carcaſſes, they might extinguiſh, whome, kept off by walles they could not approch.

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  (afterwardes King of Italy) who out of it paid him alwayes tribute, as to the Lord thereof, retayning neuertheleſſe a portion vnto himſelfe. Beſides this he ſpeedely charged his Vandals, that they ſhould vtterly chaſe away naked the Biſhops, and the Laytie alſo of the better ſort, from their Churches and manſions. Which was accordingly in moſt of them performed: Many, aſwell Biſhops as Lay-men of marke, and honourable perſons, to be ſlaues vnto Vandals, we our ſelues haue knowne.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IIII. Howe the Biſhop and Clergie were handled at Carthage.
               
               AFTER this commaunded he S. Auguſtine wrote his booke de haer
                        •
                     ſibus, vnto his Diſciple Quoduultdeus, perhaps this man. And his Epiſtle 19. vnto Deo-gratias, ſeemeth vnto him, who was this mans ſucceſſor. 
                  Quoduult-deus Biſhop of the ſaid City Carthage (a man well knowne to God and the world) and with him a very great company of the Clergie, naked and ſpoyled to be thruſt into wether-broken ſhips, and ſo baniſhed: whome God of his mercyfull goodneſſe vouchſafed by proſperous nauigation to bring to the City of Naples
                  
in Campane. Senators and men of worſhip he firſt quayled by cruell confining from their manſion places, and afterward expelled them beyond the Sea. Nowe then the Biſhop being (as hath beene declared) thruſt out with his Clero venerabili. reuerend Clergie, forth-vvith deliuered he vp to his owne Religion, the Church called Restituta, at vvhich the Biſhops cuſtomably made their abode: the reſt alſo vvhich vvere vvithin the vvalles, he tooke away, together vvith the goodes vnto them belonging, and of thoſe without the walles, he ſeazed as many as he would; eſpecially vpon two very fayre and large of the holy Martyr Cyprian; the one where he ſhedde his bloud, the other where his body vvas buried; vvhich place is called Mapalia. 
                  Sheepe-cotes. But vvho is he that can vvithout teares call to minde, howe he gaue commaundement, that the bodies of our dead ſhould not (but in ſilence and without ſolemnity of hymnes) be brought to the graue? Whereunto he alſo added, that the Clergie remayning ſhould be puniſhed with Exilio ali. Exitio, exile. While theſe thinges vvere doing, the Magni Sacerdote
                        •
                     
                   principall Prieſtes and notable perſons of thoſe Prouinces, which

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  with to be brought: which Sebaſtian taking in his hand, ſpake thus. This loafe that it might come to this fineneſſe and whiteneſſe, as to be counted fitte for the Kinges boorde, was firſt boulted from the baſe gurgeons and branne, then, of a heape of flower was moyſtened with liquor, and ſo paſſed water and fire, comming thereby to be both faire to ſight, and pleaſant to taſte: * Euen ſo haue I alſo already beene grownd in the Mola catholicae matris. mill of our Catholike Mother, purged as cleane flower, and tryed with the ſiue, ſprinckled with the water of Baptiſme, and baked vvith the fire of the holy Ghoſt: and as this bread out of the Ouen; ſo haue I by the diuine Sacraments (God being the workeman) iſſued pure and cleane out of the celeſtiall Font. But may it pleaſe you to performe that which I nowe propoſe; let this loafe bee broken in peeces, ſteeped in vvater, moulded againe, and then put into the ouen, thence if it come out better then it already is, I vvill doe as you exhorte. Which propoſition when Genſericke with all them in preſence had heard, he was ſo intangled, that he could finde no ſolution,

and therefore afterwardes ſlewe that warlicke perſonage, by another ſort of argument.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. The Church ſore oppreſſed: Biſhops baniſhed.
               TO returne from whence I digreſſed: ſauage commaundements rayſed vp daylie terrour, ſo that compaſſed in midſt of the Vandals, we had not any leaſure to take breath: neyther might place of prayer or Immolandi. ſacrifiſing, be any where obtayned by our complaints, ſo that the prophefie was then manifeſtly fulfilled. Nowe is there neyther Prince, Prophet, nor
                  Dan. 3. 
                  Captaine: nor place to ſacrifice vnto thy name. Euery day wanted not injuries, euen to thoſe Prieſtes, who were in ſuch regions, as payde contribution to the Pallace. * If any man in his exhortations to the people, named by chaunce (as the manner is) Pharao, Nabuchodonoſor, Holofernes; or any ſuch like, it vvas layde to his charge, that this he had mentioned in derogation of the Kinges perſon, and baniſhment was his immediate rewarde.

Neuertheleſſe as this perſecution was in ſome place openly practiſed; ſo in an other quarter was it more * couertly put in vre, that by ſuch deceipt ſooner might the name of the Godly be extinguiſhed. Many Prieſts we knewe at that ſeaſon for this cauſe exiled; as Vrban Biſhop of Girben, Creſcens metrapolitan of the Aquitan City, vvho had vnder him ſix-ſcore Biſhops ſuffragans, Habet-deum of Theudeles, Euſtrace of Suffecta, and two more of Tripoly, one of Viciſſibrata, and Creſconius of B. Nicenum. 
                  Een: Foelix alſo Biſhop of Adrument, for that he had * receiued one Iohn a Monke from the other ſide the Sea, with diuers others alſo, whome it were ouer long to recite: during whoſe exile, neuertheleſſe it was not permitted to enſtall others in their Cities. Amidſt thoſe troubles ſtood the people of God faſt in their beliefe, and like bees labouring their hiues, and combes, encreaſed and grewe ſtrong by the Melleis fidei clauiculis. Exod. 1. ſweet tentrels of faith. In ſo much that the Scripture was accompliſhed. The more they were afflicted, the more they multiplyed, and preuailed exceeding much.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII. Of Deo-gratias and Thomas, Biſhops of Carthage.
               IT came to paſſe in proceſſe of time, that to the city Carthage, after ſo long diſcontinuance & deſolation, was at requeſt of Valentinian the Emperor, ordayned a Biſhop, who had to name Deo-gratias. The actions of whome & what God wrought by him, who ſo ſhould endeauour particularly to ſet downe, the day would faile him before he had deliuered any juſt part thereof. Being created Biſhop, it fell out (our ſinnes ſo deſeruing) that Genſericke in the fiftenth yeare of his raigne, tooke the moſt noble and famous City Rome, carrying away with him the treaſure of many Princes, together with the people. After the arriuall of which captiue multitude at the African ſhore, the Vandals and Moores ſharing them (as the faſhion of the Barbarians is) husbandes were ſeparated from their wiues, children from their parents. Forth-vvith this notable Prelate full of Gods ſpirit, cauſed all the golden and ſiluer veſſels belonging to diuine ſeruice, to be ſold for their redemption from barbarous

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  litle dying, ſeeme nowe to be onely three; if at leaſt-wiſe there be ſo many: Vincent the ⸬ Vigitane Biſhop, Paul the P. F. P. S. haue Gigitanus and Sinnaritan. 
                  Sitmaritane (a Paul indeede no leſſe in deſert, then name) and one Quintian, who flying the perſecution liueth nowe a forraigner in Adeſſa a City of Macedon.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. The notable conſtancy of Maturian and Maxima, as well in vowed chaſtity, as in profeſſion of faith; and what followed thereof.
               WEE find in that ſeaſon many martyrdomes, but of Confeſſors a great multitude: ſome of whome I vvill endeauour to recite. One of thoſe Vandals whome they cal Millena
                     
                        •
                     ios. Coronels of thouſands, had to his ſlaues P. F. Martinian. 
                  Maturian and Saturian, and two of their brethren: and with them was fellowe ſeruant, a notable handmaide of Chriſt named Maxima, both in body and force beautiful. Maturian being an Armourer, and doing ſeruice very agreable to his Lord, and Maxima gouerning the houſhold, it entred into the Vandals imagination to joyne them in marriage, thinking by wedlocke to eſtabliſh their loyalty

towardes him. Maturian (as worldly yong men are vvont) affected the marriage: Maxima already Deo ſacrata. conſecrated to God, rejected the ſpouſals of men. When the time came that they ſhould goe to the ſolitary chamber of their ſecrets, and that Maturian (ignorant vvhat God had decreed of him) was deſirous to be bold with her, as with his wife, the ſeruant of Chriſt with quicke voyce anſwered him Chriſto membra corporis mei dicaui nec poſſum humanum ſortiri coniugium. To Chriſt (O brother Maturian) I haue dedicated my body, neither can I be partaker of humane * marriage, ſeing I haue already a heauenly and true ſpouſe; but this counſaile I giue thee. It is in thee if thou wilt ſo bring the matter to paſſe, that thou thy ſelfe maiſt alſo delight to become his ſeruant, whoſe ſpouſe thou ſeeſt I haue choſen to be. So well framed this motion through our Lord Gods appointment, that giuing eare to the Virgin, he aduāced the gaine of his ſoule in his yong yeares. To the Vandals eares came not the contract of this Spiritualis ſecreti commercia. ſpirituall ſecret, vntill Maturian nowe mortified & changed, perſwaded his brethren likewiſe, that as his true brothers they would partake of the treaſure, which he had found. He thus

                  Conuerſus. At this day ſuch as entring Monaſteries became not Eccleſiaſticall, are called Conuerſi (conuerts) conuerted with his three brethren, they altogether, with the Mayde in their company, iſſuing priuily forth, were aſſociated into the Tabracene Monaſtery, which the noble Paſtor Andrewe then gouerned. And ſhe not farre from thence liued in a Monaſtery of Puellarum. Virgins. This could not be hidden from the Barbarian, who by diligent ſearch and many rewardes, made enquiry after them. Finding out therefore, Non iam ſua, 
                        •
                     ed Chriſti mancipia. no more his ſlaues, but Chriſts, with fetters & torments, he vexed the ſeruants of God: dealing with them, not onely that they ſhould vſe carnall knowledge; but (which is worſe) that with filth of rebaptiſation they ſhould defile the beauty of their faith. King Genſericke, to whoſe eares this matter at laſt came, gaue charge that they ſhould be ſo long tortured, vntil they conſented & yealded to his will. He commāds ſtrong trunchiōs knotted like a ſaw, and Palmatos as bigge as one could gripe, to be addreſſed with their clubbed ends: which not only brake their bones, daſhing againſt their backes, but pearced inward alſo with their ſharpe prickes, and fetching ſtreames of bloud, by renting the fleſh diſcouered the bowels. Neuertheleſſe in the day following were they alwayes made

whole, in ſo much that often (& for a long ſpace) no ſignes of their hurts appeared, which by Gods holy goodnes were euermore cured. This paſſed, and Maxima remayning vnder fore impriſonment, was ſtreatched out vpon an vnmerciful Compede crudeli P F. Cuſpide. payre of ſtocks, whome as the ſeruants of God viſited with great reſort, before them all the ſtrong timbred engine & huge peeces of wood, became rotten, and fell aſunder. This miracle both is famous by the report of them all, & the party to whome the priſon appertayned, affirmed to me with an oath that it was true. But when the Vandal neglected to acknowledge her vertue, Gods anger beganne to worke reuenge in his houſe. He himſelfe with his children dyed, and the beſt alſo of his cattle periſhed. The Lady remayning a widowe, deſtitute of Sonnes and ſubſtance, offered as a preſent the ſeruants of Chriſt to P. F. S
                        •
                     
                     ſaon. 
                  Serſaon the Kings coſen; Who hauing receiued them very thankfully, an euill ſpirit began preſently by occaſion of the Saints, in ſondry wiſe to vexe his children and family. What happened the King had word by his Kinſman, and decreed thereupon that they ſhould be ſent into baniſhment to B. Capſus 
                  Capſur a Heathen King of the Moores.
                  
As for Chriſts handmaide Maxima, he of his owne motion, as one confounded and ouercome, diſmiſſed her: who yet liueth Mother to a multitude of Virginum Dei. Gods Virgins; and is one whome I knowe well. They were conuayed & deliuered vp to the ſaid King of the Moores, inhabiting in the deſert called Caprapict, where the Diſciples of Chriſt, beholding amongſt the Gentils diuers prophane ſortes of ſacrifices, beganne by admonition and example alſo, to inuite the Barbarous nation vnto knowledge of our God. By which meanes they gayned to Chriſt a huge multitude of the rude Gentils, amongſt whome the name & fame of Chriſtian religion had neuer before beene blazed, nor ſpred by any man. Then bethought they howe beſt the vnmanured & barren ſoile, might by preaching be cultured, and prepared to receiue the ſeede of the Goſpell, and ſubſequently be watered with holy Baptiſme. Sent are meſſengers through the wide journies of the wilderneſſe, and ariuing at length at * 
                  Rome, make petition that ſome Prieſt & with him Miniſtros Deacons, might be ſent vnto a people imbracing the faith. Which ſuite Pontifex Dei. Gods high Biſhop with no ſmall joy

accompliſhed. Erected is a Church; baptized are wonderfull great numbers of the Barbarians, and of thoſe which vvere Wolues, encreaſeth a plentifull flocke of Lambes. Relation whereof when Capſur had made to Genſericke; ſwelling with enuie, he willed the ſeruants of God to be drawne by the feet at Chariots tailes in ful courſe, ſo to end their liues amongſt thickets and thornes, and that the bodies of thoſe innocents haled forwardes & backwardes, ſhould be torne with ſharpe prickles of the buſhes and brambles: being in ſuch wiſe boūd, that they might view each others end. Who as they thus tyed beheld one another, the wild horſes being in race, and the Moores lamēting at the ſight, euery of them at the point of the ſwift flight thus tooke his farewell. O brother pray for me, God hath fulfilled our deſire: O this is the way to the kingdome of heauen. In ſuch wiſe prayſing and ſinging, and the Angels rejoycing at the ſight, their ſoules departed; where euen vntill this day our Lord Ieſus Chriſt leaueth not to worke great * miracles. B. Fauſtin Biſhop of Buronitanus. P. F. 
                  Burtinita proteſted to me once, that in his preſence a blinde woman there receiued her ſight.

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  they entered at the very houre, when themaritha, Galibus, Ammonis, Ptol. diuine Sacrament was in diſtributing to the people, and with extreame fury Corpus Chriſti & ſanguinem pauimento 
                        •••
                     rſerunt▪ &c. ſcattered on the pauement the body and bloud of Chriſt, prophaning the ſame vnder their beaſtly * feete.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. X. The glorious profeſſion of Armogas, his miraculous tombe. The happie conſtancie of Maſculas.
               
               AT this time Genſericke by the ſetting on of his Biſhops, gaue commandement that none but Arrians ſhould beare office in his, or his childrens Court. They came amongſt others, to our B. Armogaſter. 
                  Armogas, whoſe legges when they had often and long ſtrayned vvith bigge ſtringes, and with nipping and twanging ſinewes had as yet rather wrinkled only, then furrowed his forehead, wherein * Chriſt had fixed the ſtandard of his Croſſe: the Saint looking vp to heauen, the ſtrings and ſinewes braſt in ſunder like ſpiders twiſt. When the Torturers ſawe the ſinewie⸬ B. Caballini
                        •
                     . thongs burſt, they brought againe and againe ſtronger cordes, yea P. S. P F. Canabiuis. horſe-ropes;

all which came to nothing at his only calling vpon the name of God. Hanging alſo by one foote with his head downeward, he ſeemed to all men as if he ſlept vpon a feather-bed. When Theodoricke his Lord, and ſonne to the King (torments not preuayling) would haue commaunded him to be beheaded, he was ſtayed by his Prieſt Iocundus, telling him: you were better make him away by ſondry vexations. For if you kil him with the ſword, the Romans will beginne to publiſh him a Martyr. Theodoricke hereupon condemned him into the Prouince of Bizagena, there to digge pittes: afterward (as it were to greater deſpite) he willed that he ſhould be a Cow-heard hard by Carthage, where hee might be ſeene of all men. At which time hauing reuelation from our Lord, that his houre of reſt approched, he called vnto him one Foelix a worſhippefull Chriſtian, Steward of the Kings Sonnes houſe, and which reuerenced Armogaſtes as an Apoſtle, and ſaid vnto him: the time of my diſſoluing is at hand, I deſire you by the faith which both of vs embrace, that you will bury me vnder this Elme tree, which if you doe not, you ſhall render account

thereof to God: not that he cared where or howe his body ſhould be buried, but that it might be manifeſt what Chriſt had reueiled to his ſeruant. Foelix anſwered: farre be that from me, venerable Confeſſor: nay, I will bury you in a Church with that triumph and honour that you deſerue. Bleſſed Armogastes replyed, not ſo; but you ſhall doe as I haue ſaid. He loath to contriſtrate the man of God, promiſed indeede to fulfill that which he requeſted. VVithin very fewe dayes, the performer of ſo good a confeſſion of faith, dyed. Foelix haſtened to prepare the deſigned graue vnder the tree; and becauſe the knotty rootes intangled vvith the drie earth, bredde delay; leaſt the Holy body ſhould be buried vvith the lateſt, cutting the rootes quite away, and digging much more deepe, they beheld a ready coffin of very gliſtring marble, ſuch as perhaps fewe or no Kinges haue enjoyed.
               But neither am I to pretermitte one B. Maſculinum. 
                  Maſculas 
                  Archimimum. Maſter of the reuels; whome diuerſly ſhot at, to depriue him of the Catholike faith, the King himſelfe at laſt with gloſing wordes inuited, promiſing

to heape vpon him riches, if to his will he lent an eaſie eare. When for all this he remayned conſtant and vnconquered in faith, the King vvilled that he ſhould vnder-goe the ſentence of death; yet craftely gaue ſecreat inſtructions, that if at the exigent he dreaded the ſtroke of the brandiſhing glaiue, ſo much the rather he ſhould dye, not thereby being rendred a glorious Martyr: if contrarywiſe he vvere found conſtant in his confeſſion, the ſworde ſhould be ſtayed. But he (Chriſt giuing him ſolid foundation) became an vnmoueable pillar, and retourned a glorious Confeſſor. Though the enuious enemy vvould not make him Martyr: yet could he not violate the dignity of a Confeſſor.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XI. The magnanimious reſolution of Saturus.
               
               WE knew an other at the ſame time by name Saturus, vvho being a bright member of the Church of Chriſt, many times Catholica libertate. with catholike liberty reproued the impiety of the Arrians: & Steward

he was of Hunricks houſe. Conſpired it was through the inſtigation of P F P. S. Ma
                        •
                     inado. 
                  Mauridan a Deacon, whome vngratious Hunricke ſingularly reſpected, that Saturus ſhould be made an Arrian. Honoures with much riches are proffered in caſe he cōſent, dire torments are prepared if he refuſe, this option being ſet before him, that vnleſſe he obeyed the Kinges commaundement at the firſt diſcuſſion, preſently forfeyting houſe and ſubſtance, his ſlaues and children ſhould be ſold, and his wife before his eyes, be deliuered vp in wedlocke to a camel-driuer. He on the other ſide full of Gods ſpirit, preuenting in a ſort their wickedneſſe, doubted not to exaſperate their fury ſo farre. Whereupon his Often after is mention, likevviſe of laymens vviues, but neuer of Prieſts vviues (notvvithſtanthe chiefe rage vvas againſt them) vviſe without her husbandes priuity, ſecretly beſought reſpite, and obtayned it at their handes, who had in charge the putting of this rigorous ſentence in execution. Then went ſhe a ſecond Eue vnto her husband, being before hand Conſilio magiſtrata. taught her leſſon, and aduertiſed what to ſay: yet found ſhe not him an Adam, that would dare to touch the illecebrous aples of the forbidden tree. For Non Indigens ſed Saturus. not Indigent, but Satured was he called, ſaturate with the plenty of the houſe

of God, and one that had drunke at his delicious ſtreame. To the place where her husband al ſolitary was at his prayers, came this woman; her garments rent, her hayre about her eares, accompanied with her children, and a litle ſucking infant in her handes; whome caſting at her husbands feete, and with all her armes about his knees, ſhe hiſſed forth this ſerpentine voyce. Haue compaſſion (O my ſweeteſt) of me thy poore wife, and no leſſe of thy owne ſelfe; haue compaſſion of theſe children common to vs both. Here behold them before thine eyes. Let them not be ſubject to ſeruile condition, whome deſcent of our ſtocke hath made noble. Let not me be yoked to a baſe and ſhamefull marriage, yea and my husband yet aliue: me (I ſay) who ſo often at feaſts applauded to my ſelfe in my Saturus. God knoweth full ſore againſt thy will ſhalt thou but doe that, which voluntarily perhaps many haue yealded vnto. He gaue her for anſwere thoſe vvordes of Iob.
                  Iob 
                        •
                     . 
                  Thou haſt ſpoken like a fooliſh woman. Well ſhould I be afraide, if there were no other joy, then the bitter ſweets of this life. Thou ſerueſt nowe the Diuels turne, O

wife: who, if thou didſt loue thy husband, wouldſt neuer drawe him to a ſecond death. Let them take away my children, ſeperate my vvife, ſpoyle me of my goodes, I ſecure of my Lordes promiſe, will ſticke faſt to his vvordes. If any man ſhall not forſake wife, children,
                  Luc. 14. 
                  landes, or houſe, he can not be my Diſciple. The end was this: the woman refuſed by aduiſed reaſons, went her way: Saturus couragious i. to Mardome. for a Crowne, is examined, ſpoyled, puniſhed, and ſent away a begger, forbidden by going abroade to haue any vvhither to reſort. All tooke they from him, only of Baptiſmes ſtole could they not bereaue him. Thus paſſed this, and Genſericke commaunded the Church of Carthage, the Prieſts and their Deacons being diſperſed into ſondry places for want of a Biſhop; which was hardly opened at meditation of Zeno the Emperor by Seuerus a noble man of Rome, where vpon they al retourned from baniſhment. What i. Genſericke. he did in Spayne, Italy, Slauome, Champayne, Calabre, Poole, Sicil, Sardinia, Abruzo, Venice, Lucania, Epire, Greece, they can beſt declare which endured it. Here let the end be of our no leſſe arrogant

then cruell perſecution, ſuſtayned vnder Genſericke. He raigned Procopius. 39. thirtyſeauen yeares and moneths three.
               
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               
                  CHAPTER. I. The diſſimuled demeanour of King. Hunricke.
               
               
                  GENSERICKE being dead,⸬ B. Honerichus. Nundrius. Procop. Honorichus. his eldeſt Sonne Hunricke ſucceeded, who in the beginning of his raigne, was ſomewhat tractable and moderate (after the accuſtomed ſubtilety of the Barbarians) eſpecially concerning our affaires in religion. So that whereas heretofore vnder King Genſericke it had beene proclaymed, that there ſhould be no ſpirituall aſſemblies: now people made their meetinges afreſh. And to giue remonſtrance of a religious

Prince, he cauſed the Manichaean heretikes diligently to bee ſearched out; many of whome he burnt, moſt hee ſent away to forraigne ſhippes. All which The Anabaptiſts burnt vnder Q. Elie vvere all of them Proteſtants. 
                  Manichees in a manner he found to be of his owne religion, principally ſuch as were Prieſts or Deacons of the Arrian hereſie: which ſet him more on fire, becauſe of the ſhame thereby redounding. One amongſt them was found called Clementian a Monk, who had this their poeſie charactred on his thigh: A Manichaean Diſciple of Chriſt Ieſus. For this cauſe did the ſaid tyrant the more endeauour to pleaſe; becauſe in this one thing he much diſpleaſed, that with inſatiable deſire euermore eagrely gaping after his pray, he burdened the prouinces of his Kingdome with ſundry vexations & impoſitions; ſo that of him preciſely it might beſaid A King needing reuenewe is a great
                  B. Calamitas. P. F. P. S. Calumniator. 
                  calamity.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. Eugenius created Biſhop of Carthage, and of his vertue.
               ZENO the Emperor and Lady Placidia making interceſſion, Per edicta libri. by their letters, authorized that the Church of Carthage
                  
might to themſelues elect for Biſhop whome they thought good, hauing beene deſtitute of ſuch an ornament now full 24 yeares, it was condeſcended vnto by Hunricke, and licence graunted. He ſent therefore to the Church Alexander a noble man, who brought this meſſage; that the Catholikes ſhould in his preſence, poſtulate for themſelues a worthy Prieſt. He ſent alſo by his Secretary B. Iutarit 
                  Vuitared a Proclamation to be publikely read, contayning this tenour.
               Our Lord the King hath willed vs to ſhewe you, that the Emperor Zeno, and moſt renowmed Placida, haue written by Alexander a noble man, requeſting by their letter, that the Church of Carthage may haue a peculiar Biſhoppe of your religion. This he hath giuen commaundement ſhould be performed, and hath written backe vnto them, or preſcribed their Ambaſſadors to make report, that according to their deſire, yee may ordayne Biſhoppe whome you will, vnder this condition, that in like ſort the Biſhoppes of our religion that are at Conſtantinople, or in any other Prouinces of the Eaſt, may by his commaundement

haue free liberty to Populo tractare▪
                   preach to the people, and exerciſe Chriſtian religion, in what * language they will in their owne Churches, in ſuch ſort as you here, or in other Churches of Africke, haue free arbitrement to Miſſas agere. ſay Maſſe, or preach in your Churches. For if this be not obſerued towards them, not only the Biſhop that ſhal be created and his Clarkes, but all other Biſhops alſo with their Clergy ouer the African Prouinces, ſhal be commanded to the Moores. As ſoone as this edict was in my owne hearing read before the whole congregation, the 14. Calendes of P. F. Iuly: Iune; wee beganne ſorrowfully to murmur amongſt our ſelues: for that by this politike pretext, a perſecution vvas like to followe; and it is well knowne that to the Ambaſſador we made this anſwere. If the matter goe thus, and ſtand vpon ſuch pernitious conditions, the Church delightes not to haue a Biſhop: let Chriſt gouerne it who at all times hath vouchſafed to guide it. Which information the Ambaſſador neglected to admitte, and with all the people burned with deſire to haue preſent diſpatch, vvhoſe crie vvas intollerable, and could by no means bee

appeaſed. Of this holy man much writeth Greg. Tur. de gl. Confeſſ. l. 2 
                  Eugenius therefore a holy man and one acceptable to God, was choſen Biſhop, of vvhoſe election the Church of God was greatly recomforted, people Catholike liuing vnder a barbarous gouernement, triumphed to ſee the auncient creation of their chiefe Biſhop, againe renued. The greateſt number of young men and women by their vniuerſall joy well witneſſing, that they had neuer ſeene a Biſhoppe ſitting in his Pontificall Throno. Throne.
               This man of God, that bleſſed Prieſt Eugenius, beganne by vertuous conuerſation to be reuerently eſteemed, euen of Hiis qui foris ſunt, he alludeth to the Apoſtles phraſe 1. Tim. 3. intending ſuch are not vnited vnto the Church of Chriſt. thoſe without, and to be ſo louing to al, that he would gladly haue left his life (if it might be) for euery of them. Such great almes alſo our Lord did by his meanes exhibit, that it ſeemed incredible how ſo much could be beſtowed, where the Barbarous poſſeſſed all, the Church hauing not the value of on penny. His humility, charity, and piety wherewith he was endued from heauen, who ſo would attempt to expreſſe, he ſhould faile of his purpoſe. It is for certaine, that mony neuer ſtayed with him, except perhaps it had beene

offered when the Sunne hauing ended his courſe, gaue place to darkneſſe; and then only he reſerued what might ſerue for a day, not what couetouſneſſe might haue vviſhed, our Lord daylie ſending him greater ſtore. But his fame waxing euery where glorious and manifeſt, the Arrian Biſhops, eſpecially Cyrill, beganne to be tormented with ſore enuy, and purſued him with daylie quarrels. To be ſhort they put into the Kings head, not to ſuffer him to ſit in his Pontificall Throne, nor preach after his accuſtomed manner: Further to forbidde him, that any men or women attyred after the Vandall manner, ſhould be ſeene in the church. The Biſhop anſwered as became him: The houſe of God is free for all; thoſe which enter, no man may driue forth: and the rather, for that an exceeding multitude of our Catholikes vvent after their guiſe, by reaſon of ſeruice in the Kings Court.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III. The terrible vſage practiſed vpon Courtiers, reſorting to the Catholike ſeruice.
               SVCH anſwere, as ſoone as the King had receiued from the man of God, he

ordeyned torturers at the Church-gates, who, when they eſpied man or woman clad like one of the Vandall nation, forthwith clapping on their heads fleſh-hooks and writhing about the ſame their lockes of haire, with a ſtrong twitch pulled away both haire and ſcalpe withall, from the head: ſome being thus ſerued, loſt therewith their eyes; certayne alſo dyed outright. The women after this torment endured, were carried through the ſtreets to the gaze of the City, with a Cryer before them, which they (who ſuffered it) made reckoning of, as a great gaine: many of whom we knewe; but any one of them to haue for the paine forſaken their ſtraight way, I neuer knew. When by this meanes he could not infringe the conſtancy of any one of the faithfull, he determined that none of our religion being of his Court, ſhould receiue their prouiſion of corne, or accuſtomed penfions. He proceeded alſo to trie them with rurall labours, & ſent men of good calling & delicately brought vp, to the Country of Vtica, there vnder the ſeruent parching of the Sun Vt Ceſpites meſſi
                     
                        •
                     m deſec
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     ent. to delue for tillage, whither all of them cheerefully going forwardes, rejoyced in our Lord.

Amōgſt whome one of the company had a withered hand, which for many yeares ſtood him in no ſteede, who therefore not vntruly alleadged that he could not work yet was he ſo much the more violently preſſed forth. But as ſoone as they came to the place, and that all falling to their prayers mourned, & principally for him; through the mercy of God, that dry hand of the Confeſſor became hole. This was the entrance of Hunrickes perſecution, and now began our griefe and Part
                        ••••
                     
                     tio. trauailing.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. The horrible tyranny of Hunricke toward his owne linage.
               HE, who had nowe begonne to ſhewe himſelfe deſirous (although it otherwiſe fell out) to leaue his Kingdome to his children after his death, perſecuted cruelly his brother Theodoricke with his ſonnes, and the ſons likewiſe of his brother Genton, of whome not one ſhould haue eſcaped, had not death interupted his deſignment. Firſt for aſmuch as he knew the wife of B Dederichus & The dericus. P. F. & P. S. Theodoricus. 
                  Theodoricke to be a politike woman, he ſlewe her vpon pretended ruine, leaſt by ſome witty wile ſhe ſhould (as I ſuppoſe) arme her huſbāds eldeſt ſonne againſt the tyrant, as ſhe

that was both wiſe and ſage: After whom was alſo ſlayne her eldeſt ſonne, who had beene brought vp in learning, and by the conſtitution of Genſericke, ſhould firſt of all his nephewes enjoye the Kingdome, being the eldeſt of them all. Proceeding yet farther, he reſolued vpon more cruelty, and cauſed Iocundus a Biſhop of his owne ſect (whome alſo they called Patriarch) to be buried in the market-place, before the ſtaires of the newe ſtreete, in face of all the people; for no other cauſe, but that he was held very deare in the houſe of Theodoricke the Kings brother, by whoſe aſſent it may be, that the ſaid familie might haue obtayned the Kingdome. Which impious villainy gaue vs to foreſee the miſchiefe that hung ouer our owne heads, ſaying one to another: he that ſheweth ſuch cruelty to his owne Prieſt, when will this fellowe ſpare vs and our religion? Next he baniſhed with inhumane exile, Godagis the elder of Gentons ſonnes, and his wife, without permitting the ſolace of ſeruant or hand-maide. His brother Theodoricke likewiſe (his wife and ſonne being before ſlayne) he ſent packing, naked and in diſtreſſe: after whoſe

death he ſet his litle infant, & two daughters of ripe yeares, on Aſſe backes, and to their great affliction ſent them wandering farre away. Diuers Earles and Nobles of his owne nation he purſued, laying falſe ſurmiſes to their charge, for that they B. made themſelues a brotherhood. fauoured his brother. Some of them he burned; others he ſlewe with the ſworde, a right imitator of his Father Genſericke, who drowned his brothers wife in Amſag the B. faetidum. famous Riuer of the Ptol. Cirteſii, whoſe City was Cirta Iuli
                        •
                     . 
                  Cirtenſes, waighty ſtones hanged at her necke: and after the death of the mother, ſlewe alſo her ſonnes. Sondry had beene commended vnto Hunricke (and that vnder an oath) by his father Genſericke at his death, whome, he vnmindfull of fidelity, and violating his oath, put to death by fire, and ſondry torments, B. 
                        •
                     ldicus 
                  Heldicas, whome his father had ſometime made gouernour of his Kingdome, nowe an aged man and full of yeares, he beheaded, and burnt his wife in the midſt of the City, together with an other woman called ali. Th
                        •
                     ucaria. 
                  Thamaria: the bodies of whome he willed to be drawne through the ſtreets, hardly ſuffering them at the entreaty of his Biſhops, to be buried at euening, when they had layne al the day in

open viewe. P. F. P. S. Gamut. 
                  Caniut brother to Heldicas, hauing fledde to their Church, he might not ſlay, whome yet he ſhut into a filthy draught, and made him there liue a long ſpace: laſtly condemned him with a certayne goat-heard & a Country fellowe, to digge holes for vines; whome beſides this he cauſed to be rent with terrible whips, twelue times in the yeare, that is euery moneth once, ſcant graunting them a litle water and browne bread. This they ſuffered fiue yeares or more, who if they had beene Catholikes and endured for their faith, theſe puniſhments might haue auayled them to an eternall rewarde. But thus much I could not but write, leaſt the kings impiety euen towardes his owne company, ſhould be omitted; who not only brent with flames his Biſhop locundus (as I haue already told) but very many other in like manner of his Prieſts and Deacons, that is to ſay of Arrians, he addicted eyther to flames or to Beſtiis mancipauit keepe beaſts. All thoſe being now in ſhort ſpace cut off, whome he feared; and hauing eſtabliſhed (as hee thought) the Kingdome, which neuertheleſſe was to be but ſhort & tranſitory, being ſomewhat ſecure and voide of affaires,

he addreſſed all the inſtruments of his fury, to perſecute the Catholike Church.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. Viſions ſorewarning the Catholikes of perſecution towardes them.
               YET before the tempeſt of perſecutionThou giueſt to them which fel, the imminent miſchief at hand, was foreſhewed by many viſions and tokens, which wēt before it. For almoſt two yeares1. feare thee, a token to flie from the face of the bovve. Pſal. 59. before it came, a certaine man ſawe Fauſtus Church glittering with accuſtomed ornaments, & while he rejoyced in the brightneſſe of ſo great glory, as the tapers gaue goodly light, and aſwell the rich pals and cloathes as the lampes gliſtered; ſodainly (as he ſaid) the amiable cleareneſſe of that light vaniſhed, & darknes ſucceeding, a fauour abhominable aroſe, and all the cōpany of the fathers preſent, were by certaine Arrians driuen out of dores; ſo much the more to be lamented becauſe he ſawe not the former beauty reſtored any more: this viſion he which ſaw it, told in my hearing to holy Eugenius. A certaine prieſt alſo ſaw the ſame church of Fauſtus ful of innumerable people, & a litle after none at al, but in their place a multitude of ſwine. An other3.
                  
ſawe a floore of wheate ready to be winnowed, the corne not (as yet) ſeperated from the chaffe; and while he wondred to ſee ſo great a confuſed heape, ſodaynlie a tempeſtuous whirle-winde with roring noyſe beganne, the approch whereof the riſing of the duſt ſhewed; by the force hereof all the chaffe flew away, the corne remayning. Then came a certayne tall perſonage, of a goodly countenance, and coſtly apparelled, who beganne to clenſe the wheate, caſting away the empty and pined graines, ſuch as vvere vnapt for ſlowre, vntill hauing thus tryed, and leaſed a good ſpace, he had brought the greatneſſe of that heape to a quantity, though winnowed and fine, yet paſſing ſmall. Moreouer, an other told vs thus.3. A certayne high man ſtood vpon our Lordes hill, which is called Ziquens, and cryed on the right hand and on the left. Get yee hence, get yee hence. There was one4. vvhich beheld in a rudy skie, ſulphury cloudes toſſing vp and downe, which beganne to ſhoot forth mighty ſtones; theſe ſtones falling to the earth kindled more fiercely, and flaſhed with greater flames, & entring into houſes, burnt thoſe whome

they found within. He that ſawe it ſaid that he hid him ſelfe in a chamber, whither the 
                     •••
                  me, through Gods mercy, could not approch: that the wordes of the Prophet might as (I thinke) be fulfilled. Shut thy dore, and be hidden a litle ſpace,
                  Iſa. 26. 
                        •
                     . 
                  vntill the anger of God paſſe. The reuerent Biſhop Paul ſawe alſo a tree, ſtreatching out with flouriſhing branches to the very heauens, which alſo was ſo well ſpredde, that it ouer-ſhadowed all Africke: and when al people tooke pleaſure in the taleneſſe and beauty thereof, there came (ſaid he) an Aſſe with great violence, who rubbing his necke againſt the ſtocke of the roote, ouer threwe by his ſhouing, that wonderous tree, not without a great cracke. Quintianus
                  6. likewiſe an B. Venerable. honourable Biſhoppe ſawe him ſelfe ſtanding vpon an hill, from whence he beheld an innumerable flocke of ſheepe, and in midſt of the flocke were two boyling pots. Butchers vvere alſo there, who did caſt the fleſh of thoſe muttons into the ſeething pots, and by ſo doing the whole flocke was conſumed. Imagine theſe two pots to be the Cities Sicca Veneria, and B. Lara. but Ptol. hath Lares 
                  Laribus, where the multitude was firſt aſſembled, and whence this fire
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. VII. The horrible baniſhing of almoſt fiue thouſand perſons, with certayne pittyfull accidents hapning in the ſame.
               WITH what floudes of teares ſhall I now preſent, how he baniſhed to the wilderneſſe Biſhops, Prieſts, Deacons, and other members of the Church, foure thouſand, nine hundred, ſeauenty and ſix: amongſt whome ſome had the gout, others through very age loſt their bodily ſight. Amongſt whome was bleſſed Foelix Biſhop of P. F. P. S. Abdiritanus. 
                  Abbiris, who had fourty-foure yeares continued Epiſcopall dignity, and being ſtroken with a palſie, neyther felt any thing, nor could ſpeake at all. Of whome being very carefull, becauſe he could not ride, I perſwaded that the King might be moued by ſome about him, to permit him at leaſt (being almoſt at point of death) to remayne at Carthage: for to baniſhment he could by no meanes be carryed. Whereunto (as is reported) the Tyrant freſhly anſwered: If he cannot ſit vpon a beaſt, let wilde buls be coupled and drawe him tyed faſt with ropes,

to the appointed place. We carryed him therefore throughout the journey, bound ouerthwart a Super b
                        ••
                     
                     donem. mulets backe, as if he had beene a logge. All were brought together to the Cities of Sicca and Laribus, whither the Moores reſorting, ſhould receiue them deliuered vp to their handes, and tranſport them to the wilderneſſe. Then came thither two Earles, vvho with damnable ſubtilty beganne in ſweete communication to deale vvith Gods Confeſſors. What meane you (ſay they) to be ſo obſtinate, not to obey our Lord the Kinges lawes; who may honourably ſtand in his preſence if you ſpeedely obey his vvill? Streight way all with a great ſhout cryed out and ſaid: We be Chriſtians, we be Catholikes, we inuincibly confeſſe the Trinity one God.
               
               They were after this ſhut in a priſon very grieuous, but ſomewhat large, where I found meanes to get in, made an exhortation to the brethren, and Diui
                        ••
                      miſteria celebrandi. celebrated the diuine myſteries. There were alſo very many litle children, whome their mothers followed, with motherly affection: ſome rejoycing; others drawing them back: ſome were glad that they had borne Martyrs; others perſwading to the deluge

of rebaptization, endeauouring to recall them from confeſſion of their faith: but their allurementes could not then ouercome any, neyther made any one ſtoope vnto earthly affections. It liketh mee here briefly to declare what a good old woman did. As I trauailed accompaning Gods army, ſetting forwardes more by night then by day, becauſe of the heate; I beheld a poore woman carrying a bag, and other implements, leading in her hand an infant, and encouraging him in this wiſe. Runne Domine meus. Sirra: ſeeſt thou all the Saints howe merry lie they goe forward, and haſten to their Crowne? Whome vvhen I rebuked, for that ſhee ſeemed vnſeaſonable, preſuming to thruſt her ſelfe amongſt the profeſſed warriours of Chriſt, and being a woman to aſſociate her ſelfe with men. She anſwered P. S. hath it but once. 
                  Benedicite, benedicite, and * pray yee for me with this my litle nephewe. For ſinner though I be, daughter I am to one, who vvas Biſhoppe of Zurina 
                  P. F. Zurita. I asked her why then ſhe walked in ſo meane a ſort, and for what cauſe ſhe had vnder taken ſo long a journey. Who replyed: With this my litle boy I goe to the place of baniſhment,

leaſt the enemy finding him alone, call him from the way of truth, to death. To theſe wordes I could anſwere nothing elſe, the teares trickling downe my cheekes, but only, Gods vvill be done. The aduerſary, who nowe perhaps ſaid in his hart: I will part the ſpoyles,
                  Exod. 15. 
                  I will glutte my ſoule, I will ſlay with my ſworde, my hand ſhall rule. As ſoone as he ſawe that he could not catch one, ſought narrowe and filthy places wherein to penne vp Gods company. Then was to them denyed all comfort of acceſſe, for permitting vvhereof the keepers had beene beaten with ſtaues, and ſorely puniſhed. The Confeſſors of Chriſt are tumbled one vpon an other, as ſwarmes of graſhoppers, or (to ſpeake more properly) as graines of corne. In which thronging together, there could be no meanes of ſtepping a ſide to doe the office of nature, but of neceſſity euen there vvas the receptacle of their ordure and vrine, ſo that the horrour and ſtench thereof ſurpaſſed all other manner of paynes. I vvas once (not without much a doe, and deepe bribes beſtowed on the Moores) permitted to enter whilſt the Vandals ſlept.

Stepping in I began as at a mire, to ſincke vp to the knees, and ſawe that of Ieremie come to paſſe, who were bredde vp in Saffron
                  Ierem. 4. 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , embraced 
                        〈◊〉
                     . In fine being called vpon by the inſolent and clamorous Moores, to haſten forward their impoſed journey, iſſuing forth vpon a Sunday, their garments, face, and head beſmeared with dirt: in cruell wiſe were they led away by thoſe Moores, ſinging yet vnto our Lord vvith great joy: Glory is this to al his Saints. Pſal 14
                        •
                     . 
                  Gloria haec eſt omnibus Sanctis eius. Preſent was there alſo at that time, Cyprian the bleſſed Prelate Biſhop of B Vnzibil. but Ptol. V
                        ••
                     
                     
                     
                        ••
                     bi
                        •
                     a▪ Pl
                        ••
                      Vl
                        ••
                     uburita 
                  V
                     
                        •
                     izi
                        •
                     ir, who to their ſingular conſolation, cheriſhed euery one with godly and fatherly affection, and not without ſtreames of teares, ready to leaue his owne life for the brethren, and to yeelde himſelfe voluntarily to the fellowſhips of their paines, if he might haue beene ſuffered. He ſpent in very deede in that hard diſtreſſe, all that he had, beſtowing it vpon the impoueriſhed brethren: for hee ſought occaſion how he might be joyned to the Confeſſors, being himſelfe a Confeſſor already in preparation of hart, and in vertue: afterwardes paſſing many bickerings and calamities of priſon, he enjoyed to his

great gladneſſe, the exile which he ſo deſired. Howe great multitudes followed from ſondry Countries and Citties, to ſee the Martyres in a longer ſenſe then it is novve a daies taken Martyrs of God, the wayes and pathes beare witneſſe, not able to conteine the flocke of people, who comming as beholders, ranne vp and downe on the higher ground. An ineſtimable troupe alſo of the faithfull, with waxe tapers in their handes, deſcended downe; who caſting their childrē at the feete of the Martyrs, cryed out thus. * 
                  To whome wil you leaue vs wreatches, while you goe forwardes to your Crowne? Who ſhall chriſten theſe ſucklings in the font of the euerlaſting water? who ſhall impart vnto vs the benefite of Penance, by 
                  Reconciliationis in dulgentia. Matt. 16. 
                  reconciling and indulgence, abſoluing vs from the bandes of our ſinnes? for aſmuch as it is ſaide, whatſoeuer ye ſhall looſe on earth, ſhalbe looſed in heauen? who ſhall with ſolemne prayers commend vs to the graue, when we dye? By whome ſhall the wonted Rites of the 
                  Diuini ſacrificii. 
                  diuine Sacrifice be performed vnto vs? Our hearts ſerue vs well to goe with you, if we might; that ſo no neceſſity might ſeperate the ſonnes from you our fathers. A midſt theſe wordes, not deſtitute of B. prayſes teares, is no man any more admitted to goe forwardes with them for their comfort:

but the whole crewe was preſſed forwasrds and made to runne, that they might reach to the laborſome lodging where the The Arrabians at this day cal ſuch a troup Carauanna and very neare to Cannaua is the vvord Conuoy, vſuall through Chriſtendome in the ſame ſenſe Cannaua was prepared. As oft as the men fainted, or any other (yea although tender children) they were firſt punched forwardes with the toppes of ſtaues, or with ſtones; but afterwardes the Moores were commanded to tie by the feete, thoſe which were not able to goe, & hale them through the hard rough places, like carcaſes of brute beaſts. So, firſt were their garments rent, then all parts of their bodies. For here a head was daſht againſt the Gladios acutos petrarum. ſharp-edged rocks, there ſides were thumpt; ſo that life was gaſped out, euen betweene the hands of them which haled them: the number of whome I could not reckon, thy were ſo many. Extant remayneth to be ſeene all alongſt the common Aggerem publicum. high way, the reatchleſſe buriall of the Saints, their graues witneſſing, where they lie. The reſt as ſtronger, ariued at the wilderneſſe, where being ſetled, they had barly (as beaſts) giuen them for food. Where alſo is reported to be ſo great plenty of venimous wormes and ſcorpions, as to them who knowe it not, might ſeeme

incredible, which with their very breath infect and poyſon, euen ſuch as are farre of. And they ſay that no man ſtung with one of thoſe Scorpions, euer eſcapeth; whoſe deadly venime neuertheleſſe, was at no time found to haue hurt any one of Chriſts ſeruants, through his mercyfull protection. But vvhen as a vvhile they had beene fedde with barly-corne, that ſame alſo was afterwardes with-drawne, as though God, who rayned Manna to the auncient Fathers, could not as well ſuſtayne his baniſhed ones in ſo deſolate a place.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Hunricke ſummoneth the Catholikes to disputation with the Arrians.
               
               SHARPER proceedinges were yet farther continued againſt the Church of God: he vvhich euermore deſtroyed the members thereof, being deſirous to teare in peeces the vvhole body. For vpon the day of our Lordes aſcention, an Ambaſſador of the Emperor Zeno (not the King himſelfe) being preſent, came this precept directed to Biſhoppe Eugenius, to

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  ſafed to aduertiſe my meaneneſſe by his ſecretary Witared, who becauſe it concerned religion and faith, did in the Church rehearſe his charge vnto vs, both Clergie and people being preſent. By the contents whereof we vnderſtand the Kinges Writ, to haue in like ſort gone forth to all our Coepiſcopos. brethren Biſhops, appointing vs to meete at a determinat day, to diſpute of our faith. This ordinance vve ſignified, howe reuerently we embraced, & to the ſaid ſecretary my meanenes gaue information, that all of the parties beyond the Sea agreeing vvith vs in one Religion and communion, ought to haue notice hereof (for thoſe of the Kingdome are all ready to obey) eſpecially for that it is the common cauſe of the whole world, and not only of the Africane Prouinces. For as much then as I promiſed to exhibite by B.Sancto a ſecond bill, a further anſwere, I humbly beſeech your Honour, to preſent vnto our Lord and mercyfull Kinges eares, the information before mentioned, that his clemency may in good ſort know, that wee (God-willing) by no meanes ſhunne the order taken for diſputation; but that vvithout aſſent of the vvhole,

we muſt not take vpon vs to determine matters of faith. For this cauſe require we, that he vouchſafe of his great bounty, juſtice, and vviſdome, to condeſcend thereunto. Dated by Eugenius Biſhop of the Catholike Church of Carthage.
               
               VVhen this information vvas put vp by bleſſed Eugenius: he vvho had nowe conceiued miſchiefe, vvas pricked forward to vtter forth his impiety with worſe vexation, and by P. F. P. S▪ Ob
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     s. 
                  Cubadus Prouoſt of the Realme, ſent to Eugenius this word. Subdue to me all the earth that the vvhole world may be brought vnder my power, and then B. Euangelium. (Eugenius) vvill I fulfill thy demaund. Whereunto bleſſed Eugenius replyed, as he well might. That which hath no reaſon ought not to haue beene ſpoken: This is as one ſhould bidde a man ſoare vp in the ayre and flie, which is contrary to the faſhion of humane nature. For I ſaid if the Kinges mightineſſe deſired to vnderſtand our faith, which is the only true beliefe, let him ſende to his friendes, and I vvill likewiſe vvrite to my brethren, that our Biſhops may come, who togither vvith vs may demonſtrate our

common faith, eſpecially to the Church of Quae caput eſt omnium Eccleſiarum. 
                  Rome which is the head of all Churches. To this anſwered Cubadus. Then of like you and my Lord the King are haile fellowes. Eugenius anſwered; Not ſo, but as I ſaid, If he deſire to knowe the true faith, let him write to his friends, that they ſend directions for our Catholike Biſhoppes, and then will I write to the Biſhops of our ſide: for the caſe is one and the ſame, of all the whole Catholike faith. This did Eugenius, not for that there wanted in Africke that could refell the aduerſaries objections, but to the intent that they might come, who being farre from their Dominion, might haue more confident liberty, and withall open vnto all nations our injurious oppreſſion. But he that contriued nothing but deceipt, would heare no reaſon, compaſſing by ſondry preſumptions, to moleſt & grieue whome ſoeuer of the Biſhops he heard ſay to be learned. Already had he the ſecond time baniſhed Donatian Biſhop of B. Vinia
                     
                        •
                     enſe ſe
                     
                        •
                     undum, 
                        ••
                     c. 
                  Vibia, with an hundred and fifty baſtinadoes; and the Subfetulan Biſhop Praeſidius, a ſharp witted man: After them ſerued he in like ſort Manſuetus, German, Fuſcle, and diuers others.

While this was doing, he commaunded that none of our religion ſhould haue any of theirs to ſojourne at our boord, nor that they ſhould at all eate at meales with Catholikes. Which thing was to them nothing beneficiall, but turned to our great aduantage: for if their ſpeach (as the Apoſtle2. Tim. 2. teacheth vs) is wont to creepe like a canker, howe much more could their familiarity at table infect? ſeing the ſame Apoſtle1. Cor. 5. commaundeth not ſo much as to communicate with the wicked at their meate. But nowe where the fire of perſecution was once kindled, and that the fury of the malitious King did euery where flame, our Lorde ſhewed a miracle by his faithfull ſeruant, which I may not paſſe ouer.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IX. Eugenius Biſhop of Carthage reſtoreth by miracle, ſight to a blinde man.
               THERE was in this city Carthage a certaine blinde man, well knowne to all the City, by name Foelix, this man was viſited of God, and at night by a viſion receiued he this commaundement. Get thee hence and goe to my ſeruant Eugenius, ſay that I haue ſent thee to him, and at the

houre when he halloweth the Font, where by thoſe which come to the faith may be Chriſtned, he ſhall touch thy eyes and they ſhall be opened, and thou ſhalt ſee the light. Warned by ſuch apparition, yet reputed he himſelfe (as it often falleth out) beguiled by a dreame; neyther would he ariſe, but drowned againe vvith ſleepe, was in like manner againe called vpon to goe to Eugenius. He neglected neuertheleſſe as before, and the third time being haſtily and ſharply rebuked, rayſed vp the boy, which was wont to reach him his hand, and gets in all haſte to Faustus Church, & after prayer made, he ſignifieth to Peregrine a Deacon (neither without ſtreames of teares) that he had to ſpeake with the Biſhop, and to declare a ſecret vnto him; vvhich the Biſhop vnderſtanding, willed the man to be brought in. For already in ſolemnity of the feaſt, reſounded the Hymni Nocturni Cantante populo. Which tearme of Nocturne remayneth at this day in the churches office or ſeruice▪
                   Nocturne, Hymnes throughout the Church, and the people were ſinging with loude voyces. The blinde man told in order his viſion, and plainely ſaid: I will not leaue you vntill according to our Lords heſts, you yeald vnto me my ſight. Depart from me ſaid the holy Eugenius, a

ſinner I am, and of all other ſinners moſt vnworthy, as one, who therefore am reſerued vnto ſuch times as theſe. But the other claſping about his knees, ſaid nothing elſe then as before: Render me my ſight. Eugenius then eſteeming it a certayne kind of ſhamefull B. crudelitate. rigour, if he ſhould ſtifly refuſe, and becauſe withall the time did call⸬ P. F. P. S. credulitate. him away, accompaned with the Clergie he went along with the man to the Font. Where kneeling downe, not vvithout great groanes, hee pearced the heauens with ſighes, and Criſpantem benedixit aquae fontem. P. F. alueum fontis. bleſſed the whiuering waters. As ſoone as he had riſen from his prayer, he ſaid to the blinde: I haue told thee already (brother Foelix) that I am a ſinfull man: but he, which vouchſafed to viſit thee, performe to thee according to thy faith, & open thy eyes. At theſe words he ſigned his eyes with the ſtandard of the Croſſe, and through the grace of God, the blinde man receiued ſight: whome hee there retayned by him, as long as the baptiſing endured; leaſt by reaſon of this ſo great a miracle, the people ſhould oppreſſe the man with great concourſe about him. Then was it manifeſted to the whole Church; and the blinde man went with

                  Eugenius to the Altar (as the manner is) to make an offering to our Lord, for his health receiued, which the Biſhop tooke and laide vpon the Altar: and the people through extreame joy, gaue an P. S. P F. irreuocabilis B
                        ••
                     naeſtimabilis. vnappeaſable ſhout. Straight way went one with haſty report hereof, to the King. Foelix is featch away, examined what had paſſed, and how he receiued his ſight. He vttered the whole in order: the Arrian Biſhops ſaid that Eugenius had wrought by ſorcery. And becauſe (oppreſſed with the clearneſſe of the thing, ſo that they could not ſhadowe it) they were greatly confounded (for Foelix was a man wel knowne to the whole City) if it had beene lawfull, they would therefore haue ſlayne him, as the Iewes ſought to put Lazarus to death after he was raiſed to life.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. X. The impudent and vnreaſonable proceeding of the Arrians, about their chalenge of disputation.
               NOWE drewe neare that quarrelling day, appointed the Calends of February; there aſſembled Biſhops, not only of Africke, but of many Iſlandes alſo, wearyed

with affliction and ſorrowe. Many dayes togither there was no mention of diſputing, vntill in the meane-ſpace i. the king he had ſingled out the skilfulleſt and learnedſt perſons, to the intent that by ſondry calumniations he make them away. For one of that learned crewe, named Laetus (a ſtout & moſt learned man) after long impriſonment he conſumed by fire, thinking by ſo doing to ſtrike a feare into the reſt, & bleamiſh the cauſe. At laſt yet beganne the conflict of diſputation, at the place which the aduerſaries had choſen. Our Diuines therefore eſchewing all tumultuous clamour (leaſt the Arrians ſhould after ſay that they had by ſome of ours beene ouer-ruled) choſe certayne amongſt their owne company to anſwere for all. Cyrill placed aloft for himſelf and his Satellitibus. attendants, a moſt ſtately throne, we ſtanding on our feete: whervpon our Biſhops beganne to ſay. Conference is there alway to be taken in hand, where not proud ſuperiority of power beareth ſwaye; but where an aſſembly is by common conſent made, that the diſputers debating the controuerſie, and each part doing their endeauour, the truth may come to light. But

nowe who ſhall be the diſputer? who the defender? which with vpright ballance may eyther confirme that, which is rightly auouched, or refell vnreaſonable aſſertions. When they vſed theſe and ſuch like words, the Kings ſecretary anſwered. The Patriarke Cyril ſaith, that ſome of you arrogantly and vnlawfullie vſurpe to themſelues the name of Catholiks. Our company then with proteſtation of the ſame, ſayd: let it be read vnto vs by whoſe authority Cyril taketh vpon him this title. Thereat our aduerſaries making a great ſtirre, beganne to cauill. And foraſmuch as our ſide requeſted, that if the wiſer people might not examine the matter, at leaſt they might be lookers on; all the ſonnes of the Catholike Church there preſent, were cōmanded to haue a hundred ſtroks with a cudgell. Then beganne Bleſſed B. Euſebius. 
                  Eugenius to ſay aloude: God, behold the violence, which we ſuffer, and conſider the tribulation, which we ſuſtayne of our perſecutors. With this our men turning to Cyril, ſaid: propound that which you intend. Cyril excuſed himſelfe that he vnderſtood not Latin. Our Biſhoppes replyed that they alwayes knewe him to haue ſpoken

Latin, that therefore he ought not nowe to drawe backe, eſpecially ſeing he was the kindler of thoſe coales. But he perceiuing the Catholike Biſhops to be ready for to joyne with him, would needs by diuers illuſions and ſhifts, auoyde audience: which our part fore-ſeing, had compoſed a Pamphlet concerning faith, very ſeemely and ſufficiently compiled: this they nowe exhibited, with proteſtation: If yee be deſirous to knowe our beliefe; the faith which we holde, is herein compriſed.
               
                  The exhibited booke here mentioned, is omitted. For though P. S. erroneouſly entitle it Victors; yet Victor himſelfe hath already teſtified the contrary: and Gennadius noteth the Author thereof to haue beene Eugenius.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
               
                  CHAPTRR. I. The Churches are cloſed: the Catholike Biſhops by Proclamation depriued of their Seas, and their goods giuen to Arrian Miniſters.
               
                  OVR booke being put vp and peruſed, yet could not they with their bleare eyes behold the light of truth: but wood for anger, and ſtorming vvith outragious language, they tooke it very ill, that we called our ſelues by our name of Catholikes. And forthwith they falſly ſuggeſt to the King, that with clamorous noyſe we auoyded audience of the matter, who giuing credit to their lyes, kindled at that preſent with choler, haſtened to fulfill

that which he had in his hart. And during the abode of the Biſhops at Carthage, he ſent his meſſengers ſecretly with an edict through the Prouinces, by force whereof in one day he cloſed all the Churches of Africke, and gaue vnto his Biſhops for a gift, all the ſubſtance of the Biſhops and of the Churches. And more then this, not knowing himſelf what he ſaid, or of what he ſpake, the lawe which our Chriſtian Emperors had long before decreed againſt them and other Heretikes, for the honourable maintenāce of the catholike Church, the ſame they bluſhed not to ſet forth againſt vs. Adding much of their owne heades, as ſeemed beſt to their tyrannicall power: For this is the forme of the proclaymed lawe.
               
                  A PROCLAMATION.
                  
                     HVNRICKE King of the Vandals and Alanes, to all ſubiectes of our Realme. It is the part of triumphant vertue, and a thing worthy our Maieſtatis Regiae. royall maieſty, to recoile euill deuiſes aſtainſt their Authors. For whoſoeuer inuenteth any wickedneſſe, let him impute it to his owne follie, if he fall into miſchiefe. In which thing, our Grace following the ayme of Gods iudgement,

hath aſſigned vnto all perſons, as their deſertes good or badde require. Prouoked therefore by ſuch as haue thought meete to reſiſt the commandement of our Father of 
                        
                           •
                        nclytae recorda
                        
                           ••
                        onis. famous memory, or of our owne Manſuetudinis. clemency, we doe nowe take vpon vs at length, the cenſure of ſeuerity. For whereas by our authority, we haue proclaymed amongſt all our people, that in the ſhieres of the Vandals, the Prieſts of the Homou
                        
                           ••
                        an
                           •
                        . Conſubſtantials ſhould not haue their aſſemblies, nor take vpon them any of their myſteries, which indeede doe rather contaminate, then other wiſe. This when we ſawe to be neglected, and that very many were found, which affirmed they kept and retayned the vncorrupted rule of faith: it is well enough knowne, that they were all cited vnder nine moneths warning, that they ſhould with out any feare, aſſemble togither for diſputation ſake (if at leaſt they had any thing to ſay for their purpoſe) at the Calends of Febr. the 8th. yeare of our Raigne. To whome after their meeting at the City of Carthage, when delay of the time preſcribed was expired, we are knowne to haue granted farther reſpite of certayne dayes. As ſoone as they ſhewed themſelues ready for the conflict, it was the firſt day propounded vnto them, by our reuerēd Biſhops, that they ſhould Propriae. directly proue conſubſtantiality by the diuine Scriptures: or at leaſtwiſe condemne that, which was decided and Amputatum eſt. cut off,

by No meruail though the Arrians lie in the number for neither alſo vvere they tvvo Counſels, being by the Church of Rome reiected. more then a thouſand Biſhops from all partes of the world, at the Councels of Arimini, and Seleucia; which thing they would not doe, but drawing the matter to a ſedition, incenſed alſo the people. The ſecond day likewiſe, when we commaunded them to make anſwere concerning the ſame faith; as it had beene propoſed vnto them, they enterpriſed their former raſhneſſe and miſdemeanour, perturbing all thinges with ſedition and clamour, that they might not at al come to the conflict. Whereunto we them prouoking, haue ordayned that their Churches ſhall be ſhut vp, with this prouiſo: ſo long to remayne cloſed vntill they aſſent to proceede vnto diſputation: Which they waxing obſtinate in their wicked deuiſes, haue refuſed to accompliſh. So that it is in this caſe neceſſary, and most iust with all, to retourne vpon thoſe men, what in the corps of thoſe lawes is expreſſed, B. induxiſſe cum errore P. F. induxiſſe ſecum in errorem. In P. S. this clauſe vvanteth. which the Emperors by them induced into errour, did at ſeuerall times promulgate. Theſe lavves are extant in the decrees of Theodoſius the vvorthy Emperor. B. ſuperſtition. The ſubſtance of which lawes ſeemeth to contayne, that no Church ſhould be open to any other, then to the Biſhops of their owne inſtitution, that it ſhould be lawful for none other to Conuictus agere. liue collegially, to make aſſemblies, or to haue or build any Churches at all, either in the City, or yet in the ſimpleſt places; but that alſo attempted, eſcheat to the Prince. And moreouer, that inheritances

annexed to any Church of their faith, ſhould not any more be paide to their Prelates. Nor that ſuch perſons ſhould haue licence B. Commeandi. P. F. P. S. Commemorare. to paſſe vp and downe, whither them pleaſed, but ſhould be baniſhed from all Townes and Cities, neyther haue authority either to baptize, or to diſpute of religion. That alſo they ſhould haue no leaue Ordinan di, it is ment of holy orders. to giue orders, either to Biſhops or Prieſts, or others appertayning to the Clergie; a rigorous penalty being ſet downe, that aſwell they which ſhould ſuffer themſelues to receiue ſuch honours, as thoſe alſo that were Ordina
                        
                           •
                        ores. giuers of ſuch orders, ſhould euery of them, be fined in tenne pound of gold, with their farther extenſion, that they ſhould not be permitted to make ſupplication about it. Yea, if ſo be they had In B it vvanteth. by ſpeciall ſeruice deſerued reſpect, In B it vvanteth. yet ſhould they not preuaile. But in caſe that notwithſtanding this detriment, they perſiſted, then ſhould they by conuenient proſecution, be exiled out of their Country. Toward the comminalty extended likewiſe thoſe Emperors their ſeuerity, ſo that they might neyther bequeath, nor giue or take, euen that which was caſt off and forſaken, not as made ouer vpon truſt, not by legacy, not by grantes, not by executorſhip, not by any Codicillo bil or other manner of writinges. They alſo made ſuch as were Milita
                        
                           •
                        ent palatio penſioners in the pallace, liable to penalty of an exceſſiue forfeiture, Albetvvene this ſigne, and the like far after follovving, is in B. moſt confuſedly miſplaced. after the rates of their degree

and dignity, that ſpoyled of all honourable priuilege they ſhould incurre infamy, and finde themſelues noted for publike offendors. To the Officialibus iudicum diuerſorum. offices alſo of ſeueral tribunals, was preſcribed the penalty of 30. po
                           •
                        
                        do. thirty pound of ſiluer: which if they who perſiſted in their errour, had fiue times paid, then ſhould ſuch perſons be conuicted, whipped, and ſo baniſhed. Next had they giuen in commaundement, that the bookes of all thoſe Prieſts, whome they perſecuted, ſhould be caſt into the fire, and all other ſuch bookes; which in like manner we alſo nowe commaund to be done with thoſe bookes, by meanes of which, iniquity hath induced it ſelfe into errour of that name. For as touching the ſeuerall perſons, of whome was ſpoken, theſe ordinances they made, that P F. Illuſtres, ſpectabiles, ſenatores, populares. perſons of excellency ſhould euery of them forfeit fifty pound of gold, the ⸬ honourable fourty pound, Senators thirty, common Gentlemen twenty, Prieſts thirty, decurions fiue, marchants fiue, Plebeii. common people fiue, Circumcelliones. wandring ruffians tenne; and who might happen to continue after this damage, their goodes confiſcated, they ſhould by baniſhment be puniſhed: vpon Ordines ciuitatum. corporations in Cities, procurators alſo, and takers of leaſes, this penalty they inflicted; that if they concealed, and did not diſcloſe or atach ſuch perſons, preſenting them to iudgement, they themſelues ſhall make good the forfeiture. Moreouer to thoſe

who tooke the landes of the Crowne to farme, this mulct was ſet downe, that as much as was their yearely rent to the Kinges houſhold, ſo much ſhould they ſemblably pay into his Exchequor for a fine; as in generall the like to be obſerued in all, either hyrers or poſſeſſors of lande, which ſhall be minded to endure in the ſame ſuperstition, I here doe appoint. Of Iudges farthermore, that who ſo were found not to be most inſtant in proſecuting this affaire, ſhould be puniſhed by outlawry, and loſſe of life. Alſo of the chiefe officers, that three ſhould be puniſhed, the rest be amerced, and caſte in twenty poundes of gold. Of neceſſity therefore must all the Homouſians be bound by the very like constitution, whome it is euident indeede to haue held, and ſtill to hold the ſubſtance of ae wicked beliefe: vnto whome we nowe by this our decree denounce, that they abſtayne from Hominibus, but ſurely for omnibus. all the a fore-ſaid matters, which ſhall be proſecuted throughout all Ordines. estates in the Cities; as likewiſe vpon Iuſtices, who neglecting the former ordinances, can be proued not to haue grieuouſly puniſhed ſuch as withſtand the ſame. To all perſons therefore intangled with the errours of the fore-mentioned faith of the Homouſians, which hath wholy beene heretofore ſo condemned by a Councell of ſuch a great number of Priests,

we enioyne and giue commaundement, that they abſtayne from all the fore-ſaid affaires and contracts. Let them knowe, that nothing is permitted vnto them, but that ſemblable puniſhment attendes to inuolue them euery one, vnleſſe before the Calendes of Iune, in the eight yeare of our Raigne, they conuert vnto the true * Religion, which we reuerence and honour. Which prefixed day for no other purpoſe hath our piety afforded, then to the end that vnto ſuch, as before hand renounce their errour, pardon be not denyed, and the obſtinate be by due puniſhmentes chaſtiſed. But whoſoeuer ſhall perſeuer in that errour, whither they enioy Knight-hood of our houſe, or happely haue charge vnder ſeuerall Titles and imployments, let them be compellable to infliction of thoſe mulcts aboue preſcribed, according to the qualities of their degrees: nothing in the meane ſeaſon being of any validity, which any of them may happen by ſurreption to obtayne, againſt priuate perſons of what calling and place ſoeuer they be: This our proclamation willeth, that to be obſerued, which in the former lawes was concerning ſuch expreſſed, that they may vndergoe congruent puniſhment. Iudges prouinciall ſlackly putting our ordinances in execution, we will that they be ſentenced by their ſuperior Iudge. 
                        *⁎*
                     
                     
But to true worſhippers of the Maieſty diuine (that is to ſay vnto our Prieſts) we by this our conſtitution doe decree and prouide, all manner of Churches belonging to the whole Clergie of the name aboue mentioned, in what places or Countries ſoeuer they ſtand within theſe Dominions, which Propitia diuinitate by the grace of God are vnder our imperiall gouernment, togither with all ſuch thinges as to the ſame appertayne; not doubting but to reliefe of the poore it ſhall proue more beneficiall, which to our Sacroſanctis. thriſe-holy Biſhops is ſo iuſtly giuen. We notifie then vnto all men this lawe of ours, iſſuing from the very fountayne of iuſtice, that none may pretend ignorance of our commaundement.
                  Fare yee well 
                        6. Cal. of March. Carthage.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. Extreame proceedinges of Hunricke againſt the Biſhops.
               AFTER theſe lamentable edicts, farced with intoxicate poyſon, he willeth al the Biſhops which were aſſembled at Carthage (whoſe Churches, houſes, and ſubſtance he had already ſeazed) to be deſpoyled in their lodgings, and ſo driuen out of the Towne gates. Neyther ſeruant, nor beaſt, nor garment to change, was

left them. It was farther more forbidden, that any man ſhould harbour any one of them, or giue them ſuſteynance. And who ſo ſhould attempt for pity to doe the contrary, he with all his family ſhould be brent by fire. Prudently did the Biſhops, who were then caſt forth, in that (though begging) yet they departed not from thence. For had they gone their wayes, not only ſhould they neuer haue beene recalled: but they vvould haue belyed them (as they did) that they ſhunned diſputation; eſpecially becauſe when they ſhould haue retourned, their churches had no goodes left, all being rifled. While therefore the Biſhops lay round about the walles in the open ayre, it fell out ſo, that the wicked Tyrant went forth towardes the fiſh-pondes, vvhome they thought good to meete in the way, ſaying: Why are we ſo afflicted? For what euils committed ſuffer we this? If called to diſpute, why are we ſpoyled? why are we ſlaundred? why are we deferred, and driuen to remayne amongſt the dunghils here without in the Country, afflicted with hunger and nakedneſſe, farre from our Churches and houſes? Whome he beholding with

a fell regarde, before he heard their complaint, willed the horſe-mē with ful courſe to ride ouer them, that by ſuch violence they might not only be trampled vpon: but be ſlaine outright. Many of them were then ſore cruſhed, eſpecially aged men. Then to the men of God was it commaunded to preſent themſelues, and meete him at the Temple of Memory, vnwitting what treachery was there prepared.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III. A fraudulent oath is propoſed to the Biſhops.
               THITHER when they came, in a writing deliuered vnto them, was this ſerpentine ſubtlety incloſed. Our Lord King Hunricke, although lamenting your obſtinacy, refuſing as yet promptly to obey his will, and to become of the ſame religion where of he himſelfe is, being now in purpoſe to deale gratiouſly with you, will (if you ſweare vnto the contents of this paper) ſend you to your Churches and houſes. Hereunto anſwered the Biſhops with one voyce: We ſay ſtill, as we haue already ſaid, and will euer ſay: Chriſtians we are, Biſhops we are; we hold the Apoſtolicall and only true faith. A litle ſilence hauing enſued

after confeſſion of their faith, the Kinges commiſſioners proceeded haſtely to extort an oath from the Biſhops: whereupon the bleſſed men Biſhop Hortulane, and Biſhop P. F Florentinian. 
                  Florentian joyntlie replyed: Depute you vs brute beaſts, that we ſhould eaſely & vnaduiſedly ſweare, ignorant what the writing contayneth? The Kings meſſengers vvithout more ſtay diſcloſed to them the purport thereof, which with colourable wordes was gloſed: for thus the entrapping tenour thereof comprized. Sweare ye, if ye deſire that after the death of our Lord the King, his Sonne Hildericke ſucceede in the Kingdome: and if none of you will ſend any letter beyond the Sea. This oath if ye refuſe not to take, he will reſtore you to your Churches. The mercyfull playne meaning of many, minded to haue ſworne (whereas God indeede prohibiteth ſwearing) leaſt Gods people might afterwardes ſay, that the Prieſts by not ſwearing, gaue cauſe that their Churches were not reſtored. Others of the Biſhops more circumſpect, ſmelling out the guilfull treachery, denyed to ſweare, alleaging that it was forbidden by the authority of the Goſpell; our Lord himſelfe

denouncing. Yea and ſhall not ſweare at all.
                  Matt. 5. Then inferred the Commiſſioners: Who purpoſe to ſweare let them goe a-part. Which vvhen they did, by notary was ſtraight enrolled what each ſaid, in what City he was entitled. The like was done to them that would not ſweare. Then were both parties committed to warde, and not long after, the deceiptfull drift of the oath, which before lay hid, plainely appeared. To thoſe which would ſweare, it was ſaid: for as much as contrary to the commandement of the Goſpell you vvould haue ſworne, the Kings will is that you ſhall neuer ſee your Churches; but being baniſhed you ſhall lawfully receiue waſt and vnhabited places, there to husbandry the ground; yet with this clauſe * that you ſhall neyther ſay Pſalmes, nor pray, or hold any booke to reade in your hand, nor baptize, nor giue orders, nor Reconciliare praeſumatis. preſume to reconcile any man. In like manner to thoſe which refuſed the oath they ſaid. Becauſe you wiſh not the raigne of our Lordes Sonne, therefore you would not ſweare: for which conſideration it is commaunded, that you ſhall be ſent away into Corſe the Iſland, there to hewe timber for ſhips.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII. The horrible cruelty of the Heretikes: the conſtancy of Dioniſia and her Sonne, with others.
               THE Beaſt thirſting after innocents bloud, proceeded (during that the Biſhops vvere not as yet exiled) and ſent through all the Prouinces of Africke at once, his cruell tormentors; ſo that no place, no houſe, remayned free from lamentation, ſcreeching, & outcryes. They ſpared not any age or ſex, but ſuch only as yealded to their will. Some they cudgeled with ſtaues; ſome they hunge vp; others they burned. Women (and eſpecially Gentle-women) they tortured openly naked, againſt the lawe of naturall honeſty. One of whome our Country-woman Dioniſia, I will ſuccinctly intreate of. When they ſawe that ſhe was not only bolder, but more beautiful alſo then other Matrones, they willed her firſt to be vnrayed, and made ready for cudgels. Who in her payne cryed boldly vnto them: I am aſſured of my God; vexe me how you liſt, only my woman-hood dicloſe yee not. But they with greater rage ſet her

naked vpon an higher place, for a publike ſpectacle. Amidſt the ſtripes of the woundes, while ſtreames of bloud flowed ouer all her body, with a free voyce ſhe ſpake thus vnto them: Ye Miniſters of Satan, that which you doe, reckoning it my reproch, is to me an honour. Moreouer in ſo great extreamities, and already nowe a Martyr; being her ſelfe Diuina
                     
                        •
                     um Scripturarum 
                        •
                     cientia plena. vvell ſeene in the Scriptures, ſhe animated others to Martyrdome. By this her holy example, ſhe ſaued almoſt all her Country. And beholding her only Sonne (who was deinty, and as yet of tender age) to be ſomevvhat daunted vvith feare of paynes, chaſliſing him with her lookes, and becks, and checking him vvith the authority of a mother, ſhe ſo encouraged, that he became thereby much the more conſtant: to whome amongſt his terrible torments ſhe ſpake as followeth. Remember (O my child) that in the name of the holy Trinity we were baptized In Matre Eccleſia Catholica. in our Mother the Catholike Church: let vs not looſe the garment of our ſaluation, leaſt he which inuited vs, finde not at his comming a nuptiall garment, and ſay to his ſeruants. Caſte them into vtter darkeneſſe
                  Matt. 22.
                  
                  where ſhal be weeping of eyes, & gnaſhing of teeth. That payne is to be dreaded which neuer endeth, & that life to be deſired which alway laſteth: With ſuch words as theſe ſhe made her ſonne a Martyr. For the honourable youth (who had to name Maioricus) yealding his ſpirit, in the combat of his confeſſion conſummated his triumphant courſe: and ſhe embracing her ſacrifice, giuing God thankes by mouth aſmuch as euer ſhe could, choſe to bury him in her owne houſe, in conſolation of her hope to come, that as often as vpon his graue ſhe powred out prayers to the Trinity, ſhe might conceiue confidence, that ſhee ſhould neuer be eſtranged from her ſonne. Howe many were by her (as I ſaid) gayned to God in that City, it were tedious to recite. For howe great thinges her ſiſter likewiſe, called Datiua; and B. Leotia. P.S. P. F. Leontia. 
                  Loice daughter of the holy Biſhop German; and the honeſt Phiſicion B. Aemylius. 
                  Emelius, coſen to Datiua; and deuout Tertius a man famous in Confeſſion of the Trinity; or Boniface the Sibidenſian did endure; vvith vvhat torments they were Euiſcerati. i. bovveled. torne: let him orderly declare that is able.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. V. Admirable endurance of Maiorc; and incomparable conqueſt of Victoria.
               
               WHo can alſo expreſſe, vvhat paynes Maiorc a noble-mans ſlaue of the towne of Tuburb, did ſuſtayne for Chriſt? who after innumerable blowes of ſtaues, was lifted vp with pullyes, and being carryed through the City in hanging wiſe, was nowe hoyſted vp a loft, and in a moment by letting the ropes ſhip, lighting vpon the ſlintes of the ſtreets, with the peyſe of his body, daſhed againſt the ſtones like a ſtone. He was moreouer often times haled along, and ſo cruſhed with the ſharpe pointed flintes, that you might haue ſeene (by reaſon the vtmoſt skinne was rent aſunder) the oflappes of his inward partes, hanging at his ſides and belly. This man had ſuffered not much vnlike matters, in the time of Genſericke, rather then he would bewray the ſecretes of one of his friendes. Howe much more then, would he be furniſhed with conſtancy about Sacraments of religion? and if he ſhewed himſelfe ſo truſty to his friend,

which only loued him; howe much more did he owe to him, who ſhal fully rewarde his loyaltie?
               What outrages were done in the City Cluſe, it is not in me to declare; for the very number of Martyrs and Confeſſors, it is not poſſible to recount. One Matron amongſt them called Victoria, a true amplifier of her name, as ſhe hung burning ouer a ſofte fire in the face of the people, was thus intreated by her vngratious huſband, her children ſtanding by. Why ſuffereſt thou, O wife? If thou deſpiſe me haue pity (thou hard harted woman) of theſe litle ones, whome thou haſt engendred. Howe hapneth it that thou regardeſt not thine owne wombe, & ſetteſt nothing by thoſe, whome groaning thou broughteſt into the world? Where is the plighted troth of matrimoniall loue? where are the bandes of wedlocke? Where is the honeſt contract drawne long ſince betweene vs? Regard I pray thee thy children and huſband, and fulfill quickly the Kings commaundement, that thou may eſt eſcape the torments yet at hand, and be rendred to me againe, and to our children. But ſhe neyther giuing eare to her childrens crying,

nor to the Serpents flatteries, caſting her eyes vpwardes from the ground, contemned the world with the deſires thereof. Whome when the Executioners perceiued to be dead, after that her ſhoulders were with long hanging out of their place, tooke her downe fully bereft of life. And (as ſhe afterwards told vs) a certayne Virgin came to her, who touched euery part of her body, whereby ſhe became immediately whole and ſound.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. The reſolute conſtancy of the Proconſull or Marſhall Victorian, and his braue anſwere.
               IN what ſort to extoll Victorian of the City Adrument, and at that time Proconſull of Carthage, through default of wordes I am ignorant. No man in Africke was richer then he, and held he was in eſtimation with the impious King, as one very faithfull in all thinges giuen him in charge. The King ſent him word after a familiar ſort, that if he gently aſſented to his commaundement, he would make account of him aboue all other: but the ſeruant of God gaue this confident anſwere.

I am aſſured of Chriſt, my God, and my Lord: ſay thus to the King. Let him lay me vpon coales, thruſt me vpon beaſts, put me to all kinde of torments; if I giue place, then in vaine was I chriſtned in the Catholike Church. For if there were no other life then this alone, which is preſent, & that we hoped not after an other which is eternall▪ yet would I not doe it, and for a litle temporall glory be ſo vngratefull to my Creator, which in ſuch ſort hath beſtowed vpon me his faith. At which anſwere the Tyrant chafed, and with what torments and how ſore paynes he afflicted him, humane eloquence is not ſufficient to expreſſe, vvho triumphantly and happily conſummating his courſe, receiued the Crowne of Martyrdome.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VII. A ſtory of two brethren in like ſort, tormented with equall paynes.
               NEYTHER is any body able to explicate the conflicts of the Martyrs, which they atchiued at the City of P.S. Tambar. P. F. Tambay. 
                  Tambad, vvhere two brothers of the City of Aquiſregie
                        ••••
                     . 
                  Kings-water, well aſſured in our Lord,

gaue each to other their faith, howe they vvould requeſt the torturers, that they might be handled with like payne and puniſhmēt. When therefore at the firſt, hung vp with waighty ſtones at their heeles, they had remayned in that caſe all the whole day; the one of them deſired that he might be let downe, and that a litle reſpite might be giuen him: the other brother fearing leaſt he vvould haue-denyed his faith, cryed to him from the engine where he hung. Doe not ſo, doe not ſo brother: that was not our oath to Chriſt, I will accuſe thee, when we ſhall appeare before his terrible Throne, ſince we ſware vpon his body and bloud, to ſuffer togither for his cauſe.
               
               Saying theſe and other wordes, he imboldned his brother in ſuch wiſe, to the agony of his paſſion, that he cryed out with a loude voyce. Put me to what puniſhments you will, perſiſt, vrge vs being Chriſtians, with your crueleſt torments: as my brother doth, ſo will I alſo. With what fiery plates they were ſcorched, and with what inſtruments each was feared, and with what torments they were tortured, the thing it ſelfe declareth, in that the executioners themſelues did caſt them out of their ſight, ſaying: Theſe fellowes

will make all the people followe, ſo that no man at all will be conuerted to our religion. This they ſaid the rather, for that no blewiſh wannes, no token of their torments any thing appeared.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. The Courage of the Tipaſenſes: and of them which ſpake, their tongues being cut out.
               LET vs nowe haſten to ſpeake to the honour of God, of that which was done in Ptol. Tipaſa, at this day Tenes▪ or Tun
                        ••
                     . 
                  Tipas, a City of the great Mauritania. As ſoone as the Townſ-men ſawe an Arrian, from a ſecretary of the Court, made their Biſhop, & ſent to deſtroy their ſoules, almoſt all the City fled into Spayne (the paſſage being very ſhort) ſo that very fewe remayned behinde, ſuch as found no meanes of ſhipping: whome the Biſhop of the Arrians firſt by faire meanes, afterwards by threats, aſſayed to compell to Arrianiſme. But they conſtant in faith, not only derided his madneſſe, while he perſwaded them: but alſo boldly celebrated the diuine myſteries, aſſembling togither in one houſe. Intelligence receiued, he ſecretly ſent information thereof vnto

                  Carthage: whereupon the King in a great rage, directed thither a certayne Earle with charge, that in midſt of the marketplace, all the Prouince being there aſſembled, their tongues & right handes ſhould be cut off at the very roote and ſtumpe: yet through the aſſiſtance of the holy Ghoſt, they ſo ſpake and ſpeake ſtill, as they did neuer before. If any man be incredulous, let him goe now to Conſtantinople, and there ſhal he find Reparatus a Sub-deacon, one of that company, ſpeaking (& that eloquently) without any impediment. For which cauſe he is greatly reuerenced in the palace of the Emperor Zeno, the Queene eſpecially honouring him with ſingular reſpect.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IX. The incredible tyranny of Hunricke towardes his one Vandals Catholikes.
               WHo may nowe in fit tearmes diſcourſe, & reckon vp togither the diuerſities of paynes, which by their kings commaundement, the Vandals practiſed againſt their owne people? If a writer attempted particularly to recount the things that haue paſſed in Carthage only, though ſimply without all flouriſhing ſpeech, yet

would it trouble him to recite the very names of the torments: which to be true, is to euery body manifeſt, & is eaſely proued. For you may daylie ſee ſome without hands, others wanting their eyes; ſome depriued of their feete, many that haue loſt both noſe and eares; diuers whoſe ſhoulder-blades are falne out of their place by long hanging, or whoſe heads were ſunke downe betweene their ſhoulders, by reaſon they were daylie tortured, and by ropes had bin much wafted vp and downe in the ayre. There were which by racking of the ropes inſunder, fell head-long from the height where they hunge; and vvith mighty pitch very many loſt the ſtate of their braine, togither with their eyes: and ſome their bones being cruſhed inſunder, yealded forth with their liues; others liued not lōg after. He that thinketh this a fable, let him aske of B. Auius. 
                  Vranius the Ambaſſador of Zeno, in whoſe preſence ſuch thinges were moſt of all put in execution, becauſe comming to Carthage he had caſt abroade, that his comming was for the defence of the Catholike Churches. Wherfore the Tyrant to giue him to vnderſtand that hee ſtood in awe of no man, in thoſe places & ſtreets

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  to be racked (Epidophorus ſitting by and raging) before his torments tooke out Sabana. In Spayne this word is at this day current In Greeke alſo Sabanon, ſignifieth any cloath to mundifie vvithall. the Chriſome clothes, wherewith he once veſted this fellowe at the Font, when he vndertoke for him, vvhich priuily he brought about him to this purpoſe; and wauing them in the ayre, and lifting them vp that all might behold it, he is ſaid with ſuch wordes as theſe, to haue moued the vvhole City to lamentation and teares. Theſe are the Lintea
                     
                        ••
                     ina. linnen (O Epidophorus, thou abuſed miniſter of errour) which ſhall accuſe thee, when the Majeſty of the great Iudge ſhall come: they ſhall be diligently by me kept, in witneſſe of thy perdition, and condemne thee headlong to the bottomeleſſe depth of the pit which burneth with brimſtone. Theſe did cladde thee, ariſing without ſpot out of the Font: theſe ſhall vehemently perſecute thee, vvhen thou ſhalt with the reſt, inherit the flames of hell; becauſe thou haſt put on curſedneſſe as a garment, renting and forſaking the true and holy robe of Baptiſme and faith. What wilt thou doe (O wreatch) vvhen the ſeruants of the houſe-holder ſhall beginne to call togither, thoſe that were inuited? Then the King beholding

thee who wert once called, and ſeing thee to want thy wedding rayment, ſhall with terrible indignation ſay vnto thee. Friende,
                  Matt. 22. 
                  howe enterſt thou in, not hauing a nuptiall garment? I ſee not that which I gaue thee, I acknowledge not this to be that, which I beſtowed vpon thee: Thou 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     t loſt the habite of thy Knight-hood, which in defence of thy Virginall body thou waredſt. Tenne moneths I couered thee, I drewe the ſigne of my Croſſe vpon thee, I waſhed thee cleane with water, and adorned thee with the purple of my bloud: I perceiue not my ſeale in thy face; I ſee no character of the Trinity: no ſuch can be at my banquet. Binde you him hand and foote with ropes, who would voluntarily ſeperate him ſelfe in ſuch ſort from his Catholike brethren. He hath enlarged and pitched his lines, a ſnare, wherewith he hath both entangled him ſelfe, and ſtopped others from my feaſt. He hath laid for diuers a ſtumbling-blocke in their way: therefore with eternall ſhame and euerlaſting ignominy, I caſte him out from my table. While Muritta ſpake, Epidophorus being put to ſilence, was ſeared in conſcience before the day of the fire euerlaſting.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XI. Baniſhment of the Clergie of Carthage: the notable conſtancy of twelue Quyriſters.
               AL of them therefore preparing their backes for ſtrokes, cheerefully went forwards to baniſhment, who being yet in their long journey, outragious & vnmerciful men came (by ſetting on of the Arrian Biſhops) to take from them, that which peraduenture Chriſtian piety had giuen them for ſuſteynance: when as each of thē ſo much more gladly ſung. Naked I came ſorth of my mothers wombe, and naked now I goe to exile: ſor God is not to ſeeke, howe to feede his hungry, nor howe to clothe vs in the deſert. Two Vandals moreouer, who had often vnder Genſericke beene Confeſſors, contemning their riches, went with theſe of the Clergie into baniſhment, and their mother in their company. Out of this multitude of Confeſſors (that is to ſay of the Clergie of Carthage) as they were in their journey, twelue children by the ſuggeſtiō ofal Theu
                     
                        ••
                     rius. 
                  Theucorius (who of a Lector was become a runnegate) vvere to be ſeperated, ſuch as he knewe to haue cleare ſtrong voyces, and

fit for muſicke, & had beene his Schollers while he was Catholike. Quickly vpon his information were men ſent, and with barbarous fury boyes to the number of twelue, are recalled from their journey, all ſeperated in body not in minde, from the flocke of the Saints; dreading yet their ruine, with ſighs and teares they claſped their fellowes knees, that they might not be drawne away; whome neuertheleſſe the rude Heretikes, parting with their menacing ſwordes, carryed backe to Carthage. But though they were dealt with all not by faire meanes (as their age ſeemed rather to require) they were found more reſolute then for their yeares; and leaſt they ſhould ſleepe to death, they lighted to themſelues the lampes of the Goſpels light. At this the Arrians conceiued grieuous indignation, bluſhing for ſhame to ſee themſelues ouercome by boyes, and enflamed thereby, vvill them to be beaten afreſh vvith wandes, whome fewe dayes before they had cut with many laſhes. Sores are made vpon ſores, and the hurts renewed waxe rawe afreſh: yet came it to paſſe through our Lordes aſſiſtance, that their ſmall age tainted not for payne, and their courage

increaſed, ſo that they waxed ſtrong in faith: whome nowe Carthage honoureth with great affection, regarding this Quyre of twelue boyes, as of twelue Apoſtles. They dwell togither, they table togither, they ſing togither, they rejoyce in our Lord togither.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XII. The Martyrdomes of certayne: and the euill entreaty of Biſhop Eugenius.
               
               IN thoſe dayes two Marchants of the ſame City, who both had to name Frumentius, vvere crowned vvith a notable Martyrdome. Seauen brethren alſo, not by nature, but by grace (as which liued togither in one Monaſtery) accompliſhing the agony of their confeſſion, came to the garland vvhoſe flouriſh neuer vadeth: Liberatus the Abbas. Abbot, Bonifacius a Deacon, Seruus a Sub deacon, Rusticus 
                  Sub diaconus. a Sub-deacon, Rogatus a Monke, Septimus a Monke, and Maximus a Monke: For as then more cruelly did the Biſhops, Prieſts, and Clergie of the Arrians rage, then the King and his Vandals. For euery where thoſe Biſhops vvith their Clergie, ranne vp and downe, perſecuting vs with their ſwordes

by their ſides, as namely one Antony a Superintendent of theirs, & ſomewhat crueller then the reſt; whoſe practiſes againſt vs vvere ſo abhominable and incredible, that they can not be vttered. His reſidence vvas in a City neare to the wilderneſſe, which joyneth vpon the Prouince of Tripoly. As an vnſatiable beaſt thirſting after Catholikes bloud, he ranne here & there, roaring after his pray: and impious Hunricke acquainted vvith his fierce diſpoſition, vvould needes baniſh Eugenius into the coaſts of that wilderneſſe. But Antony to whoſe cuſtody he was committed, kept him ſo cloſe and ſtraight, that no man could haue acceſſe; and beſides by ſondry afflictions, guiles, and paynes, thought to make him away. The holy man while he bewayled the ſore perſecution, and wore out his aged limmes by rough haire-cloth, and lying on the bare ground, watred his couch vvith deuout ſhowers of teares; fell at laſt into the troubleſome diſeaſe of the palſey. At newes whereof the Arrian conceiuing great joy, ranne in haſt to the Cell of Gods exiled ſeruant: and when he perceiued the true Biſhoppe, through ſtopping of his diſeaſe to maffle in ſpeech,

he caſt in minde to deſtroy him out-right, as to whome he wiſhed not long life. Willing therefore the ſharpeſt vinegre to be brought that could be found; he powred the ſame into the reuerēd old mans jawes, notwithſtanding that hee abhorred and loathed it. For if the Lord of vs all, which came to that end to drinke it, when he had taſted it, refuſed to drinke; howe much rather ſhould this faithfull ſeruant and Confeſſor of his reject it, when hereticall fury preſſed it vpon him? By this vinegre encreaſed that noyſome diſeaſe, of vvhich yet afterwardes (Chriſt of his pity mercyfully aſſiſting) he became hole.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIII. The barbarous and vaine outrage of an Arrian Superintendent, againſt a Catholike Biſhop.
               BY the like baniſhment and vſage of Habet-deum, and other of our Biſhops, is eaſely manifeſt, how grieuouſly the City of Tamallum, wherein Antony made his abode, might be vexed. For whereas he had, vvith ſondry afflictions giuen him vexation, neyther could make him an Arrian, but found the Champion of Chriſt

alwaies conſtant in his profeſſion; neuertheleſſe had promiſed his confederats to ouercome him, ſaying: If I make him not of our religion, I am not Antony: now perceauing that he failed of his boaſt, he inuented thus to doe. Tying the Biſhop hand and foote with bigge bandes, and gagging his mouth that hee might not crie out, he caſt vpon him water of rebaptization, as he counted it: as though he could aſwell binde his conſcience, as his body; or that he were not preſent by his grace, who heareth the groanes of the fettered, and ſearcheth the ſecretes of harts; or as though the falſe water, could take away ſuch a perfect reſolution, as the man of God had already ſent to heauen, teares being the meſſengers of his hart? He then looſed the man of his bandes and with ſemblance of great ioy merily ſaide. Behould brother Habet-deum you are now made a Chriſtian of ours (what can you now doe, but conſent to the Kinges pleaſure?) to whom Habet-deum anſwered. Nay (wicked Antony) Ibi eſt mortis dānatio. there is mortall ſinne and damnation, where conſent of will is obtained: I ſtood faſt in faith, & confeſſing it with often ſpeech maintained

with open proteſtatiō, that which I beleeue now, & alwaies did. After that thou hadſt bound me with chaines, ſtopping the entrance of my mouth; in the tribunall of my hart ſent I vp to the view of the heauenly Emperours, the actes of this my ſufferance, the Angels ſubſcribing thereunto.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIIII. More of the Arrians tyr any, and how they rebaptized people by plaine violence.
               LIKE violence was generally vſed by the Tyrāts. For the Vandals were to this purpoſe, ſent about euery where, that they might bring al paſſingers, to be deſtroyed by their Prieſtes: who when they had ſlaine their ſoules with that erronious water, gaue them a bill or ticket; that they might no more haue violence offered. For it was not lawefull either to priuate men, or to marchants and men of affaires, to paſſe any where, except they ſhewed a teſtimoniall, diſcouering the death of their owne ſoules. Reuelation whereof, Chriſt long ſince opened to his ſeruant Iohn, where hee ſaith. It
                  
                  ſhall be to no man permitted to buy or ſell, but to
                  Apoc. 13 
                  him that hath the marke of the beaſt in his forehead, and in his hand. Their Biſhops alſo & Prieſts, march about townes & villages in the night ſeaſon, with a band of weaponed men, and (theeues of ſoules as they were) B. Deſpicatis poſ. ianuarum. PF. Deſpicatio ianuarum breaking open doores, entred in with water and ſword: and whom they found at home (ſome of them peraduenture ſleeping in their bedds) they ſprinkled with their thunder and fierie ſhowre, and all at once with Simoniacall crie, called them their Chriſtians: ſo that they ſeemed rather to make a May-game of Suae hae reſeos aquam. & ſo hath B. their hereticall water, then a matter of religion. Thoſe of leaſt capacity, and dul ſpirit, reputed, that by this meanes, the ſacrilegious abhomination was accompliſhed in them: but the wiſer ſort comforted thēſelues, in that it could not hurte them, which had beene done to them repugning or ſleeping. Many did preſently caſt aſhes vpon their heads; ſome did put on mournfully haire-cloath, becauſe ſuch a change had hapned, others did anoint themſelues with filthy dirt, renting to fitters the Chryſoms which had beene laide vpon them, and with faithfull hand

caſting them into draughts and ſtinking places.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XV. Children taken from their parents: the manly courage of a Phiſicions wife.
               VVITH ſemblable force, was before my eyes, in Carthage, a Gentlemans ſonne of ſeauen yeares old taken from his parents, by Cyrillas commandment. The mother (all matronlike grauely laide aſide) ran after the theeues through the Cittie, her heaire about her eares, & the child cried aſwel as he might, In P. F. is thriſe repeated Chriſtianus ſum. 
                  I am a Chriſtian already, by Saint Stephen I am a Chriſtian, whoſe mouth they ſtopped, and drenched his guiltleſſe infancie in their puddle.
               Like prank they plaied with the children of honeſt Liberatus the Phiſition: For being commanded with his wife & children to baniſhment, the malicious Arrians thought it beſt, to diuide the litle children from the parents to proue if by tendernes of affect on they might ouerthrow the fathers conſtancie Seperated are the younglings from their parents, whereat

as Liberatus was about to ſhed teares, hee was by his wife reprehended, and the teares as they were iſſuing forth dried vp: For in this wiſe ſhe ſpake vnto him. And wilt thou (my Liberatus) looſe thy ſoule for thy children? eſteeme them as if they had neuer beene borne; for Chriſt will at full be reuenged in them▪ See you not, how they crie, & ſay that they are Chriſtians? What this woman did alſo in the ſight of the Iudges muſt not bee concealed When her husband and ſhee were impriſoned (but ſeuerally that one might not ſee the other;) word was ſent to the woman, that ſhee ſhould nowe lay away her ſtubborneſſe, for that her husband had obeyed the Kings commandement, and was become a Chriſtian of theirs. Let me ſee him ſaide ſhe and I will alſo do as pleaſe God. Being led out of priſon, ſhee found her good man ſtanding before the iudgement ſeate, compaſſed with a great multitude; & thinking it to be true which the enemies had feigned, caught houlde with her hand vpon his garment next to his throate, and before them all throtled him, ſaying: vngratious and reprobate, vnworthie of Gods fauour and mercie,

why wouldſt thou floriſh for a litle while & periſh euerlaſtingly? what wil thy gold profit thee? what wil thy ſiluer; wil they deliuer thee frō the furnace of hell? This ſhe ſaid and much more. To whome her husband anſwered: what aileſt thou woman? what ſeeſt thou? or what maiſt thou (perhaps) haue heard ſay, concerning me? In the name of Chriſt I remaine Catholike ſtill, neither ſhall I euer forſake that, which I yet hold faſt. Then coulde the heretickes, being guilty and detected of their lye, no longer coulour their treacherie.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XVI. The voluntary exile of ſundrie perſons: the Supplication of Biſhop Habetdeum to the Kinge.
               I Haue briefely ſpoken already of the monſtrous violence and outrage by them vſed. VVhich many fearing, hide themſelues: ſome in caues; others in vncouth places, both men and women, no man being of their counſaile: where for want of reliefe, ouercome with hunger or colde, they breathed forth their contrite

and afflicted ſoules, carrying with them among their tribulations the ſecurity of an vnuiolate faith. In ſuch plight was found Creſconius a Prieſt of the Cittie Mizent, in a caue of the B. Quiz
                        •
                     n. P. F. & P. S. Ziquens but Ptol. hath Vuic zan and Plinie Quiza. 
                  Quizan mountaine, already deade, & his body beginning to draw to corruption. Seing we haue newly mentioned Habet-deum, he came to Carthage and thought good to goe to the abhominable King, to manifeſt to him his conſcience, which had alwaies beene familier and well knowne to God. Neither could Antony hould him backe for verie ſhame. He offered to the King a Supplicatiō hauing in effect theſe words? What haue you now obtained at their handes which are fledde? or of them which you baniſhed? yee haue daily ſpoiled them of their ſubſtance, yee haue depriued them of Church, country, and home: you haue onely lefte them their ſoule, which alſo you ſeeke to make * captiue. O times, O corrupted manners? All the world vnderſtandeth it, and the perſecutor himſelfe ſeeth it. If it be faith which you follow, why vexe yee the members of the true faith, with ſo enormious perſecutions? what meddle you with our baniſhment?

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  ley, began to bring forth a duskiſh, rather then a floriſhing haye; forthwith a ſcalding wind was at hand, ſcorching it all, and withering it away. For the duſty ſeaſon vnder a hotte ayre, chafing al things, had filled euery place as with a cloud. Al trafficke was ceaſed, no ploughes with labouring Oxen turned vp the gritte of the ground; for neither were Oxen aliue, nor any ploughes remaining. And of the country Peaſants, part were dead the other part ſeeking their graues. And for as much, as through the incōuenience of the famine, neither buying nor ſelling were accuſtomed, nor the earth duely tilled, troopes, and in a manner carcaſ
                     •
                  es of olde people, of young men and maydes, of boyes and girles, were in euery place ſcattered abroade, through townes, villages, and each particuler cittie, whereſoeuer they could, and in ſuch ſorte as they could, and in ſuch ſort as they might. For ſeeing they were become like a naughtyNum. 20. Pſal. 57. and froward body, prouoking Gods wrath at the waters of contradiction; they felt hūger as dogges, not that they might finde foode, but that they might feele the Trinity reuenging, whom they had ſo denied.

Some did ſpreade themſelues ouer the fieldes; others ſought the ſecreteſt places of the woods, ſearching after olde rootes of hearbes, or of ſuch trifles. There were, which about to enter into their houſe, fell downe by companies on the very threſhold, being conquered by famine. The high waies and pathes were full of carcaſes: the ſtincke breathing from the deade, killed the liuing on all ſides. Burials abounded of thoſe which daily deceaſed, and there was no vertuous abilitie to beſtow the charity of the graue: for famine raging, the liuing were not ſufficient to bury the deade; and they themſelues alſo ſoone after to dye. All men greatly deſired to turne their owne liberty & their childrens, into bondage; but they found not vnto whome. Mountaines and hilles, Streetes of the Citties, waies and pathes, made one common graue for all, to whom conſuming neede denied ſuſtenance. The Vandalls themſelues, whom before the ſundry ſpoiles of many Princes, & poſſeſſion of Africa had enriched, were now moſt of all oppreſſed with neceſſity: and how much the ſtatelier they ſeemed to themſelues, by multiplying

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  Could they well be called by any other name then Barbares, a name importing their fierce crueltie, and dreadfull terror? with how great gifts ſoeuer yee honour them: with how great ſeruices ſoeuer ye appeaſethē, they know not how to doe otherwiſe, thē to enuy Romans. And as tou ching their inclination and ayme, they euermore endeuour to blemiſh the glorie and ſtocke of the Roman name: neither are they willing that any Roman ſhould remaine aliue. And where they are found to ſpare whom they hould in ſubiection, it is but for their ſeruice that they ſpare them: for they neuer loued any of the Romans. If euer barbarous and rude Pagan, cared to debat with vs in matter of faith by argument, then will likewiſe the Arrians hereſie come to diſputation. But when could it euer obſerue any reaſon, ſince it ſeperateth God our Sauiour from God the Father: By fraude and calumniation maintaine they their cauſe: and like a tempeſtious whirl-wind, with their ſtorming rage, would they turne all vpſide dowe. If diſputation by Biſhops was expedient, what is to doe with hanging vp from ground, with fire, hookes, and

with gallowes? why hath continuallie the Arrian brood inuented ſuch kinds of tormēts againſt guiltleſſe perſons, as not Mezentius himſelf did euer excogitat? Againſt innocēcy haue outragious furor & couetous cruelty fought; to deſtroy mens ſoules, and rauin away their ſubſtance. If conference were wiſhed, wherto tendeth rapine of other mens goods; and not only from Prieſtes, but from all the Laity; who reioyced when they were ſpoyled, and with great conſolation receiued the ranſacking of their ſubſtance.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIX. Lamentation of the Auctor for the miſerie of Afric: & inuocation of the praier & meditatiō of Saints, for redreſſe therof.
               Approch now (I pray you) all ages, al ſexes, all eſtates: approch all ye that beare the name of Catholikes; who are ouer all the world borne in your Fathers boſome; who alone know how to impart a true brotherly affection, who haue learned of Paule our inſtructour both to reioyce with them which ioy, & to lament with them which ſorrow. Aſſemble togither

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  and yong men haue learned to treade ſharpe and rough wayes: trained vp in cloiſters of monaſteries, they haue beene led into captiuitie of the Morians: and her holy ſtones are diſperſed, not only in the higher end of the ſtreets, but euen in the dreary metall mines. Tell confidently you may vnto her protector what tribulation ſhee is in, and how her ſtomacke is diſquieted with exceſſiue weeping. For ſhee ſitteth among the Gentiles finding no eaſe, and there is no man to comfort her. I ſought among the Fathers of the Eaſt to ſee who bewailed her, and there was not any. I ſearched a comforter & I found him not, while in her hunger ſhee fed vpon gall, and in her thirſt drunke vineger: imitating the paſſions of her ſpouſe and Lord: who therefore, ſuffered for her, that ſhee might follow his ſteppes. Pray O ye Patriarkes, of whoſe ſtocke ſhee is borne, who now ſo traiueileth in earth. Pray, O yee Prophets, knowing her affliction, whoſe prayſe you by Propheſie, ſo long before did ſing forth BeSuffragatores. interceſſors for her, O Apoſtles, ſeeing to gather her togither you ranne as ſwift courſers ouer the whole world, our Lord reyning the bridle.

Thou principally, O bleſſed Peter, why art thou ſilent for the ſheepe,Ioh. 21. and lambes commended to thee, with great care and regard, by our vniuerſall Lord. Thou, O holy Paul, inſtructor of the Gentiles, who from Hieruſalem vnto Slauony didſt preach the Goſpell of God; aduize what the Arian Vandals doe, & how thy children lament in captiuity. O all ye Apoſtles, poure forth togither your grones for vs. Wel we know that we are vnworthy for whom you ſhould entreate: foraſmuch as theſe calamities which haue fallen out for our probation, haue not bin ſēt vs as to the iuſt is wōt, but as plagues for our deſerts: yet pray for vs your children (euill though we be) as Chriſt praid for the Iewes his enemies. Let that ſuffice for our chaſtiſement, which hath already beene laide vpon vs: and now at laſt let forgiuenes bee ſolicited for ſinfull wretches. Let it bee ſaide vnto the reuenging Angell; It ſufficeth; hold thy hand. Who is ignorant that our approbrious wickednes procured all this for going aſtray frō Gods commaundements, and refuſing to walke in his lawe. But proſtrate wee beſeech you, that yee deſpiſe notVeſtros peccatores. your

miſerable ſinners; for his ſake who from poore fiſhermen rayſed you to the hight of Apoſtolicall dignity.
               Moſt miſchieuous Huneric held the dominion of his kingdome ſeauen yeare, ten monethes: then conſummated the race of his life by a death correſpondent to his demerits. For he putrified and boyled out vermine; ſo that not his body, but gobets of his body may be ſaid to be buried.Ier. 22. And as that King long ſince trāſgreſſor of the lawe giuen had no other buriall then the buriallP. P. Ni caſ
                        •
                     j &c. of an Aſſe: ſo periſhed and ſoone, this (execrable Tyrant) by ſemblable ignominious death.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. 
                  B. The Paſſion of ſeanen Chriſtian brethren. Seeke lib. 3. cap. 12. The Paſsion of ſeauen bleſſed Martirs which ſuffered at Carthage vnder King Huneric The 2. day. 6. Non. of Iuly.
               AT tēpting to ſet forth the triumphes of bleſſed Martyrs, I firſt implore aide of God, to the declaration of their actes, that hee which accompliſhed vnto them conqueſt and victorie, vouchſafe alſo to affoorde vnto mee (although vnworthy and vndeſeruing) ſome ornamēts

how meane ſoeuer of vtterance: For then ſhal I be able to expreſſe what is deſired, if they for me wretch make ſupplication vnto our Lord. The ſeauenth yeare it was of moſt cruell and no leſſe impious Huneric, when behold the ancient enemy, that olde & craftie ſerpent, ſpitting forth the venim of his threeforked tongue, vſing for an inſtrumēt one Ciritlas a Biſhop Ariomanitarū P. F. B. Ariahorū. of the Arrian-madd heretickes, ſubuerting and poſſeſſing the mind of the bloodie Prince, ſo to perſwade him, that hee could not euer enioy a peaceable, & long continued raigne vnleſſe he vtterly aboliſhed the very memory of innocents, (though neuertheles through Gods iuſt iudgement preuēted by a moſt ſhameful death, ſcraling with vermin he breathed out his ghoſt) with gory mouth began to perſue the multitude of Catholikes, who through all the Prouince of Africa had multiplied much like what was foretold to Abraham the Patriarke: to wound thē by theGladio rebaptizatis. glayne of rebaptization, and to ſoile with his muddy ſwarth, the ſtole of one cleane baptiſme, which Chriſt waſhing in the wine of his fleſh, & wringing in the preſſe of his Croſſe had perfectlie

whitned. The Tyrant therefore admitting (as he was both eaſie to be caried away, and fierce) that ſerpent in ſuggeſtion, began to ſhake all Africa at once with ſauage edictes.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               FIrſt and foremoſt hee ſent parling by inhumane baniſhment into far lands a notable company of Prieſtes and Deacons: to whom for compaſſion he commanded to giue the Bis-acutum. twy-edged ſort of grayne which only beaſts feede vpon; & neither diſhusked by the myll; but the branny ſcorce remained vpon it. Afterwards moreouer, his madnes and impietie encreaſing moſt vnmercifully gaue he commandment this ſimple ſuſtenance to bee withdrawne. Not long after this, willed hee yet further, the Churches (Per iudicafis venerabilibus portis. whoſe gates were in time paſt held ſo venerable) to bee mured vp ſtronly with huge morterworks. As for monaſteries; as wel thoſe of mē, as thoſe of holy virgins, hee charged to be deliuered vp togither with their dwellers into the hands of the Gētiles, (that is to the Morians.) Semblable was the lamentation of all; ſemblable

entire and full of reſolution of dying for Chriſt: ſemblable floudes of teares trickling from their eyes For our Lord nowe permitted them to be fed with the bread of teares; and to drinke their meaſure of teares, if not teares without meaſure. And if there were Gen. & percutiā coruorū. of Rauens ſome prone to deſtruction, which departing forth of the arke ſtayed eger vpon the dead carkaſes; greater yet was the number of happie Doues perſiſting in the name of the Trinity. How many noble & excellēt perſons; Lords of ample & large demayn exchā
                  ged land for heauē, rēdring vp both body and goods? and how many tender and noble Gentle-women were contrary to naturall honeſty whipt with rods, in face of all the people; and excruciated with ſundry torments, euer bare away triumphant monuments of victorie? How many yong children deriding the inhuman edictes, firſt deſpiſed the world ere they entred the inticing pathes thereof?
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               IN thoſe daies were alſo ſeauen (as cō
                  cerning aſſociation of our Lords feruice, brethren) who dwelt with one hart and
            
            
               
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               CHAP. 4.
               SOONE came this to the Tyrantes eares, who drunken with furie, willed them yet more to be conſtrained by vnheard-of torments, & loaded with more plenſant ſhackles. Thē gaue charge that a ſhippe ſhould be filled with bundles of dry fewell; them to be faſt bound in the ſame veſſell; ſo fire to bee applied in the midſt of the ſea; whereby they ſhould be burnt to death. As they were brought forth out of the priſon; the multitude of Gods people accompanied thoſe warriars of the Trinity, who as innocent lambes were led to be ſacrificed; contemplating the weighty and horrid yrons; no leſſe then as rare iewels. For bonds theſe were not indeed to bee reputed, but rather ornaments of brauery. With cheerefull alacritie went they toward execution, as if they had haſtned vnto a banquet; ſinging through the paſſages of the ſtreetes with one voice vnto our Lord; Glory in the
                  Luke 2. 
                  highest to God; and in the earth peace to men of good will. This is our deſired day; more feſtifull then any feſtiuity: Now behould is
                  2. Cor. 6. 
                  the acceptable time; now behold is the day of ſaluations
                  
when for the faith of our Lord God we endure addreſſed death, that wee may not loſe the garment of obtained faith. The people alſo with common voice cryed: Feare not O ſeruāts of God, nor dread the threats and terrors of tribulations preſent: dye we rather for Chriſt, as he died for vs, redeeming vs with the price of his ſauing blood. One neuertheleſſe by name Maximus a child of their cō
                  pany, laboured thoſe authors of euil with vehement endeuour to diſioyne from ſociety of the Saints, ſaying Why haſtneſt thou prety boy vnto death? let them goe, they are mad; heare thou our counſaile, that thou mayſt obtaine thy life, & goe to the great Kings court. Whervnto he, though a child in yeares, yet cried with mature grauity, no man gets me from my holy Father that Liberatus, and from my brethren, who bred mee vp in the monaſtery: with them I liued in the feare of God, with them I deſire to dye; with whom alſo I truſt that I ſhal attaine the glory to come. Thinke not that you can ſeduce my childhood: ſeauen ſoules ſith our Lord would aſſemble vs, hee will in like ſorte vouchſafe to crowne vs all with one martirdome. As none periſhed of
                  2. Mac. 7. 
                  the ſeauen Machabees ſo the number of ſeauen ſhall
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  church of Celebrina. Thus in confeſsion of the Trinity ſuffered the thriſe-bleſſed Martirs, accompliſhing a glorious proſecution of their combate, and receiuing crownes of our Lord. To whome is honor, & glory, world without end, Amen.
               The end of B. Victors hiſtorie of the Arrian perſecution in Africa againſt the Catholikes.
            
         
         
            
               Plame. 146.
               Our Lord reedifying Ieruſalem ſhal gather togither the ſcatterlings of Iſrael: hee who healeth the cruſhed in heart and bindeth vp their bruiſes.
            
            
               COncerning proceſſe of the perſecution after the good hound King Huneric had yelped vp his laſt; not much is extant in authors: albeit that it continued outright (not at all times indeed with tenor of equall terrour) ſome 90. yeares ſpace, as witneſſeth Iuſtinian in his lawes. But good eſtimat thereof may be gathered by the life of S. Fulgentius moſt authentically written by one of his owne diſciples vnto his ſucceſſour Foelicianus.
               
            
            
               
THE LIFE OF SAINTSuarius 1. die Ianuarij. Fulgentīus Biſhop of Rulp.
            
               HVNERIC the Arrian 
                King of Vandals, after that Carthage had beene by them ſubdued, exiled all the Senators into Italy: one of whom was Gordian Grand-father to Fulgentius. Which Gordian being deceaſed, his ſonne Claudius returning to Carthage, although their houſe had beene giuen to Arrian Prieſts; yet recouering great parte of his heritage, by fauor which he found at the Kings hāds: and departing to Lepte, there eſtabliſhed his habitation. Fulgentius there borne, was by the diligence of his carefull mother Mariana (For ſoone was his Father taken from the life of this mortality) trained vp in learning: and cauſed to be inſtructed in Greeke before hee tooke ni hand Latin, that thereby he might attaine to greater perfection & skill in that ſtrange tongue. So highly profited he in all good partes togither with encreaſing yeares, that his

mother exceedingly reioyced in his wiſdome and towardnes: greatly eaſing by his preſence the diſcomfort of her loſt husband; and permitting to his gouernment the ordring of her houſhold. In which charge he bare himſelfe pleaſurable to his friends, reaſonable to his 
                  •
               llwillers; to the ſeruants aſwell milde in direction as ſeuere in correction; & diligently vphold his patrimony. Being at lēgth inſtituted the Kings collector, and preſcribed to bee rigourous in exacting of the rated payments: heauy to his ſoule, began the burden of worldly buſines to wax. And vaine flattering felicity yeelding diſguſt, by litle and litle the loue of ſpirituall life ſeemed to take roote in his hart firſt encreaſed a deſire of reading & praying: then caſt he in mind to frequent monaſteries; and beheld by experience the ſweet conuerſation of Gods ſeruants. Whō perceiuing as they had no worldly ſolace, ſo to haue no wearines; as no temporall ioyes, ſo no vexation of ſpirit: and withal diſcerning with what cheerefulnes and alacrity ſundry perſons, yea yong-men, walked the ſtraight vvay of perfection in perpetuall continency; he

brake out vvith himſelfe in theſe vvords. Why trau
                     •
                  ile I in the world which ſhall yeelde me no future & laſting reward? Although better it be to weepe well, then ioy ill, yet if to ioy be our deſire; howe much excelleth their ioy, who haue a good conſcience towards God, who dread nothing but ſinne, doe nothing but accompliſh the commandements? Change we labours: and as I before endeuoured among my noble friendes to appeare more noble: ſo now let my imployment and ſolicitude bee among the humble and poore ſeruants of the Higheſt to become more poore and humble; turning by Saint Mathevves example from a Publican to a Diſciple.
            
            Reſolued to renoūce terrene delights, and to render himſelfe partaker of that kind of life, vvhich in vpright diſquiſition the arbitrary diſcuſſion of his inward thoughts approued & extolled; leaſt yet ſudaine change might breede him ſome annoyance either in body or minde, hee put himſelfe into exerciſe of faſting; and auoiding the company and accuſtomed complements of his olde acquaintance, and familiers, he gaue himſelfe ſolitarilie to reading and oraiſons: ſo that euen in a ſeculer profeſſion he conuerſed as a perfect Monke. All thoſe which knew him

were ſtriken with wonder and admiration at his extraordinary carriage: imputing this ſtrict demeanure of a man ſo delicately brought vp to proceed from neceſſity and priuy pouerty. When he had now made ſome proofe of ſuch thinges wherein he conceiued difficulties might grow: and well vnderſtood the abilitie of a couragious wil prouoked and ayded by the concurrence of diuine grace: peruſing (among other theologicall treatiſes) the diſcourſe of Saint Auſten vppon the 36. Pſalme, his loue of perfection more ſtrongly encreaſed: ſo that he determined out of hand to effectuate his holy deſigne. It came in his minde by ſecret departure in vnknowne apparell to ſequeſter himſelfe: but then reflecting that his conuerſion, if hidden, would only auayle himſelfe; if publiſhed, might be an incitation to others: he without delay went to Biſhop Fauſtus a good and godly perſonage (one of thoſe Prelates whom Huneric had confined vnto certaine places neere vnto their owne country; whereby they might ſooner relent) beſeeching at his hands monaſticall habit. For in a litle monaſtery which hee had erected, held

his reſidence. The prudent Biſhop well knowing the worldly cōuerſation of the yong mā in time paſt, gaue no credit vnto his purpoſe, nor cōforte vnto his requeſt: but willed him firſt leanre to become a leſſe delicat lay-man: and gently put him from him. But he humbly kiſſing the Biſhops hand beſought him very affectuouſly not to repell him vtterly; but gratiouſly to open vnto him the monaſtery dore, and admitte him for one of his diſciples. Importunity declared ſincere reſolution; ſincere purpoſe deſerued credence, and obtained admiſſion. Fame of the thing ſpreading abroad; ſome deſpaired ſucceſſe becauſe of his former daintines, others conſidered his excellent wit were rayſed into expectation of ſome noble and worthy conſequence. Diuers of his familiars excited by imitation of his renūciation, addicting themſelues to the like life, only his inconſiderat & worldly minded parent grew greatly diſquieted & frighted. As if her Fulgentius were now dead (albeit well were hee deade who ſo died) ſhe impatienly runneth to the monaſtery, brawleth with B. Fauſtus, & crieth out; Reſtore the ſonne to his mother, the

               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               ſtrayned here and there vp & downe by fleeing to hide himſelfe: and Fulgentius had no better ſhift then to get to another litle monaſtery gouerned by Abbot Foelix; who not ignorant of his vertue, gladly would haue deſigned vnto him: which honor Fulgentius conſtantly refuſed: but to take part of the charge vpon him, the conſent of the company impoſing it, hee could not ſtifly deny. So that theſe two holy Fathers equall in loue of God and their neighbour, equall alſo in vertue, & like in conditions, mutually gouerned; each fearefull of offēding the other, each vigilently attending to the behoof of the couent: but one peculiarly addicted to inſtruction and inſtitution; the other to ordering the affaires & to neceſſary prouiſion.
            This monaſtery being in like ſorte by  tumults diſſolued; they paſſed with their whole company into more remote & vnknowne parts of Africke; laſtly ſetled in the territory of Sicca, not without great fauour of people and no leſſe profitt and gaine of ſoules: Vntill one Foelix a Prieſt of the Arrian heretikes, who not farre of preached his perfidious doctrine againſt

the ancient faith, through emulation and ſpite ſpurned againſt them. This fellow, great in power and auctority, but greater in malice, growing into feare, leaſt by means of Fulgentius (whoſe learning now began to wax famous) ſundry whom the Arrian nouelty had reduced might be reconciled: cauſed to be beſet all the waies and pathes of the reſorte of theſe two Monks. For Fulgentius though no Prieſt, yet vnder habit of a Monke fulfilled indeed the office of a Prieſt; not by reconciling any, but by holſome aduertiſemēts winning and drawing whom he could to reconſiliation. Neceſſary it was that who had ſhewed themſelues ſuch valiant wariours by abſtinence, ſhould a litle fall into perſecutors hands, to the intēt that by participating alſo in the combat of martyrdome, ſuffring inflicted torments for their faith, they might know and vnderſtand how much they had profited. It fell out therefore that theſe two as they walked by the way, lighted into the watchmens hands: & after apprehenſion were preſently ſeuered, and carried (wel charged with bonds) vnto the Arrian Prieſt. Without faulte became they in this ſorte

priſoners, and without warre captiues▪ 
               Foelix at the very firſt fright caſt away frō him certaine money which he hapned to haue about him for the brethrens ſuſtenance; committing vnto GOD that which onely for Gods ſeruants, had beene reſerued. The Arrian at their approach before him very roughly and bluntly demaunded why they came out of their country in ſecret ſort, to ſubuert Chriſtian Kings: Kings terming all ſuch as hee and his like had peruerted from the faith Catholike. As they prepared to anſwere and would faine haue ſpoken; he commanded them firſt to bee ſcourged. Foelix out of his great charity made preſently requeſt, that brother Fulgentius might be ſpared: who (ſaide hee) can not well liue to endure the extremity of the torment, but will of liklyhood ſend forth his innocent ſpirit vnder your hands: let rather your wrath be wholy wreaked vpon me; in whom lieth the abſolute cauſe of our action. What I confeſſe I know to be true. Foelix therefore was moſt cruellie beaten: but not that Fulgentius ſhould eſcape: Who being of tender conſtitution, as noble-borne, with much adoe ſuſteyning

the blowes of the ſtaues (as himſelfe afterwards tolde vs) aduiſed howe either to mitigate the enraged tormentor, or to gaine ſome reſpit and eaſe and cried out, that willingly hee would ſay ſomewhat, deſiring that he might be heard. Stripes and baſtanados being intermitted, he began with his ſweet eloquent mouth to recite cauſe of his trauaile into thoſe quarters: giuing to the Aduerſary no ſmall wonder at his learning, and his flowing ſpeech. Almoſt had the Prieſt forgotten his cruelty, and ſhame of the iniury was ready to embrace his obdurat heart: yet leaſt he ſhould appeare ouercomne with his words, he cryed out fiercely: Lay him on luſtely, and multiplying your blowes rend this pratler: what? weenes he, I trow, to ſeduce me alſo? Incredibly hereupon is he againe beaten: and then both of them deformedlie ſhauen, ſtript of their clothes and ſent away packing all naked. But vnto them* bredde neither ſuch nakedneſſe, nor ſuch boldnes, confuſion: Nay verily by ſo baſe an iniury ſuſtained for conſcience ſake, ſingulerly were they beautified. Forth then from the Arrians houſe departed they no otherwiſe thē as from a glorious

combat, and as crowned with laurels of victory: & in their returne found luckily the money which Abbot Foelix had throwne aſide. Rumor of this deteſtable facte gaue vnto ſundry no ſmal offence, and namely to the Arrian Biſhop of the dioces: who had helde Fulgentius deare and much fauoured him, while hee was yet a lay-man; and was now ready to proſecute reuenge of his profered violence, in caſe he would ſeeke it. Whereunto when many perſwaded him, Fulgentius gaue them this humble deniall. Lawfull it is not for a Chriſtian to meditate reuenge: well knoweth our Lord how to repay the iniuries inflicted on his ſeruants. If my caſe bee venged, then looſe I reward of my patience. Eſpecially ſeeing it might ſcandalize many litle ones, if I a Catholike and a Monke, ſhould require iudgement at an Arrians hand.
            
            
               Fulgentius reading the wonderful liues  of the Egyptian Monkes, ſayled thitherwards (accompanied with only one brother) aſwell to liue vnder a more ſtricte rule, as alſo to leaue the title of Abbot, & to liue againe vnder obedience. Driuen was the ſhippe by force of weather and winde to the hauen of Syracuſe, chiefe Citie

of Sicilia. Biſhoppe there, at that time was holy Euſalius; who had a proper, monaſtery, whereunto he frequently reſorted, when he was ſomewhat voide from Epiſcopall cares. In very charitable ſort were they by this Biſhop entertained: he perceiuing the ſufficiency of Fulgentius enquired the cauſe of his voyage; who pretended ſearch after his parents; as loath of pure humility to lay open his intended purpoſe: (and ſpirituall parents he indeed ſought) Euſalius eaſily found the feigned anſwere, and by further queſtions receiuing the true motiue, diſwaded ſuch iorney, aſſuring him that Egypt
               * was in ſchiſme and ſeperated from the communion of Bleſſed Peter: and added Without faith impoſsible is it to pleaſe God: and what profiteth it to afflict the body with faſting, when the ſoule ſhall want spirituall comfort? Neither put thou thy faith in hazard vpon conceiued regard of a more perfect life. At Syracuſe liued Fulgentius one winter and though not but at the good Biſhops charity, yet ceaſſed hee not of that litle ſtudiouſly to relieue the neceſſities of others: and winter being paſt, he viſited Ruffinianus, a Biſhop likewiſe but heretically liuing in an

obſcure ſmal iſlet of the Sicilian ſhore; beſeeching his aduice alſo concerning the purpoſed iorney. Of whom in ſemblable ſort diſſwaded; hee was about to returne to his monaſtery: but better aduiſed would not omit the memory of the Apoſtbes:
               * but ſayling to Rome venerably viſited the places of holy Martyrs: and there beholding the order of the Roman Nobility, triumphant pomp of King Theoderic, & vniuerſall gladnes of the cittie; he yet reſpected not ſuch worldly toies with delight, but by ſight thereof ſtirred vp his minde to deſire of heauenly ioyes: giuing this leſſon of admonition vnto his company. Howe beautifull may the celeſtiall Hieruſalem be when terreſtriall Rome ſo glittereth? If ſuch honor be giuen to louers of vanity; what glorie ſhall be imparted to the Saints, louers and followers of truth?
            
            Returning into Africa to the incredible  ioy of his Monkes, being deſirous of reſt for loue of contemplation, but finding diſtractions in his monaſtery by neceſſity of charitable charge; to auoid the burden and care of ruling others, hee priuily ſtole vnto another monaſtery farre of amidſt the ſhelly rockes of the ſea, deſtitute

in a manner of all humane ſolace & neceſſaries. Where being receiued; as much as he paſſed all others in excellencie of learning and ſpirituall eloquence, ſo farre ſubiected he himſelfe to al in humilitie and obedience: many bookes hee there copied out very faire with his owne hands, and not ſeldome made neceſſarie implements of Palme leaues. The rather in ſuch ſecret ſort had he ſequeſtred himſelfe into other quarters, for that his eſtimation was growne to be ſuch, as that the noble-men and gentry imployed themſelues in a kind of contention who might moſt gratifie him: of whom Silueſter the principal man of the Bizacene prouince beſtowed vpon him a ſeate ſingulerly fertill, and moſt commodious for erection of a monaſtery: which he gratefully accepting ediſied indeede ſuch a place; but more glorious by the brightnes of the vertues there reſident, then of curious or magnificent building: neither endured he there to ſtay. His old Monks recouering notice of his abode, letted not inſtantly to require him: and great grew the diſſenſion; theſe ſeeking to regaine him, thoſe other to detaine him: his owne

choice was to remaine with the later, in ſubiection: but the former complaining to B.Faustus, he laide chalenge to Fulgentius as to his Monke; threatning excommunication to the others if they obſtinatly reſiſted. In fine to his old monaſtery was he conſtrained to returne: where that he ſhould no more attempt to ſlippe away for loue of ſpirituall vacance, they cauſed him to be conſecrated Prieſt.
            Sundry Citties wanting Paſtors (for  the Kings auctority had prohibited Biſhops to be any more ordained) many of them ſought and laboured to haue Fulgentius for theirs, & elected him outright. Secure neuertheleſſe held he himſelfe by reaſon of the prohibition; vntil ſuch time that the Biſhops which yet ſuruiued decreed* that contrary to the Kings commandement and order, Biſhops ſhould be ordained in all places vacant: for then hid he himſelfe, nor would be found. According as the Biſhops had defined, were there out of hand, in all haſt (leaſt aduertiſement ſhould ouer ſoone arriue at the Kings eares) worthy Prieſts and Deacons euery where taken, bleſſed and conſecrated:* Only Fulgentius who was moſt

of all ſought for, no where appeared. All ſolemnities of cōſecratiō being paſt, returned he, & diſcouered himſelf, wel hoping now to bee ſafe. But otherwiſe diſpoſed God; For by great happe the city Ruſpae remaining as yet vnfurniſhed, the citizēs getting incling of his diſcouery came vnto him, inuade him, hould him, cary him with them and not requeſt but conſtraine him to be their Biſhop. In which prelacy and dignity he nothing forgot the integrity of his former ſtate, neither gaue ouer to be a monk. Meane and ſimple attyre he vſed, often went barefoot; wholly abſtayned from fleſh, oyle, and wyne: in no place would he be without company and preſence of ſome monks of his. Shortly after enſued that which was before well enough forſeen to be a lykely conſequent; but contemned in reſpect of the churches neceſſity and deſtitution: that is, that the King exiled threeſcore Biſhops and more into Sardinia: among them this holy Saint, who gladly mounted the commanded veſſell, reioycing that he had a part in ſuch a glorious confeſſion. Diuers of his monks and clergy followed him: and arriuing

into Sardinia, at Calaris began he a kind of monaſtery: For the Clearks and Monks liued togither at the ſame table & in the ſame houſe: only the Monks more ſtrictly poſſeſſed nothing, in propriety. And hereby his ſermons conuerted hee many to monaſticall life.
            Among the craftie fetches and perſecutory  driftes of King Traſamund, whereby he endeuoured to allure Catholikes▪
                vnto the Arrian inuentions, hee feigned deſire of becomming a Catholike: and propoſing diuers fooliſh & deceiptful queſtions pretended that he could not finde any man ſufficient to anſwere him: Hearing therfore of Fulgentius he haſtily ſent for him. Who with good courage comming to Carthage, ſeriouſly confirmed the Catholikes in their faith: and with great pleaſantneſſe of ſpeech, and gladneſſe of cheere, he anſwered to all queſtioners, reiecting no man: ſo that ſundry already rebaptized hee reclaimed from their errour, & reconciled them, inſtructed them to lament their fall; others hee exhorted not to looſe their ſoules for temporall commodities: and whom hee ſaw at the pinch of perdition, with milde words he

ſo ſtayed and animated to a noble & generous reſolution, that they were aſhamed, and ſorrowfully repenting, deſiſted to accompliſh the Fiendes ſuggeſtion. Certain alſo by him eſtabliſhed, who before were tottering, letted not with great confidence to reproue the weak-grounded impudency of the Arrian party. Thus turning the Omnipotent of heauen his enemies deuiſe to his proper glory. After this champion of Chriſt had ſtood in the Princes ſight, hee was by him both found and acknowledged to bee euery way aunſwerable to the reporte which went of his wiſedome and learning: and certaine difficulties were propoſed vnto him ſhortly to bee by him anſwered by writing. Which anſwere being framed, was firſt by the learnedſt Catholikes conferred vpon, & then brought to the peoples knowledge before that it was deliuered vp. The King peruſing the ſame with great attention; prayſed his wiſedome, wondred at his eloquence, commended his humility: yet was not worthy to vnderſtād the truth. Not long was his ſtay in Carthage: for the Arrians clamorouſly incenſed the King, complayning

that Fulgentius had already reconciled ſome of their Prieſts, that the people fell apace vnto him, and that their whole religion ſtood in hazard. By whoſe importunity the King committed him againe into Sardinia. Late in the night was he brought a bord the ſhippe, that his departure might be for the preſent concealed from the people: but by contrarie windes ſo long was hee delaied vpon the ſhore, that during many daies togither, almoſt all the citty came to him & taking their farewell cōmunicated at his hands. Great lamentation ariſing at his departure, he tolde to luliates a merueilous deuout man (whoſe ſorrow among the reſt was moſt extreame) both that hee ſhould ſhortly returne, and the Church obtaine peace: deſiring him to keepe it ſecret. So great was his humility, that he neuer was delighted with doing miracles, neither deſired that grace. Requeſted to pray for others neceſſities, hee vſually receiued theſe words: Thou knoweſt (O Lord) what is our ſoules health, graunt of thy mercy vnto our neceſsity as farre forth as ſhal not hinder our ſpirituall profit. Whatſoeuer hee by prayer ſo obtained at Gods hands, he imputed it to

their faith, ſaying God had granted it to them, not to him. Hee was wont to ſay that Miracles make not a man iuſt and righteous, but famous.
            Returning againe to Sardinia he began  a freſh foundation of a new monaſterie, aſſembling ſome 40. Monks or vpwards, teaching them principally to obſerue exacte and preciſe pouerty; often and ſundrie times putting them in mind, that no Monke was he, whoſoeuer deſired property in any thing: and that why one Monke ſhould fare better then his company, there may perhaps bee iuſt reaſon through ſpeciall infirmity: but to chalenge propriety was an euident ſigne of a proud will and couetous deſire. To whom he any thing more diſtributed thē to the reſt, he willed them to be the more humble, ſaying. Who taketh of the common ſo much, becommeth debter to all: which debt onely humility ought to pay. He gaue to euery one what their neede or manifeſt reaſon required; but if any preſumed to aske, hee denied it although there were happilie good cauſe. For (ſaid hee) Monkes ought to content with that which is giuen them: and they which aske; be it that they neede it, yet are they
               
               in bondage to carnall deſires: and haue not their mind perfectly ſet vpon heauenly thinges; ſeeing what they cannot giue by worldly bargaining & buſines, they labour to purchace by petition. Very pleaſing was it vnto him, if any of the brethren propoſed a hard queſtion: and gladly heard hee the doubts of any brother were hee neuer ſo ſimple; neither would hee for wearineſſe or tediouſneſſe ceaſe to yeelde them reaſon vntill they confeſſed themſelues ſatisfied. In correction ſo long would he appeare ſeuere, as the neceſſity of diſcipline did compell; remaining, euen when hee ſeemed moſt diſpleaſed and angrie, nothing at all in minde troubled or diſquieted.
            
               Traſamund the King taken away by  death, Hilderic ſucceeding yealded liberty to the Catholick Church; and recalled the Biſhops from exile: and Fulgentius was with ineſtimable deuotion of the Africans euery where receiued no leſſe then if at euery place he had ben the peculier Biſhop. With lights, lamps, tapers, and boughes they mett him: with whom reioycing he now reioyced, as before with them lamenting he had lamented. So enflamed was the deuotion

of people, that a ſhowre happening, they with their garments held hollow ouer his head as by a tabernacle, ſheilded him from the rayne. Enioying his proper Sea, yet lyked he ſtyll to reſide amōg the monks; and in the monaſtery made himſelfe ſubiect to Abbot Foelix: & whereas in all great maters of the dioceſe his authority and aduiſe was ſought, yet within the monaſtery in eu'ry thing, were it neuer ſo ſmall, would he be ruled by* 
               Foelix. Moſt of his clergy choſe he out of the monaſtery, to encreaſe loue & amity in tyme to come betweene the Clergy and monks. He preſcribed to his Clergy to hold their houſes neere vnto the Church,, to dreſſe each his gardayn with his owne handy labour, to haue a ſinguler regard of pronōcing & ſinging well.
            In the Councell of Vincenſe being by ſentence of all the Biſhops preferred in place before B. Quodvultdeus, who claymed the preheminence to his proper ſea: the deuout Father would not for the preſent diſproue the iudgmēt of the Coūcel; but at the next Coūcel he made ſupplication that B. Quodvultdeus might be recited and ſet before him; which was granted.
            
               A yeare before he deceaſed, forſooke  he eccleſiaſtical buſineſſe, and the monaſtery it ſelfe: departing into the Iſland Circina, with a few brethren; and there liued he in a monaſtery vpon a litle rock: as feruently perſiſting in mortification, as if he now began a freſh a penitentiall life. But by importunity of the people, needing him and complayning of his abſence, he returned and ſhortly fell into greiuous pangues of ſikneſſe: lying ſo ſome 60. dayes he often cryed; O Lord, giue me here patience, and afterwards pardon. Phyſicions perſwading him to vſe a bath; Can bathes (quoth he) make that a man hauing accompliſhed the courſe of nature ſhould not dye? if not; why then induce you me now at my laſt end to diſſolue the rigor of my long-obſerued profeſsion? Calling laſtly the brethrē about him, he thus ſpake vnto them. Careful of your ſouls helth (deare brethren) haue I perhaps beene auſtere and hard vnto you. Whoſoeuer is greiued, I beſeech him pardon mee: and if my ſeuerity haue poſsibly paſſed meaſure and due moderation, pray ye to God that he impute it not to me. They all kneeling downe acknowledged, and affirmed him to haue beene alwayes louing, gentle, and milde

towards them. He replyed. God prouide you a Paſtor worthy of his Maieſtie. Then calling for a ſumme of money, which as a faithfull ſteward he dayly accuſtomed to diſpenſe vnto the needy, he willed it all preſently to be disburſed: and reciting by memory the wydowes, orphāts, pilgrims, and poore, he allotted to euery one their portion. Soone dyed then amidſt his prayers this verteous man; and famous Doctor of the Church the firſt day of a new yeare, the 25. yeare of his epiſcopall dignity, the 60. of his lyfe, hauing written very many treatiſes, againſt the heretiks; ſondry ſermons, and epiſtles. Whoſe tongue was of ſuch force to mooue, that the Biſhop of Carthage hearing him preach two dayes at Carthage, could not cōtayne from teares all the whyle, for ioy that Gods goodnes had giuen to his Church in thoſe afflicted and confortleſſe tymes, ſo noble an inſtrument of his glory.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               ther for ſandy deſerts, neither at all, vnleſſe they would turne Black-moors. Occaſion of which their paſſage ouer the Mediterrane, was this. Of the two moſt eminent perſonages for martiall affaires; and famouſeſt generals of the Roman Empire Aetius and Boniface; this later being by Valentinian the third, then Emperour, placed Gouernour of Africke; the former (who by ouerthrowing Attila with his innumerable Hunnes wonne afterwards incredible honor, but withal puffed vp his hart with ſwelling ambition) plotted ſurmiſes againſt him; as a deſtroier of the prouince, with aduiſe, that beſt might this appeare in that happily he would refuſe to obey, if he were ſent for. By letters in the mean ſpaceful of feigned amity, gaue Aetius aduertiſement to Erle Boniface that hee was held ſuſpect, & like ſhortly to be diſcharged of his dignity. Wherupon, being preſently reuoked into Italy, hee made anſwere of expreſſe deniall: then, to preuent puniſhment, directed meſſage vnto the Vandals in Spaine, promiſing if they would paſſe vnto him, to parte Africke with them. VVhich no ſooner had they done, but that to the Erle came commiſſioners

from Empreſſe Placidia, mother to Valentinian: for he hauing bin alwaies before found moſt loyall, great was the wonder at this ſtrange demeanure. To whom he had rendred reaſon, expoſtulating his ſeruices and the vnkinde abuſes offered, laid alſo before their eies the letters of Aetius, and that they had returned due report of the truth, he was reſtored to grace. Hereupon, whereas before no arguments neither yet S. Auguſtines own * Epiſtle vnto him (which ſeemethEpiſt. 70. about this point) could auert him from cōceiued indignation; he now promiſed to do his vtmoſt for diſpatching away and ridding the Vandals whoſe ſociety he now began to deteſt. And firſt with many thouſands of coyne he aſſayed thē: which offer reiected, he met them in battell but receiued an vtter ouerthrow at their hands. Diuine vengeance ouertooke yet Aetius after certain yeares; for attempting extraordinary greatneſſe he was by the Emperour preuented and put to execution. Genſeric who performed this inuaſion was but baſe ſonne to Godegiſcus,
                  Procopi. though being a warriar he preuayled to exclude from the regimēt his yonger

brother Gonthar the lawfully begottē heire, and laſtly made him from life.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               TOuching the preciſe tyme of thoſe things, which B. Victor mentioneth; In chro. 
                  Proſper who was bred vp vnder S. Auſten noteth in his chronicle, that the Vandals croſſed into Afric during the conſulſhip of Hierom and Ardaburius, which fell in the yeare of our Lord 427. inſinuating that the ſiege of Hippo with the death of the famous Doctor was 3. or 4. yeare after: that in the yeare 435. peace was made with the Vandals, the region about Hippo being yealded them to inhabit: and by him it ſeemeth that in the yeare 437. it was, that Genſerich perſecuted and chaſed the Biſhops of his prouince, depriuing them of their churche, bycauſe they refuſed to become Arians, and embrace that religiō which he preſcribed them to admitt. But vnto the Vandals ſauage proceedings may (beſyds the words of Victor this more patheticall deſcription of the firſt attēpts ſett down by Biſhop Poſsidius another of Auſtens diſciples, yeald no vngratefull light. In

ſhort tyme after, through the will andPoſſidius in vita Aug. power of God, it came to paſſe, that a huge band, well armed with ſondry weapons, well exerciſed in warres, of inexorable enemies (Vandals, and Alans, aſſociated with the people of Goths, as alſo perſons of ſondry other nations) disborded itſelfe by ſhip, out of the parties of Spayne on the other ſyde the ſea, and ruſhed vpon Africa: and piercing through all Mauritania, euē vnto our prouincies, raging with all cruelty & atrocity, by ſpoyling, ſlaughter, and ſondry torments, by fireing and other miſchifs, as innumerable, ſo vnſpeakable, deſtroyed whatſoeuer came in their way: ſparing neither ſexe nor age; neither the Prieſts or miniſters them ſelues; neither the very ornaments, furniture, or aedifices of Churches. This moſt fierce proceeding, and hoſtile depopulation, that man of God Auſten did feele don, and ponder to be don, not as other men did, but more deeply and profoundly conſidering the ſame; and therein principally regarding before hand the dangers yea deaths of ſoules, more then ordinarily was wont; Tears became his food

both day and night (* for who addeth vnderſtanding addeth greif: and an intelligent heart is as a corroſiue vermine to the bones) ſo that moſt bitter and aboue others moornfull led hee in patience the laſt act both of his old age and life. For already ſaw this man of God the cities together with their buyldings vtterly ſubuerted the inhabiters of villages ſome of them extinguiſhed by their deadly enemyes, others of them chaſed away and ſcattred abroad: the churches deſtitute of Prieſts & miniſters; the holy Virgins alſo, and .a. Quoſcunque continē
                     tes. what men ſoeuer profeſſed cōtinency, euery where diſperſed of theſe, part to haue dyed by torments, part to haue beene ſlayn by the ſword; part the integrity of mind, body, & of faith being quite loſt in captiuity, after an euill and hard ſort▪ to ſerue their enemyes. He perceiued likewiſe the hymnes of God, and laudes to haue periſhed from the churches; church buyldings in very many places waſted by fyre; the ſolēnities which vnto God are due vaniſhed out of their proper places: .b. Sacriſicia. ſacrifices and ſacraments diuine either not ſought for; or not eaſily

the perſon found who might impart thē to the ſeeker: of thoſe who fled into the moūtain foreſts, & rocky caues, or dens, or els fortreſſes, of what ſort ſoeuer; certaine to haue beene ſurpriſed and ſlayn, the reſt disfurniſhed and depriued of neceſſary ſuſtentations therby to pine trough hunger: the gouernors moreouer.c. themſelues of the churches, and Clericos. thoſe of the clergy who happily had by Gods grace either not lighted vpon them, or els eſcaped their incurſions, ſpoyled of all things and made bare, in moſt poore plight to beg relief. Scarſe three among innumerable churches ſaw he now remayning, that is of Carthage, Hippon, and Cirta; which by ſpeciall benefit of God were not ſubuerted; & the cities of theſe ſtand permanent as furniſhed both by diuine & humane ayd: albeit Hippon after his death emptied of indwellers was by the aduerſaries fyred. Amydſt which euils cōforted he himſelfe with the ſentence of a certaine wiſeman ſaying. No great thing ſhall it ſeeme that tymber and ſtones fall; and that men which are mortall muſt dye: all theſe accidents, hee (as deeply wiſe) with plentifull teares dayly lamented.

Augmentation finally gaue this alſo to his moornfull lamentations that thoſe foes came in like maner to beſiege the ſaid city of the Hipponēſes 
                  Regiorum, al. regionū. 
                  Regij, which vntil then held her former ſtate. Foraſmuch therefore as in defence thereof was conſtituted one Erle Boniface, he who ſomtime had beene confederat of the Goths army; their ſiege continued about the citie almoſt 14. months: the benefit of the ſea ſhore being withall cutt of. Thither had we alſo from the neighbouring territory, together with other our aſſociat Biſhops, betakē our ſelues by flight; and there remayned during the whole ſiege. Where very often wee had mutuall talke cōcerning theſe misfortunes: and conſidered the dreadfull iudgments of God layd now before our eyes: ſaying; Iuſt art thou O Lord, and rightfull is thy doom. And altogether grieuing, groning, and ſhedding teares, wee beſought the Father of mercies, and God of all conſolation, that he would be pleaſed to relieue vs from this tribulation. And it hapned that ſitting with him at table, & entercourſe of ſpeech paſſing, he began to ſay in our preſence; Yee ſhall vnderſtand,

that at this preſent of our calamity, I aske of God, that either he vouch ſafe to free this citie ſo by foes enuironed: or in caſe it otherwiſe ſeeme good vnto him, then to enharden his ſeruāts with courage to endure his pleaſure; or at leaſtwiſe to take me vnto him ſelfe, out of this world. By which ſaying of his being inſtructed from thence forwards together with him, and with our ſeuerall companies, and thoſe which inhabited the ſame citie, of the higheſt God we required the like. Behould then, the third moneth of the ſiege, tooke hee his bed, trauailed with feuers; and began to be exerciſed with his laſt ſicknes. Neither ſurely did our Lord defraud his ſeruant of the fruit of his praier: for both to himſelfe, For the Vandals through famine lefte the ſiege. Proc. and to the citty, hee in ſeaſon obtained what before he had with wette praiers earneſtly ſued for.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               HEreunto may bee added, that Carthage as is gathered out of Prosper was by Genſeric, impudent violator of the concluded peace, fraudulently ſurpriſed in the yeare of our Lord 439. & that 15. yeares

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  for cōſciēce ſake, like fauor frō heauē to haue bin found. Neither may I let paſſe, that Africke as moſt other regions ſcourged of God might (it ſeemeth) not vntruly crie out, Before I was abaſed I ſinned: forPſal. 118. ſo farre was it runne in diliciouſnes and looſenes, that in Carthage (as bitterly lamented Lib. de prouid. 
                  Saluian Biſhop of Maſsilia at the very ſame ſeaſon) might be ſeene men of more diſcipline and ſeuerity in life to be hiſſed at in the ſtreetes, as if they were wonders, or monſters; not doubting to pronounce thereof, That the paſſage of the Vandals into Africke was not to be imputed vnto Gods rigour, but to the Africans wickednes; & Lib. 3. cap. 19. 
                  Victor himſelf acknowledgeth no leſſe. Adde wee this alſo out of Procopius, that for better cuſtodie of the purchaſed pray were ordeined in ambuſhes and places fit for guard, both Vandals and Alans vnder no fewer leaders then foureſcore; whom they tearmed Chiliarchs (Lib. 1. cap. 8. 
                  Victor Millenarians) that is, Captaines of thouſands. Whereby the army conſiſting of but 50. thouſand gaue ſhew of 80. thouſand. Whereas alſo at the beginning Vandals only and Alans were held in roll; yet admitted in time were other alſo of barbarous

nations; paſſing all vnder the name of Vandals, except Mauruſijs. 
                  Moores onely, who at the laſt were in like manner receiued into the armie
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               THree tragicall acts hauing beene by B. Victor of Vtica ſo repreſented, as that wee haue not only heard, but in a maner ſeene with our eyes, what can not but make pious harts to bleed: & a forth act being alſo performed, wherein ſome qualification and hope of better times began to appeare: it ſhall not (I know) be vngratefull to all Chriſtian eares, if I exhibit the laſt accidents of this veritable hiſtory; to which the Omnipotent himſelfe gaue a gladſome Concluſion. cataſtrophe. Nay I may not be ſo harſh to their patient & compatient harts, who haue ſorrowfully (though not tediouſly) through paſſed the rufull relations; as to defraud thē of the conſolatory part remayning behynde. So to doe where impiety; at leaſt, a kind of inhoſpitality. And beſides the intermediant chances not vnpleſant, the finall euent moſt delectable to recite; euidently ſhall it be manifeſt how a well

prepared breſt, ſhould in aduerſe times not be deiected; for that God by admirable and incomprehēſible means compaſſed what we can not coniecture. Cō
                  pendiouſly therefore to ſet downe out of Procopius; what he at large deliuereth the abſtract and ſumme of things is as followeth.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  I. GENSERIC being very far ſtept into age, at the time of his death, left in his laſt teſtament, among other things this diſpoſitiō, that the ſucceſſion of his Kingdome ſhould alwaies paſſe vnto the neereſt in blood of the males, and among equall in blood to the eldeſt. Thirty and nine yeares after the taking of Carthage, dyed he: & to him ſucceeded his elder ſoone II. 
                  Huneric, the other brother III. 
                  Genzon being before departed this life. Succeſſors to the hound Huneric were firſt IIII. 
                  Gundabund ſon to his brother Genzon, who continuing in the ſteps of his cruell predeceſſors, afflicted the Chriſtians (ſo alwaies and no otherwiſe termeth Procopius the Catholicks, excluding the Arians from that honorable name) and

by death was to late called away in the twelfth yeare of his reigne. After whom V. 
                  Traſamund took in hand the affaire of gouernement: a man farre paſſing his anteceſſors as well in wiſdom, as magnanimity and courage: who alſo (by a contrary courſe vnto them) not by torments and vexations, but by rewards & honors inuited the Chriſtians to for ſake their antient faith, and paſſe vnto his Arianiſm, but thoſe who would not relent, he no way preſſed with puniſhment and affliction. And with Anaſtaſius the Emperor he alwaies maintained good & perfect frendſhipp. In this mans time receiued the Vandals a ſore ouerthrow at the * Moores hands, farre greater then euer they had in any skirmiſh before. In the teritory of Tripolis was a Generall of the Moores named Cabaon, who perceiuing the Vandals to intend him warre, vſed this not abſurd ſtratageme. He firſt willed all vnder his commaund to vſe abſtinence in dyet to containe from dealing with women, and to refraine from all iniury and wrong: then made he a double munition or fortification; within the one ſhutt the women, prohibiting vnder

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  to Iuſtinian the Emperour was this Hilderich, euen before hee was Emperour; and ſundry preſents had paſſed betweene thē. There was in the ſtocke of Gizerich, one Gilimer, ſonne to Genzon (of whome is before mentioned) and nexte in age vnto Hilderich: a skilful warriour, of a ſore wit, well furniſhed with meanes and euery way apte to inuade the ſtate; and who otherwiſe by proximity and age was expected to ſucceede. But impatient of ſtay he letted not to thruſt farre into the intereſt royall, to vſurpe auctority; proceeded to traduce the King vnto the Vandals as a dull and not daring Prince: charging him alſo calumniouſly that hee entended to reſigne and deliuer vp to the Emperor the whole dominion, togither with the Vandals. To which ſurmiſes credite ouerlightly giuen, Ilderich after ſeauen yeares gouernment is togither with Amer and his brother Euagenes committed to ward; Gilimer created King. Newes wherof being brought to Iuſtinian the Emperour: he by curteous aduertiſement wiſhed Gilimer not ſo to violate Gizerichs will and teſtament; nor perſiſt in ſo open wrong. Vpō which meſſage Gilimer forth with put out

                  Amers eyes, and helde the other two in ſtreighter cuſtody: and to ſecond Embaſſadors which Iuſtiniā
                   ſhortly ſent againe, he finally anſwered, that the Emperours curioſity was ouer great to ingeſt himſelfe into the actions of other Princes; & pretended that Ilderich had attempted ſomewhat againſt thoſe of the bloodroyall, neither ought to be King for that his cares and employments were not vpon his kingdome.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               GREAT indignation conceaued the Emperour at his tyrannicall obſtinacy: Wherefore the Perſian warre (as God would haue it) being with good ſucceſſe freſhly ended, & Beliſarius the great Captaine, then preſent in Conſtantinople, hee reſolued enterpriſe for the liberty of Africke. Some repugnance yet therein he found, for the common people repiningly murmured & obiected the Emperour 
                     
                        ••
                     os fleete, that was in like attempt vtterly defeated, and the dreadfull ouerthrow giuē to Baſiliſcus, wherby periſhed an entire army, & the common wealth became extreamely impoueriſhed: they refuſed

therefore to contribute vnto this warre. Furthermore not the ſtouteſt of the Captaines, (in whom lay the hope of wel carrying ſo great a charge) but were diſcouraged, and ſore dreaded the greatneſſe of the danger: ſeeing firſt they had to ouercome the Seas, then out of ſhips to aſſault a ſtrong and potent kingdome. The ſoldiers alſo ſo lately returned from the Perſian brunts, grudged that they ſhoulde now ſodainely bee deſtined to other vnknowne people and ſea-combates, ere they had once beene ſo much as warme in theie owne country. None yet was found who had the heart or would preſume to diſſwade the Emperour, excepte only Iohn the maiſter of the Pallace who with a graue and vehement oration dehorted that enterpriſe, which vpon human reaſons he held to be abhorred: telling him plainly that by this iourney he ſhould abuſe to liberally both the blood of his beſt ſoldiers, and the publike treaſurie, and abilities of his ſubiects: vpbraiding that Carthage which hee would impugne was diſtant by land 140. daies iorneies, and by ſea ſo farre, that ſcarce in a yeare ſhould report returne of what was

done: that if he ſubdued the Vandals, yet ſhould he not be Lord of Africa, both Sicilie and Italy being vnder thoſe ſtrange nations dominion: happily alſo by this prouocation might hee drawe warres to his owne gates, and to the walles of Conſtantinople. He beſought him therefore to deſiſt from vndertaking ſo doubtfull and dangerous buſineſſe, and adding labours vnto labours.
               Much moued the words of Iohn the Emperors minde; & much remitted he of his former feruor, towards poore Afric. There came not long after a certaine Biſhop out of the parties of the Eaſt, & obtaining to relate vnto the Emperor, that which he came for; told him that he had receiued from God a viſion, wherein appeared the Emperor himſelfe; and was ſharply by the Almightie reprehēded & accuſed of great impiety, that hauing cō
                  ceiued the good purpoſe of deliuering the Chriſtians in Afric from the hands of the barbarous, he had afterwards vpō no cauſe forſaken the enterpriſe: and that God promiſed the Emperor to aſſiſte him; and to bring Africke into his ſubiection, as it had beene vnto the former antient

Emperors. No longer differred Iuſtinian (annimated by this oracle) but furniſhed ſhips, ordained Beliſarius generall.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               THe firſt beginning of good lucke to this actiō was that Pudentius an African, reuolting from the Vandals, ſent haſty word to Iuſtinian that if the army came to Tripolie, he ſhould eaſily obtaine that teritory for that few ſoldiers were there to reſiſte. Which Beliſarius accordingly, by the aide of Pudentius brought to good effect. Preſently vpon which, Godas in likemaner, one of Gilimers captains, gouuernour of the great Iſland Sardinia, and by nation a Goth, ſent ſubmiſſion to the Emperour, ſaying he choſe rather to ſerue a iuſt King, then a Tyrant whoſe cō
                  mandments were vniuſt. Towards Carthage were then directed 1000. footmen, and foure thouſand horſemē: with them 400. Eruls and 600. Hunns all vſing their bowes. The nauy was in all 500. veſſels, mariners 3000. and of voluntary aduenturers from Conſtantinople 2000. In the ſeauenth yeare of Iuſtinians empire was this expedition addreſſed: and Epiphanius Biſhop

of the citie bleſſing (as the maner is)* the fleet in the Emperours preſence led one by one into a ſhip, ſuch ſoldiers as had lately beene baptized. In this fleet paſſed with the reſt Procopius author of this hiſtory, conſailor for the warres vnto the Generall Beliſarius: and paſſing by Syracuſe he got intelligēce that the Vandals, were attempting againſt Goda, but that there was of the Roman forces no dreade at all: in ſomuch that Gilimer as moſt ſecure had abandoned the ſea coſtes, & was reſident at Hermione foure daies iorney vp into the contrey.
               Approching to ſight of the African ſhore, great conſultation was had how to proceed. Archelaus (contrary to the affection of the ſoldiers, who weary of the ſea would preſently haue ſett to ſhore) perſwaded to deferre landing, for that all that ſhore was both ſubiect to tēpeſts, and deſtitute of hauens: adding that all the townes of Africke, except only Carthage were by Gizerich in time paſt diſmā
                  tled of their walles: for which reſpects he preferred directly to aſſaile Carthage neere whereunto was a goodly hauen, & vngarded; from whence their could be no

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  more diſtance to hold on the lefte hand; on the right hand kept he the ſea: commanding the nauy as well as they could to obſerue the proceeding of the army, and to keepe neere vnto it. In this order marched the army forwards, no faſter then after 80. furlongs to a daies iorney: with ſuch moderation alſo & diſcipline, that the husband men round about, hid not themſelues for feare, but ſecurelie brought all neceſſaries to the campe and freely ſold them.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               GILIMER vpon firſt newes of his foes approach, wrote vnto his brother Ammat at Carthage, that hee ſhould put to death Ilderich, and whomſoeuer els of their kindred that hee had in priſon: and haue the Vandals with all the munition of the citty in a readines; that they might in the ſtreights at Decimum (a place 70. furlongs from the citty) incloſe the emperials as fiſhes in a nette, betweene their two armies. Beliſarius being come to Decimum; Gilimer vppon that very day diſpatched his brothers ſonne Gibamund with 2000. Vandals, charging thē to keepe

on the left hand, and he himſelfe purſued the taile of the Romane army: meaning that ſo they ſhould bee on three ſides inuaded. And ſurely had not Ammat by three houres ſpace preuented his opportunity, enough to doe had the Romanes found: but he about noone went to Decimum: and (which was as bad) leauing behinde him at Carthage the beſt part of the Vandals, he haſtely left them word to follow him to Decimum, and going forward with a fewe encountred with Iohn, where 12. of our valienteſt being at the firſt ouerthrowne Ammat himſelfe ſoone bare them company; whoſe death ſeene, the Vandals mainely flying backe ſtroke terrour in the reſt whom they mett from Carthage; who conceiuing the victors to be more in number then they were, turned likewiſe backe: and were chaſſed by Iohn to the very gates of Carthage; looſing in their whole number neere 2000. perſons. About the ſame time met Gibamund and his 2000. ſoldiers, with the Hunnes, in the fielde of Salt, 40. furlongs from Decimum, voide of habitation or trees: and were by thē at the firſt onſet ouerthrown and ſlaine. Beliſarius in the meane ſpace

drawing toward Decimum, knew nothing of all this which had hapned; & ſending before him the Captaines of the confederats, hee followed with the maine battell. Gilimer and his Vandals meeting with the formoſt; great grewe the contention whether party ſhould gaine a certaine high hill which ſeemed of great aduantage. Frō which the Vandals ſo droue the Romans, that they fled to a towne 7. furlongs thence, (where Beliſarius had placed Vliar a captaine of ſpeares, with 800. men of armes) in confidence of there being ſuccoured. But the contrary fell out; for theſe likwiſe growing into great terror tooke feareful courſe toward Beliſarius. At which time, if Gilimer had followed his fortune, hardly could the Romans haue ſuſteined him, ſo great was their dread, and ſo great the multitude of the Vandals. Or if hee had gone toward Carthage, he had oppreſſed Iohns troops which ſtrayed out of order, he had ſaued the citty; and meeting with our fleete had with no adoe deſtroyed it: But he deſcending downe the hil, at the ſight of his brothers body gaue his minde to lamentation and funeral. And Beliſarius after he had ſtaied

thoſe which fled▪ and vpbrayded them of cowardiſe; and receiued aduertiſement of Ammats death, with what els had paſſed, in poſting ſpeede hee couragiouſly flew toward the Vandals, whom finding vnwary of his appraoch, and in litle order hee put ſodainely to flight; the night hindering their purſuit.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               THE next day paſſed the whole army to Carthage, but comming late entred not the cittie: although the Carthagineans preſētly ſet open their gates, placed creſſets & torches in euery quarter, & made bone fires throughout the citty all the night long. Annexed to the Kings Palace was a ſtrong priſon; wherein among others, were diuers merchants, who had bin deſired to aide Gilimer whē the warre began: & were to haue bin executed the ſame day, wherein Ammat was ſlaine ſo neere was their life at the brinke. The keeper of this priſon vnderſtāding what had paſſed at Decimum; & ſeeing the fleet now drawing toward the port; comming in to thē, who ſince their firſt impriſonmēt neuer heard glad word, but in dongcons

hourely expecting death; asked them what they would depart with all their goods to him which would ſet them free. To their anſwere to take what he would; he replied, that they ſhould onely ſweare to ſticke by him in any troble that might befall him concerning them. Which grā
                  ted, ſetting them at liberty, hee himſelfe went away with them. Beliſarius before he would enter the citty, againe admoniſhed the army how ſinguler modeſtie would be expected at their hands, in this ſo great and godly a citty; ſhewed them that they ought to repute all the Africans as Romans; and how ſhamefull it were to be vnciuil and rude towards thoſe, whoſe liberty and ſafety they came to aſſert againſt the Arrianizing Vandals. Entring he mounted into Oilimers Throne; where came before him certaine merchants, and others, complaining that the night laſt paſt their goods had bin rifled by his mariners. The iuſt and generall Chieftaine, louer of all honeſty, & obſeruer of equity, forced Catonymus author of the inſolency vnder oath to bring forth all the parcells ſtolne; which hee accordingly repreſented; but perfidiouſly notwithſtanding

vpon a ſuddaine ſecretly fled to Conſtantinople with thoſe rapines, where not long after taken with an apoplexy, berefte of his wittes, and depriued of his periurde tongue, hee deceaſed in a moſt wretched plight: At his entrance memorable it is to ſee the great diſcipline of the army, and the ſinguler confidence of the inhabitants; for neither was there any ill language giuen on any ſide, neither was any ſhop ſhut, or any thing not ſet forth to ordinary ſale. Which was wonderfull ſtrange in a cittie freſhly taken, & changing gouernment. The Vandals which had fled to the churches; hee tooke into protection, and gaue them ſafety: then addicted his minde to repaire the walles which were exceedingly ruinous.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               AN olde ſaid ſaw had beene in the mouths of the multitude, that G. ſhould chaſe B. and againe B. chaſe G. which now all ſaw apparātly fulfilled in Genſerich and Boniface, Beliſarius and Gilimer. Cleered alſo was at this time another ambiguous prediction, much to benoted: and thus it was. Principally honoured

aboue others, among the Carthaginians, was the holy man Cyprian, whoſe feaſt they yearly celebrate in the moſt goodly temple of the ſame Saint a litle without the Citie. This church had the Arrian hereticks taken into their owne charge, expelling the Chriſtians, and driuing away the Prieſts with great reproche. The Africans being much grieued hereat, it is ſaid that Cyprian appeared in a viſion, willing the Chriſtians to be of good comfort, for that ſhortly he himſelfe would reuenge the iniury. With great certainety expected the Africans this promiſed euent; vtterly to ſeek when or in what ſort it were to be expected. Vpon the very eue of this Saints feaſt was it, that the nany emperiall was diſcouered from Carthage: whereupon the Chriſtians aſſoon as Ammat was departed againſt the Roman forces (while the euent was yet vncertaine of battell) taking to themſelues good hope preſētly thruſting out the Arrians receaſed the Temple ſanctifie it a new, purge the ſuperſtitions of the Arrian hereticks; hang vp rich and beutifull offrings, ſett lights in redynes; put in order the golden veſſels and pretious

paraments, fetching them forth from their ſecret repoſitories. The reſt of the Chriſtians alſo when they heard of the good ſucceſſe at Decimum, haſtning to the ſame church lightned all the tapers, and lamps; aſſiſting the Prieſts to whom the function of all ſuch things appertained. In ſomuch that the Vandals themſelues held ſo manifeſt a fulfilling of this prophecy in great admiration.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               GILIMER ignorant how to repaire his ſtate, ſollicited the vplandiſh of the Africans to intercept Roman ſoldiers if they ſtragled, promiſing for euery head brought him a peece of golde. Many indeed of the ſeruants were in that ſort ſlaine; whom Gilimer performing his couenant, ſuppoſed to be ſo many men of armes. Neither fownd he preſenter confaile then to ſend for his brother Zazon (who in this meane ſeaſon had receiued Sardinia from Godas) and concerning his haſty returne, he ſent him a letter, wherin he thus complayned: It was not Godas that called thee into Sardinia▪ but the bitter fate of the Vandals bereft mee at this exigent, both of thee
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  the Moores moſt wretched and miſerable; they euer after the cōqueſt of Africa kept a moſt bountifull; went attired in ſilkes & veluets; gaue themſelues to playes and ſports, to muſike & hunting, to banqueting & recreations. Moores contrariwiſe leade their liues in cotages, where they ſcant ſtand vpright or can ſtirre, wanting neither Sunne, nor ſnow, nor any other miſery of their climat: ſleepe on the bare ground (the beſt among them laide but ſomwhat betweene) forbidden by law of their country to chaunge attyre after the ſeaſons; but a boyſtrous courſe ragged weede they at all times wore alike. Ignorant they are what bread or wine is; but, whether it be wheat, rye, or barly, which they can gette, they neither grinde it to meale, nor bake it, but eate it iuſt as beaſts doe. This harſh conuerſation & cuſtome made the Vandals to thinke death not vnpleaſant, nor ſeruage ſhamefull. Which not being hidden from Pharas, he by letters inuited Gilimer to render himſelfe, which hee not without abundant teares peruſed, and returning anſwere that hee had rather ſuffer what he did, then what his enemies would do vnto him; he concluded

with requeſt of a citharne, a lofe of bread, and a ſponge. Which laſt clauſe was not vnderſtood, vntill the meſſenger explicated, that he deſired a lofe, becauſe ſince his comming to the mountaine hee neuer had ſo much as ſeene any baked bread; a ſponge, to wipe away his teares; the citharne, to ſolace his calamities with ſome wonderfull dittie, being expert in muſike. Pharas pittying his caſe, & in him the vncertainty of humane condition; ſatisfied his petition: but more ſtrictly obſerued his cuſtody and charge. Three monthes continued this ſiege; Gilimer no leſſe afflicted in his health thē in his hart, conſtantly yet perſiſted obdurat, vntill a poore Moor-womā
                   in his ſight had ſet certaine bruſed corne, to drie ouer a hyrdle: neere therunto ſate two children; the one Gilimers brothers ſonne, the other the womans: who grieuouſly pining with hunger; the Vandal firſt caught the lumpe raw, and ſcalding hotte, and thruſt in his mouth; which the other, tugging him by the haire of the head, forced him, halfe bittē as it was to deliuer out of his throte. Which Gilimer ſeeing preſētly conceiued it ominous to his owne fortunes & vpon

conditions pacted, rendring himſelfe was ſent to Carthage.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               OPtion after this came to Beliſarius, from Iuſtinian the Emperour, that either hee ſhould come to Conſtantinople together with Gilimer and the captiue Vandals, either els ſtay behind them, at his diſcretion. But he finding that enuie, had begun to thruſt out his ſting againſt him, reſolued vpon going in perſon to excuſe him ſelfe vnto the Emperour. And there according to his worthy deſerts receiued he thoſe honors, which neuer had any priuat man ſince the time of Titus & Veſpaſian; but only Emperours themſelues if fortunately they ſubdued ſome whole nation. For at his entrance, before him went the trophees and ſpoiles, with the captiues; and he himſelfe triumphing (yet on foot) followed after through the citie. The ſpoiles were no meane matters: goldē thrones of eſtate, rich chariots, pretious furniture, plate of maſſiue gold, pretious ſtones, ſiluer many thouſāds of talēts: Much of that which had in times paſt beene taken out of the palace at Rome.
                  
Among which were alſo ſondry noble and excellent peeres of the Iewes, which of old were by Veſpaſian and Titus tranſlated from Hieruſalem out of the Temple. Theſe a certaine Iewe beholding, forbore not to ſay aloud, that thoſe things ought not be but where King Salomon firſt placed them: that for profaning them had Rome by Genſeric beene ſakt, and for the ſame reſpect Gilimer by Beliſarius ouercome. Which ſpeech comming to the Emperours eares, he greatly dreaded, & willed all thoſe things to be caried vnto Hieruſalem for the Chriſtians churches. Laſt of all followed Gilimer with the principall of the Vandals: & comming vnto the Emperours preſence lamented not▪ but only vtred thoſe words of the Scripture: Vanitie of vanitie, and all vanitie. To him &Eccl. 1. to his kindred aſſigned the Emperour certaine honorable enterteinement in France: but into the number of the Patricians or Nobility he might not be admitted, bycauſe he would by no means renounce the Arian ſect. Shortly after was to Beliſarius decreed a triumphe after the faſhion of the antient Captaines. Caried in a ſiluer chaire of honour vpō the ſholderes

                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  and Arians; & reuolting from their Chriſtian Emperour Rodulph of Auſtria, haue voluntarily ſubmitted to the heathen Tur
                        •
                     k
                        •
                     , and made a league with Hell. God of his holy mercie auert the dredfull conſequēces, which I haue horrour to think vpon how imminent they are vpon our neighbours neckes. Beginning with pitifull ruines of the faith and the deteſted propagation of infidelity in former age: I am conſtrained by ſimilitude of cauſes to dread like lamentable effects in this of ours▪ and therby with regret & obteſtation of publick moane, through expectation of publique miſeries, to conclude the Vandal perſecutions: Which otherewiſe, ſeeing the Almighty reſtored to the African church, golden times, ought to haue ended in a golden period.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            TVVO TABLES. BY THE FIRST NVMBER is deſigned one of Victors three Books: by M. The Paſſion of the ſeauen Martyrs: by F. The life of Saint Fulgentius: by C. The continuation to the Historie. The laſt number importeth the Chapter. A SVMMARIE OF THE Catholickes faith and practiſe.
            
            
               
                  ABb
                        •
                     ſſ
                        •
                     s, or Mothers of Nonries. 1. 8. 2. 6.
               
                  Abbot, 3. 12 M. 3. F. 3.
               
                  Alliluya, ſong ſolemnely at Eaſter. 1. 9.
               
                  Altar 1. 9.
               
                  Altar-cloathes. 1. 9.
               
                  Angels inuocated. 3. 19.
               
                  Archdeacon, 3. 10.
               
                  Benedicite, 2. 7.
               
                  Benediction of Biſhops craued of the people. 2. 7. Bleſſing of the ſhips by a Biſhop at their ſetting forth. C. 9.
               
                  Biſhops. The excellent vertue, charity▪ and a
                     •
                  mes of the Catholike Biſhops, 1. 7. 2. 2. M. 2. F. 5. F. 8. 9.
               They refuſe to deliuer vp church-ornaments to the officers. 1. 9. refuſe an

oath vniuſtly tēdred. 3. 3. refuſe to exclude from Catholike ſeruice ſuch as returned to the Catholik faith. 2. 2.
               Biſhops are ordered in dioceſes vacāt, contrary to the Kings inhibition and commandement. F. 6. Biſhop receiued with proceſſion F. 9.
               
                  Cat olique. Catholikes hold faſt this name and deny it to the Arrians. 2. 10. Onely Catholikes held for Chriſtians. 2. 7. The Church tearmed Our Catholike Mother. 1. 5. 3. 19. M. 3.
               
                  Character in Baptiſme. 3. 10.
               
                  Chaſtity. vowed and profeſſed. 1. 8. M. 2. C. 2 Seeke Nonns.
               
               
                  Chriſom-cloth. 3. 10.
               
                  Chriſtian. Seeke Catholique.
               
               
                  Churches. Seeke Saints. Churches opened and ceaſed vpon ſometimes through zeale. 1. 9. C. 13.
               
                  Clergy, S. Prieſts.
               
               
                  Confeſſors in act. 2. 7. in hart 27. ſometime called Martyrs. 2. 7.
               
                  Conſtancy of Catholikes in general. M. 2. M. 3. Singulerly, in an Erle ſolicited by the King 1. 5. in a proconſull or Marſhall. 3. 6. of the husband againſt wife and children. 1. 11. of the wife againſt

husband and children. 3. 5. 3. 15▪ of children. 3. 15. M. 2. of 12. Boyes, quiriſters. 3. 11. of a yong boy a Monk. M. 4. The conſtancy of Catholikes was admired and wōdred by the perſecutors themſelues. 3. 7.
               
                  Conuerſion of many Arrians; and of their Prieſts. F. 7.
               
                  Croſſe. Confidence in the woode of the Croſſe. M. 5. that is in the worke performed on the woodden croſſe.
               
                  Diſputation. S. Religion.
               
               
                  Euchariſt, Reall preſence. 1. 9.
               
                  Faith. The Arrians ſeeme to haue onely an opinion not faith of their doctrine. 2. 8.
               
                  Fryers. that is Brethren: (the French word being Freres) 3 12.
               
                  Heretickes. Compared by God to Aſſes, Butchers, Sulfury cloudes. 2. 5.
               Their ſociety held pernicious. 2 8. Hereſie is a ſpice of madnes or frēcy. M. 1.
               
                  Hermits, F. 5. 10.
               
                  Hymnes, 2. 9. M. 5.
               
                  Lamentation, concerning the perſecution 3. 9. C. 2.
               
                  Lector, one of the eccleſiaſticall orders. 1. 9. 3. 10. 3. 11.
               
                  
                  Lights, vſed at the publique ſeruice and proceſſions. 2. 5. 2. 7. C. 13. F. 9.
               
                  Maſſe, The ſolemne ſacrifice of Chriſtians. 1. 6. C. 2. celebration thereof, 2. 7. 3. 8. frequented notwithſtanding laws to the contrary. 2 8.
               
                  Miracles, in confirmation of Catholikes in their faith 1. 8. 2. 3. C. 4. C. 14. C. 10. 2. 7. 2. 9. 3. 5. 3. 8. M. 5. By viſions 2. 5. 2. 9. C. 8. C. 13. By ſtrangely plaguing the perſecutors. 1. 8. 1. 9. 3. 2. 3. 17. 3. 19.
               
                  Monaſteries, are oft mentioned.
               
                  Monkes, 1. 6 1. 8. 3. 12. F. 5.
               The ſweetnes of monaſticall life. F. 1. Strictnes thereof and pouerty. F. 2. voluntary obedience. F. 8.
               
                  Nocturns, which name at this day remaineth in the Catholike Mattens▪ 2, 9.
               
                  Nonns, Virgins conſecrated to God, 1, 8. 2. 6. vncapable of mariage, 1, 8.
               
                  Nonries, 1, 8.
               
                  Offrings, & donaries hang vp in the churches, C. 13.
               
                  Orders, Holy orders▪ 3, 1.
               
                  Patience, S. Conſtancy, F. 4.
               
                  Perſecutors of Catholikes horribly ſtroken by Gods hand, S. Miracles. S. Peter. ſeeke Pope
               
               
                  
                  Pilgrimage to places where Martyrs had ſuffered and miracles there done, 1▪ 8. in the end of the chapter, to Rome, F. 5.
               
                  Pontificall throne of Biſhops, 2, 3.
               
                  Pope, honorably mentioned as Gods high Biſhop 1. 8. At his hand is direction & aide ſought for the conuerſion of the infidell Moores, 1▪ 8. To S. Peter was the gouernment of the vniuerſall Church principally committed, 3, 19. Communion with the Church of Rome; or ſeperation from it is reputed all one as with or from S. Peter himſelfe. F. 5.
               
                  Prayers, Publique praiers by night vpon ſolemne vigils, 2▪ 9.
               
                  Pouerty, voluntary S. Monkes.
               
               
                  Prieſts, The clergy of Africa to haue liued vnmaried it is in a manner manifeſt; in that not once in ſo great & long a perſecution is mentioned any eccleſiaſtical perſons wife, whereas of lay-mens wiues is frequent mention.
               
                  Priſon, Maſſe and ſermons in a priſon, by ſtealth, 2. 7. M. 3.
               
                  Proceſsion with wax-lights and tapers burning, 2. 7. F. 9. M. 5. (F. 7.
               
                  Prophecy of religion to be reſtored. C. 13.
               
                  Pulpit, wherein Lectors red and ſong; as
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  Certaine voluntarily followed the Clergy into banniſhment. 3. 11.
               
                  Yookes rifled, prohibited. 1. 9. 3▪ 1. 3. 3.
               
                  Buryall. Sotemne bury all forbidden. 1. 4. Catholiks buried ſometime vnder a tree. 1. 10. ſomelime in priuat houſes. 3. 4.
               
                  Biſhops confined. F. 2. forbidden to be harbored or relieued. 3. 2 1. 9.
               
                  Catholique. The Arrians quarell about this name, and vngracefully challenge it. 2. 10.
               
                  Chaſtity. All profeſſours of the continent life are hated and chaſed away. M. 2. C. 2. a. Vowed and profeſſed chaſtity is by the Arrians deſpiſed & commanded to be violated 1. 8. Sacred virgins ſhamfully handled and tortured by them. 2. 6.
               
                  Churches ſhutt vp. 1. 11. 3. 1. M. 2. fraxed and brent. 1. 1. taken from Catholikes & by the Arrians addicted to their Common praier. 1. 1. 1. 4. 3. 1. abuſed to ſtables. C. 6. Churches ranſaked & ſpoiled. 1. 9. 3. 1.
               
                  Cle
                        •
                     gy of the Arrians, extraordinarily rage aboue others. 3, 12. 3, 13. 3, 14. M. 1. F. 4.
               
                  Confining of Biſhops to certaine place for

manſion. F. 2
               
                  Couetouſnes inſatiable after Catholiks goods. 1, 1. 1, 3. 1
               
                  Councells. The Arrians alleage falſe councells for coūtenance of their error. 3. 1.
               
                  Diſputation coulorably offred by the Arrians and violently demeaned. 2, 8. 9, 10. 3, 1. 3, 18. F. 7
               
                  Enuye of the Arrians at the vertue of the Catholique Biſhops. 1, 7. 2, 2
               
                  Heretiks. The Arrians burn Manichaeans to take from themſelfes the note of hereſie. 2, 1
               
                  Impriſonment is ouer all.
               
                  Lawes and Proclamations. Benefit of lawe & iuſtice denied to Catholiques. 3, 1
               
                  Martyrdome is frequēt in ſondry chapters. For enuie of this name and glory; certaine are made deferred to long vexation. 1, 10. C. 3
               
                  Maſſ
                        •
                     
                   decreed and forbidden. 2, 8. 3, 1. aboliſhed. C. 2. Catholiques ſlayn at it, and put to death for hearing it. 1, 9
               
                  Miracles miſinterpreted and diſcredited, 2, 9. M. 5. C. 13
               
                  Monaſteries held in ſpeciall hatred, 1, 1. deliuered to the Moores. M. 2
               
                  Monaſticall perſons perſecuted, M. 2. vrged

to break their vow and marry, 1. 8. extremly hated, S. Prieſts.
               
               
                  Nonns ſcattered, and tormented, 2, 6
               
                  Oaths of ſtate deceiptfully tendred to entrap, 3, 3
               
                  Perſecution. Spoiling of goods, death, and are ouer all. Occaſion ſtrangely ſought vnder pretext whereof to begin perſecution, 2, 6. Diſobedience and ſtate is ſtyll vrged & pretended, 1, 5. 3, 1. 2, 7. F. 6. Perſecuting in one place they of policy abſtained in another, 1. 6: and ſometimes mitigated for oſtentation of clemency, 2, 1. Gods honour, zeale of iuſtice & clemency alſo are pretended, 2, 8. 3, 1. The ciuill lawes ordained by antient Emperours againſt Hereticks are retorted vpon Catholiques, 3, 1. Catholiques making ſupplicatiō are worſe entreated, or fruitleſſe, 1, 4. 3, 2. 3, 1 6: flie ouer ſea, 1, 7. 3, 8: flie into deſerts, 3, 1 6: they are thruſt to day-labour▪ 1, 1. 2, 3. 3, 3: they are pined, 2, 7. 3, 2. M. 2. depriued of their dignities and fo bidden to bear office, 1, 6. 2, 6. Inticing allurements and promiſes, to peruert, M. 3. M. 4. C. 6
               
                  Praiers: Catholique ſeruice and praier countermanded▪
                  
1, 6. 3, 3. The Arrians vrge that publique praiers ſhould be admitted in any languague indifferently. 2, 2
               
                  Prieſts vſed with all rigor, 1, 4: banniſhed, and horribly vſed: M. 2. S. Banniſhment▪
                   Spoiled of their ſubſtance, and terribly entreated, C. 2. Malitiouſly ſlandred of incontinency, 2, 6. Puniſhment inflicted for receiuing a Monke from beyond the ſea: 1, 6
               
                  Proclamations againſt Catholiks, 2, 8. 3, 1
               
                  Reconciling by the ſacrament of penance, forbidden, 3, 3
               
                  Reſort mutuall of Catholiques is forbidden, 1, 11
               
                  Rites eccleſiaſticall aboliſhed. C. 2
               
                  Rome. Peculiar malice of the Arrians againſt the ſea of Rome, 1, 7. They ſurname Catholiques, Comans, 1, 10
               
                  Sacrament of Chriſts body and blood irreuerently caſt vnder foot, 1, 9
               
                  Scripture. The Arriās prouoke to it alone, 2. 8
               
                  Serches by night, and ranſaking of houſes, 3, 15
               
                  Torments: 3, 4: 5: with cordes, 1, 1: hotyrons, 1, 6. 2, 6. 3, 7: Stockes: 1, 8: whipping & beating: 1, 7. 34. 3, 11. 1, 8: F. 4:

hāging by the heels: 1, 10: 2, 6: maiming and diſmembring the body: 3, 8: 3, 9
               
                  Watch & ward to apprehend Catholiques: 3, 15: F. 4
               
                  Women vnciuilly and vnſhamfaſtly vſed: 2, 6: 3, 4: M. 4
            
         
         
            Faultes eſcaped.
            
               Fol. 9 read Meerly was my ayme to ſhew▪
               
               f. 10. read licentious
               f. 15. read barbarous
               f. 20 read but for ſingula
               f. 30. read made of ſtubbed palmes
               f. 40. read ſuch as are
               f. 52. read burned in
               f 65. read larger ſenſe
               f. 75. read vvhiuering font.
               f. 83. read true councels
               f. 114 read Emperor.
               f. 119. read hee farther came to Carthage
               f. 123. read no ability
               f. 127. read mothers P. F
               f. 128. read toucheth vs
               f. 132. The paſſion of the 7. martyrs is diſtinct by it ſelfe & no partt of the 3. booke.
               f. 133. read rebaptizationis
               f. 134. read ſerpentine
               f. 137. read vs none
               f 138. read peaſant
               f. 143. read Ruſp. Surius
               f. 149. read heritage
               f. 153. read baldnes.
               f. 155. read Eulalius
               f. 156. read ſhelty
               f. 168. read Viſigothes
               f. 169. read ſeemed they and the like diſcouer
               f. 172. read Hieron.
               f. 179. blot out 180.
               f. 209. read Caried.
               f. 211. read large and
               f. 212. read moan.
            
            
         
      
   