
      
         
            
            
            
               
            
            
               LONDON, Printed for Leonard Becket, and are to be ſold at his Shop in the Temple neere the Church, 1611.
         
         
            
            
            A VERY CHRISTIAN, LEARNED, and briefe Diſcourſe, concerning the true, ancient, and Catholicke Faith, againſt all wicked vp-ſtart Hereſies: Seruing very profitably for a Preſeruatiue againſt the profane Nouelties of Papiſts, Anabaptiſts, Arrians, Browniſts, and all other Sectaries.
            
            Firſt compoſed by Vincentius Lirinenſis in Latine, about twelue hundreth yeares ago.
            And now faithfully tranſlated into Engliſh, and illuſtrated with certaine Marginall Notes.
            
            By THOMAS TVKE.
            Imprinted at London for Leonard Becket, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in the Inner Temple. 1611.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT worſhipfull, Sir IOHN LEVENTHORPE knight, and to the right vertuous Lady Ioanna, his wife, all happineſſe earthly and heauenly.
            
            
               RIght Worſhipfull, great is the peruerſeneſſe of Mans nature, as may appeare by the multitude of errors, and falſe religions, of the which the world is now ſicke euen vnto death. For the Iewe hath his, the Turke his, the Indians theirs, the Papiſt his:

yea and almoſt euery man is ready to turne his fanſy into faith (ſo common is this kind of Alchymie) and to make doctrines of his owne deuiſes; ſo fond we are by reaſon of ſelfe-loue, and the blindneſſe of our minds.
            But (as Eli ſayd) this is not well. For there is but one true Religion, and as 
                  In Natiu. Dom. Ser. 4. Niſi vna eſt, fides non eſt.
                
               Leo ſaith, Faith is either One, or None. Now becauſe there are ſo many religions in the world, therefore ſome will be of none, but ſtand as it were amazed, not knowing what courſe to take, like the 
                  Eccleſ. 10. 15. fool, that Salomon ſpeakes of, which knowes not the way into the Citty. It behooues

vs therefore ſeeing ſuch variety of profeſſions to looke before we leape, & to ſound the waters before we hoyſe vp our ſailes (for heauen is no harbor for heretickes, no common Inne for all kinds of Trauellers) I meane afore all to conſult with the written word of God, the oracle of truth, the ground of faith, a 
               
                  Pſal. 119. 105. 
               lanterne to our feet, & a light vnto our path, & is 
               2. Tim. 3. 16 
               profitable to teach, to conuince, to correct and instruct in righteouſneſſe, that the mā of God maybe abſolute. Heare (ſaith S. 
                  Aug. ep. 48. Audi dicit Dominus, non dicit Don
                        ••
                      &c.
                
               Auſtin) Thus ſaith the Lord: not, thus ſaith, Donatus, or Rogatus, or Vincentius, or Hilary, or Auſtin,
               
but, Thus ſaith the Lord. 
               Iſ. 8. 20. 
               To the Law, and to the Teſtimony (ſaith Eſay:) if they ſpeake not according to this word, it is becauſe there is no light in them. By the Scripture God ſpeaketh his whole will, ſaith 
                  Per Scripturam Deus loquitur omne, quod vult. Moral. l. 16. c. 16. 
               Gregory. If therefore men would in the true feare of God and lowlineſſe of ſpirit deſire diuine direction, and attend vnto the word, vndoubtedly they ſhould ſee their way before them, and could not be ſo tranſported of Impoſtors, as they vſe to be. For 
                  Pſal. 25. 9. 12. 14. 
               them that be meeke, will he guide in iudgement, and teach the humble his way. What man is he, that feareth the Lord? Him

will he teach the way, which he ſhall chuſe. The ſecret of the Lord is reuealed to them, that feare him; and his couenant, to giue them vnderſtanding. And as our Sauiour ſpeaketh, 
                  Ioh. 16. 23. 
               Whatſoeuer ye ſhall aske the Father in my Name, he will giue it you. So then, if we will not giue eare vnto Man, but vnto God, if we will not truſt vnto our owne wings, but ſeeke for aide of him, we may boldly expect aſſiſtance of him according to his word. And becauſe to begin a courſe well is nothing, vnleſſe a man continue conſtant in it; therefore it behoues vs to cleaue faſt vnto the faith, auoiding all impoſtures

of Heretickes whatſoeuer. For the furtherance hereof, this Treatiſe was firſt written in Latine aboue a thouſand yeares agoe, by a learned and godly Frenchman, whoſe authority is nothing leſſe to be reſpected for his Monaſticke kinde of liuing, conſidering that our moderne Monkes haue almoſt nothing of Antiquity beſides their name. And for the ſame purpoſe we haue turn'd it into Engliſh, deſiring the Almightie to bedew the ſame with the bleſſing of his grace. My labour I account as due to the Church in generall, and abundantly deſerued of you

both in particular: if therefore you ſhall accept it, I ſhall haue my full deſire.
            The God of heauen and earth preſerue you by his grace, that after this life on Earth ye may be preſented to Ieſus Chriſt to liue in heauen with him in eternall glory.
            Amen.
            
               London S. Clem. April 14. 1611.
               
               Your VVorſhips in Chriſt Ieſus to be commanded,
Thomas Tuke.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To The Reader.
            
               THERE are three ſorts of men, for whō I haue tranſlated this little booke. The firſt are they, that heare their fathers inſtruction, and deſpiſe not the gouernement of their mother: whom I deſire God vpon my knees to keepe free from the poyſon, and peruerſneſſe of all Heretickes, and Schiſmatickes whatſoeuer. The ſecond are they, that are miſ-led by Romiſh Impoſtors into many groſſe and nouell errours,

ſuch as the Scriptures and antient Doctors vtterly condemne, as may eaſily be ſeene by viewing ſundry workes of diuers learned men amongſt vs, either written, or turned into Engliſh. The chiefeſt cauſe of of whoſe erring, partly conſiſts in an incredible credit, which they giue vnto their Teachers, and partly in their owne wonderfull ignorance of the holy Scriptures, which might inlighten their eies, and informe their iudgements. It is written of Naaſh, that he would make a couenant with the men of Iabeſh Gilead vpon condition 1. Sam. 11. 2. that he might thrust out all their right eies: euen ſo ſurely the Diuell delights in nothing

more, then in putting out mens eyes, and in captiuating their vnderſtanding (which is as the right eye of the ſoule) that being blinded, he may leade them at his pleaſure. But if it would pleaſe them to ſearch the Scriptures Iohn. 5. 39. (as Chriſt exhorteth) and to conſider of the Catholicke doctrine of the antient Church euen to the times, wherein this our Author liued, I doubt not, but that the ſcales of ignorance would fall from their eyes, and that thoſe mists would be ſoone diſperſed, which Satan caſts before them. The third are ſuch, as are not much offended at the doctrines of the Church, but condemne her gouernment, and ſtumble at her Ceremonies,

which yet are neither vndecent, nor ſuperſtitious, or numerous, and ſuch as neither Gods word forbiddeth, nor any approued Church in the Chriſtian world condemneth, as they are commanded by this Church, & entertained.
            
            Now ſee heere what ſtrange conceipts and doctrines are deuiſed, and defended of them, ſuch as haue no foot-step in the Scripture, no fellowſhip with Antiquity, 1. It is affirmed that The true and right gouernment of the Chriſtian Churches is a certaine Democratie. 2. That a prouinciall Church is Contrary to the teſtament of Chriſt. Hereupon Henry Iacob in an Epiſtle prefixed

to a booke lately printed at Leyden, labours for a Separation. 3. That humane ceremonies being once abuſed, cannot bee purged but by vtter aboliſhion. 4. That Indeede Chriſt lay at the Paſſ. but that he did ſo at the laſt Supper, the Scripture ſayes not. it is out of all doubt, that Chriſt ſate or lay at his laſt Supper: or thus, that it is not only poſsible or probable, but certaine that he vſed a table gesture at that his laſt Supper. 5. That becauſe Chriſt vſed a table gesture; therefore it is vnlawfull for vs to vſe any other then a table gesture. 6 That to receiue the bread and wine kneeling is vnlawfull, is Idolatry. 
               Kneeling at Communion, as it is required of the Church of England, lawfull. Which me thinkes is very strange. For what is the Idoll? wee kneele not vnto the Elements, but vnto God, in teſtimony

of reuerence and humbleneſſe of ſpirit. Secondly if wee Muſt receiue the Sacrament with reuerence and humility of heart (as who dare gainſay?) thē vndoubtedly wee May receiue it with a reuerend and humble gesture. Thirdly, if our kneeling be idolatry, then are wee idolaters (as if oppreſsion bee theft, and oppreſsors are Theeues: if to take the Cure of ſoules, and to take no Care of ſoules be murder, then they, that take the Cure of ſoules, and take no Care of ſoules are Murderers) yea and reſolute Idolaters: for we do not onely kneele, but ſtand to defend it, and we practiſe it daily, yea and charge them with ignorance that do condemne it

as vnlawful. Now what wil follow? If we be idolaters, then they must not eate with vs. If any, (ſaith S. Paul) that is called 
               1. Cor. 5, 11. 
               a brother, bee an Idolater, with ſuch one eate not. And againe, If wee be Idolaters, how dare they communicate with vs? What? with Idolaters? Either therefore theſe conceits must be for ſaken, or elſe I ſee not how wee can but ſwarme with Iacobites. But I am perſwaded better things of many of them: ſuch as accompany Saluation, and tend not to Separation. A. Fuluius once ſayd to his ſonne: Ego te non Catilmae aduerſus patriā, ſed patriae aduer ſus Caulinam gonui. 
               I begat thee not for Catiline againſt thy Country, but for thy Country againſt Catiline:
               
ſo may I ſay, they were not begotten by the Goſpel, for Iohnſon, for Iacob, for any turbulent and phantaſticke Doctor againſt the Church, but for the Church againſt them. And be they well aſsured that this ſleight stuffe will ſhrinke when it comes to wetting, this counterfeit coine will not indure triall. The greatneſse of men, their learning, their godlineſſe, are no arguments to moue vs to receiue their owne conceipts for doctrines. No, an Angell muſt not be heard againſt the truth. But mee thinkes I heare ſome Queſt. man ſay, How may I be reſolued in this difference of opinions? what ſhall I doe to finde out the truth? I anſwer. Firſt giue diligent An.
               
care to the voyce of God in the Scriptures: what it ſaith, that receiue, though it croſse thee neuer ſo much, and where it hath no tongue, haue thou no care. Do not firſt entertaine a conceit, and then look out Scripture to draw it by the haire to thee. Secondly, be not ouercaried with any preiudicate opinion of thine Oppoſite: neither let the reuerend conceit of thy Teacher, that hath taught thee ſuch a doctrine, couer thine eye from beholding reaſon: and do not thinke that, becauſe hee is a good man, therefore all muſt needes bee good, that hee hath taught thee; or that his doctrines are ſounder thē another mans, becauſe his life is better.

Thirdly, be not proud, or ſelfeconceited, For Iam. 4. 6. 
               God reſiſteth the proud. God and Pride (ſaith Bernard) cannot dwell together in the ſame heart, which could not dwell in the ſame heauen. And the Hiſtory of the Church ſheweth that Arrius of very pride fell into wicked and open hereſie. But the Lord 1. Pet 5. 5. Pſal. 25. 9. giueth grace to the humble, and teacheth him his way. If yee aske (ſaith Auguſtine) what is the firſt ſtep in the way of truth? I anſwer Humility. If yee aske what is the ſecond? I ſay Humility, If yee aske, what is the third? I ſay the ſame, Humility. fourthly, pray earneſtly with Dauid that

God would bee pleaſed to Pſal. 119. 34. 66. 
               Giue thee vnderſtanding, and to teach thee good indgement and knowledge. Finally, bee not eaſily perſwaded to beleeue Doctrines ſpecially against the vnanimous conſent of a true Church, which neither the ancient acknowledged, neither are allowed by any preſent approoued Church, but are the conceipts of ſome particular perſons. In one word, I pray thee diligently to read this Treatiſe ouer. For it teacheth how to continue in the faith, againſt all the fraudes and fallacies of Imposters. It is not great, but good: learned, though but litle: and as ſweete to them,

that are intelligent, as ſhort. The Lord bleſſe it to thee, and giue thee an vnderſtanding head, and an obedient heart.
            
               
                  April. 14. 1611.
               
               Thine in Chriſt,
THOMAS TVKE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TREATISE, OR Diſputation of VINCENTIVS So called of Lerme, or Lerina, an Iland in the Mediterraneā
                   ſea, where he liued. LIRINENSIS, for the Antiquity of the Catholicke faith, againſt the profane Nouelties of all Hereſies.
            
            
               The Preface.
               
                  FORASMVCH as the Scripture ſpeakes, and warnes vs thus; 
                     Deut 32. 7 
                  Aske thy Fathers, and they will ſhew thee thine Elders and they will tell thece. And againe, 
                     Pro. 22. 17. & 3. 1. 
                  Apply thine eare to the words of the wiſe. In like manner alſo, My Son, forget not theſe ſayings, and let thine heart keepe my words? It ſeemeth

to me This word ſignifies a pilgrime, or ſtranger: a word befitting al Chriſtian men: & vnder this name our Author puts forth his Booke, concealing his owne proper name, leaſt the Aduerſary ſhould reiect the worke for the workemans ſake. Or it may be a read peregrin, a pilgrime or a ſtranger. 
                  Peregrinus, the leaſt of all the ſeruants of God, that it will not be a little profitable, through the Lords aſſiſtance, if I ſhall ſet downe thoſe things in writing, which I haue faithfully receiued of the holy Fathers; ſure I am, very neceſſary for mine owne infirmity, ſeeing I may haue in readineſſe, whereby the weakeneſſe of my memory may bee relieued with continuall reading. Vnto which taske, not only the benefite of the work doth mooue me, but the conſideration alſo of time, and the oportunity of Place. The time; for ſeeing all things are carried away therewith, it behoueth vs alſo to catch ſomething therefrom againe, which may further vnto eternall life: eſpecially becauſe the expectation

of Gods terrible iudgement requireth the ſtudies of Religion, and the ſubtilty of nouell Heretiques, asketh much care and diligence. The Place alſo, becauſe auoiding the throngs & multitudes that are in Citties, we liue in a little Village more remote, and are there incloſtred in a Monaſtery, where without great diſtraction we may do that, which the Pſalmiſt ſings of; Be ſtill and 
                  
                     Pſal. 46. 10. 
                  know that I am God. But indeed the reaſon of our purpoſe is agreeable thereunto, as who, becauſe wee haue ſome while bene toſſed with diuers and grieuous troubles of a ſecular warfare, haue at the length through the fauour of Chriſt hidden vs within the hauen of Religion, moſt faithful alwaies vnto all: that there the blaſts

of vanity and pride being laid downe, and appeaſing God By, not For: the Ancients knew no merits, but Chriſts, They preached mercy, not merit. by the ſacrifice of Chriſtian humility, we might eſcape, not onely the Ship-wracks of the life preſent, but the flames alſo of the future.
               But now will I in the 
                  That is with the helpe of God, for to do a thing in the name of God, is either to doe it to Gods glory: or by his power & authority: or elſe, as here, by his grace, or with confidence of his aſſiſtance, as 
                        •
                      
                     Pſa. 20. 5. 
                  name of the Lord, ſet vpon this buſineſſe; to wit, ſet downe in writing, the things that haue ben deliuered from our Elders, and committed to our keeping, intending to be a faithful Relator of them, and not preſuming to be their Author. Neither meane I to ſet downe all, but to touch thoſe onely, that are neceſſary: & that not in any poliſhed and curious ſtile, but in a plaine and familiar ſpeech, that the moſt of them may ſeeme to bee pointed at rather then vnfolded. Let them write

delicately and with accurateneſſe, that are led thereunto through confidence of their wit, or by reaſon of their office: but for me it ſhall be ſufficient, that I haue prepared a Remembrancer for my ſelfe, to helpe my memory, or rather to preuent my forgetfulneſſe, the which yet I will endeauour through the Lords aſſiſtance to mend, and perfite dayly, by reuoluing and calling to mind the things that I haue Not which himſelfe hath forged vpon the anuill of his owne wit. 
                  learned. And this I haue ſaid before hand, that if happily ought of ours ſhall come into the hands of the He meanes eſpecially ſuch as are Saints not in reſpect, of grace onely, but of place, as Biſhops & other Miniſters, whoſe office is holy. 
                  Saints, they would reprehend nothing therein raſhly, which they may ſee by promiſe yet to be amended.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 1.
               INquiring therefore oftentimes with great care and very ſingular diligence, of very many excellent men, both for holineſſe and learning, how I might by ſome certaine, and as it were generall and regular way, diſcerne the truth of the Catholicke faith, from the falſehood of wicked hereſies, I receiued this anſwere alwaies from them all almoſt; That if either I, or any other would finde out the wiles of vpſtart Hereticks, and eſcape their That is their deceit full reaſons, wherby they ſeeke to catch & intangle men. 
                  ſnares, and continue ſound and whole in a ſound faith, he muſt fortifie his faith through the Lords aſſiſtance with a two-fold fence; namely firſt with the authority of Gods word: and then alſo

with the tradition of the Catholicke Church.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               HEre, it may be ſome man will aske; Seeing the Canon of the Scriptures is perfect, and that it is aboundantly ſufficient of it ſelfe to all things, what need is there that the authority of the Churches vnderſtanding Queſt. ſhould be ioyned therunto? Surely, becauſe al mē do not after one manner vnderſtand Anſ. the holy Scripture, according to the height thereof; but diuers men interpret the ſentences thereof diuerſly, that there may ſeeme to be as many meanings thereof almoſt, as men. For Nouatian expounds it one way, Photinus another way, Sabellius thus, Donatus otherwiſe,

                  Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius other waies, Appollinaris & Priſcillianus by themſelues, Iouinianus, Pelagius, Celeſtius another way, and finally, Neſtorius hath a ſence by himſelfe, And therefore by reaſon of ſo great deceipts, and windings of ſo different errours, it is very neceſſary that a man ſhould interpret the Prophets and Apoſtles according as the Catholicke Church doth vnderſtand them.
            
            
               CHAP. 3.
               IN like manner, euen in the Catholike Church wee muſt haue a ſpeciall regard, that we hold that which is, Euery where beleeued alwaies & of all: for this is truly and properly Catholike (as the very force & reaſon of

the name declareth) which comprehendeth al things truly vniuerſally. Now this we ſhall doe, if we follow Vniuerſality, Antiquity and Conſent. And wee ſhall follow Vniuerſality thus, namely if we do confeſſe this one faith to be true, which the whole Church through out the world confeſſeth. We ſhall follow Antiquity, if by no meanes we reiect thoſe interpretations, which we know to haue bene vſed and eſteemed of our holy Elders and Forefathers. And Conſent in like ſort alſo, if euer in Antiquity we follow the determinations and iudgements of all, or ſurely of almoſt all Prieſts and Doctors.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 4.
               VVHat then ſhal a Chriſtian 
                  Queſt. 
                  Catholicke do, if ſome few members of the Church ſhall cut themſelues from the fellowſhip of the Catholicke Faith? Surely what elſe, but preferre the ſoundneſſe of Anſ. the whole body before a noyſom and corrupt member? And what Quest. if ſome new contagion ſhall indeuour the corruption, not of ſome ſmall part of the Church onely, but euen of the whole body thereof alſo? In like manner then he ſhall bee Anſ. carefull to cleaue faſt vnto Antiquity, which cannot now wholly be ſeduced by any nouell deceipt. And what if euen Queſt. in Antiquity it ſelfe the errour of two or three, or of a Citty,

or of ſome Prouince be found out? Then his whole care ſhall Anſ. be to prefer the decrees of the Vniuerſal Church, vniuerſally of old maintained, to the raſhneſſe or ignorance (if any ſuch be) of ſome few perſons. But what if ſome ſuch thing breake out, Quest. where nothing of that nature may be found? Then ſhall hee Anſ. compare the ſentences and opinions of the Fathers together, and take Counſell of them: of thoſe Fathers or Elders (I meane) Or eſpeciall, duntaxat. onely, which though they liued not in one age and place, did yet continue in the fellowſhip and faith of one Catholicke Church, & were laudable Teachers: and whatſoeuer he ſhall perceiue that not one or two alone, but that all alike with one and the ſame conſent did openly, commonly, and

conſtantly hold, write and teach, let him know that the ſame of him alſo is without any ſcruple to bee beleeued. But that thoſe things, which wee ſay may be made more plaine, they are each of them to be cleered by examples, and to be a little more enlarged, leaſt through affectation of too much breuity, the weight of things bee not perceiued, by reaſon of paſſing ſo ſwiftly ouer them in our ſpeech.
            
            
               CHAP. 5.
               IN the time of Donatus, from whom ſprang the Donatiſts, when as a great part of Aphrica had throwne themſelues headlong into his furious errours, and when vnmindfull of their honour, religion and profeſſion,

they did preferre the ſacrilegious headines of one man to the Church of Chriſt, then thoſe Africans could of them all alone be ſafe within the ſanctuaries of the Catholicke faith, which hauing that wicked Schiſme in deteſtation, adioyned themſelues to all the Churches of the world; leauing in truth a notable paterne to them that ſhould come after, namely how, and that alſo well, the ſoundneſſe of all might be preferred before the fury of one, or but a few.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 6.
               IN like manner, when as the poyſon of the Arrians had now corrupted not ſome fewe, but almoſt all the world, ſo as that well neere all the 
                     Latini ſermonis, that ſpake the Latine tongue. Latine

Biſhops being deceiued, partly by force and partly by fraude, knew not well, by reaſon of a certaine kinde of blindneſſe, which had inuaded their vnderſtandings, what courſe they were beſt to follow, when things were ſo confuſed: then whoſoeuer was a true Louer & worſhipper of Chriſt, the ſame by making more accoūt of the ancient-faith, thē of nouel-falſhood, was preſerued from all infections of that contagious doctrine. The danger in truth of which time hath aboundantly ſhewed what great calamity the bringing in of that vpſtart doctrine cauſed. For then were ſhaken not ſmall things onely, but euen the greateſt alſo. For not onely alliances, kindreds, friendſhips, and houſes were diſſolued, but alſo Cities,

People, Prouinces, Nations, yea, and the whole Romane Empire was vtterly ſhaken, and put out of order. For when that profane noueltie of the Arrians, as a certaine 
                     Bellona, & Furia were two heathen god deſſes: the one was ouer war, the other was the mother of fury. 
                  Bellona or Furia, had firſt captiuated the He means Conſtantius or Valens, or both: who were Arrians both. 
                  Emperour, and then brought all the Or principall Courtiers. 
                  chiefest about him vnder new lawes, it ceaſed not afterwards to trouble & diſorder all things, priuat and publicke, facred and profane, and to haue no regard of that, which was good and true, but whomſoeuer it liſted, to ſmite them downe, as from ſome place on high. Then were wiues defiled, widdowes robd, Virgins deflowred, Monaſteries demoliſhed, Cleargy-men diſturbed, Leuites beaten, Prieſts baniſhed, priſons, gaoles and mynes filled with

the Antiquity acknowledgeth men liuing to bee Saints: & not dead men onely, as ſome do, Saints: the greateſt part of whom being driuen out of Citties forbidden to them, and exiled, were euen broken and conſumed with nakedneſſe, hunger, and thirſt, amongſt deſerts, dens, wild beaſts and rockes. But all theſe things did they for no other cauſe befall, but euen becauſe the ſuperſtitions of mans inuentions were taught for heauenly doctrine, becauſe well-grounded antiquity was vedermined by wicked nouelty, becauſe the ordinances of the Elders were violated, becauſe the decrees of the Fathers were repealed, becauſe the determinations of the Ancient were diſanulled, and for that the luſt of profane and vpſtart curioſity contained not it ſelfe within the moſt Heretiks break from their teachers, exorbitate, & go an whoring after the idols of their owne braines. 
                  chaſte

limits of ſacred and vncorrupt Antiquity?
            
            
               CHAP. 7.
               BVt (it will bee thought) perhaps wee faine theſe things through hatred of nouelty and loue of Antiquity. Whoſoeuer iudgeth this, let him giue credit at the leaſt to bleſſed Ambroſe, who in his ſecond book to the Emperour, Gratian, himſelfe bewailing the bitternes of the time, ſaith: But now, almighty God, quoth In ſine cap. vlt. he, we haue beene ſufficiently puniſhed by our owne deſtruction and bloud-ſhed for the ſlaughters of the Confeſſours, the baniſhments of the Prieſts, and for ſuch wicked villany. It is cleare enough that they, which violated the faith, cannot

be ſafe. In like manner, in the third booke of the ſame worke: Let vs, therefore keepe (ſaith he) the commandements of the Elders, that wee be not bold through vnciuill raſhneſſe to breake the ſeales, that are hereditary. Neither the Elders, nor the Power, nor the Angels, nor Archangels durſt open that ſealed booke of prophecy: the prerogatiue of explaning that 
                     Reu. 5. 3. 5. was reſerued for Chriſt alone. Which of vs dares vnſeale the That is, the holy Scriptures: ſo called, becauſe it is giuen them to keep, and teach: I meane Miniſtets, which book is then ſaid to be vnſealed in our Authors ſenſe, when it is violated and corrupted. 
                  Sacerdoticall Booke, ſealed of Confeſſours, and conſecrated now with the martyrdome of many? which they, that haue bene compelled to vnſeale it, yet afterwards haue ſealed, when the fraud was condemned: they that durſt not violate it, were Confeſſours and Martyrs. How can wee deny their

faith, whoſe victory we do extoll? Wee praiſe them I ſay, O venerable Ambroſe, wee praiſe them indeed, and prayſing wee wonder at them. For who is he, that is ſo mad, who though he be not able to ouertake them, yet would not wiſh to follow, whom no violence hath driuen from defending of the faith of the Elders? Not threatnings, not flatterings, not life, not death, not the palace, not Sergeants, not the Emperour, not the Empire, not men, not diuels, Whom (I ſay) the Lord, for their conſtant imbracing of holy Antiquity, deemed meete for ſo great an office, as by them to repaire Churches ruinated, to quicken ſpirituall people extinguiſhed, to put on the Crownes of Prieſts, that were deiected, to

deface (a fountaine of vnfeigned teares being infuſed from heauen into the Biſhops) thoſe wicked (I ſay) not letters, but litures (blots or daſhes) of nouell impiety, and finally, to call back now almoſt all the world being ſtrucken with the tempeſt of ſuddaine hereſie: (I ſay to call it backe) to the ancient faith, from vp-ſtart falſhood: vnto ancient ſoundneſſe, from furious and vnſound newneſſe, and to the ancient light, from the blindneſſe of nouelty.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               BVt in this certaine Diuine vertue of Confeſſions, that we are alſo euen moſt of all to mark, that then in the very Antiquity of the Church, they vndertooke the defence, not of

ſome part; but of the whole body. For it was not lawful for mē ſo great, and of ſuch quality, to mantaine with ſo great contention & indeauour, the ſtraggling & ſelfe-thwarting coniectures of one or two, or to ſtriue for the raſh conſent of ſome little Prouince: but following the decrees and determinations of Apoſtolique and Catholicke truth, made by all the That is, the Miniſters of the Goſpell: ſo called, becauſe they did offer the people to God, as a ſacrifice: killing their fleſh with the Word, as with a ſacrifycing Knife. 
                  Prieſts of the holy Church, they chooſed rather to betray themſelues, then the faith which was held of old vniuerſally. Whereby they obtained alſo ſo great a degree of glory, as that they were rightly and worthily counted not Confeſſours only, but the Principall of Confeſſours alſo. It behoueth therefore all true Catholikes vnceſſantly to meditate

on this notable, and indeede diuine enſample of thoſe ſame bleſſed men: who ſhining like the He alludes to the Candleſticke in Exod. 25. 
                  ſeuen headed Candleſticke, with the ſeuenfold light of the holy Spirit, haue ſhewed their poſterity a moſt euident way, how the boldneſſe of prophane nouelty may in all the vaine bablings of errours bee Or ouerthrowen, quaſht, ſtayed, broken, c
                        •
                     nteratur. hence forth cooled with the authority of ſacred Antiquity.
            
            
               CHAP. 9.
               NEither is this a new thing truly: for this cuſtome was alwaies vſed in the Church, that the more any man flouriſhed in religion, the more ready he was to withſtand nouell deuices. The world is full of ſuch examples. But, for breuity ſake, wee will make choyce of

ſome one, and this eſpecially from the Apoſtolicke Sea. In times paſt therefore Agrippinus, of venerable memory, Biſhop of Carthage, held rebaptization firſt of all men, againſt the Canon of the Word, againſt the Rule of the Uniuerſall Church, againſt the iudgement of all his Fellow-prieſts, againſt the Or againſt the cuſtome & ordin ances contra morem & inſtituta.
                   manner and cuſtomes of the Elders. The which preſumption cauſed ſo great a miſchiefe, as that it miniſtred a forme of ſacrilege, not onely to all heretickes, but gaue occaſion of error to ſome Catholickes alſo. When as all men therefore euery where vpon the nouelty of the thing cryed out againſt it, & all the Prieſts on euery ſide, did euery one indeuour to reſiſt it, then Pope Stephen, of happy memory, Biſhop
                  
of the Apoſtolike See, with the reſt of his Fellowes, but yet aboue the reſt withſtood it; deeming it, as I ſuppoſe, a thing beſeeming, if hee did excell all the reſt as much by deuout affection to the faith, as hee did ſurpaſſe them by the authority of place. Finally, in an Epiſtle which was ſent into Affrica, the 
                     Apud Cypri. Lib. 2. Ep. 7. ſaid Stephen ordeined in theſe words: That nothing ſhould bee renewed, but that which is deliuered. For that holy and wiſe man knew, that piety doth nothing elſe allow of, but that all things ſhould with the ſame faithfulneſſe bee reteined for the Children, with the which they were receiued of the Fathers, and that we ought to follow religion, not which way wee would lead it, but rather by that way it would lead vs, and that that

is the propertie of Christian modeſty and grauity for men not to deliuer their owne deuices to them, that ſo come after, but to keepe the things receiued of their Elders. What therefore was the iſſue then of all the matter? Surely what elſe, but that, which was vſuall, and accuſtomed? Antiquity namely reteined, and nouelty exploded.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 10.
               BVt peraduenture then that Obiect. new deuiſe was deſtitute of means to defēd & beare it out. Yea verily, there was for it ſo Anſ. great acutenes of wit, ſo great aboundance of eloquence, ſo great a number of maintainers, ſo great likelihood of truth, ſo many Oracles of Gods word,

but indeede after a new and naughty manner vnderſtood, that me thought all that conſpiracy could by no meanes be deſtroyed, vnleſſe that ſelfe ſame vndertaken, defended, & commended profeſſion of nouelty, had forſaken the alone cauſe of ſo great an enterpriſe.
               To conclude, what force had that Affrican Councell or Decree? Truly none, through the gift of God: but all things were aboliſhed, made void, and troden vnder foot, as dreames, as fables, as things ſuperfluous.
            
            
               CHAP. 11.
               AND ô the wonderfull change of things! The Authors of the ſame opinion are accounted Catholickes: but

the Followers are iudged Heretickes. The Maiſters are abſolued, the Schollers are condemned. The writers of the bookes ſhall bee the children of the Kingdome, but Hell ſhall receiue the Defenders. For who would doubt that moſt bleſſed Cyprian, the Light of all the Saints, both Biſhops and Martyrs, together with the reſt of his fellowes, ſhall reigne eternally with Chriſt? Or who on the contrary is ſo ſacrilegious, as to deny that the Donatiſts, & thoſe other peſtilent wretches, which doe bragge that they rebaptize by the authority of that Councell, ſhall burne for euer with the Diuell? Which iudgement truly to me ſeemeth to bee promulged of God, for their craftineſſe eſpecially, who when they go about to forge

an hereſie vnder another bodies name, do commonly lay hold of the writings of ſome ancient man ſomething too couertly ſet out, which in reſpect of their darkneſſe, doe as it were, ſerue for their owne opinion: that that, which, I know not what, they doe bring forth, they may ſeeme to thinke, neither firſt, nor all-alone. Whoſe wickedneſſe I iudge worthy double hatred: either therfore, becauſe they are not afraid to proffer the poyſon of hereſie vnto others: or therefore alſo, becauſe they do with a wicked hand blow vp, and winnow the memory of euery holy man, like aſhes now raked vp, and diffame thoſe things with a reuiued opinion, which ought in ſilence to be buried; altogether following the foote-ſteps

of their father Cham, who not onely neglected to couer the nakedneſſe of venerable Noah, but told it alſo to the reſt, that it might be mocked. Whereby hee did ſo grieuouſly ſinne againſt child-like piety, as that his very poſterity became obnoxious to the curſes of his ſin: thoſe brethren being bleſſed, and farre vnlike, who would neither diſtaine the nakedneſſe of their reuerend father with their owne eies, nor haue it lye open vnto other mens, but couered him, as it is written, with their faces backward: which is neither to approue, nor diſcloſe Gen. 9. the error of the holy man: and therefore are they bleſſed in their poſterity. But let vs returne vnto our purpoſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 12.
               WE ſhould therefore greatly feare the grieuous ſinne of changing the By faith is not meant, the gift of faith, but the doctrine: not by which, but which wee do beleeue. 
                  Faith, and of ſtairing Religion: from the which wickedneſſe wee are deterred, not onely by the diſcipline of Eccleſiaſticall Conſtitution, but alſo by the cenſure of Apostolicall authority. For all men know how grauely, how ſeuerely, and how earneſtly the bleſſed Gal. 1. Apoſtle Paul inueigheth againſt ſome, that were too ſoone through their owne lightneſſe, tranſlated from him, who had called them to the grace of Chriſt, vnto another Goſpel, which is not another: who had heaped to themſelues Teachers after their owne 
                  2. Tim. 4. 
                  deſires, turning their eares from the

truth, and turning themſelues to fables, hauing damnation, 1. Tim. 5. becauſe they haue broken the firſt faith. Who were by them deceiued, of whom the ſame Apoſtle writeth to the Romane brethren: Now I beſeech you 
                  Rom. 16. 17 
                  brethren, marke them, that cauſe diſſentions & offences otherwiſe then the doctrine which yee haue learned, and auoyd them. For ſuch ſerue not the Lord Chriſt, but their owne belly: and by faire ſpeeches, and flattering ſeduce the hearts of the ſimple: which enter into houſes, and lead captiue 
                  2. Tim. 3. 6. 
                  ſilly women laden with ſinnes and led with ſundry luſts, euer learning, and neuer coming to the knowledge of the truth, Tit. 1. 10. 11 
                  Uaine-talkers, and Seducers, which ſubuert whole houſes, teaching things which they ſhould not, for filthy Lucre ſake.
                  
Men of corrupt mindes 2. Tim. 3. 8. 
                  Reprobate concerning the faith: proud, and knowing nothing: but 1. Tim. 6. 4, 
                        •
                     
                   
                  doting about questions, and ſtrife of words, deſtitute of the truth, imagining that gaine is godlineſſe. Likewiſe alſo being idle 
                  1. Tim. 5. 13 they learne to goe about from houſe to houſe, yea they are alſo bablers, and buſibodies, ſpeaking things, they ought not. Who 
                  1. Tim. 1. 19 
                  repelling a good conſcience, as concerning faith, haue made ſhip-wracke. Whoſe prophane bablings further much vnto impiety, and their 2. Tim. 2. 17 
                  word fretteth like a canker. And it fitteth well which is alſo written of them: 2 Tim. 3. 9 
                  But they ſhall preuaile no further: for their madneſſe ſhal be manifeſt vnto all, as theirs alſo was. When therefore ſome ſuch wandring vp and downe Countries and

Cities, & carrying about their He alludes to Pedlars that go vp and downe to ſell their Wares. 
                  Pedlary errors, had come alſo to the Galatians: and when as the Galatians hauing heard thē, being now affected with a certaine loathing of the truth, and caſting vp the Manna of Apoſtolicke and Catholicke doctrine, delighted themſelues in the filthineſſe of hereticall nouelty, the Apoſtle did ſo exerciſe his Apoſtolicall authority, as that with all ſeuerity he did decree: But though either we (ſaith hee) or an Angel from 
                  Gal. 1. 8. 
                  Heauen preach vnto you otherwiſe then we haue preached, let him bee accurſed. What is that which he ſaith, But though wee? Why does hee not rather ſay, But 
                  Queſt. 
                  though I? The meaning hereof Anſwer. is this: Though Peter, though Andrew, though Iohn: Laſtly, though the whole cōpany of Apoſtles
                  
ſhold preach to you otherwiſe, then we haue preached, Let him bee accurſed. A terrible Curſe, that to maintaine the conſtant embracing of the firſt He means not Faith, whereby we do beleeue, but which we doe belieue, that is, the doctrine of Faith, which was once for euer deliuered to the Saints, as in Iud. 3. faith, he neither ſpared himſelfe, nor the reſt of his Fellowapoſtles. Yet this is but little, Although (ſaith hee) an Angell ſhould from heauen preach vnto you, otherwiſe then wee haue preached, let him be accurſed. It ſufficed not for the keeping of the faith, once deliuered to haue mentioned the nature of Man, vnleſſe hee had comprehended alſo the excellency of Angels. Though We (ſaith he) or an Angell from heauen. Not becauſe the holy and heauenly Angels can now offend: but this is his meaning: If alſo (ſaith hee) that ſhould bee, which cannot be, Whoſoeuer hee be, that ſhall aſſay

to change the faith, that was once deliuered, let him bee accurſed.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 13.
               BVt hee ſpake, it may bee, Obiect. theſe things without due regard, and vttered them in an humane paſſion rather, thē decreed them with Diuine reaſon. Farre bee it from him, for hee goes on, and preſſeth Sol. this ſame point with a very earneſt repetition: As wee haue 
                  
                     Gal. 1. 
                        •
                     . 
                  ſaid before, quoth he, ſo ſay I now againe, If any preach vnto you otherwiſe, then that yee haue receiued, let him be accurſed. He ſaid not: If any preach vnto you beſides that which ye haue receiued, let him bee bleſſed, praiſed and entertained: but let him be, quoth he, accurſed, that

is ſeparated, put from the flock and excluded, leaſt the curſed contagion of one Sheep ſhould corrupt the harmeleſſe flocke of Chriſt, by a Or infectious, contagious. venemous mixture with them. Yea, but perhaps theſe precepts belong only to the Galatians. Then theſe Obiect. things alſo are commanded to Sol. the Galatians onely, which are mentioned in the ſame Epiſtle after: ſuch as are theſe; If wee liue in the Spirit, let vs alſo walk in the Spirit, let vs not be deſirous of 
                  
                     Gal 2. 25. 26. 
                  vaine glory, prouoking one another, enuying one another: and the reſt. Which if it bee againſt ſenſe, and if they be commanded vnto all alike, it ſtandeth with good reaſon that, as theſe commandements concerning manners, ſo thoſe alſo concerning faith ſhould equally belong to all.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 14.
               ANd as no man may prouoke, or enuy one another, ſo no man may receiue ought beſides that, which the Catholike Church doth alway preach. or elſe perhaps Obiect. it was at that time inioyned: that if any did preach otherwiſe, then was already preached, hee ſhould bee accurſed: but not at this time there is no ſuch commandement. Then that alſo, which hee likewiſe Sol: ſpeaketh in the ſame Epiſtle, And I ſay, walke in the Spirit, and 
                  
                     Gal. 5. 16. 
                  ye ſhall not fulfill the lust of the fleſh, was at that time onely commanded, and is not now inioyned. But if it be both impious and pernicious ſo to thinke, it doth neceſſarily follow

that, as theſe things ought to be obſerued of all ages, ſo thoſe things which are decreed concerning the keeping of the faith without alteration, are commanded alſo to all ages. To preach any thing therefore to Chriſtian 
                  There are now two ſorts of Catholiks, Chriſtian, & Antichriſtiā, the former are reall, the other (as the Ieſuits) are nominall & titular. Catholikes beſides that, which they haue receiued, was neuer lawfull, is no where lawfull, and neuer ſhall be lawfull: and to accurſe them, which preach any thing beſides that, which was once receiued, hath beene euer behoouefull, is euery where behoouefull, and ſhall alwaies be behoouefull: Which things ſeeing they thus ſtand, is there any man either ſo bold, as to preach otherwiſe, then hath ben preached in the Church, or ſo light as to receiue otherwiſe, then that hee hath receiued of

the Church? Let him cry, and cry againe, and againe, let him in his letters cry both vnto all, and alwaies, and euery where, 
                  He alludeth to that in Act. 9. 15. euen that veſſell of election, that teacher of the Gentiles, that Apoſtolique Trumpet, that Preacher of Men, and who knew the will of God, That if any one preach a new doctrine hee ſhall be accurſed, On the contrary alſo certaine Frogs, and Gnats, and Flies, that ſhall periſh, ſuch as are the Pelagians, cry out againſt him, and that vnto Catholikes. We, ſay they, being Authors, Leaders, and interpreters, Condemne ye thoſe things, which yee did hold, hold yee thoſe things, which yee did condemne, Reiect yee the ancient faith, the Fathers ordinances, and thoſe things which the Elders haue committed to

your truſt and Receiue ye, What things I pray you? I tremble to ſpeake them: for they are ſo inſolent, that mee thinkes they This he ſaith to ſhew the abhominablenes of their errours. cannot be without ſome vile offence affirmed, no nor intruth ſomuch as refelled.
            
            
               CHAP. 15.
               BVt ſome man will ſay. Wherefore then doth God Queſt. very often ſuffer certaine excellent perſons in the Church to broach new matters vnto Catholikes? It is a good queſtion, and worthy to be diligently & Anſ. largely anſwered. Which yet we muſt make anſwere to, not of our owne head, but by the authority of Gods word, and by the inſtruction of an Eccleſiaſticall Teacher. Let vs therefore heare holy Moſes, and let

him teach vs, wherefore learned men, and ſuch as by reaſon of the grace of knowledge be called alſo Prophets of the Apoſtle, are ſometimes permitted to publiſh new doctrines, which the old Teſtament vſeth allegorically to call Strange Gods; to wit, becauſe Heretiques worſhip their owne opinions, as the Gentiles doe their gods. Bleſſed Moſes therefore in Deuteronomy writeth; 
                     Deut. 13. 1. 2' 
                  If there ariſe among you a Prophet, or which ſaith hee hath ſeene a viſion: that is to ſay, a Teacher conſtituted in the Church, who is thought of his Schollers and Hearers to teach by ſome reuelation. What followeth? And ſhall giue thee a Signe or Wonder, and the Signe or Wonder, which he hath ſpoken of ſhall come to paſſe. Doubtles

ſome great, I know not what, Teacher is vnderſtood, and indued with ſuch knowledge, as who may ſeeme to his owne followers not onely to know things, that are within the reach of man, but alſo to foreknow things, which are aboue him, ſuch almoſt as Ualentinus, Donatus, Photinus, Appollinaris, and the reſt of that rabble, were by their Diſciples crakt of to haue bene. But what followes, And ſhall ſay, quoth Moſes? vnto thee, 
                  
                     Deut. 13. 2. 
                  Let vs go and follow after other gods, which thou knoweſt not, and let vs ſerue them. What are thoſe ſtrange Gods but ſtrange errours, which thou haſt not knowne, that is to ſay, new, and not-heard-of? And let vs ſerue them, that is, let vs beleeue thē, follow thē. But what ſaies he laſt of all? 
                     Deut. 13. 3. 
                  Thou ſhalt not

hearken, quoth hee, vnto that Prophet, or dreamer of dreames, And why, I pray thee, doth not God Or inhibit, hinder, let. prohibite that to bee taught, which hee doth forbid to be receiued? Becauſe, ſaith hee, the Lord your God prooueth you, that it might appeare whether you loue the Lord your God, withall your heart, and withall your ſoule. The reaſon is cleerer then the light, why the prouidence of God doth ſometimes ſuffer certaine Teachers of the Churches to broach ſome new doctrines: that the Lord your God, quoth he, might try yee. And indeed it is no ſmall temptation, when as he, whom thou counteſt a Prophet, the Diſciple of the Prophets, and a teacher and defender of the truth, and whom thou doſt exceedingly reuerence & loue,

Shall on the ſuddaine cloſely bring in ſome hurtfull errours, which thou art neither able quickly to perceiue, as long as thou art led by a fore-ſtalled iudgement, concerning his old maiſterlike authority: neither doſt thou eaſily thinke it lawfull, to condemne them, whilſt thou art hindred by thine affection towards thine ancient Maiſter Or teacher..
            
            
               CHAP. 16.
               HEre ſome man may, perhaps deſire that thoſe things, which are in the words of holy Moſes affirmed, may be by ſome Eccleſiaſticall Enſamples cleered. The deſire is iuſt, and not long to be put off. For that we may beginne with the neereſt, and thoſe, that are

manifeſt: what a temptation was that of late ſuppoſe wee, when as that wretch Neſtorius, being ſuddenly turned from a Sheepe to a Wolfe, had begun to rend the Flocke of Chriſt? At Falſe teachers are called Wolues, becauſe they bite and deuoure the Sheep of Chriſt with their wicked errours: and like Wolues they are not of the Sheepeheards feeding, but his foes. which time the very ſame perſons, whom he did teare: for a great part of them as yet did verily think him to be a ſheep, and therefore lay the more open to his teeth. For who would eaſily imagine him to erre, whom he ſaw choſen with ſuch iudgement of the Empire, and ſo highly fauoured of the Prieſts? Who being continually honoured with the great loue of the Saints, and very great good will of the people, did openly preach the word of God, and confute alſo the hurtfull errours of Iewes, and Gentiles. By the which meanes I

pray you, would hee not perſsade any man that hid doctrines, preaching, and iudgement were right and ſound? Who to make way for his one hereſie inueighed againſt the blaſphemies of all hereſies. But this was that, which Moſes ſaith; The Lord your God proueth you, whether yee loue him or no. And that we may paſſe by Nestorius, in whom there was alwaies more wonderment then profite, and more fame then experience: whom the fauour of men, rather then of God, had for a while aduanced in the opinion of the common people: let vs rather ſpeake of thoſe, who hauing profited well and being full of induſtry became no ſmall temptation to Catholike men.
               As in Hungarie, in the memory

of our Anceſters He was Biſhop of the Sirmitan Church: But a Galatian borne: skilfull in the Greeke and Latine tongues: he foſtered a blaſphemous error againſt Chriſt: and being a man of good parts otherwiſe, ouerthrew himſelfe with pride, (a moath that frets the cuſhion in which it bred) as ſome Ancients ſay. 
                  Photinus is ſaid to haue tempted the Church of Sirmion. Where whē
                  as with the great liking of al mē hee was called vnto the prieſthood, and had executed his office for a time, like a Catholike, ſuddenly, like that euil Prophet, or Dreamer, which Moſes ſpeaketh of, hee began to perſwade the people of God, committed to his truſt, to follow after ſtrange gods, that is to ſay, ſtrange errours, which before they knew not. But this is vſuall, and that dangerous, becauſe hee was furniſhed with no meane helpes to ſo great a wickedneſſe. For hee had a good wit, and hee was an excellent Scholler, and very eloquent, or powerfull in ſpeech; able in both languages to diſpute and write eloquently and ſubſtantially:

as appeareth by the monuments of his bookes, which hee hath written, partly in Greeke, and partly in Latine. But it was well, that the Sheepe of Chriſt committed to him, being very watchfull and wary for the Catholicke Faith, had quicke regard to the words of Moſes, who did forewarne them, and that, although they did admire the eloquence of their Prophet and Paſtor, yet notwithſtanding, they were not ignorant of the temptation. For whō before they followed as the Such an one is euery godly and orthodoxall Biſhop, and Paſtor: who goes before his fellowes the Sheepe of Chriſt in life and doctrine, ringging the word of God in their eares: & being at the controll of the chiefe Sheepheard, as well as the meaneſt in the flock. 
                  Bel-weather of the Flocke, euen him they fled frō afterwards, as from a Wolfe, Neither do wee come to know the perill of this Eccleſiaſticall temptation by the example of Photinus, but of Apollinaris alſo, and are therby alſo admoniſhed

to the more diligent keeping of the faith, which is to be kept. For he made his hearers to haue much a doe, and brought them into great ſtraites. For whereas the authority of the Church drew them one way, the cuſtome or conuerſation & acquaintance of their Maiſter drew them backe another way: and ſo wagging, and wauering betwixt both, they ſee not which way they ſhould rather chuſe. But it may be he was a man, that might eaſily bee contemned. Yea verily, he was ſo worthy a man, and ſo qualified, as that he might in the moſt things be too ſoone beleeued. For who ſurpaſt him in acutenes of wit, practiſe, and in Schollerſhip? How many hereſies hee hath ouerthrown in many volumes,

how many errours contrary to the faith hee hath confuted, that moſt excellent and very huge worke, conſiſting of no leſſe then thirty bookes, doth witneſſe, wherein he hath with a great maſſe of argumēts confounded the furious cauils of Porphiry. It is too long to reckō vp all his workes, for the which he might intruth be matched, with the chiefeſt builders of the Church, had he not through that wicked luſt of hereticall Humility is the nurſe of verity, pride & curioſity be the founders of hereſie. curioſity found out what nouelty I wot not, by the which he might both defile all his labours, as with the mixture of a certaine leproſie, and ſhould haue his doctrine ſaid to be not ſo much an edification, as an Eccleſiaſticall tentation. Heere perhaps ſome may require at my hands, that I would ſhew

them the hereſies of theſe men, of whom we ſpake before; to wit, Neſtorius, Apollinaris, and Photinus. But this is nothing to the matter; which now wee are in hand with. For our purpoſe is not to ſet downe the errours of all, but to ſhew the examples of a few, whereby that may euidently and plainely be cleered, which Moſes ſpeaketh: Namely that, if at any time any Eccleſiaſticall Teacher, and hee a Prophet by reaſon of interpreting the myſteries of the Prophets, ſhal attempt to bring in ſome new point of doctrine into the Church of God, the Diuine prouidence doth ſuffer it to be done, that We might be proued.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 17.
               IT will not therefore bee amiſe by way of digreſſion briefly to ſhew the opinions of the fore-named heretiques, that is, Photinus, Apollinaris, & Neſtorius. This is then the doctrine of Photinus: that God is ſingle and alone, and to bee confeſſed after a Iudaicall manner: he ſaith that there are not full three perſons, neither doth he thinke, that there is any perſon of the Chriſt is called the Word: becauſe he is begotten of the Father, as words are of the mind: and becauſe hee ſhewes his Fathers mind vnto vs. 
                  Word or Son of God, or any of the Holy Ghoſt: he doth alſo ſay that Chriſt is a meere man only, to whom he aſcribeth a beginning from Mary: and this he teacheth by all meanes for a doctrine, That we ought to worſhip onely, the perſon of God the Father, and onely Chriſt the

Man. Theſe things therefore held Photinus. Apollinaris alſo doth as it were glory that hee doth conſent vnto the vnity truly of the Trinity, and that with perfect ſoundnes of faith: but he doth by open profeſſion blaſpheme againſt the Incarnation of the Lord. For hee ſaith, that the ſoule of a man was either not at all in the fleſh of our Sauiour, or elſe ſurely that there was ſuch a one, as wanted vnderſtanding and reaſon. Yea and he ſaid, that the very fleſh of our Lord was not of the fleſh of the holy Virgin Mary, but that it came downe from heauen into the Virgin: and alwaies ſtaggering and doubting, he ſaid ſometimes that it was coëternall with the God, the Word, ſometimes that it was made of the Diuinity of the

                  Word. For he would not that two ſubſtances ſhould bee in Chriſt, one Diuine, and another Humane, one of a father, the other of a mother: but he immagined that the nature of the Word was diuided, as though a part thereof remained in God, and the other had bene turned into the fleſh: that, whereas the truth ſaith, that of two ſubſtances there is one Chriſt, he being oppoſite to the truth might affirme that of one Diuinity of Chriſt, there are two ſubſtances. Theſe then are the errours of Apollinaris.
               
               Now Nestorius being ſicke of a contrary diſeaſe to Apollinaris, whiles he makes fare, as if hee did diſtinguiſh two ſubſtances in Chriſt, all on the ſudden hee brings in two perſons: and with incredible wickednes

will haue two Sons of God, two Chriſts: One of them God, the other Man: one that is begotten of a Father, the other generated of a Mother: and therefore hee doth affirme that holy Mary is not to bee called the Non The
                        •
                     
                     t ocos
                        •
                     ſed Chriſtoto
                        •
                     os. 
                  Mother of God, but the Mother of Christ: to wit, becauſe of her came not Chriſt, who is God, but he, which was man. If ſo be that any man thinke, that hee ſaith in his letters, that Chriſt is one, and that hee ſpeaks of one perſon of Chriſt, let him not eaſily giue credit to him. For either hee hath deuiſed this ſhift through his skil to deceiue, that by good things he might the more eaſily perſwade men alſo vnto euill: as the Apoſtle ſaith: It wrought death 
                  
                     Rom. 7. 13. 
                  vnto me by that, which was good. Either therefore (as wee ſaid

before) to the end that hee might deceiue, he doth in ſome places of his writings glory that he doth beleeue on Chriſt, & one perſon of Chriſt: or elſe ſurely hee ſaith that two perſons now after the Virgins deliuerāce did ſo meete and knit in one Chriſt, that yet he holds there were two Chriſts at the time of her conceptiō or deliuering, & a little afterwards. And whereas intruth Chriſt was at the firſt borne an Lo the fond cōceit of this heretique! The Colt ruins if he haue the reines. 
                  ordinary and meere man, and not yet partaker of the vnity of the perſon of God the Word, afterwards the perſon of the Word aſſuming him deſcended into him. And although now being aſſumed he do remain in the glory of God, yet it ſeemeth to him that for ſome ſpace there was no difference betwixt him, & other mē.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 18.
               THeſe things therefore Neſtorius, Apollinaris, & Photinus like Not rage but zeale makes him thus to ſpeake. A dog will bawle & bite: a mad dog will not ſtick to bite his maiſter, and that which he ſhould not; & ſuch are falſe teachers. 
                  madde dogs doe barke againſt the Catholicke faith; Photinus by not confeſſing the Trinity: Appollinaris in ſaying that the nature of the Word is conuertible, & not acknowledging two ſubſtances in Chriſt, and by denying either the whole ſoule of Chriſt, or at the leaſt, the minde & reaſon in the ſoule, and by affirming that the Word of God was in ſtead thereof: & Neſtorius, by auouching either that there are alwaies two Chriſts, or that there were two ſome while. But the Catholike Church iudging rightly both of God and of our Sauiour, blaſphemeth neither againſt the myſtery of the Trinity,

nor againſt the Incarnation of Chriſt. For it worſhippeth both one Diuinity in a perfect Trinity, and the equality of the Trinity in one and the ſame Maieſty, and acknowledgeth one Ieſus Chriſt, not two, and that ſame is both God and Man. It beleeueth indeed that there is one perſon In him, but two ſubſtances: it beleeueth there are two ſubſtances, but one perſon; two ſubſtances, becauſe, the Word of God is not changeable, that it ſhould be turned into fleſh: and one perſon, leaſt by profeſſing two Sons, it may ſeeme to worſhip a Quaternity (or Foure) & not a Trinity, or Three.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 19.
               BVt it is worth our labour to lay open this point with diligence more diſtinctly, and more plainly. In God there is one ſubſtance, but three perſons. In Chriſt there be two ſubſtances, but one perſon. In the Trinity there is Alius & alius, non aliud & aliud. diſtinction of perſons, but no diuerſity of nature. In our Sauiour there is diuerſity of nature, but no difference of perſon. How is there Queſt. in the Trinity diſtinctiō of perſons, but no difference of nature? Namely, becauſe there is Anſ. one perſon of the Father, another of the Sonne, and another of the holy Ghoſt: but yet the nature of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt, is not diuers, but one & the ſame.
                  
How is there in our Sauiour Quest. differēce of natures, but not of perſon? Surely becauſe there is one ſubſtance of the Diuinity, & Anſ. another of the Humanity: but yet the God-head and Manhead are not two perſons, but one and the ſame Chriſt, one & the ſame Sonne of God, and one and the ſame perſon of one and the ſame Chriſt, and Sonne of God. As in a man the Fleſh is one nature, and the Soule another: but the ſoule and the fleſh is one and the ſame man. In Peter & Paul the ſoule is one nature, and the fleſh another: but yet the fleſh and ſoule are not two Peters, neither is the ſoule one Paul, and the fleſh another Paul; but one and the ſame Peter, and one and the ſame Paul, ſubſiſting of the double and diuers nature of the ſoule and of the

body. So then in one and the ſame Chriſt there are two ſubſtances: but one is diuine, the other is humane: one of the Father God, the other of the Mother, the Virgin: one coëternall and equall to the Father, the other conſubſtantiall to the Mother: yet one and the ſame Christ, in both the ſubſtance. There is not therefore one Chriſt God, and another Man: not one vncreated, and another created: not one that cannot ſuffer, and another, that can ſuffer: not one equal to the Father, another leſſer then the Father, another of the mother: But one and the ſame Chriſt is God and Man: the ſame is vncreated, and created: the ſame could not bee changed, and could not ſuffer, the ſame was changed, and did ſuffer: the

ſame is equall to the Father, & inferiour: the ſame was begotten of the Father before time, & the ſame is borne of his Mother in time: perfect God, and perfect Man: in God is the ſoueraigne Diuinity, in Man the whole Humanity: I ſay the whole Humanity, which comprehendeth both the Soule and the Fleſh: yea true fleſh, our fleſh, and the mothers fleſh: a ſoule alſo indued with vnderſtanding, furniſhed with iudgement & reaſon. There is therefore in Chriſt, the Word, a Soule, and Fleſh: but all this is one Chriſt, one Sonne of God, and one Sauiour and Redeemer of vs. And one, not by I wot not what corruptible confuſion of the God-head and Man-head, but by a certaine entire and ſingular vnity of perſon. For that

coniunction doth not conuert and change the one into the other (which is an errour proper to the Arrians) but hath ſo conioyned both the natures in one, that the ſingularity, or vnity of one & the ſame perſō abiding alwaies in Chriſt the property of either nature remaineth alſo for euer: ſo that verily the body doth neuer at any time begin to be God, nor ceaſe at any time to bee a body: which is alſo made manifeſt by an example of an humane caſe. For neither for the preſent onely, but for the future alſo, euery man ſhall conſiſt of body and ſoule: yet neither ſhall the body euer bee changed into the ſoule, or the ſoule into the body: but euery man being to continue euer, the difference of both the ſubſtances ſhall

continue for euer in euery man: euen ſo in Chriſt alſo the property of both the ſubſtances is to bee reteined of them both for euer, but yet the vnity of the perſon being preſerued ſafe.
            
            
               CHAP. 20.
               BVt whereas wee doe often name this word Perſon, and ſay that God in perſon was made man, wee muſt greatly feare, that we do not ſeeme to ſay this, That God the word did onely by the reſemblance of action take vpon him thoſe things, that appertaine to vs, and that hee wrought whatſoeuer belonged to the cōuerſation of a man, as it were in ſhew, and not as a true Man: as is wont to be done on the ſtages, where

one man doth ſuddenly repreſent many perſons, of the which himſelfe is none. For as often as there is made a reſemblance of another mans action, the duties and deedes of others are ſo done, as that yet theſe men, that act them, are not the very ſame men, whom they do act, or counterfeit. For, that we may for illuſtration ſake vſe the enſamples of things ſecular, and which are vſed of the Manichees, whenas a Tragicall Player doth counterfeit a Prieſt, or a King, hee is neither a Prieſt, nor a King: for the action ceaſing, thoſe things alſo ceaſe together, which that perſon had repreſented.
               But from vs farre bee this curſed & wicked mockery. Let this madneſſe be the Manichees,
                  
who being phantaſticall Preachers, affirme that the Sonne of God, who is God, was not a man truely and ſubſtancially, but that hee reſembled man by a certaine imaginary act and conuerſation. But the Catholicke faith doth ſo ſay that the Word of God was made Man, that hee tooke vpon him our nature and properties, not deceitfully, and in ſhew, but truly, and liuely: and that he did not reſemble thoſe things, which belong to the nature of man, as not his owne, but that hee did ſuſtaine them rather, as being his owne: and that hee was altogether alſo the very thing, which hee did reſemble. Euen as we our ſelues alſo in that we ſpeake, vnderſtand, liue, and ſubſiſt, wee doe not repreſent men, but wee are men. For

neither Peter and Iohn (that we may eſpecially ſpeake of them) were men by imitating, but by ſubſiſting. In like maner Paul did not counterfeit an Apoſtle, or reſemble Paul: but hee was an Apoſtle, and Paul indeede: Euen ſo alſo God the Word by aſſuming and hauing the fleſh, and by ſpeaking, doing, and ſuffering by the fleſh, yet without any corruption of his nature, vouchſafed verily to performe this, that hee might not reſemble or counterfeit a perfect man, but exhibite, that hee might not ſeeme, or be thought to bee a true man, but that hee might ſubſiſt, and bee one indeede. Therefore as the ſoule vnited to the fleſh, but yet not turned into fleſh, doth not reſemble a man, but is a man, & is a man not in ſhew, but in ſubſtance:

ſo alſo the Word God by vniting himſelfe vnto man without any cōuerſion of himſelfe was made man not by cō
                  fuſion, not by imitation, but by ſubſiſting. Let vs therefore vtterly reiect all conceipt of that perſon, which is vſurped by counterfeiting, & reſembling: where alwaies one thing is, and another thing is counterfeited: where hee that doth act or repreſent, is neuer he whom he doth act. For farre bee it from vs to thinke, that God the Word hath taken vpon him the perſon of man in this deceiptfull manner: but rather ſo, as that his ſubſtance continuing vnchangeable, and by taking vpon him the nature of a perfect man, he might himſelfe be fleſh, a man, the perſon of a man: not counterfeit, but true:

not by reſemblance, but in ſubſtance. To conclude, not ſuch a one as ceaſeth with the action, or repreſentatiō, but which alway abideth in the ſubſtance. This vnity therefore of perſon in Chriſt, was not made and perfected after the Virgin had brought him forth, but in the very wombe of the Uirgin.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 21.
               FOr we muſt be very wary that we doe confeſſe, that Chriſt not onely is one: but alſo that he was alwayes one: becauſe it is intolerable blaſphemy, though thou ſhouldeſt grant him to be one (perſon) now, yet to auouch that he was ſometime not one, but two; to wit, one after the time of his Baptiſme, but two at the

time of his Birth. Which exceeding great ſacriledge ſurely we ſhall not be able otherwiſe to auoid, but by confeſſing that man was vnited to God in the vnity of perſon, not at his aſcenſion, or reſurrection, or Baptiſme: but euen now in his mother, euen in the wombe, yea, euen in the very conception of the Virgin: by reaſon of which vnity of perſon thoſe things, that are proper vnto God, are indifferently and in common giuen to him being man, and thoſe things, that are proper to the fleſh, are aſcribed vnto God. For thence it is that the holy Scriptures ſay, both that the Sonne of Man came downe from heauen, and that the Lord of glory was crucified vpon earth. Thence alſo it is that,

becauſe the fleſh of the Lord was made, becauſe the fleſh of the Lord was created, the very word of God is ſaid to be made, the wiſedome of God is ſayd to be filled, the Or thus, & is according to knowledge ſayd to be created: euen as in, &c 
                  Science or knowledge of God is ſayd to be created: euen as in reſpect of fore-knowledge his hands & his 
                     Pſal. 22. 16. 
                  feet are ſayd to be peirced. In regard, I ſay, of this vnity of perſon that alſo hath by reaſon of the like myſterie proceeded, that becauſe the Fleſh of the word was borne of his Uirgin-mother, that therefore God the word himſelfe ſhould be moſt catholickly beleeued to be borne of the Virgin, and moſt wickedly denied. Which things ſeeing they thus are, God forbid that any man ſhould go about to depriue holy Mary of the priuiledges

of diuine fauour, as a ſpeciall glory. For ſhe is through a certaine ſingular benefit of our Lord and God, and her owne Sonne, to be moſt truly and moſt happily confeſſed the 
                     Dei non Deitatis: of God, not of the God head: for ſo hee had no mother. 
                  Mother of God. But ſhe is not ſo the mother of God, as a certaine wicked hereſie ſurmiſeth, which affirmeth that ſhe is to be ſayd to be the mother of God in name onely, as who forſooth did bring forth that man, which was afterwards made God; as we call one the mother of a Prieſt, or the mother of a Biſhop, not becauſe ſhe did bring forth one, that was at his very birth a Prieſt or Biſhop, but for that ſhe brought one forth, that was afterwards made a Prieſt or Biſhop. She was holy not by generation, but by regeneratiō: her Sonne, that tooke fleſh of her, gaue grace to her. Holy Mary is not, I ſay, ſo to be called the

mother of God: but therefore rather, becauſe, as hath beene ſayd before, that holy myſtery was accompliſhed euen in her ſacred wombe, ſince by reaſon of a certaine ſingular and indiuiduall vnitie of perſon, as the Word in the fleſh is fleſh, ſo man in God is God.
            
            
               CHAP. 22.
               BVt now according to thoſe things, which haue beene briefly ſayd before concerning the foreſayd hereſies, and the Catholicke faith; let vs for the refreſhing of memory make a briefer and ſhorter rehearſall: to the end verily, both that being repeated they might be better vnderſtood, and that being preſſed they might more ſurely be remembred. Accurſed

therefore be Photinus for not acknowledging three diſtinct perſons, & for affirming Chriſt to bee no more then a bare man. Accurſed be Apollinaris, that affirmeth the corruption of the Diuinitie changed in Chriſt, and denieth the property of a perfect manhead. Accurſed be Neſtorius, which denieth that God was borne of the Virgin, and affirmeth there are two Chriſts, & reiecting the faith of the Trinitie, bringeth in amongſt vs a quaternity. But bleſſed be the Catholicke Church, which worſhippeth one God in a perfect Trinity, and the equality alſo of the Trinity in one Diuinitie: ſo as that neither the ſingularitie of the ſubſtance confoundeth the propertie of the perſons nor the diſtinction of the

Trinitie ſeparate the vnitie of the Deity. Bleſſed, I ſay, be the Church, which beleeueth that there are two true and perfect ſubſtances in Chriſt, but yet one perſon of Chriſt: ſo that neither the diſtinction of the natures diuideth the vnitie of the perſon, nor the vnitie of the perſon confounds the difference of the ſubſtances. Bleſſed, I ſay, be the Church, which that it might acknowledge that Chriſt both is & was euer one, confeſſeth that man was vnited to God, not after his birth, but now euen in the mothers wombe. Bleſſed, I ſay, be the Church, which vnderſtandeth that God was made man, not by the conuerſion of nature, but in regard of perſon; perſon, I ſay, not counterfeit and tranſient, but ſubſtantiall and permanent. I

ſay, bleſſed bee the Church, which affirmeth that this vnity of perſon is ſo effectuall, as that by reaſon thereof the things of God are by a wonderfull and vnſpeakable myſterie aſcribed vnto man, and the things of man aſcribed vnto God. For, becauſe of that vnitie it doth not deny that man deſcended from heauen in reſpect of the God-head, and hath belieued, that God was made vpon earth, that he ſuffered, and was crucified in regard of the Manhead. To conclude, by reaſon of that vnity ſhe doth acknowledge Man to be the Sonne of God, and God to be the Sonne of the Virgin. Holy therefore and venerable, bleſſed and inuiolable, and to that celeſtiall praiſing, performed of the Angels, altogether comparable

be this confeſſion, which glorifies God with a threefold ſanctification. For therefore it doth eſpecially Or preach. tel and glory of the vnitie of Chriſt, leaſt the myſterie of the Trinity ſhould exceed. Be theſe things ſpoken by way of digreſſing, elſe where (if God ſhall pleaſe) they are more largely to be treated of, and vnfolded. Let vs now returne vnto our purpoſe.
            
            
               CHAP. 23.
               VVE ſayd therefore before, that in the Church of God the Teachers error was the peoples temptation: and that the tentation was ſo much the greater, by how the the learneder he was, that did erre. Which we taught firſt by the authority of Scripture, and

then by Eccleſiaſticall examples; to wit, by reckoning vp them, that though they were for a time accounted ſound in the faith, yet at the laſt did either fall into the ſect of ſome other, or elſe deuiſed an hereſie of their owne. A matter doubtleſſe of great moment, & both commodious to learne, and neceſſary to be thought of and remembred, the which wee ought diligently to illuſtrate and inculcate with the multitude of enſamples: that all Catholikes for the moſt part may know, That they ought with the Church to receiue teachers, and not that they ſhould with teachers forſake the faith, that the Church embraceth.
               But in my conceit, though we might recken vp a number in this kind of tempting, yet

was there almoſt none, that was ſo great a temptation, as was Origen: in whome there were many things ſo excellent, ſo ſingular, and ſo admirable, that any man might eaſily iudge At the firſt ſight, before matters were ſcanned. at firſt that all his aſſertions were to be belieued. For if the life doth win authority, his induſtry, his chaſtity, patience and ſufferance was not ſmall: if either kindred or learning, Who more noble then he, who at the firſt was borne in that He was the ſonne of Leonides, who dyed a Martyr vnder Seuerus.
                   family, which was made illuſtrious by Martyrdome? And afterwards hauing for Chriſt loſt not his father onely, but all his ſubſtance alſo, he did profit ſo much within the ſtraites of holy pouerty, he did often, as they ſay, ſuſteine afflictions for confeſſing the For his fathers goods were conſiſcated to Seuerus. He cals his pouerty Holy: becauſe it befel him by tyranny for religion ſake. Lord. Neither indeed were

theſe things onely in him, all which might afterwards proue a tentation: but hee had alſo ſuch a notable wit, ſo profound, ſo acute, and ſo fine, that he did much and farre ſurpaſſe almoſt all: and ſo great was the skill of this notable man in all knowledge and learning, as that there were but few things in diuine philoſophy, & of humane it may be almoſt none, which hee did not thorowly vnderſtand. Who when he had atteined to the learning Cuius ſcientiae um Graeel encederent. of the Greekes, he gaue himſelfe, alſo to the ſtudy of the Hebrew.
               But why ſhould I ſpeake of eloquence? whoſe ſpeech was ſo pleaſant, ſo delectable, and ſo ſweete, that not words me thinkes ſo much, as hony ſeemed to flow out of his mouth.

What incredible things did he bolt out and cleer by the force of diſputation? What things ſeeming hard to be done, did not he make that they ſhould ſeeme moſt eaſie? But he woue Obiect. his aſſertions, it may be, onely with the knots of arguments. Yea doubtleſſe there was neuer Sol. any Teacher, which vſed more examples or proofes of holy writ. But he wrote, I beleeue, Obiect. but little. No man writ more: Sol. that I thinke all his works cannot onely not be read ouer, but indeede not ſo much as found. And who alſo, that he might not want any helpe to knowledge, was furniſhed with ripeneſſe of age. But perhaps he Obiect. was not very happy in Diſciples. Who euer more happy? For out of his boſome ſprang innumerable Teachers, an infinity

of Prieſts, Confeſſors and Martyers. And now what man is able to conceiue in what admiration, in what renowne and grace he was in with all men? What man a little more deuout then ordinary did not with ſpeed reſort vnto him from the fartheſt quarters of the world? What Chriſtian did not reuerence him almoſt as a Prophet, what Philoſopher honor'd him not as a Maiſter? And how reuerend he was accounted, not onely among priuate men, but euen of the chiefeſt in the Empire, the Stories doe declare, which ſay that he was ſent for by the Mammaa. mother of Alexander the Emperour, intruth becauſe of heauenly wiſedome, which alſo he did much affect & loue. But the epiſtles alſo of the ſame mā beare witnes, which he wrot

by the authority of Chriſtian Teacher to Emperour Philip, who was the firſt Chriſtian of all the Romane Princes. Concerning whoſe incredible knowledge, if any man beleeue not a Chriſtian teſtimony, we being the relators, let him at the leſt receiue a Pagan confeſſion, the Philoſophers being the witneſſes. For that wicked Porphicie ſaith that being moued with his fame, he went, being in a manner but a boy, to Alexandria, and that he ſawe him there being now an olde man: but indeede ſo notably qualified, as one that had attained to the height of all learning. The day would ſooner faile me, then I ſhall be able to touch euen the ſmalleſt part of thoſe excellent things, which were in that man: which notwithſtanding

did not only perteine to the glory of religion, but alſo to the greatneſſe of temptation. For what man among a thouſand would eaſily caſt off from him a man of ſuch an excellent wit, ſo great a ſcholler, and of ſo great account, and not rather vſe that ſentēce, So Cicero of Plato l. 1. Tuſc. quaeſt. 
                  That he had rather erre with Origen, then iudge truly with other men? But what ſhould I make many words? It ſo fell out, that not ſome humane, but (as the euent declared) a too dangerous temptation made by ſo great a perſon, ſo great a Teacher, ſo great a Prophet, did draw very many frō the ſoundneſſe of the Faith. Wherefore this Origen ſo great and ſo well qualified, whiles he doth inſolently abuſe the grace of God, whiles he makes too much of

his own wit, and thinks ſo well of himſelf, whiles he contēneth the ancient ſimplicity of Chriſtian religion, whiles he preſumes he is wiſer then all men, and whiles that contemning the traditions of the Church, and the He meaneth their authority. maiſterſhips of the Elders he doth after a new manner expound certaine places of the Scriptures, he hath deſerued that it ſhould be ſayd vnto the Church of God concerning him alſo; If there ariſe among you a Prophet. And a little after, 
                     Deut. 13. 1. 
                  Thou ſhalt not, quoth he, listen to the words of that Prophet. And againe, Becauſe the Lord your God, ſaith he, tryeth you, whether ye will loue him, or no. It was indeed not onely a temptation, but euen a great temptation to remoue the Church, being Or committed, deliuered, addicted, bent. giuen vnto him, and depending

vpon him, and through wondring at his wit, learning, eloquence, conuerſation and reputation ſuſpecting him not, nor fearing him (to remoue the Church, I ſay) all vpon the ſudden by little and little from the ancient Religion to nouell profaneneſſe.
               But ſome man will ſay that the bookes of Origen 
                  S. Ierome thinkes not ſo: vide Epiſ. ad Panimachium, et Oceanum.
                   are corrupted. I gain ſay it not, but had rather too it were ſo. For that is both deliuered and written of ſome, not onely Catholikes, but alſo Heretiques. But that is it, which now we are to marke, that although he himſelfe bee not, yet the bookes, which are publiked vnder his name, are a great temptation, which being peſtered with many wounds of blaſphemies are both read & embraced, not as

other mens, but as his owne: ſo that although Origen did not conceiue the error, yet Origens authority may ſeeme powerfull to perſwade the error.
            
            
               CHAP. 24.
               BVt Tertullians cōdition alſo is euen the ſame. For as he among the Greekes, ſo this man among the Latines is without doubt to bee reputed the chiefeſt of all our men. For who more learned then this man? who more exerciſed in diuinity, and in humanity? For verily he did with a certaine admirable capacity of vnderſtanding, vnderſtand & compaſſe al Philoſophy, and all the ſects of the Phyloſophers, the authors & abettours of the ſects, and all their doctrines, and all manner of ſtories and ſtudies. And did hee not excell for a wit ſo

graue and vehement, as that he propounded almoſt nothing to himſelfe to vanquiſh, which he did not either breake into with acuteneſſe, or ſtrike out with weightineſſe.
               Moreouer, who can expreſſe the praiſes of his ſpeech? which was repleniſhed with ſuch, I wot not what, vrgent arguments, as that whom he could not perſwade, he forced to conſent vnto him: whoſe ſentences were almoſt as many as words: and as many victories as Or conceipts and opinions. ſenſus.
                   reaſons. This knew the Martioniſts, Apelles, the Praxeans, Hermogenes, the Iewes, Gentiles, Gnoſtickes, and the reſt, whoſe blaſphemies he ouerthrew with his manifold & great volumes, as with certaine lightenings. And yet this man alſo, I ſay, this Tertullian being vnmindfull

of the Catholicke doctrine, that is, the vniuerſall and ancient faith, and much more eloquent, thē happy, changing his iudgment afterwards wrought that at laſt, which the bleſſed Confeſſour Hilarie writeth of him in a certaine place; By the error (quoth he) which he fell afterwards into, he made the workes, which he wrote well, to looſe their reputation. And hee himſelfe was alſo a great temptation in the Church. But of him I will ſay no more. This thing I will onely mention, that, becauſe hee did againſt the commandement of Moſes affirme that the new braine-ſicke doctrines of Montanus ariſing in the Church, and that thoſe madde conceits of He meaneth Priſcilla, and Maximil a, two Montaniſts. mad women, euen the dreames of an vpſtart doctrine, were true prophecies,

he did deſerue that it ſhould be ſaid of him alſo and of his writings; If a Prophet ſhall ariſe among you. And againe. Thou ſhalt not heare the words of that Prophet. Why ſo? Becauſe, ſaith he, the Lord your God tryeth you, 
                  
                     Deut. 13. 3. 
                  whether you will loue him, or not. By theſe therfore ſo many, and ſo great examples in the Church, and by the reſt of that nature, we ought euidently to marke, and to know more clearely then the light, that if euer any teacher in the Church ſhall wander from the faith, the prouidence of God doth Not cauſe, but ſuffer. ſuffer it to be done for our tryall to proue, whether we loue the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our ſoule, or no.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 25.
               VVHich things, ſeeing they ſo ſtand, he is a true and right Catholicke, who loueth the truth of God, the Church, the body of Chriſt, and who preferres nothing to Gods Religion, nothing to the Catholicke faith, not the authority, not the loue, not the wit, not the eloquence, nor the philoſophy of any man: but contemning all theſe things, and abiding firme and ſtedfaſt in the faith, doth iudge that, whatſoeuer he ſhall vnderſtand to bee vniuerſally held of old of the Catholicke Church, himſelfe ſhould hold and beleeue alone: but whatſoeuer nouell and ſtrange doctrine hee ſhall perceiue to bee priuily brought in

after by any one beſides, or againſt the iudgement of all the Saints, hee knowes that it belongs not to religion, but rather to tentation. And is alſo eſpecially by the ſpeeches of the bleſſed Apoſtle Paul inſtructed: for this is that, which hee writeth in his firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthes: There muſt bee, ſaith he, hereſies euen among you, that they, which are approued among you, might be knowen. As if hee ſhould ſay; for this cauſe the Authors of hereſies are not preſently rooted out by God, that they, which are approued, might be ſeene: that is, that it might appeare, how ſure, faithful and conſtant a louer of the Catholick faith euery mā is. And in truth, when euery nouelty cometh vp, the weightineſſe of the Corne, and the lightneſſe of

the Chaffe is preſently perceiued: at which time that is eaſily ſhaken frō the Floore, which was held with no weight within the Floore. For ſome doe forthwith flye quite away, but others being onely driuen out, doe both feare to periſh, and bluſh to returne, being wounded, halfe dead, and halfe aliue: as haiung drunke ſuch a quantity of poyſon, as neither kild them, nor was digeſted, as would neither make them dye, nor ſuffer them to liue. Oh miſerable condition, with what waues of care, with what whirlwinds are they toſſed! For ſomtimes, which way the wind ſhal driue thē, they are carried with a violent error: ſometimes returning to themſelues, they are beatē back like cōtrary waues: ſomtimes by raſh preſumptiō they

allow of thoſe things, which ſeeme vncertaine: ſometimes alſo through a reaſonleſſe feare they are afraid of thoſe things, that are certaine: being vncertaine which way to go, which way to returne: what to follow, what to fly, what to hold, what to let go. Which afflictiō verily of a doubting & wauering hart is the medicine of Gods mercy towards them, if they would be wiſe. For therefore are they toſſed, beaten, and almoſt killed with ſundry tempeſts of thoughts, out of the moſt A quiēt hauen indeed: for out of this harbour men are either toſſed vpon the waues of errour, or ſwallowed vp. 
                  quiet hauen of the Catholike faith, that they might let downe the ſailes of a proud ſpirit ſpread out on high, which they did wickedly ſpread open to the winds of nouelties, and that they might retire and keep themſelues within the moſt

faithfull ſtation of their gentle and good mother, and firſt vomit vp thoſe bitter and troubled waters of errours, that they might bee able For a veſſell is not capable of wine, till the water or dregs, that filled be emptied out. 
                  afterwards to drinke of the ſtreames of liuing and ſpringing water. Let them vnlearne that well, which they did not well to learne: and let them receiue by the vniuerſall doctrine of the Church, what may bee vnderſtood: and what may not, let them beleeue.
            
            
               CHAP. 26.
               WHich things ſeeing that they are thus, reuoluing and recounting the ſame things oftentimes, I cannot ſufficiently wonder that the madneſſe of ſome men, that the vngodlines of their blinded vnderſtanding,

and laſtly, that their luſt of erring is ſo great, that they are not contented with the rule of beleeuing, which of old was once deliuered and receiued, but that they do dayly hunt after change of nouelties, & euer delight to put ſome new matter to religion, to change & take away: as though it were not an heauenly doctrine, which ſufficeth to haue beene once reuealed, but an earthly inſtitution, which could not otherwiſe bee perfited, but by continuall correction, or rather reprehenſion: albeit the Oracles of God cry out; Thou ſhalt not remoue the 
                  
                     Pro. 22. 28. 
                  ancient bounds, which thy Fathers haue ſet: And, Thou ſhalt not iudge aboue, or more then the 
                  
                     Eccles. 8. 17. 
                  Iudge: And againe, Hee that 
                  
                     Ecc. 10. 8. 
                  breaketh the hedge, a Serpent ſhall bite him: And that of the Apoſtle,

wherewith all the wicked nouelties of all hereſies are often cut in peeces, as with a certaine ſpirituall ſword, and are alwaies to be diſmembred; O 
                  1. Tim. 6. 20. 21. 
                  Timotheus, keepe that which is committed to thee, and auoid profane 
                  Cainophonias, ſiue Cenephonias. 
                  nouelties of words, or vaine bablings, and oppoſitions of knowledge falſely ſo called: which while ſome profeſſed, they haue erred about the Faith. And for all this are there ſome found of ſuch a marble forehead, ſo impudent without all ſhame, and of ſuch an adamant like obſtinacy, as which would not yeeld to ſuch heauenly ſpeeches of ſo great importāce? which would not faint vnder ſuch heauy weights? which would not be broken in peeces with ſuch mighty hammers? finally, which would not

be bruiſed with ſo great lightnings? Auoid, quoth he, profane nouelties of words. He did ſay Antiquities, hee ſaid not old: Yea hee doth plainely ſhew, what ſhould follow on the contrary, For if Nouelty muſt bee auoided, then Antiquity is to be maintained. And if Nouelty be profane, then Antiquity is ſacred. And oppoſitions, quoth he, of knowledge ſalſly ſo named. A falſe name indeed is vſed among the doctrines of heretiques, that ignorance might bee coloured with the name of knowledge, and myſtineſſe with the name of cleereneſſe, and darkneſſe with the name of light. Which, quoth hee, while ſome profeſſed, they haue erred concerning the faith. What was that, which whiles they did profeſſe, they fell away, but a new, I wot not

what, and vnknowne doctrine? For you might heare ſome of them ſay: Come, O yee fooliſh and wretched men, who are commonly called Catholicks, and learne the true faith, which none, but we, doth vnderſtand, which many by-paſt ages hath ben concealed, but was of late reuealed & diſcloſed: but learne ye by stealth, and ſecretly, for it ſhall delight you. And in like manner, when ye haue learned it, teach it cloſly, leaſt the world doe heare it, leaſt the Church take knowledge of it. For it is granted but to a few to conceiue the ſecret of ſo great a myſtery. Are not theſe the words of that Harlot, which in the Prouerbs of Salomon calleth them that paſſe by the way, which goe right on their way? Who ſo is, quoth ſhee, the ſimpleſt 
                        Pron. 9. 15. 16.
                     
among you, let him turne into me. And thē that, are voyd of ſenſe, ſhe exhorteth, ſaying: do yee gladly touch hidden bread, and drinke ye ſweete water 
                  Furtim. 
                  by ſtealth. And what followes? But hee knowes not, quoth he, how that 
                  Terrigenae. 
                  Earthlings do periſh at her houſe. And who are thoſe earthly men? Let the Apoſtle declare, euen they, ſaith he, which haue 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  erred about the faith.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 27.
               BVt it is worth the labour diligently to entreate of all that place of the Apoſtle. 1 Tim. 6. 20. 
                  O Timotheus, ſaith he, keepe that, which is committed to thee, auoiding profane nouelties of words. O: this exclamation betokens, both foreknowledge, and charity alſo: for hee did

                  Foreſee the errours, that were to be, for the which he was alſo Grieued aforehand. Who is Timotheus now at this day? but either the Vniuerſall Church, or ſpecially the whole company of Prieſts or Biſhops, who ſhould either haue themſelues, or inſtill and teach vnto others the whole knowledge of Diuine worſhip. But what meaneth this, keepe that, which is committed to thee? Keepe it, ſaith he, for feare of Theeues, for feare of enemies: leaſt, whiles men do ſleepe, they ſhould ſow their darnall vpon that good ſeede of wheate, which the Sonne of man had ſowne in his Field. Keep, quoth he, that which is committed to thee. What is that, which was Committed? That is to ſay, that wherewithall thou art put in

truſt, not that which thou haſt deuiſed; that, which thou haſt receiued, not that, which thou haſt inuented: a matter not of wit, but of doctrine: not of priuate vſurpation, but of publique tradition: a thing, that was brought vnto thee, and not which commeth from thee: as in which thou muſt not bee an Author, but a Keeper: not an Ordainer, but a Follower: not a leader, but one that is led. Keep, ſaith he, that which is committed: keepe the Talent of the Catholicke Faith, inuiolated & vncorrupted. That which is committed to thy truſt, let it remaine in thy poſſeſſion, let it be deliuered of thee. Thou haſt receiued Gold, repay Gold: I will not that thou ſhouldeſt bring mee one thing for another: I would not that inſtead

of gold thou ſhouldeſt either impudently put lead, or deceitfully braſſe: I reſpect not the colour of the gold, but the nature ſurely. O Timotheus, O Prieſt, O Treatiſer, O Teacher, if the gift of God ſhall make thee fit, be thou for wit, exerciſe, and doctrine a Bezaleel of 
                     Exod. 36. 1. the ſpirituall Temple, in graue the precious gemmes of Diuine doctrine, fit them faithfully, adorne them diſcretly, adde luſtre, fauour and comlineſſe. Let that bee through thine expoſition vnderſtood more cleerely, which was before beleeued more obſcurely. Let the poſterity reioyce that that was vnderſtood by the meanes of thee, which antiquity before did reuerence being not vnderſtood: the ſame things which thou haſt learn'd, do thou

teach ſo, that, although thou ſpeakeſt Or after a new faſhion: Noue, non noua.
                   
                  newly, yet not new things.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 28.
               BVt it may be ſome mā ſaies: what? ſhall there then bee Quest. no progreſſe made of religion in the Church of Chriſt? Let there bee made verily, and as Anſ. much as may be. For who is he, that is ſo ſpitefull to men, and ſo hatefull to God, as that goes about to prohibite that? But yet let it be ſo, that it may be indeed a proceeding, & not a changing, of the Faith. For that is to To proceed or make progreſſe. 
                  profite, that euery thing bee increaſed in it ſelfe: but that is changing, when a thing is altered from one thing to another. It behoueth therefore, that the vnderſtanding,

knowledge, and wiſedome, as well of each as of all, as well of one man as of the whole Church ſhould by the degrees of ages and times increaſe, and profite much and greatly: but yet in their owne kind onely: to wit, in the ſame doctrine, in the ſame ſenſe, and in the ſame iudgement.
            
            
               CHAP. 29.
               LEt the religion of ſoules reſemble the ſtate and nature of bodies, which although in the proceſſe of yeares they declare and finiſh their proportions and degrees, yet do they continue ſtill the ſame, which they were at firſt. There is much difference betwixt the flower of Child-hood, and the ripeneſſe of Old-age: but yet

the very ſelf-ſame men become old, which had bene yong: that albeit the very ſtate and quality of one and the ſame man bee altered, yet is he neuertheleſſe one and the ſame nature, one and the ſelfe-ſame perſon. The members of ſucking children are ſmall, but of young men great: yet are they the very ſelfe-ſame. As many as are the ioynts of little ones, ſo many are there of men: and if thoſe be any which come forth in riper yeares, they be now already planted in the nature of the ſeede: ſo that no new thing comes out in old men after, which did not now before lye within them hid in their childhood.
               Whence it is manifeſt, that this is the lawful and right Rule of profiting, that this is the certaine

and moſt excellent order of increaſing: if ſo be that the number and degrees of age do alway diſcouer thoſe parts and formes, when wee are greater, or elder, which the wiſedome of our Creator did forme before, when wee were little. If that the ſhape of man ſhould afterwards be changed into the ſhape of another kinde, or if at the leaſt wiſe the number of the members ſhould be increaſed or decreaſed, the whole body muſt of neceſſity either periſh, or become monſtrous, or at the leaſt be weakened. So alſo it is fitting that the doctrine of Chriſtian religion ſhould follow theſe rules or faſhions of increaſing: namely, that it ſhould bee ſtrengthened by yeares, inlarged by time, & extolled with age: but yet remain

incorrupted and pure, and bee compleat and perfect in all the meaſures of her parts, and in al her owne members, as it were, and ſenſes: as which more ouer admitteth no change, no loſſe of property, nor indureth any variety of definition.
            
            
               CHAP. 30.
               FOr examhle ſake: our Elders ſowed of old the Wheaten ſeedes of the faith in this Corne field of the Church: it is vniuſt, and vnbeſeeming, that wee their Poſterity inſtead of the naturall and true Wheate, ſhould make choice of the Cockle of errour put into the roome thereof. But this rather is right and agreeable, that the beginnings and the endings being correſpondent to each

other, we ſhould reape and enioy of the increaſings of a wheaten inſtitution the fruit or graine alſo of wheaten doctrine: that whenas ſomthing out of thoſe beginnings of the ſeeds is by proceſſe of time ſhot vp, it may now both 
                     Laetetur, be manured: for laetamen is manure, which being layd on the ground, doth make it flouriſh. Pallad. lib. 1. vſeth this word: In laetandis, inquit arboribus crs tes facicmus.
                   
                  flouriſh, and be trimmed vp by husbanding: yet ſo as that nothing of the property of the ſprout bee changed: though forme, ſhape, and diſtinction bee added, that yet the nature of euery kinde abide the ſame. For God forbid, that thoſe roſy plants of Catholicke iudgment ſhould bee turned into Thiſtles & Thornes. Farre be it, I ſay, that in this ſpirituall Paradiſe Darnell and Woolfe-bane ſhould all vpon the ſudden come from the ſets and ſhootes of Cynnamon and Balme. Whatſoeuer

therefore is faithfully ſowen of the Fathers in the Church, which is Gods 2. Cor. 3. 9. Husbandry, it behooueth that by the labour of the children the very ſame ſhould be husbanded and lookt vnto: it is fitting that the very ſame ſhould flouriſh and ripen, that the ſame ſhould grow, & come to perfectiō. For it is lawfull that thoſe ancient doctrines of heauenly Philoſophy, ſhould in proceſſe of time bee exactly handled, trimmed, and poliſhed but it is vnlawful that they ſhould be changed, it is vnlawfull to mangle and to maime them. They may lawfully receiue cleareneſſe, light, and diſtinction: but it is needfull that they ſhould reteine fulneſſe, ſoundneſſe, and property.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 31.
               FOr if this licentiouſneſſe of wicked deceit be once permitted, I tremble to vtter what great danger may enſue of rooting out, and aboliſhing of religion. For when any part of the Catholicke doctrine ſhall be reiected, others alſo, and others after them, one after another, will now as it were by cuſtome and lawe be reiected and done away. Moreouer alſo, when the parts are each of them ſeuerely reiected, what will follow at the laſt, but that the whole ſhould in like manner be refuſed? Yea, and contrariwiſe, if nouelties ſhall begin to be mingled with antient doctrines, and forreine with domeſticall, and profane with ſacred,
                  
it cannot be but that this faſhion will ſpread it ſelfe ouer all, that nothing in the Church wil hereafter bee left vntouched, nothing ſound, nothing vncorrupted: but that the An errour ſtifly mainteined is a filthy harlot. Stewes of wicked and filthy errours ſhould afterwards be there, where there was aforetime the Sanctuary of the chaſt and vndefiled truth. But let godly deuotion driue this wickedneſſe from mens minds, and let this rather bee the fury of the wicked.
            
            
               CHAP. 32.
               BVt the Church of Chriſt, being a diligent and wary Keeper of the Doctrines, that are cōmitted to her, doth alter nothing in them at any time,

diminiſheth nothing, addeth nothing: ſhee cuts not off things, that are neceſſary, ſhe ads not things ſuperfluous, ſhe looſeth not her owne, ſhe vſurps not ſtrangers: but this one thing ſhe ſtudies with all diligence, namely, that by handling the antient doctrines faithfully and diſcreetly, ſhe might perfit and poliſh thoſe, if any, that haue bene ſhaped and begun of old: and if any be already perfectly declared and made manifeſt, that ſhe might confirme & ſtrengthen them: and that, if any be now confirmed and defined, ſhe might conſerue and keepe them. To conclude, what elſe did ſhe euer labour by the Decrees of Councels, then that the ſelfeſame thing, which was Or barely. ſimply beleeued afore, might more

carefully bee beleeued after? that the very ſame thing, which was more ſlackly preached before, might be more diligently preached after? that the very ſame thing, which was more careleſly kept before, might more carefully be husbanded after?
               This thing, I ſay, ſhe hath aimed at alwayes, and at nothing elſe, being ſtirred vp with the nouelties of Heretiques. The Catholicke Church be the decrees of her Councells hath done nothing, but that, what ſhe had receiued before of the Elders onely by tradition, ſhe might moreouer ſet the ſame thing downe in hand-writing for thoſe alſo, that ſhold come after: comprehending a great deale of matter in a few words, and commonly expreſſing the

thing by ſome conuenient new tearme for the clearenes of vnderſtanding, and not for any new meaning of the Faith.
            
            
               CHAP. 33.
               BVt let vs returne vnto the Apoſtle: O Timotheus, ſaith he, keepe that, which is committed 
                  1. Tim. 6. 20. 
                  to thee, auoiding the profane nouelties of words: Auoid them ſaith he, as a Viper, as a Scorpion, as a Cockatrice: that they may not ſmite thee, not onely by touching, but by ſight alſo, and by breathing. What is it 1. Cor. 5. 11. 
                  to auoid? Not to eate meate with ſuch an one. What meaneth this, Auoide thou? If there come any vnto you, ſaith Saint Iohn, and bring not this doctrine. 
                  2. Ioh. 10. What doctrine meanes he, but

the Catholicke and vniuerſall, which both continueth by an vncorrupted tradition of the truth one & the ſame throughout all ſucceeding ages, and ſhall continue for euer and for euer, without end? But what followeth? Do not, quoth he, receiue him to houſe, neither bid 
                  2. Ioh. 11. 
                  ye him God ſpeede. For he, that biddeth him, God ſpeed, is partaker of his euill deeds. Profane nouelties of words, ſaith Paul. What is profane? Such as are altogether voyde of holineſſe and Porrò, fiue procul a ſano religion: vtterly ſtrange from the boſome of the Church, which is the temple of God. Profane nouelties of words, ſaith he: nouelties of words, that is, of doctrines, Or opinion concerning things or matters. things, opinions: which nouelties are contrary to antientneſſe, to antiquity.
               
                  
Which if they ſhould be receiued, it cannot bee, but that the Faith of the bleſſed Fathers ſhould be violated either all, or for a great part thereof at leaſt: it muſt needs bee, that all the faithfull of all ages, all the Saints, all the chaſte Or the continent, the virgins. the continent virgines, that all the Cleargy, Leuites, and Prieſts, that ſo many thouſands of Confeſſors, ſo great armies of Martyrs, ſo great an aſſembly and multitude of cities and people, that ſo many Iſlands, Prouinces, Kings, Nations, kingdoms, countries, and finally, that now almoſt all the world, being incorporated into Christ the Head by the Catholicke faith, it muſt needs bee, I ſay, that all theſe aforeſaid, ſhould be ſaid to haue beene ignorant for ſo long continuance of time, to

haue erred, to haue blaſphemed, and not to haue knowen what they ſhould beleeue.
            
            
               CHAP. 34.
               
                  AUoid, ſaith he, profane nouelties of words: which to receiue and follow was neuer the propertie of Catholickes, but alwayes of Heretickes. And in truth, what hereſie was there euer, which did not ſpring vp vnder a certaine name, in a certaine place, and at a certaine time? Who euer brought vp hereſies, but which firſt ſeparated himſelfe from the viuerſall and antient conſent of the Catholicke Church? Which that it was ſo, examples ſhew moſt cleerely. For who euer before that prophane Pelagius
                  
preſumed that the power of Free-will was ſo great, that hee did not thinke that the grace of God was neceſſary to helpe it in good thngs in euery act? Who euer before Celeſtus his prodigious diſcipline denyed that all mankind was guilty of Adams tranſgreſſion? Who before ſacrilegious Arrius dared to diuide the vnity of the Trinity, who durſt confound the Trinity of vnity before wicked Sabellius. Who before moſt cruel Nauatianus affirmed that God was cruell, for that he had rather the death of him, that dyeth, then that he ſhould returne and liue? Who before Simon the Magitian, whom the Apoſtle 
                     Acts 8. 21. curſed, from whom that whirle-poole of filthineſſes flowed by a continual and hidden ſucceſſion, euen vnto

                  Priſcilianus the laſt and hindermoſt, (who I ſay, before that Simon) durſt affirme that God the Creator is the author of euils, that is, of our abhominable acts, impieties, and wicked enormities? For he did auouch, that God himſelfe did with his owne hands create the nature of men ſo, as that by reaſon of a certaine proper motion, or impulſion of a certaine neceſſary will, it could doe nothing elſe, it could will nothing elſe, but commit ſin: becauſe it being chafed and inflamed with the furies of all vices, it is carried by an vnſaciable deſire, into all the gulfes or whirlepits of diſhoneſt and filthy facts. Innumerable examples there are of the like nature, which for breuity ſake we pretermit: by al which yet we haue

euidently and clearely inough ſhewed, that this with almoſt all hereſies, is ſolemne, as it were, and That is, Heretickes count is a Law, and make it as a Trade. 
                  according to Law, to delight alwaies in prophane nouelties, to contemne the ordinances of Antiquity, and through oppoſitions of knowledge, falſly ſo tearmed, to make ſhip-wracke from the faith. On the contrary alſo, this is almoſt proper vnto Catholickes to keep thoſe things, Or which the holy Fathers left in their cuſtody, Dipoſit
                           •
                         patrum.
                   which were left in the cuſtody of the holy Fathers, and were committed to them, and to condemne prophane nouelties, and, as the Apoſtle ſayd, and ſayd againe: If any ſhall 
                  Gal. 1. 9. 
                  preach otherwiſe then that which was receiued, to Anathematize or curſe him.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 35.
               HEere ſome man perhaps may aske, whether Heretickes Queſt. alſo do vſe the teſtimonies of the holy Scripture. Indeed Anſ. they vſe thē, and in truth with vehemency: for you may ſee thē flie through all & euery booke of the word of God, through the bookes of Moſes, and of the Kings, through the Pſalmes, Apoſtles, Goſpels, Prophets. For whether it bee amongſt their owne Followers, or with others: whether priuately, or publickly: whether in Sermons, or in Bookes: whether at Banquets, or in the ſtreetes: they neuer almoſt vtter any thing of their owne, which they labour not alſo to ſhadow with their words of

the Scripture. Reade the pamphlets of Paulus Samoſatenus, of Priſcillian, Eunomius, Iouinian, and the reſt of thoſe So he calleth peſtilent, and pernicious Teachers: whoſe errors are as plague-ſoares, rotten and infectious. 
                  Plagues: you may ſee an infinite maſſe of examples, that no page welneere eſcapes, which is not painted and colored with the ſentences of the Old, or New Teſtament. But they bee ſo much the rather to bee taken heede of, and feared, by how much the more cloſely they lurke vnder the ſhadowes of Gods word: For they know, that their ſtinking errours would not quikly bee pleaſing almoſt vnto any man, if they ſhould bee vented barely, and as they are in their owne nature: and therefore they beſpice them (as it were) with the word of God, that he, which would eaſily deſpiſe the

errour of man, might not eaſily contemne the Oracles of God. They doe therefore, as thoſe are wont, which being to giue ſome bitter potions to children for to drinke, doe firſt rub their mouthes about with honey: that the ſilly little ones, hauing before felt the ſweeteneſſe, might not be afraid of the bitterneſſe. Which thing they alſo are carefull of, which ſet the names of medicines vpon ill hearbes and hurtfull Or drugs. ſyrrops: that almoſt no body would ſuſpect poyſon, where he read a remedy written ouer.
            
            
               CHAP. 36.
               FInally, our Sauiour alſo cried out for the ſame thing. Beware yee of falſe Prophets, 
                  
                     Math. 7. 15. 
                  which in ſheepes cloathing come

vnto you: but inwardly they are rauening Wolues. What is ſheepes cloathing, but the ſentences of the Prophets and Apoſtles, which they with a certaine ſheepe-like ſincerity haue wouen as certaine fleeces for that immaculate Lambe, which taketh away the ſinnes of the world? Who are rauening Wolues, but the ſauage and rauening opinions or conceits of heretickes, which alwaies annoy the Foldes of the Church, and rend aſſunder the Flocke of Chriſt, on what part ſoeuer they are able. But that they may ſteale more ſlily vpon the vnwary ſheepe, retaining ſtill their woluiſh cruelty they lay aſide their ſhape of a Wolfe, and wrap themſelues within the ſentences of the holy Scriptures, as it were, within certaine

                  Sheepe-skinnes: that when a body hath felt afore the ſoftneſſe of the wooll, hee might not bee afraid of the bitings of the teeth. But what ſaith our Sauiour? Yee ſhall know 
                  
                     Math. 7. 16. 
                  them by their fruits. That is, when they ſhall begin not only now to vtter thoſe ſayings, but alſo to expound them: nor as yet to cracke of them only, but alſo to interpret them: then that bitterneſſe, thē the ſoureneſſe, and madneſſe is perceiued, then this new deuiſed poiſon will bee breathed out, then are prophane nouelties diſcloſed, then may ye ſee the bounds of the Fathers to be remoued, the Catholicke faith to be then but chered, and the doctrine of the Church torne in peeces.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 37.
               SVch were they, whom the Apoſtle Paul reproueth in his ſecond Epiſtle to the Corinthes, ſaying: For ſuch falſe 
                  2 Cor. 11. 13. 
                  Apoſtles, ſaith hee, are crafty, workmen, transforming themſelues into Apoſtles of Chriſt. What meaneth this transforming themſelues into the Apoſtles of Chriſt? The Apoſtles alledged examples of the Or word Law of God, and ſo did they: The Apoſtles cited the authorities of the Pſalmes, and ſo did they: the Apoſtles produced the ſayings of the Prophets, euen ſo did they too, not a iot the leſſe. But when they had begun to expound thoſe ſentences diuerſly, which they had alike alledged: then were

the ſimple Apoſtles diſcerned from the ſubtill Apoſtles, the ſincere from the counterfeite, the right from the peruerſe, and finally, the true from the falſe. And no wonder, quoth he: For 
                  verſ. 14. 15. 
                  Sathan himſelfe tranſformeth himſelfe into an Angel of light: it is no great thing therefore, though his Miniſters bee transformed as Miniſters of righteouſneſſe. Therefore by the Apoſtle Pauls doctrine, ſo often as euer either falſe Apoſtles, or falſe Prophets, or falſe Teachers all edge the ſentences of Gods word, with the which being vnderſtood amiſſe, they ſeeke to maintaine their owne errors, there is no doubt but that they follow the crafty deuiſes of their Author: which he would neuer without doubt deuiſe, but that hee knowes,

that there is no way at all more ready to deceiue, then that, where the deceit of a wicked errour is vnderhand introduced, There the authority of Diuine ſentences ſhould bee pretended.
               But ſome man will ſay: how Queſt. is it proued, that the Diuell is wont to vſe proofes of holy Scripture?
               Let him read the Goſpels, An. in the which it is written; Then the Diuell tooke him, that is, the 
                     Mat. 4. 5. Luk. 4. 9. Pſal. 91. 11. Lord and Sauiour: and ſet him vpon a pinacle of the Temple, and ſaid vnto him, If thou be the Son of God, caſt thy ſelfe downe: For it is written, that hee hath giuen his Angels charge ouer thee (to keepe thee 
                  Theſe words are not in the Goſpell, though in the Pſalme. 
                  in all thy waies:) and with their hands they ſhall lift thee vp, least it may bee thou ſhouldeſt daſh thy foote againſt a ſtone.
                  
What will this Fiend do to ſilly men, that ſet vpon the Lord of glory with teſtimonies of Scripture. If, quoth hee, thou be the Son of God caſt thy ſelfe downe. Why ſo? For, ſaith he, it is written, The doctrine of this place is to bee diligently marked, and reteined of vs, that, when we ſhall ſee ſome alledge the words of the Apoſtles or Prophets, againſt the Catholicke Faith, we ſhould in no wiſe doubt: conſidering ſuch a remarkeable example of Euangelicall authority, that the Diuell ſpeaketh by them. For as then the That is, the Diuell to Ieſus, and Hereticks to true Catholikes. 
                  Head ſpake to the Head, ſo now alſo the Members ſpeake vnto the Members: to wit, the members of the Diuell, to the members of Chriſt, the vnfaithfull to the faithfull, the ſacrilegious

to the religious▪ finally, Heretiques to Catholickes. But what I pray you, ſaith hee? If, quoth he, thou bee the Sonne of God, caſt thy ſelfe downe. That is to ſay, thou wilt be the Son of God, and wilt receiue the inheritance of the kingdome of heauen, Caſt thy ſelfe downe: that is, throw thy ſelfe off from the doctrine and tradition of this high Church, which is alſo counted the Temple of God. 
                  1, Tim. 3. 15.
               
               And if any man ſhould aske ſome hereticke which perſwades him to doe thus: How doſt thou prooue, vpon what ground doſt thou teach, that I ought to forſake the vniuerſall and ancient faith of the Catholicke Church? Hee would preſently anſwer: For it is written. And forthwith hee prepares a multitude of teſtimonies,

examples, and authorities, from the Law, frō the Pſalmes, from the Apoſtles, from the Prophets, through the which being after a new and naughty manner interpreted, the vnhappy ſoule might bee plunged headlong into the gulfe of hereſie. And now with thoſe promiſes following the hereticks are wont to deceiue vnwary men. For they preſume to promiſe and to teach. That in their Church, that is, in the conuenticle of their communion, there is a great, and ſpecial, and in truth a certaine perſonall grace of God, ſo as that they, whoſoeuer they bee, that are of their company, without any labour, without any ſtudy, without any trauell, though they neither ſeeke, nor aske, nor knocke, are yet for all that

ſo ordered by God, that being lifted vp in the hands of Angels, that is, being preſerued by Angelicall protection, they can neuer daſh their foote againſt a ſtone, that is, they can neuer be ſcandalized, or offended.
            
            
               CHAP. 38.
               BVt ſome man doth ſay; If Quest. the Diuel and his Diſciples do vſe Diuine ſpeeches, ſentences, and promiſes, amongſt whoſe Diſciples ſome are Falſ-apoſtles, & Falſe-prophets, and Falſe-teachers, and all of them generally heretiques: what ſhal Catholicke men, and the Children of the Church our Mother, do? How ſhall they diſcerne the truth in the holy Scriptures from falſehood?
               Surely they ſhall haue ſpeciall Anſ. care to doe this, which wee

haue in writing ſet downe in the beginning of this aduertiſement to haue beene deliuered vnto vs by holy and learned men: namely, that they doe interprete the holy Scriptures according to the traditions of the vniuerſall Church, and by the rules of Catholicke doctrine: wherein alſo it is neceſſary that they follow the vniuerſality, antiquity and conſent of the Catholique and Apoſtolique Church. And if at any time a part ſhall rebell againſt the whole, if nouelty ſhall thwart antiquity, if the diſſention of one, or of ſome few erronious perſons, ſhall croſſe the conſent of all, or ſurely of the greateſt number of Catholickes, let them preferre the ſoundneſſe of the whole to the corruptneſſe of a

part: in the which ſame vniuerſall body, let them make more account of religious antiquity, then of profane nouelty: & in like manner in the ſame antiquity, let them firſt and foremoſt, afore all thinges preferre the generall decrees, if there be any, of an vniuerſall counſell, vnto the raſhneſſe of one, or of ſome very few. Then ſecondly, if that be not, let them follow, which is the next thing to it, the iudgements of many & great Teachers, that are agreeable one vnto another: the which being faithfully, ſoberly, and carefully obſerued by the Lords aſſiſtance, we ſhall eaſily perceiue all the hurtfull errours of the heretickes, which riſe vp.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 39.
               HEre now I ſee it meete, that I ſhould ſhew by examples, how the profane nouelties of Heretickes may bee both found out, and condemned, when the iudgements of ancient Teachers, agreeing one with another, are produced and compared. Which ancient conſent of the holy Fathers wee ſhould with great labour ſearch out and follow, yet not in all the petty queſtions of Gods word, but onely, at the leaſtwiſe eſpecially, in the rule of faith. But neither are hereſies alwaies, nor all of them thus to be impugned, but thoſe onely that are new and freſh: namely when as they doe firſt ariſe, before they falſifie the

Rules of the ancient faith, whiles they bee let with the ſtraitneſſe of the time it ſelfe, and before that, the poyſon ſpreading it ſelfe farther about, they do attempt to corrupt the writings of the Elders. But hereſies that haue gathered much ground, and are waxen old, muſt not this way be aſſailed, becauſe that by reaſon of long continuance of time, they haue had opportunity offered them, a great while to He is ſaid to ſteale the truth, which writhes the Scriptures to his owne opinion or errour, peruerting their meaning. ſteale the truth. And therefore it behooueth vs either to confute thoſe more ancient wicked Schiſmes or Hereſies by no meanes, but by the ſole authority of the Scriptures, if neede be, or elſe verily to auoid them, being now of old confuted & condemned by the generall Councels of Catholike Prieſts.

Therefore ſo ſoone as the rottenneſſe of euery wicked errour beginnes to breake out, and to ſteale for the defence of it ſelfe certaine ſentences of Gods word, and to expound them falſely and deceitfully: the ſentences or iudgements of the Elders are preſently to bee gathered together for to interpret the Or Scriptures. 
                  Canon, by the which that nouell, and therefore profane opinion, whatſoeuer it be which ſhall ſtart vp, may without any coyle preſently be deſcried, & without any retractation condemned. But the iudgements of thoſe Fathers onely are to be compared together, which liuing, teaching & cōtinuing, holily, wiſely, & cō
                  ſtantly in the Catholike Faith and Fellowſhip, obteined either to dye faithfully in Chriſt, or

to be ſlaine happily for Chriſt. Whom to notwithſtanding we muſt giue credit with this condition, that, that be accounted vndoubedly true, certaine, and ſure, whatſoeuer either all of them, or the moſt, haue manifeſtly, commonly, and conſtantly with one and the ſame meaning, as in a certaine vnanimous Councell of Teachers, confirmed and eſtabliſhed by receiuing, holding and deliuering it. But whatſoeuer any man ſhall conceite or thinke otherwiſe then all men, or elſe contrary to all men, though he be (o) holy and learned, though For the perſon doth not commend the faith, but faith the perſon. he be a Biſhop, though he bee a Confeſſour and Martyr, let it be put apart from the authority of the commune, publicke and generall iudgement, amongſt proper, hidden and priuate opinions:

and let vs not with very great hazzard of our ſoules, after the wicked faſhion of Heretiques, & Schiſmatiques, follow the nouell errour of one man, forſaking the truth of Catholike doctrine.
            
            
               CHAP. 40.
               THE holy and Catholicke conſent of which bleſſed Fathers, leaſt any man ſhould vnaduiſedly, it may be, thinke for to contemne, the Apoſtle ſaith in the firſt epiſtle to the Corinthians: And God indeede hath ordeined ſome in the Church: 
                  1. Cor. 12. 28. 
                  as firſt Apostles, of which ranke he himſelfe was one: ſecondly Prophets, as we reade in the Acts of the Apoſtles that Agabus was: thirdly Teachers, 
                  
                     Acts 11. 27. 28.
                  
which are now called Treatizers, Tractators, which by this ſame Apoſtle are ſometimes called Prophets, becauſe they open the myſteries of the Prophets to the people. Whoſoeuer therefore doth contemne theſe men, being ſet by God in ſundry ages and places in the Church of God, whiles in the name of Chriſt they do determine or iudge ſome one thing according to the meaning of the Catholicke doctrine, he doth not contemne Man, but God. And from whom, that no man ſhould diſſent, whiles with one conſent they ſpeake the truth, the ſame Apoſtle doth very earneſtly deſire, ſaying: Now I beſeech you, Brethren, 
                  1. Cor. 1. 10. 
                  that ye All ſpeake one thing, and that there be no Schiſmes or diſſentions among you: but be ye

knit together in the ſame mind, and in the ſame iudgement. If ſo be that any man ſhall goe from their commune iudgement, he ſhal heare what the ſame Apoſtle ſaith; God is not the God of 
                  1. Cor. 14. 33. 
                  diſſention, but of peace: that is to ſay, he is not his God, which departeth from them, that doe ioyntly conſent vnto the truth, but theirs, that continue peacably conſenting with them: as, ſaith he, I teach in all the Churches of the Saints, that is, of the Catholickes: which Churches are therefore holy, becauſe they abide in the fellowſhip of the faith. And leaſt any perhaps, the reſt beeing vnregarded, ſhould arrogate to bee heard himſelfe alone, and that he alone ſhould be beleeued, he ſaith a little after: Came the word of God out from you? either 
                  
                     Uerſ. 36. 
                  came it vnto you onely? And leaſt

this ſhould as it were for faſhion ſake be receiued, he hath added, ſaying, If any man thinke 
                  
                     Verſ. 37. 
                  himſelfe to be a Prophet, or Spirituall, that is, a teacher of ſpirituall things, let him be with all diligence a louer of equality and vnitie: that in truth he do neither preferre his own opinions to the reſt, and that he go not from the iudgements of all. The commaundements of which things he which knowes not, ſaith 
                     Uerſ. 38. he: that is, hee which either learnes them not beeing vnknowne, or which contemnes them being knowne, he ſhall not be knowne, that is, he ſhal be counted vnworthie to be by God reſpected among them, that are knit together in the faith, and made equall by humilitie: then which euill I wot not whether any cā be thought to be more grieuous. Which

yet we ſee to haue befallen, as the Apoſtle threatned, that Pelagian Iulianus, who either neglected to agree in iudgement with his Fellows, or elſe preſumed to diuide himſelfe from them.
               But it is now time, that we ſhould produce that example promiſed, wherein and after what manner the iudgements of the Fathers are gathered together, that by them the Rule of eccleſiaſticall faith might be eſtabliſhed by the decree and authority of a Councel. Which that it may be done more handſomely, let this be the end now of this Aduertiſement: that we may begin the reſt of the things that follow with another beginning. The ſecond Aduertiſement hath fallen betweene, neither hath any thing more

thereof remained, then the laſt parcell, that is, onely a briefe rehearſall of that, which hath bene more largely handled, which is alſo added after.
            
            
               CHAP. 41.
               THe which things ſeeing they thus ſtand, it is nowe time, that we ſhould rehearſe the ſumme of thoſe things in the end of this ſecond Aduertiſement, which haue ben ſpoken of in theſe two. We haue ſayd before that this hath euer bene, and is alſo at this day the cuſtome of Catholickes to proue the true ſaith theſe two wayes: Firſt, by the authority of Gods word: Secondly, by the tradition of the Catholike Church: not becauſe the word alone is not ſufficient of it ſelfe

for all matters, but becauſe many, whiles they expound the Scriptures, as they liſt themſelues, they conceiue ſundry opinions, and errors. And therefore that it is neceſſary, that the interpretation of the heauenly Scripture ſhould bee directed by the alone Rule of Eccleſiaſtical iudgement or vnderſtanding: eſpecially, in thoſe queſtions at leaſt, on which the grounds of all the Catholicke doctrine are layed. In like maner we haue ſayd, that we ſhould againe haue regard in the Church her-ſelfe vnto the conſent of All in generall, and alſo of Antiquity, leaſt we ſhould either bee broken off from the whole body (of the Church) being vnited and coupled together, and ſo become Schiſmatickes, or elſe be caſt

head-long from the antient religion into nouell hereſies. We haue alſo ſayd, that in the very antiquity of the Church, two certaine things are earneſtly and carefully to be obſerued, to which all, that would not be Heretiques, ſhould throughly cleaue: firſt, if any thing hath bene of antient time decreed of all the Prieſts of the Catholicke Church by the authority of a generall Councell: ſecondly, if any ſtrange queſtion ſhould ariſe, when that in no wiſe might be found, that recourſe ſhould be had to the iudgements of the holy Fathers, of thoſe onely, which in their times and places conteining all of them in the vnity of fellowſhip and of the Faith, were commendable Teachers. And that, whatſoeuer they

ſhould be found to haue held with one meaning and conſent, that it ſhould without any ſcruple be iudged of the Church to be true and Catholicke.
            
            
               CHAP. 42.
               VVHich-leaſt we ſhould ſeeme to ſet abroach through our owne preſumption rather, then by Eccleſiaſticall authority, we haue vſed the example of an holy Councell, which was held almoſt three yeares ſince at Epheſus in Aſia, thoſe moſt excellent men Baſſus and Antiochus being Conſuls. Where when there was diſpute about the confirming of the Rules of Faith, leaſt perhaps any profane noueltie ſhould ſteale in there after the

manner of the (o) Ariminian 
                  Which receiued Ualens the Arrian, hauing before condemned him. Councels vnfaithfull dealing, this ſeemed to all the Prieſts, which had come thither to the number almoſt of two hundreth, to be a thing moſt Catholicke, moſt commodious, and beſt to be done, that the iudgements of the holy Fathers ſhould be brought foorth and ſhewed, of whom it ſhould be manifeſt that ſome were Martyrs, others Confeſſors, but that all had bene and had continued Catholicke Prieſts: that ſo by their conſent and decree the religion of the ancient doctrine might well and ſolemnly be confirmed, and the blaſphemy of wicked nouelty condemned. Which when it was ſo done, then was that foreſaid Neſtorius iudged contrary to Catholicke Antiquity, but

bleſſed Cyril to conſent 
                     Ad verb. to ſacred Antiquity. vnto it. And that the truth of thoſe things might in no wiſe be called into queſtion, we haue alſo ſhewed the names and number (though we had forgotten the ranke) of thoſe Fathers according to whoſe order therein concording and vnanimous iudgement both the ſentences of holy Writ were expounded, and the rule of diuine doctrine eſtabliſhed. Whom for the ſtrengthening of our memorie it is not ſuperfluous here alſo to recite.
               Theſe therefore are the men, whoſe writings, either as of Iudges, or as it were of Witneſſes, were in that Councell ſhewed and recited; S. Peter of Perhaps it ſhold be read Biſhop of Alex. for the Comma is wanting in ſome bookes. 
                  Alexandria, a Biſhop, a moſt excellent Teacher, and a moſt bleſſed Martyr: S. Athanaſius,
                  
a Prelate of the ſame Citty, a moſt faithfull Teacher, and a moſt worthy Confeſſor: Saint Theophilus, a Biſhop of the ſame Citie too, a man very famous for his religion, life, and learning, whom worthy Cyril did ſucceed, who doth at this time make the Church of Alexandria famous. And leaſt it ſhould perhaps be thought to be the doctrine of one City & Prouince, there were ioyned alſo thoſe Lights of Cappadocia, S. Gregory Biſhop and Confeſſor of Nazianzum: S. Baſil, Biſhop and Confeſſor of Caeſarea in Cappadocia: as alſo the other S. Gregory Biſhop of Nyſſe, and for his faith, conuerſation, vprightneſſe, and wiſedome, a man moſt worthy of his brother Baſil. But that it might be proued that not Greece alone,

or that the Eaſt onely, but that the Weasterne and Latine world was alwayes alſo of that iudgement, certaine Epiſtles alſo were there read, written to certaine men by Saint Foelix, a Martyr, and S. Iulius, Biſhops of the City of Rome. And that not only the head of the world, but that the ſides alſo might giue teſtimony to that iudgement, there was taken from the South moſt bleſſed Cyprian, Biſhop of Carthage, and a Martyr; and from the North Saint Ambroſe, Biſhop of Millaine. All theſe 
                     Ad verb. of the ſacred number of the Decalogue. 
                  ten therefore were at Epheſus produced as Teachers, Counſellers, Witneſſes and Iudges: whoſe doctrine, counſell, witneſſe and iudgemēt that bleſſed Synode mainteining, following, crediting, and obeying, did readily, diſcreetly

& vnpartially giue ſentence concerning the Rules of Faith. Although a farre greater number of Elders might haue bene ioyned to theſe, yet it was not needfull: becauſe it was not ſitting that the time allotted for that buſineſſe ſhould be taken vp and ſpent with producing of a multitude of Witneſſes, and for that euery man is perſwaded that thoſe ten did differ nothing in a maner in iudgement from all their other fellowes.
               After all which things we haue alſo annexed the holy iudgement of Cyril, which things are conteined in the eccleſiaſticall acts. For after that the Epiſtle of S. Capreolus, Biſhop of Carthage was read, who laboured and intreated no other thing, but that Noueltie
                  
being conuinced Antiquity might be beleeued, Biſhop Cyril ſpake and defined to the ſame effect: the which it ſeemeth not vnfitting for the matter in hand here alſo to interpoſe.
               For hee ſaith in the end of the Acts; And this Epiſtle which was read, quoth he, of the reuerend & very religious Biſhop of Carthage, Capreolus, ſhall bee faithfully recorded, whoſe iudgement is manifest: for hee would haue the doctrines of the ancient faith confirmed, but nouell conceipts, and ſuch as are ſuperfluouſly deuiſed, and wickedly publiſhed, to bee reiected, and condemned. All the Biſhops cryed together in ſigne of approbation; Theſe are the words of vs all, we do all affirme theſe things, this is the wiſh of vs all. And what, I pray you, were the

words and the wiſhes of all, but that That ſhould bee embraced, which was anciently deliuered, and that That ſhould be baniſhed, which was newly deuiſed? After which things we wondred at & told of the great humility and holineſſe of that Councell, and what a number of Prieſts there were, the greater part welneere being Metropolitanes, of ſuch knowledge, and ſo well learned, as that almoſt all of them were able to diſpute of doctrines. Whom when the Congregation being aſſembled all together might ſeeme to incourage, to vndertake and to determine ſomething of themſelues, yet would they giue nothing, preſume nothing, arrogate nothing to themſelues at all: but by all meanes prouided, that they might not deliuer

any thing to their poſterity, which they themſelues had not receiued of their Fathers, and that they might not only order the matter well for the preſent, but giue example alſo to them, that ſhould ſuceede, that they alſo might embrace the doctrines of ſacred Antiquity, and condemne the deuiſes of prophane Nouelty. Wee inueighed alſo againſt the wicked preſumption of Neſtorius, becauſe he boaſted that he did firſt and onely vnderſtand the holy Scripture, and that all thoſe whatſoeuer were ignorāt of it, which being teachers before him had handled the Oracles of God; to wit, all Prieſts, all Confeſſors and Martyrs: ſome of which had explained Gods word, and others had conſented or giuen credit to

the Explainers of it: and laſtly, becauſe he did affirme that the whole Church doth now erre, and that it hath alwaies erred, That is, the whole Church. which, as to him ſeemed, had both alwaies followed, and did (now) follow ignorant and erroneous Teachers.
            
            
               CHAP. 43.
               ALl which things, though they cannot plentifully & aboundantly ſuffice to ouerwhelme and extinguiſh all prophane nouelties, yet leaſt any thing ſhould ſeeme to bee lacking, where there is ſuch plenty of proofe to cleare this point, we haue in the laſt place added a double authority of the Apoſtlicke See; namely one of the holy Pope, or For Papa, Pope, is Fatheria name of old giuen to other Biſhops, thē the Romane.
                   Father Xistus, who like a reuerend

man doth at this preſent aduance the Church of Rome: and the other of his Predeceſſor of bleſſed memory Pope Caleſtine, whoſe authorities wee haue deemed needfull heere alſo to interpoſe. Pope Xiſtus then ſaith in an Epiſtle, which he ſent to the Biſhop of Antioch, about the cauſe of Neſtorius. Therefore, quoth he, becauſe as the Apoſtle ſaith, there is one Faith, which hath euidently 
                     Epheſ. 4. 5. preuailed, let vs hold thoſe things that are to be beleeued, and let vs beleeue thoſe things that are to bee held. At the length hee ſheweth the things, that are to bee held and beleeued, and ſaith; Let no libertie (quoth he) bee giuen at all to Nouelty, becauſe it is fitting that nothing ſhould be added to Antiquity. Let the manifeſt faith and

credulity of the Elders be troubled with no mixture of 
                  All corrupt cōceits of men are no better then mud, or mine: they are foule & filthy: and therefore to be ſhunned of ſuch as would not be deſiled. 
                  mire. Speeches altogether Apoſtolical, in that hee adornes the credulity or faith of the Elders, by comparing it to the Light, for the manifeſtneſſe or cleareneſſe of it, and deſcribes nouell profanities, (or prophane nouelties) by likening them to the mixture of mire. But Pope Caeleſtine alſo deales in the like manner, and is of the ſame iudgement. For he ſaith in an Epiſtle which he ſent to the French Miniſters, reprouing their conniuencie, becauſe they Or forſaking the ancient Religiō through ſilence. letting the ancient faith to be iniured through their ſilence, did ſuffer prophane nouelties to ſtart vp. Iuſtly, quoth hee, the matter concernes vs, if we ſhall nouriſh an error with holding our peace. Let ſuch men therefore

be rebuked, let them not haue liberty of ſpeech at ſuch their pleaſure. Some man here may Queſt. peraduenture doubt, who thoſe may be, whom hee forbids that they ſhould haue libertie to ſpeake what they liſt, whether the Preachers of Antiquity, or the Deuiſers of Nouelty. Let him ſpeake himſelfe, and anſwer the doubting of the Anſ. Readers. For it followeth: Let Nouelty ceaſe, ſaith hee, if the caſe ſtand thus, that is, if it bee ſo, that ſome accuſe your Citties and Prouinces to me, becauſe you make them to giue conſent to certaine Nouelties through your dangerous winking at them. Let Nouelty therefore ceaſe, ſaith hee, if the matter ſtand ſo, to inuade and incroach vpon Antiquity. This then was the bleſſed iudgment

of bleſſed Celeſtine, not that Antiquity ſhould ceaſe to ouerthrow Nouelty, but rather that Nouelty ſhould ceaſe to gather ground vpon, and inuade Antiquity.
               Which Apoſtolicke and Catholicke decrees whoſoeuer doth gaineſay, hee muſt needs firſt of al triumph ouer the memory of Saint Celeſtine, who determined that Nouelty ſhould ceaſe to vexe and inuade Antiquity: and in the ſecond place ſcorne the decrees of holy Xyſtus, who iudged that no liberty at all ſhould be granted to Nouelty, becauſe it is meete that nothing ſhold be added to Antiquity: yea & contemne the determinatiōs of bleſſed Cyprian, who did greatly extoll the zeale of reuerend Capreolus, becauſe hee deſired that the doctrines

of the ancient Faith ſhould be confirmed: and that nouell deuiſes ſhould be condemned: and deſpiſe the Counſell of Epheſus alſo, that is, the iudgements of the holy Biſhops almoſt of all the Eaſt, whom it pleaſed by Gods direction to determine that the Poſterity ſhould beleeue no other thing, but that That is, which the holy Fathers agreeing in Chriſt held of old before. which the ſacred and in Chriſt vnanimous Antiquity of the holy Fathers had held, and who alſo with their cryes and exclamations witneſſed with one conſent, that theſe are the words of all, that they did all wiſh this, that they were all of this iudgement: that as almoſt all Heretickes before Nestorius, deſpiſing Antiquity, and deſending nouelty ſhould be condemned, euen ſo Neſtorius himſelfe alſo

ſhould be condemned as an author of Nouelty, and an impugner of Antiquity, whoſe conſent being inſpired by an holy gift and of heauenly grace to whom it is diſpleaſing. What elſe doth follow, but that he ſhould affirme that the wickedneſſe of Neſtorius was not iuſtly condemned, and laſtly alſo contemne the whole Church of Chriſt and his Teachers, Apoſtles, and Prophets; but yet eſpecially the Apoſtle Paul, as certaine filth or offſcourings? Her, becauſe ſhe neuer departed frō the religion of the ſaith once deliuered vnto her to be husbanded & carefully lookt vnto: and Him, becauſe he hath written; O Timotheus keep that which is committed vnto 
                  1. Tim. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                  thee, auoiding profane nouelties of words: And alſo, If any one ſhall 
                        Gal. 1.
                     
preach vnto you otherwiſe then that yee haue receiued, let him be accurſed. If ſo be that neither Apoſtolicall ordinances, nor Eccleſiaſticall decrees be to be broken, by the which according to the ſacred conſent of the vniuerſall and ancient Church all Hereticks alwaies, and laſt of all Pelagius, Celeſtius, and Neſtorius haue ben iuſtly and worthily condemned, it is neceſſealy doubtleſſe for all Catholickes hereafter, which ſtudy to ſhewe themſelues the lawfull Children of the Church their Hee that hath not the Church for his mother, hath not God for his father, nor Chriſt for his brother. 
                  Mother, that they ſhould ſticke and cleaue vnto, and dye in the holy faith of the holy Fathers: and that they ſhould deteſt, abhorre, inueigh againſt, and perſecute the profane Nouelties of profane perſons. Theſe are well

nigh the things, which being more largely handled in the two Aduertiſments are cōtracted as a recapitulation ought to be, that my memory, for the helping whereof we haue done theſe things, might bee both Or mended, and repaired. refreſhed by being continually put in minde, and not oppreſſed with wearineſſe, cauſed by long diſcourſes.
               
                  Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
            
            
               LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES, for LEONARD BECKET, and are to be ſold at his Shop, neere the Church, in the Inner Temple. 1611.
         
      
   