
      
         
            
            THEE FIRST FOVRE
BOOKES OF VIRGIL
HIS AENEIS TRANSLAted
intoo Engliſh heroical verſe by Richard
Stanyhurſt, wyth oother
Poëtical diuiſes theretoo
annexed.
            Imprinted at Leiden in Holland by Iohn Pates.
            Anno M.D.LXXXII.
         
         
            
            
            TOO THEE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE MY
VERIE LOOVING BROOTHER
THEE LORD BARON
OF DVNSANYE.
            
               WHat deepe and rare poynctes of hydden ſecrets

                  Ʋirgil hath ſealde vp in his twelue bookes of
Aeneis, may eaſelye appeere too ſuch reaching
wyts, as bend theyre endewours, too thee vnfolding
thereof; not onlye by gnibling vpon thee
owtward ryne of a ſuppoſed hiſtorie, but alſo by
groaping thee pyth, that is ſhrind vp wythin thee
barck and bodye of ſo exquiſit and ſingular a diſcourſe. For where as
thee chiefe prayſe of a wryter conſiſteth in thee enterlacing of pleaſure
wyth profit: oure author hath ſo wiſelye alayed thee one wyth thee
oother, as thee ſhallow reader may bee delighted wyth a ſmooth tale,
and thee diuing ſearcher may bee aduātaged by ſowning a pretiouſe
treatiſe. And certes this preheminencye of writing is chieflye (yf
wee reſpect oure old latin Poëtes) too bee affurded too Virgil in this
wurck, and too Ouid in his Metamorphoſis. As for Ennius, Horace,
Iuuenal, Perſius and thee rablement of ſuch cheate Poëtes, theyre
dooinges are, for fauoure of antiquitye, rather to be pacientlye allowed,
thean highlye regarded. Such leauinges as wee haue of Ennius
his ragged verſes are nothing current, but ſauoure ſoomwhat nappy
of thee ſpigget, as one that was neauer accuſtomed too ſtrike vp thee
drum, and too crye, in blazing martial exploytes, alarme, but when
hee were haulfe tipſye, ac Horace recordeth. Thee oother three, ouer
this that theyre Verſes in camfering wiſe run harſhe and rough, perfourme
nothing in matter, but biting quippes, taunting Darcklye
certeyn men of ſtate, that liued in theyre age, bee ſprinckling theyre
inuectiues with ſoom moral preceptes, aunſwerable too thee capacitye
of eurie weake brayne. But oure 
                  Ʋirgil not conten
                  •
                wyth ſuch
meigre ſtuffe, dooth laboure, in telling, as yt were a Cantorburye tale,
               
too ferret owt thee ſecretes of Nature, with woordes ſo fitlye coucht,
wyth verſes ſo ſmoothlye ſlyckte, with ſentences ſo featlye orderd,
with orations ſo neatlie burniſht, with ſimilitudes ſo aptly applyed,
with eeche decorum ſo duely obſerued, as in truth hee hath in right
purchaſed too hym ſelf thee name of a ſurpaſſing poët, thee fame of
an od oratoure, and thee admiration of a profound philoſopher. Hauing
therefore (mi good lord) taken vpon mee too execute ſoom part
of mayſter Aſkam his wyl, who, in his goulden pamphlet, intituled
thee Schoolemayſter, dooth wiſh thee Vniuerſitie ſtudents too applie
theyre wittes in bewtifying oure Engliſh language with heroical
verſes: I heeld no Latiniſt ſo fit, too geeue thee onſet on, as Virgil,
who for his peereleſſe ſtyle, and machleſſe ſtuffe, dooth beare thee
prick and price among al thee Roman Poëts. How beyt I haue heere
haulf a gueſh, that two ſortes of carpers wyl ſeeme too ſpurne at this
myne entrepriſe. Thee one vtterlie ignorant, thee oother meanelye
letterd. Thee ignorāt wyl imagin, that thee paſſage was nothing craggye,
in as much as M. Phaere hath broken thee ice before mee: Thee
meaner clarcks wyl ſuppoſe, my trauail in theeſe heroical verſes too
carrye no great difficultie, in that yt lay in my choiſe, too make what
word I would ſhort or long, hauing no Engliſh writer beefore mee
in this kind of poëtrye with whoſe ſquire I ſhould leauel my ſyllables.
Too ſhape therefor an anſwer too thee firſt, I ſay, they are altogeather
in a wrōg box: cōſidering that ſuch woordes, as fit M Phaer,
may bee very vnapt for mee, which they would confeſſe, yf theyre
ſkil were, ſo much as ſpare, in theeſe verſes. Further more I ſtand ſo
nicelie on my pantofles that way, as yf I could, yeet I would not renne
on thee ſkore with M. Phaer, or ennie oother, by borrowing his termes
in ſo copious and fluent a language, as oure Engliſh tongue is.
And in good ſooth although thee gentleman hath tranſlated Virgil in
too Engliſh rythme with ſuch ſurpaſsing excellencie, as a verie few
(in my conceit) for pyekt and loftie woordes can burd hym, none, I
am wel aſſured, ouergoe hym: yeet hee hath rather dubled, then defalckt
oght of my paines, by reaſon that in cōferring his tranſlation
with myne, I was forced, too weede owt from my verſes ſuch choiſe
woordes, as were foreſtald by him: vnleſſe they were ſo feeling, as oothers
could not countreuaile theyre ſignification: In which caſe yt
were no reaſon, too ſequeſter my pen from theyre acquaintance, conſidering,

that as M. Phaer was not thee firſt founrder, ſo hee may not
bee accoūpted thee only owner of ſuch termes. Truely I am ſo far
from embeazling his trauailes, as that for thee honoure of thee Engliſh,
I durſt vndertake, too renne ouer theeſe bookes agayne, and
too geeue theym a new liuerie in ſuch different wiſe, as they ſhould
not let with M. Phaer his badges, ne yeet bee clad with this apparraile,
wherewith at this preſent they coō furth atyred. Which I ſpeake
not of vanitie, too enhaunce my coonning, but of meere veritie,
too aduaunce thee riches of oure ſpeeche. More ouer in ſoō poinctes
of greateſt price, where thee matter, as yt were, doth bleede, I
was mooued too ſhun M. Phaer his enterpretation, and clinge more
neere too thee meaning of myne authoure, in ſliſing thee huſk
and cracking thee ſhel, too beſtow thee kernel vpon thee wyttye
and enquiſitiue reader. I could lay downe heere ſundrye examples,
were yt not I ſhould bee thoght ouer curious, by prying owt a pimple
in a bent: but a few ſhal ſuffice. In thee fourth booke, 
                  Ʋirgil deciphering
thee force of Mercurye among oother properties wryteth
thus.
Dat ſomnos adimitque, & lumina morte reſignat.
M. Phaer dooth Engliſh yt in this wiſe.
And ſleepes therewyth he geeues and takes, and men from death defendes.
Myne enterpretation is this:
Hee cauſeth ſleeping and bars, by death eyelyd vphaſping.
This is cleene contrarie too M. Phaer. Hee wryteth, that Mercurye
defendeth from death, I wryte that yt procureth death, which (vnder
his correction) dooth more annere too the author his mynd,
and too natures woorcking. For yf Mercurye dyd not ſlea beefore
yt dyd ſalue, and procurd ſleeping eare yt cauſed waking, Nature
in her operations would bee founderd, thee fat were in thee fire,
thee marcket were mard. Too lyke effect Chauncer bringeth, in
thee 
                  •
               ift booke, Troilus thus mourning.

                  Thee owle eeke, which that hight Aſcaphylo,
                  Hath after mee ſhright al theeſe nightes two:
                  And God Mercury, now of mee woful wreche
                  Thee ſoule gyde, and when thee list, yt feche.
               
Againe Virgil in diuerſe places inueſteth Juno with this epitheton,

               Saturnia, M. Phaer ouerpaſſeth yt, as yf yt were an idle woord ſhuffled
in by thee authoure too dam vp thee chappes of yawning verſes.
I neauer, too my remembraunce, omitted yt, as in deede a terme
that carieth meate in his mouth, and ſo emphatical, as thee ouerſlipping
of yt were in effect thee chocking of thee poet his diſcourſe, in
ſuche hauking wiſe, ac yf hee were throtled with the chincoughe.
And too inculcat that clauſe thee better, where thee marriadge is
made in thee fourth booke beetweene Dido and Aeneas, I ad in my
verſe, Watrye Iuno, Althogh mijne authour vſd not thee epitheton,
Watrye, but only made mention of earth, ayer, and fyere: yeet I am
wel aſſured, that woord throughly conceaued of an heedeful ſtudent
may geeue hym ſuch light, as may eaſe hym of ſix moonethes
trauaile: which were wel ſpent, yf that Wedlock were wel vnderſtood.
Thus Virgil in his Aeneis, and Ouid in his Metamorphoſis are
ſo tickle in ſoom places, as they rather craue a conſtruction than a
trāſlation.
But yt may bee heere after (yf God wil grace my proceedings)
I ſhal bee occaſioned, in my Fin Couleidos, too vnlace more,
of theeſe myſteries. Which booke I muſt bee manye yeeres breedinge:
but yf yt bee throughly effected, I ſtand in hoape, yt wyl fal owt
too bee gratum opus, not Agricolis, but Philoſophis.
            
            Now too coom too theym, that gueſh my trauaile too be eaſye,
by reaſon of thee libertye I had in Engliſh woordes (for as I can not
deuine vpon ſuch bookes, that happlye rouke in ſtudentes mewes,
ſo I truſt, I offer no man iniurie, yf I aſſume too my ſelfe thee maydenhed
of al wurcks, that hath beene beefore this tyme, in print,
too my knowlegde, diuulged in this kind of verſe) I wil not greatly
wrangle with theym therein: yeet this much they are too conſider,
that as thee firſt applinyg of a woord may eaſe mee in thee firſt place,
ſo perhaps, when I am occaſioned too vſe thee ſelfe ſame woord
els where, I may bee as much hyndered, as at thee beginning I was
furthred. For example. In thee firſt verſe of 
                  Ʋirgil, I mak, ſeaſon, long
in an oother place yt woulſteede mee percaſe more, yf I made yt
ſhort:
and yeet I am now tyed too vſe yt as long. So that the aduantage
that way is not verie great. But as for thee general facilitiee,
this much I dare warrant yoong beginners, that when they ſhal
haue ſoom firme footing in this kind of Poetrie, which by a litle
payneful exerciſe may bee purchaſt, they ſhal find as eaſye a veyne

in thee Engliſh, as in thee Latin verſes, yee and much more eaſye
than in the Engliſh rythmes. Touching myne owne trial, this much
I wil diſcoouer. Thee three firſt bokes I trāſlated by ſtartes, as my
leaſure and pleaſure would ſerue mee. In thee fourth booke I did
taſk my ſelf, and perſued thee matter ſoomwhat hoatlie. M. Phaer
tooke too thee making of that booke fifteene dayes. I hudled vp
myne in ten. Wherein I coouet no prayſe, but rather doe craue par
don. Forelyke as forelittring biches whelp blynd puppies, ſo I may
bee perhaps entwighted of more haſte then good ſpeede, as Syr Tho
mas More in lyke caſe gybeth at one that made vaunt of certeyn
pild verſes clowted vp extrumpere.
            
            
               Hos quid te ſcripſiſſe mones ex tempore verſus?
               Nam liber hoc loquitur, te reticente, tuus.
            
            But too leaue that too thee veredict of oothers (wherein I craue
thee good lyking of thee curteouſe, and ſkorne thee controlment
of thee curriſh, as thoſe that vſuallie reprehend moſte, and yeet
can amend leaſte) thee ods beetweene verſes and rythme is verye
great. For in thee one euerye foote, euerye word, euerye ſyllable, yea
euery letter is too bee obſerued: in thee oother thee laſt woord is
onlye too bee heeded: As is very liuelye expreſt by thee lawyer in
empaneling a iurye.

                  Johannes Doa:M. Kytchin. in Coun
                           •
                        eete pag. 51. A.
                  
                  Richardus Roa:
                  Iohannes Myles:
                  Thomas Giles:
                  Iohannes Den:
                  Willielmus Fen:
                  Willielmus Neile:
                  Iohannes Sneile:
                  Johannes Hye:
                  Thomas Pye:
                  Richardus Leake:
                  Johannes Peake.
               
Happlye ſuch curious makers, as youre lordſhip is, wyl accompt this
but rythme dogrel: but wee may ſuite yt wyth a more ciuil woord,
by terming yt, rythme peale meale, yt rowles ſo roundlye in thee
hyrer his eares. And are there not diuerſe ſkauingers of draftye poëtrye
in this oure age, that baſt theyre papers wyth ſmearie larde ſauoring
al too geather of thee frynig pan? What Tom Towly is ſo
ſimple, that wyl not attempt, too bee a rithmoure? Yf your Lordſhip
ſtand in doubt thereof, what thinck you of thee thickſkyn, that
made this for a fare wel for his mystreſſe vpon his departure from
Abingtowne?
               
                  Abingtowne, Abingtowne God bee wyth thee:
                  For thou haſte a ſteeple lyke a dagger ſheathe.
               
               
And an oother in thee prayſe not of a ſteeple, but of a dagger.

                  When al is goane but thee black ſcabbard,
                  Wel faer thee haft wyth thee duggeon dagger.
               
Thee therd (for I wyl preſent your lordſhip wyth a leſhe) in thee
commendacion of bacon.

                  Hee is not a king, that weareth ſatten,
                  But hee is a king, that eateth bacon.
               
Haue not theeſe men made a fayre ſpeake? If they had put in Mightye
Joue, and Gods in thee plural number, and 
                  Ʋenus wyth Cupide
thee blynd Boy, al had beene in thee nick, thee rythme had beene
of a right ſtamp. For a few ſuch ſtiches boch vp oure newe faſshion
makers. Prouyded not wythſtanding alwayes that Artaxerxes, al
be yt hee bee ſpurgalde, beeing ſo much gallopt, bee placed in thee
dedicatorye epiſtle receauing a cuppe of water of a ſwayne, or elles
al is not wurth a beane. Good God what a frye of ſuch wooden rythmours
dooth ſwarme in ſtacioners ſhops, who neauer enſtructed in
any grammar ſchoole, not atayning too thee paringes of thee Latin
or Greeke tōgue, yeet lyke blynd bayards ruſh on forward, foſtring
theyre vayne conceites wyth ſuch ouerweening filly follyes, as they
reck not too bee condemned of thee learned for ignorant, ſo they
bee commended of thee ignorāt for learned. Thee reddyeſt way therefore
too flap theeſe droanes from thee ſweete ſenting hiues of
Poëtrye, is for thee learned too applye theym ſelues wholye (yf they
be delighted wyth that veyne) too thee true making of verſes in
ſuch wiſe as thee Greekes and Latins, thee fathers of knowledge, haue
doone; and too leaue too theeſe doltiſh coyſtrels theyre rude
rythming and balducktoom ballads. Too thee ſturring therefor of
thee riper, and thee encouraging of thee yonger gentlemen of oure
Vniuerſityes I haue taken ſoō paynes that way, which I thoght good
too beetake too youre lordſhip his patronage, beeing of yt ſelf
oother wiſe ſo tender, as happly yt might ſcant endure thee typpe
of a frumping phillippe. And thus omitting al oother ceremonial
complemētoes beetweene youre lordſhip and mee, I cōmit you and
youre proceedinges too thee garding and guiding of thee almightie.
From Leiden in Holland thee laſt of Iune. 1582.
            
               Youre Lordſhip his louing broother
Richard Stanyhurst.
            
         
         
            
            TOO THEE LEARNED READER.
            IN thee obſeruatiō of quātitees of ſyllables, ſoom happlye wyl bee
ſo ſtieflie tyed too thee ordinaunces of thee Latins, as what ſhal
ſeeme too ſwarue from theyre maximes, they wyl not ſtick too
ſkore vp for errours. In which reſolution ſuch curious Priſcianistes
dooe attribute greater prerogatiue too thee Latin tōgue, than reaſon
wyl affurd, and leſſe libertye too oure language, than nature may permit.
For in as much as thee Latīs haue not beene authors of theeſe verſes,
but traced in thee ſteps of thee Greekes, why ſhould we with thee
ſtringes of thee Latin rules cramp oure tongue, more than the Latins
doe fetter theyre ſpeeche, as yt were, wyth thee chaynes of thee greeke
preceptes. Alſo that nature wyl not permit vs too faſhion oure wordes
in al poinctes correſpondent too thee Latiniſtes may eaſely appeere
in ſuche termes as we borrow of theym. For exemple: Thee firſt of,
Breuiter, is ſhort, thee firſt of, briefly, wyth vs muſt bee lōg. Lykewiſe,
ſonans, is ſhort, yeet, ſowning, in Engliſh muſt bee long: and much
more yf yt were, Sounding, as thee ignorant generaly, but falſlye dooe
wryte; nay, that where at I woonder more, thee learned trip theyre pē
               nes
at this ſtoane, in ſo much as M. Phaer in thee verye firſt verſe of
Virgil miſtaketh thee woorde, Yeet ſound and ſowne differ as much in
Engliſh, as ſolidus and ſonus in Latin. Alſo in thee mideſt of a woord
wee differ ſoōtymes frō thee Romās. As in Latin wee pronoūce, Orâtor,
Audîtor, Magîſter lōg: in Engliſh, Orātoure, Audōtoure, Magiſtrat,
ſhort. Lykewiſe wee pronounce, Praepāro, Cōpāro, ſhort in Latin, and,
prepâred and compâred lōg in Engliſh. Agayne thee infallibeliſt rule
that thee Latins haue for thee quatitye of middle ſyllables is this. Penultima
acuta producitur, vt virtûtis; penultima grauata corripitur, vt
ſanguīnis. Honoure in Engliſh, is ſhort, as with thee Latins: yeet diſhonour
muſt bee lōg by thee formoure maxime: which is contrary too an
oother groūd of thee Latins, whereby they preſcribe, that thee primatiue
and deriuatiue thee ſimple and compound bee of one quantitye. But
that rule of al oothers muſt be abādoned frō thee Engliſh, oother wiſe
al woordes in effect ſhould bee abriged. Moother, I make lōg. Yeet
graūdmother muſt bee ſhort. Buckler, is lōg; yeet ſwaſhbuckler is ſhort.
And albeyt that woord bee lōg by poſitiō, yeet doubtleſſe thee natural
dialect of Engliſh wyl not allow of that rule in middle ſyllables, but
yt muſt bee of force with vs excepted, where thee natural pronuntiation
wyl ſo haue yt. For ootherwiſe wee ſhould banniſh a number of

good and neceſſarye wordes from oure verſes; as M. Gabriel Haruye
(yf I myſtake not thee gentleman his name) hath verye wel obſerued
in one of his familiar letters: where hee layeth downe diuerſe woordes
ſtraying frō thee Latin preceptes, as Maiestye, Royaltye, Honeſtie, &c.
And ſoothly, too my ſeeming, yf thee coniunction, And, were made
common in Engliſh, yt were not amiſſe, althogh yt bee long by poſition:
For thee Romans are greatly aduantaged by theyre woordes, Et,
Que, Quoque, Atque: which were they diſioincted from thee Latin
poëtrie, many good verſes would bee rauelde and diſmembred, that
now cary a good grace among theym, hauing theyre ioynctes knit
with theeſe copulatiue ſinnewes. But too rip vp further thee peculiar
propretye of oure Engliſh, let vs liſten too Tullye his iudgemēt, wherein
thogh hee ſeeme verie peremptorie, yeet, with his fauoure, hee
miſheth thee cuſhē. Thus in his booke, intituled Orator, hee writeth.
Ipſa natura, quaſi modularetur hominum orationē, in omni verbo poſuit
acutam vocem, nec vna plus, nec a poſtrema ſyllaba citra tertiam. In this
ſaying Tullye obſerueth three poinctes. Firſt, that by courſe of Nature
euerye woord hath an accēt. Next, one only: laſtlye, that thee ſayd
accēt muſt be on thee laſt ſyllable, as propè, or on thee laſt ſaluing one,
as Virtûtis, or at thee furtheſt on thee therd ſyllable, as Omnîpotēs.
Yeet this rule taketh no ſuch infallible effect with vs, althogh Tully
maketh yt natural, who by thee ſkyl of thee Greek and Latin dyd ayme
at oother languages too hym vnknowen, and therefor is too bee
borne wythal. As, Peremtorie, is a woord of foure ſyllables, and yeet
thee accent is in thee firſt. So Sêcundarie, ôrdinarie, Mâtrimonie, Pâtrimonie,
Plânetarie, împeratiue, Côſmographie, ôrtography, wyth manye
lyke. For althogh thee ignorant pronounce, Impêratiue, Coſmôgraphie,
Ortôgraphy, geeuing thee accent too thee therd ſyllable, yeet
that is not thee true Engliſh pronuntiation. Now put caſe thee cantel
of thee Latin verſe (Sapiens dominabitur aſtris) were thus Engliſhed:
Planetary woorckinges thee wiſmans vertue repreſſeth: albeyt thee middle
of planeta bee long with thee Romans, yeet I would not make yt
ſcrupulus, too ſhorten yt in Engliſh, by reaſon thee natural pronoū
               tatiō
would haue yt ſo. For thee final eende of a verſe is to pleaſe thee
eare, which muſt needes bee thee vmpyre of thee woord, and accordīg
too that weight oure ſyllables muſt bee poyſed. Wherefor ſyth thee
poëtes theymſelues aduouch, Tu nihil inuita facies, diceſue Minerua.
               
That nothing may bee doone or ſpoakē agaynſt nature, and that Art
is alſo bound too ſhape yt ſelf by al imitation too Nature: wee muſt
requeſt theeſe grammatical Preciſians, that as euery countrye hath his
peculiar law, ſo they permit euerye language too vſe his particular
loare. For my part I purpoſe not too beat on euerye childiſh tittle, that
concerneth Proſodia, neither dooe I vndertake too chalck owt any lines
or rules too oothers, but too lay downe too thee reader his view
thee courſe I tooke in this my trauaile. Such woordes as proceede frō
thee Latin, and bee not altred by oure Engliſh, in theym I obſerue
thee quantitie of thee Latin. As Honest, Honor: a few I excepted, as
thee firſt of appeered, auenture, aproched I make ſhort, althogh they are
long in Latin: as Appareo, Aduenio, Appropinquo: for which and percaſe
a few ſuch woordes I muſt craue pardon of thee curteous reader.
For ootherwiſe yt were lyke ynough that ſoom grammatical pullet,
hacht in Diſpater his ſachel, would ſtand clocking aganyſt mee, as
thogh hee had foūd an horſe neſt, in laynig that downe for a falt, that
perhaps I dooe knowe better then hee. Yeet in theeſe diriuations of
termes I would not bee doomde by euerye reaching herrault, that in
roaming wiſe wyl attempt too fetche thee petit degree of woodes, I
know not from what auncetoure. As I make thee firſt of Riuer ſhort.
A Wrangler may imagin yt ſhould bee long, by reaſon of Riuus, of
which yt ſeemeth too bee deriued. And yeet forſooth riuus is but a
brooke, and not a riuer. Lykewiſe ſoom Engliſh woordes may bee read
in ſoom places long, in ſoom ſhort, as ſkyeward, ſeaward, ſearowme.
Thee difference thereof groweth becauſe they are but compound
woordes that may bee with good ſenſe ſunderd: and thee laſt of Sea,
and ſkye beenig common breedeth that diuerſitie. Alſo thee ſelf ſame
woord may varye beecauſe of thee ſignification. Thee firſt of Felon for
a theefe I make long, but when yt ſignifieth thee diſeaſe, ſo named, I
hold yt better too make yt ſhort. Agayne a woord that is ſhort beeing
deuided, may bee long in an oother place contracted. As thee firſt of,
Leaues, yf you deuide yt in two ſyllables, I make ſhort, yf you cōtract
yt too one ſyllabe I make yt long. So thee firſt in Crauing is long, and
thee therd perſon of thee verb, too wyt, Craues, may ſeeme ſhort, where
the next woord following beginneth with a vocal, yet yt is long by
contraction: and ſo diuerſe lyke woordes are too bee takē. And truely
ſuch nice obſeruations that Grammarians dooe preſcribe are not by

thee choyſeſt poëtes alvvayes ſo preciſelye put in executiō: as in this oure
authour I haue by thee vvaymarckt. In thee fore front of thee firſt booke
hee maketh thee firſt of Lauinum long. In thee ſame booke hee vſeth
yt for ſhort. Likevviſe dooth he varie thee firſt of Sichoeus. So in thee
therd booke thee mideſt of Cyclopes ſoomtyme is made long, ſoomtyme
ſhort. And in the ſame booke thee coniunction, Que, is long. As
Limina
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   lauruſque Dei totuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   moueri. And in thee fourth:
Cretéſque Driopeſque ferunt, pictique Agathyrſi:
Alſo thee firſt of Italia is lōg: yeet in thee therd book Italus is ſhort: as:
Has autem terras, Italique hanc littoris oram.
            
            Touching the termination of ſyllables, I made a proſodia too my ſelfe
ſquaring ſoomvvhat from thee Latin: in this vviſe.
            A finita communia. B. D. T. Breuia: yeet theeſe vvoordes that eende lyke
dipthōges are common: as mouth, ſouth, &c. C common. E common:
yf yt bee ſhort, I vvryte yt vſualy vvith a ſingle E. as the, me yf lōg vvith
tvvo, as thee mee. althogh I vvould not vviſh thee quantitie of ſyllables
too depend ſo much vpon thee gaze of thee eye, as thee cenſure of thee
eare. F. breuia. G. breuia: ſoomtyme long by poſitiō
                vvhere D may bee enterſerted,
as paſſage is ſhort, but yf you make yt long, paſſadge vvith, D.
vvould bee vvritten, albeyt, as I ſayd right novv, thee eare not ortographie
muſt decyde thee quantitye, as neere as is poſſible. I. cōmon. K. commō.
L. breuia, praeter Hebraea, vt Michaël, Gaebriel. N. Breuia, yeet vvoordes
eending in dipthōgvviſe vvould bee cōmon, as playne, fayne, ſwayne.
O. cōmon, praeter ô longū. P. Breu. R. Breu. except vvoordes eending lyke
dipthonges that may bee cōmon, as youre, oure, houre, ſoure, ſuccour, &c.
As & Es cōmon. Is breu. Os cōmon. Vs breu. V. common. As for M. yt is
either long by poſition, or els clipt, yf thee next vvoord begyn vvith a vocal:
as fame, name: for albeyt. E. bee thee laſt letter, that muſt not ſalue. M.
from accurtation, beecauſe in thee eare M is thee laſt letter, and E dooth
noght els but lenghē and mollifye thee pronountiatiō. As for. I. Y. VV.
in as much as they are moungrels, ſoomtyme conſonātes, ſoomtyme vocals,
vvhere they further I dooe not reiect theym, vvhere they hinder, I
doe not greatlye vveight theym. As thee middle of folowing I make ſhort,
not vvythſtanding thee VV: and lykvviſe thee firſt of power. But vvhere a
cōſonāt immediatly follovveth thee VV, I make yt alvvayes lōg as fowling.
This much I thoght good too acquaynt thee gentle reader vvythal,
rather too diſcoouer, vvyth vvhat priuat preceptes I haue embayed my
verſes, theu too publiſh a directorye too thee learned vvho in theyre trauayls
may franckly vſe theyre ovvne diſcretiō, vvythovvt my direction.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE
OF VIRGIL
HIS AENEIS.
            
               I That in old ſeaſon wyth reeds oten harmonye whistled
            My rural ſonnet; from forrest flitted (I) forced
            Thee ſulckīg ſwincker thee ſoyle, thoghe craggie, to ſunder.
            A labor and a trauaile too plowſwayns hertelye welcoō.
            Now māhod and garbroyls I chaunt, and martial horror.
            
               I blaze thee captayne firſt from Troy cittye repairing,
            Lyke wandring pilgrim too famoſed Italie trudging,
            And coaſt of Lauyn: ſouſt wyth tempeſtuus hurlwynd,
            On land and ſayling, b
                  •
                Gods predeſtinat order:
            But chiefe through Iunoes long fostred deadlye reuengment.
            Martyred in battayls, ere towne could ſtatelye be buylded,
            Or Gods theare ſetled: thence flitted thee Latin of ſpring,
            Thee roote of old Alban: thence was Rome peereles inhaunced.
            My muſe ſhew the reaſon, what grudge or what furye kendled
            Of Gods thee Princeſſe, through ſo curſd miſcheuus hatred,
            Wyth ſharp ſundrye perils too tugge ſo famus a captayne.
            Such festred rancoure doo Sayncts celeſtial harbour?
            A long buylt citty theare ſtood, Carth ago ſo named,
            From the mouth of Tybris, from land eke of Italye ſeauerd,
            Poſſeſt wyth Tyrians, in ſtreingh and ritches abounding,
            Theare Iuno, thee Princes her Empyre wholye repoyſed,
            Her Samos owtcasting, heere ſhee dyd her armonye ſettle,
            And warlick chariots, heere chiefly her ioylitye raigned.
            This towne ſhee labored too make thee gorgeus empreſſe,
            Of towns and regions, her drift yf deſtenye furthred.
            But this her hole meaning a ſouthſayd myſterie letted
            That from thee Troians ſhould branch a lineal of ſpring,
            Which would thee Tyrian turrets quite batter a ſunder,
            And Libye land lykewiſe wyth warlick victorye conquoure.
            
               
Thus loa bye continuance thee naues of fortun ar altred.
            This Iuno fearing, and old broyls bluddye recounting,
            Vſd by her Greeke fauorits, that Troian cittye repreſſed,
            Her rancour canckred ſhee can not let to remember,
            And Paris his ſcorning iudgement dooth burne in her entrayls.
            Shee pouts, that Ganymed by Ioue too ſkitop is hoyſed.
            Shee bears that kinred, that ſept vnmercifull hatred.
            Wyth theeſe coals kendled ſhee ſoght al poſſibil engins
            In ſurging billows too touze thee coompanie Troian.
            Al the fruſhe and leauings of Greeks, of wrathful Achilles.
            Through this wyde roaming thee Troians Italy miſhing
            Ful manye yeere wandred, stil croſt with deſtenye backward.
            Such trauail in planting thee Romans auncetrye claymed.
            Tward Sicil Iſle ſcantly thee Troian nauye dyd enter,
            And the ſea ſalte foaming wyth braue flantadoe dyd harrow,
            When that Iuno Godeſſe thee fuid moſt deadlye reuoluing
            Thus to her ſelf mumbled: ſhal I leaue my purpoſe vnaunſwerd?
            Or ſhal I this Troian too ſeize thus on Italye ſuffer?
            Forſoth I ſtand letted by fats: and clarcklye recounted.
            As thogh that Pallas could not bee fullye reuenged,
            Thee Greekfleete ſcorching, thee Greekiſh coompanye drowning:
            And for on his faulty practiſe, for madnes of Aiax?
            This Queene wyld lightninges from clowds of Iuppiter hurling
            Downe ſwaſht theyre nauy, thee ſwelling ſurges vphaling.
            Thee pacient panting ſhee thumpt and launſt wyth a fyrebolt,
            And wythal his carcaſſe on rockiſh pinnacle hanged.
            And ſhal I then Iuno, of Saincts al thee Princes abyding,
            Both the wife and ſiſter too peereleſſe Iuppiter holden,
            In ſo great a ſeaſon wyth one od pild countrey be warring?
            If this geare cotten, what wigh a wyl yeelde to myn aulters
            Bright honor and Sacrifice, wyth rits my perſon adoring?
            Thus ſhe frying fretted, thus deepely plunged in anger
            Aeolian kingdoom ſhee raught; where bluſterus huzing
            Of wynds in Priſon thee great king Aeolus hampreth.
            Theeſe flaws theyre cabbans wyth ſtur ſnar iarrye doe ranſack,
            Greedelye deſyring too rang: king Aelous, highly
            In caſtel ſetled, theyre strief dooth pacifie wiſely.
            
               
But for this managing, a great hurly burlye the wyndblaſts
            Would keepe on al mayneſeas and lands wyth woonderus humbling.
            Thee father almighty this miſchiefe warelye doubting
            Mewd vp theeſe reuelers coupt in ſtrong dungeon hilliſh,
            And a king he placed, throgh whoſe Maiestical Empyre
            Theeſe blaſts rouze forward, or back by his regal apoinctment.
            Too this princelye regent her ſuit ladie Iuno thus opned.
            Aeolus (in ſo much as of mankind the Emperor heaunlye
            And father of thee Gods too thee the auctoritye ſigned
            Too ſwage ſeas ſurging, or raiſe by blusterus hùffling)
            Thee water of Tyrrhen my foes wyth nauye doe trauerſe:
            Troy towne wyth tamd gods too land ek of Italy bringing.
            Yeeld to the wynds paſſadge, duck downe theire fleete wyth a tēpest,
            Or ſhips wyde ſcatter, wyth fluds that companye ſwallow.
            Nymphs do I keepe fourteene for peereleſſe bewtye renowmed,
            Of theeſe thee paragon, for fayreneſſe, Deiopeia
            Too the in fast wedlock wyl I knit, thye wife onlye remayning;
            Thy pheere moſt faythful through eendles ſeaſon abyding,
            Thee father of fayre brats, for this thy curteſye, making.
            This labor is needeleſſe (deere Queene) king Aeolus aunſward.
            Thy mynd to accompliſh my bounden duitye requireth.
            For my mace and kingdoom through thy faſt freendſhip I gayned.
            Through thy freendlye trauaile mee dooth king Iuppiter algats
            Tender: by thye labour wyth Gods at bancket I ſolace.
            Thow madſt me in tempeſt and bluſturs loftelye ruling.
            This ſayd: wyth poyncted flatchet thee mountan he broached
            Ruſh do the winds forward through perſt chinck narrolye whizling;
            Thee land turmoyling with blaſt and terribil huzing.
            They ſkud too the ſeaward, from deepe profunditie raking
            Too the ſkye thee ſurges, the east weſt contrarie doe ſtruggle
            And ſouthwind ruffling: on coaſt thee chauft flud is hurled.
            Craſh do the rent tacklings; thee men raiſe an horribil owtcrye.
            Thee clowds ſnach gloomming from ſight of Coompanie Troian
            Both Light and welken: thee night dooth ſhaddo the paſſadge.
            Thee ſkyes doo thunder, thee lightnings riflye doe fluſh flaſh,
            Noght breeds theym coomfort, eeche thing mortalitye threatneth.
            Aeneas (his lyms wyth ſharp cold chillye benummed)
            
               
Dooth groane, then to ſkyward his claſpt hands heauelye lifting,
            Thus ſpake: O Troians, ò thriſe most nobil or happye
            That before eune the parents wyth byckring martial ended
            Your liues at townewals: of Greekes ô woorthye the ſtrongest
            Stout Diomed: bye the filds of Troy what fortun vnhappye
            Mee fenſt from falling wyth thy fierce ſlaughterus handſtroke
            Wheare lyes ſtrong Hector ſlaughtred by manful Achilles.
            Wheare ſtout Serpedon dooth reſt, where gauntlet or helmet
            In water of Simois, wyth ſouldours carcaſes harboure.
            This kyrye ſad ſolfing, thee northen bluſter aproching
            Thee ſayls tears tag rag, to the ſky thee waues vphoyſing.
            The oars are cleene ſplintred, the helme is from ruther vnhafted
            Theire ſhips too larboord doo nod, ſeas monsterus haunt theym.
            In typs of billows ſoom ſhips wyth danger ar hanging.
            Soom ſynck too bottoms, ſulcking thee ſurges aſunder:
            Thee ſands are mounted: thee ſouthwynd merciles eager
            Three gallant veſſels on rocks gnawne craggye repoſed,
            (Theeſe rancks the Italian dwellers doo nominat altars)
            Lykewiſe three veſſels the east blast ful mightelye whelmed
            In ſands quick ſouping (a ſight to be deepelye bewayled)
            One ſhip that Lycius dyd ſhrowd with faythful Orontes
            In ſight of captayne was ſwaſht wyth a royſterus heapeflud.
            Downe the pilot tumbleth wyth plaſh round ſoommoned headlong.
            Thriſe the grauel thumping in whirkpoole plunged is hooueld
            Soom wights vpfloating on raiſd ſea wyth armor apeered.
            In foame froth picturs, wyth Troian treaſur, ar vpborne.
            Alſo wher Ilionus was ſhipt, where manful Achates
            And what veſſel Abas poſſeſt and aged Alethes
            Were bulcht by billows and boarde by forcibil entrye:
            Thee ſtorme dyd conquoure, thee ſhips ſcant weaklye reſiſted.
            Theeſe vnrulye reuels, and rifrafs wholye diſordred,
            As broyl vnexſpected, thee ſea king Neptun awaked.
            Sturd wyth theeſe motions, his pleaſing pallet vpheauing
            Hee noted Aeneas his touzdtoſt nauye to wander,
            And ſees thee Troians wyth ſeas and rayne water heaped,
            This spightful pageaunt of his owne ſyb Iuno remembring,
            Thee wynds hee ſummond: and wroth woords ſtatelye thus vſed.
            
               
What ſyrs? your boldneſſe dooth your gentilitie warrant?
            Dare ye loa, curſt baretours, in this my Segnorie regal,
            Too raiſe ſuch raks iaks on ſeas, and danger vnorderd?
            Wel ſyrs: but tempeſt I wyl firſt pacifie raging.
            Bee ſure, this practiſe wil I nick in a freendlye memento.
            Pack hence doggye rakhels, tel your king, from me, this errand.
            Of ſeas thee managing was neauer alotted his empire.
            That charge mee toucheth: but he may ſtreth monsterus hildens,
            Youre kennels, good ſyrs: let your king Aeolus hautye
            Execut his ruling in your deepe dungeon hardlye.
            Thus ſayd, at a twinckling thee ſwelling ſurges he calmed
            Thee clowds hee ſcatterd, and cleere beams ſunnye recalled.
            Cymothöe and Triton on ſteepe rock ſetled ar haling
            Thee ſhips from danger: with forck king Neptun is ayding.
            Hee balcks thee quick ſands, and fluds dooth mollefye ſweetly,
            Hee glyds on the ſeafroth, with wheales of gould wagon, eaſye.
            In mydſt of the pepil much lyke to a mutenye rayſed
            Where barcks lyke bandogs thee raſkal multitud angry,
            Now ſtoans and fyrebrands flundge owt, furye weap on awardeth:
            In this blooddye riot they ſoom grauet haplye beholding
            Of geaſon pietee, doo throng and greedelye liſten.
            Hee tames with ſugred ſpeeches theyre boyſterus anger.
            In lykewiſe Neptun thee God, no ſooner apeered
            In coche: when billows theire ſwelling ranckor abated.
            Thee weather hackt Troians to the next ſhoare ſpeedely posting
            On Libye coaſt lighted: where they theire nauye repoſed.
            Theare ſtands far ſtretching a nouke vplandiſh: an Iſland
            Theare ſeat, with crabknob ſkrude ſtoans hath framed an hauen.
            This creeke with running paſſadge thee channel inhaunteth.
            Heere doe lye wyde ſcatterd and theare cliues loftelye ſteaming,
            And a brace of menacing ragd rocks ſkymounted abydeth.
            
               Ʋnder hauing cabbans, where ſeas doo flitter in arches.
            With woods and thickets cloſe coucht they be clothed al vpward.
            Acel or a cabban by nature formed, is vnder,
            Freſhe bubling fountayns and ſtoanſeats craued ar inward:
            Of Nymphes thee Nunry, wheere ſea toſt nauye remayning
            Needs not too grapple thee ſands with flooke of an anchor.
            
               
Hither hath Aeneas with ſeaun ſhips gladlye repayred.
            On ſands from veſſels dooth ſkippe thee coompanye cheereful,
            Pruning theyre bodyees, that ſeas erst terribil harmed.
            Firſt on flint ſmiting ſoom ſparcklinges ſprinckled Achates,
            In ſpunck or tinder thee quick fyre he kindly receaued.
            With sprigs dry wythered thee flame was noourriſhed aptly.
            Foorth do they lay vittayls, with ſtorme diſſeaſoned heauy.
            Theyre corne in quernstoans thye doe grind and toste yt on embers
            In the while Aeneas too rock crept loftye, beholding
            In the ſea far ſtretching yf that knight Antheus haplye,
            Were fruſht, or remanent of Troian nauye wer hulling:
            Or Capis, or the armours high picht of manlye Caicus.
            No ſhips thence he ſcried, but three ſtags ſturdye wer vnder
            Neere the ſeacost gating, theym ſlot thee clusterus heerdflock
            In greene frith browſing: ſtil he ſtands and ſnatcheth his arrows
            And bowbent ſharply, from kind and faythful Achates:
            Chiefe ſtags vpbearing croches high from the antlier hauted
            On trees ſtronglye fraying, with ſhaft hee stabd to the noombles
            Throgh fels and trenches thee chaſe thee coompanye tracked,
            Theyre blades they brandiſht, and keene prages goared in entrayls
            Of stags ſeun migty; with ſhips thee number is eeuened.
            With this good venery to the road thee captayn aproched
            And to his companions thee kild ſtags equalye ſorted.
            With wyne theire veniſon was ſwyld, that Nobil Acestes
            In ſhore Trinacrian bestowd with liberal offer.
            Theeſe pipes Aeneas then among thee coompany broched
            And with theeſe ſpeeches theyre myndes thus he cherriſhed hautlye
            O deere companions (for we erſt haue tasted of hardnes)
            Brawnd with woorſe venturs, thee mightye God alſoe ſhal eend this.
            Through Sicil his raging wyld frets and rumbolo ruſtling
            On peeres you ſayled, through Cyclops dangerus helcaue.
            On with a freſh courradge, and bace thoghts fearful abandon.
            Of peril eſcaped much ſhal thee vearye remembraunce
            Tickle vs in telling: through ſuch ſharp changeable hazards
            And doubtful dangers, oure courſe tward Italye bending,
            Wee muſt ruſh forward: oure ſeat theare deſtenye pitcheth.
            Theare muſt thee kingdoom with Troian fame be reuiued.
            
               
Stand ye to your tacklings: and wayt for proſperus eendings.
            Thus did he ſpeake manly, with great cares heauely loaden,
            His grief deepe ſquatting hoap he yeelds with phiſnomye cheereful.
            They doe plye theire commons, lyke quick and greedye repaſtours
            Thee ſtags vpbreaking they ſlit to the dulcet or inchepyn.
            Soom doe ſliſe owt collops on ſpits yeet quirilye trembling,
            Soom doe ſet on caldrons, oothers dooe kendel a bauen.
            With food they ſummond theyre force: and coucht in a meddow
            Theyre panch with veniſon they franck and quaffye carouſing,
            When famin had parted, the tabils eeke wholye remooued,
            They theire lost feloes with long talck greedye requyred.
            With feare good coomfort mingling: yf ſo haplye they liued,
            Or that their liues thee tempeſt bitter had eended.
            But chiefly Aeneas dyd wayle for manful Orontes
            And for knight Amicus, thee fats ek al heauye reuoluing
            Of Lycus and of ſturdye Gyan, with woorthye Cloanthus.
            Now the eende neere ſtreched; from ſeat when Iuppiter heunly
            Thee ſeas, thee regions and eeche place worldlye beholding,
            On Lybye land lastly fixt his celeſtial eyeſight.
            And thus as he muſed, with tears Ʋenus heauye beblubberd
            Preſt foorth in preſence, and whimpring framed her errand.
            O God moſt puſiaunt, whoſe mighty auctoritye laſting
            Ruls gods, and mankind ſkeareth with thunderus humbling:
            What ſyn hath Aeneas, my brat, committed agaynst the?
            What doe the poore Troians? who with fel boucherye ſlaghterd
            For bending paſſadge to the promiſed Italye, therefor
            No worldly corner can theym ſecuritye warrant.
            You to me ful promiſt, eare that yeers ſundrye wer eended,
            That Roman famely ſhould ſpring from the auncetrye Troian,
            By whom thee worldly coompas ſhould wholye be ruled.
            Wherefor (mightye father) what dooth thy phanſye thus alter?
            I tooke ſoom coomfort, when Troy was latelye repreſſed,
            With futur hap comming, past fortun vnhappye requiting.
            And yeet theeſe wretched vagabunds hard deſtenye ſcourgeth
            When ſhal (Prince puſiant) theeſe dangers dryrye be canceld?
            Antenor was habil, from Grekiſh coompanye ſlincking,
            Too paſſe through Greceland ſaulfly to Lyburnical empyre.
            
               
Alſo to thee fontayn welſpring of woorthye Timauus.
            Where through nyne channels with mountayns murmerus hurring
            Rough the ſea floas forward, thee land with ſnarnoiſe enhaunting
            Heere notwithſtanding this founder buylded a cittye,
            That Padua is cleaped, too linnadge Troian alotted.
            And arms of Troy towne bearing: there he ſaulflie doth harboure.
            Wee that ar of kinred too the, and haſt ſhrind in Olympus,
            Oure ſhips are whelmed through ons implacabil anger.
            (A pitiful reckning) we ar touzd, and from Italye feazed.
            Is this your daughters ritche dowry? her ſtabliſhed empire?
            Thee prince of mankind, father of Gods, mirrelye ſimpring
            Lyk when he thee tempeſt with cheereful phiſnomye calmeth,
            Buſt his prittye parat prating, and mildlye thus aunſwerd.
            Feare ye not (ô darling) on thy ſyde deſtenye runneth.
            Thee Roman townewals thow ſhalt ſee loftelye rayſed,
            And thy ſun Aeneas his glittring glorye to luster.
            This much I determyn, my mind no partye ſhal alter,
            Thy child Aeneas (for ſith ſuch care the doth anguiſh,
            Thee fates cloſe coouerd I wyl to the playnelye ſet open)
            Thy ſun, I ſay, valiant ſhal foster in Italy garboyls,
            Strong and ſturddye pepil with wars and victorye trampling.
            Theare ſhal he buyld cittyes, and theare laws ciuil enacting,
            Vntyl three ſummars ſhal coompas his hudge Lauyn empyre:
            And, the Rutils conquourd, three wynters ſtormye be glyding.
            But thy ſun Aſcanius, which is eeke ſurnamed Iulus,
            (Ilus he was termed, whilst stood the great Ilian empyre)
            Hee ſhal bee the regent, vntil yeers thirtye be flitted,
            From the Lauin kingdoom the state and thee chiefty remoouing:
            And with thick bulwarck ſhal he fence thee rempired Alba.
            Heere thre hundred wynters ſhal raigne knight Hector his ofſpring.
            By Mars fyrye fatherd twyns tyl the Queene Ilia gender;
            Romulus in forreſt of wulues dugge nurriſhed eager
            Shal take thee regiment, and towne wals ſtatelye ſhal vpraiſe
            Of Rome, thee Romans of his owne-name, Romulus, highting.
            This rule thus fixed no tyme ſhal limit, or hazard:
            Endles I do graunt yt: nay further Iuno fel harted,
            Thee ſeas, thee regions, thee ſkies ſo ſpightfulye moyling,
            
               
Shal cut of al quarrels, and with mee newlye ſhal enter
            In leage with Romans, and gowneſept charelye tender.
            Theeſe thus ar eſtabliſht. Theare ſhal cum a ſeaſon herafter,
            When thee ſayd famely ſhal cruſh Greeks ſegnorye throughly.
            Thee Troian Caeſar ſhal ſpire fro this auncetrye regal,
            His rule too Garamants, too stars his glorye rebounding
            Iulius of valerus princely ſurnamed Iulus.
            Thow ſhalt hym ſettle, with his eaſt spoyls fraighted, in heunſeat,
            Whom with relligious good vows ſhal magnifye diuerſe
            Thee world ſhal be quiet, then ſhal broyls bluddye be finniſht.
            Then playne ſound dealing with laws of woorthye Quirinus
            And Remus, his broother, thee Roman cittye ſhal order.
            Thee gates of warfare wyl then bee mannacled hardly
            With steele bunch chayne knob, clingd, knurd, and narrolye lincked.
            Heere within al ſtorming ſhal Mars bee ſetled on armoure
            With braſſe knots hundred crumpled; with ſweld furor haggiſh
            Lyke bandog grinning, with gnaſh tuſk greedelye ſnarring.
            Thus ſayd: he foorth posted (by May borne) Mercurye downeward
            That new buylt Carthage ſhould houſe thee Troian aſemblye.
            Hee flitters ſwiftly with wynges ful fledgye beplumed
            On Libye land ſeizing: ther he ſoone perfourmeth his erraund.
            Thee Moors are ſweetned by Gods forwarned apoinctement,
            But chief of al Dido, thee Queene, was wroght to the Troians.
            But the good Aeneas in night with care great awaked
            With Phoebus riſing vpgot, too ferret al vncooth
            Nouks of ſtrang country, in what coast his nauye doth harboure?
            If men, or yf ſauadge wyld beastes ther in onlye doe pasture.
            For ther he no tillagde dyd find: thus was he reſolued.
            And what he diſcoouerd, too tel to the coompanye flatly.
            His ſhips hee kenneld neere forreſt vnder an angle
            Of rock deepe dented, ſhaded with thickleaued arbours.
            Hee walcks on priuat with noane but faythful Achates
            Darts two foorth bringing with ſharp ſteele forcibil headed.
            In the myd of forrest as he gads, his moother aprocheth,
            In weed eke in viſage lyke a Spartan virgin in armour
            Or lyke to Herpalicee, ſweeft Queene, ſteeds ſtrong ouerambling,
            Which doth in her running ſurpas thee ſwift flud of Hebrus.
            
               
Shee bare on her ſhoulders her bow bent aptlye lyke huntreſſe;
            Downe to the wynd tracing trayld her diſcheaueled hearlocks;
            Tuckt to the knee naked: thus first ſhee forged her errand.
            Ho ſyrs, perceaud you ſoom mayden coompany stragling,
            Of my deere ſisters with quiuer cloſelye begyrded
            Rearing with ſhoutcry ſoom boare, ſoom ſanglier ougly?
            So Venus: and to Venus thee ſoon thus turned his aunſwer.
            We hard of no ſhowting, too ſight no ſiſter apered.
            
               ô to the, fayre Ʋirgin, what terme may rightlye be fitted?
            Thy tongue, thy viſadge no mortal frayltye reſembleth.
            Thart, No doubt, a Godeſſe, too Phoebus ſister, or arcted
            Too Nymphs in kynred: to the laſting glorye be graunted.
            Smooth this craggye trauayl: tel what celeſtial harbour
            Coompaſeth our perſons: theeſe men, this countrye we know not.
            Vs to this od corner thee wynd tempeſtuus hurled.
            This fiſt ſhal ſacrifice great flocks on thy ſacred altars.
            Then Ʋenus: I daigne not my ſelf wurth ſutch honor heunly.
            Of Tyrian virgins too weare thus a quiuer is vſed.
            And to go thus thynly with wrapt vp purpil atyred.
            Thow ſeeſt large Affrick, thee Moores, and Towne of Agenor,
            Thee Libye land marckmears: a country manful in armoure.
            In this coaſt Dido, from her broother flitted, is empreſſe.
            Tedius in telling and long were the iniurye total:
            Chief poyncts I purpoſe too touche with ſummarye ſhortneſſe.
            Her ſpouſe Sichaeus was namd, too no man vnequal
            In lands, her dandling with feruent paſſion hoatly.
            Her father in wedlock took to hym this virgin vnharmed.
            But then her owne broother was by right ſetled in empyre,
            Pygmalion named; thee ſinck and puddil of hateful
            And furiouſe cutthrots: hee murthred ſelly Sichoeus,
            With gould looue blynded iump at thee conſecrat altars.
            Of ſiſters freendſhip reckning; thee murther he whusted,
            His ſyb in her mourning with long coynd forgerye feeding.
            But loa, the proper image of corps vntumbed apeered
            In dreame too Dido; with pale wan phiſnomye ſtaring.
            His breſt he vncloaſed, thee wound, and bluddyful altars.
            Thence to flit hee wild her, not long in countrye remayning,
            
               
Tward her coſtlye viadge his wief to hyd treaſur he poincted,
            Where the vnknowne ingots of gould and ſiluer abounded.
            Dido ſo wel forniſht too flee with coompanye posteth.
            Such folck as the tyrant purſude with vengeabil hatred,
            Or feard his regiment in thronging cluſter aſembled.
            They ſnach ſuch veſſels that then were rigd to be ſayling
            Pigmalions riches was ſhipt, that pinchepeny boucher.
            And of this valiant attempt a woomman is authreſſe.
            Theare they were enſhoared, wheare thow ſhalt ſhortlye ſe townwals.
            And citty vpſoaring of new Carthago to ſkytoppe.
            Thee plat they purchaſt, that place first Byrſa they cleaped
            And ſo much as a bulhyd could coompas craftelye getting.
            But ſyrs, whence coom you? what wights? or too what abyding
            Countrye do you purpoſe too paſſe? Thee capteyn amazed,
            And ſobs deepe fetching, with ſight ful ſadlye thus aunſwerd.
            O gay Godeſſe luſtringe yf I made to the largelye recital,
            Or that of oure troubles you would to the ſummarye listen,
            Thee night thee ſunbeams would ſhrowd in claſped Olympus.
            Wee coom from Troytowne (of Troyſeat yf haplye the rumoure
            Youre ears hath tinckled) late a tempest boyſterus haggard
            Oure ſhips to Libye land with rough extremitye tilted.
            I am kind Aeneas, from foes thee ſnatcher of houſgods
            Stowd in my veſſels: in ſkyes my glorye doth harboure.
            Land I ſeek Italian: from Ioue my pettegrye buddeth.
            I made from Troytowne with veſſels twentye to ſeaward,
            My dam myghtye Godeſſe gyding, I my deſtenye tracked.
            Rackt with ſoure bluſtring ſeaun ſhips ar ſcantlye recoouerd
            I lyke a poore pilgrim throgh deſert angle of Affrick
            Wander, thruſt from Aſian regions and fortunat Europ.
            Heere Venus embarring his tale thus ſweetlye replyed.
            What wight thwart, doubtleſſe thee gods al greatlye doe tender
            Thy ſtate, neere Tyrian citty ſo lucklye to iumble.
            Hence take thy paſſadge, to the Queenes court princelye be trudging.
            Theare thy coompanions with battred nauye be landed,
            With flaws cruſht ruffling, with north blaſt canuaſed hurring.
            Thus ſtand thy recknings, vnleſſe me myn augurye fayleth.
            Marckloa, ſe wel yoonder ſwans twelue in coompany fluſshing
            
               
And the ſkytip percing, enchast with a murtherus eagel
            Swift doe fle too landward, on ground al preſt tobe ſeazed.
            As theeſe birds feazed, theyre wyngs with 
                  •
               olitye flapping,
            Sweepe the ſkye, with gladnes theyre creaking harmonye gagling,
            Eunſo thye companions, or now with ſaulftye be ſhoared,
            Or, voyd of al danger, theyre ſhips are grappled at anchor.
            Speedelye bee packing, keep on hardlye the playne beaten highway.
            This ſayd ſhee turned with roſe color heaunlye beglittred.
            Her locks lyke Nectar perfumes ſweet melloe relinquiſht.
            Her trayne ſy
                  •
                flagging lyke wyde ſpread Conopye trayled.
            Her whiſk ſhewd Deity, hee finding his moother, in anger
            Chauffing; thee fugitiue with theeſe woords ſharplye reprooued.
            What do ye meane (moother) with an elf ſhow, vaynelye thus often
            Youre ſoon too iuggle? why oure hands both claſpe we not hardly?
            Why do we not playnely good ſpeeches mutual vtter?
            Tward citty trauayling thus he blames her forgerye maſked.
            But Ʋenus enſhrowds theym with a thick fog palpabil ayrye,
            Vnſeen of eeche perſon by ſleight inuiſibil armed:
            Leaſt ſoom theyre paſſadge with curius article hyndring
            Would learne, whence they trauayld? Too what coaſt ar they repayring?
            Shee to her loftye Paphos with gladneſſe myrrye returneth:
            Wheare ſtands her temple with an hundred conſecrat altars;
            Smoaking with the encenſe; the loa pauement ſenteth of herbflowrs.
            In thee meane ſeaſon they doe paſſe directlye to towneward
            They trip too mountayns high typ, thee cittye but vnder
            Marcking; thee caſtels and turrets statelye beholding.
            Aeneas woondreth; where dorps and cottages earſt ſtood,
            For to ſe ſuch ſturring, ſuch stuffe, ſuch gorgeus handwoorck.
            Thee Moors drudge roundly; ſoom wals are loftelye rayſing;
            Soom mount high castels; ſoom ſtoans downe tumble al headlong;
            Soom mearefurth platfoorms, for buylding curius houſes;
            Soom dooe chooſe the Senat, ſound laws and order enacting;
            Soom frame play theaters; ſoom deepelye dig harborus hauens;
            Soom for great palaces doo ſliſe from quarrye the chapters.
            Lyke bees in ſummar ſeaſon, through ruſtical hamlets
            That flirt in ſoonbeams, and toyle with mutterus humbling.
            When they do foorth carry theyre yoong ſwarme fledggie to gathring:
            
               
Or cels ar farcing with dulce and delicat hoonnye:
            Or porters burdens vnloads, or clustred in heerdſwarme
            Feaze away thee droane bees with ſting, from maunger, or hiuecot,
            Thee labor hoat ſweltreth: thee combs tyme flowrye be ſprinckleth.
            O wights most bleſſed, whoſe wals be thus happelye touring
            Aeneas vttred: thee towne top ſharplye beholding.
            Hee throngs in ſhryne clowd (a ſtrang and meruelus order)
            Through crowds of the pepil, not ſeene, nor marcked of annye.
            In towns myd center theare ſprouted a groauecrop, in arbours
            Greene weede thick ſhaded, wheare Moors from ſurge water angry
            Parted, a good token dyd find: for Iuno, the Princeſſe,
            Theare the pate, in digging, of an horſe intractabil vttred.
            Thee wiſe diuined, by this prognosticat horſhead,
            That Moors wyde conqueſt ſhould gayne with vittayl abundant.
            Heere to Iuno Godeſſe thee Princeſſe Dido dyd offer
            A fayre buylt temple, with treaſure ritchlye replenniſht.
            Thee ſtayrs braſſye griſes ſtately preſented, here alſo
            Thee beams with brazed copper were coſtlye bepounced.
            And gates with the metal dooe creake in ſhrilbated harſhing.
            In this greene frithcops a new ſight newly repreſſed
            Long feareful dangers: Aeneas freſhlye beginneth
            For to raiſe his courradge: his ſharp aduerſitye treading,
            For whilſt in temple corners hee gogled his eyeſight
            Wayting for Dido; the ſtat of thee cittye beholding,
            Whilſt craftmens coonning hee marckt with woonder amazed,
            Hee ſpied on ſuddeyn thee conflicts Troian al ordred,
            And that theire bickrings al ſoyls haue coompaſed earthly.
            Hee ſeeth Atrides, Priamus, to both hurtful Achilles.
            Fast he ſtood: and trickling dyd speake: what nouke (ſyr Achates)
            In World what region do not our toyls liuelye remember?
            Loa the, ſe king Priamus; ſoom crooms of glorye be reſting.
            Soom tears this monument and ſoom compaſſion aſketh.
            Pluck vp a good curradge? this fame ſoom ſaulftye wyl offer.
            Thus ſayd, his hert throbbing with vayne dead pictur he feedeth;
            Groane ſighs deepe reaching with tears his lyers ful he blubbred.
            Hee ſees with baretours Troy wals inuironed hardly:
            Heere Greeks ſwiftlye fleing, theym Troiyouths coompanye cruſhing.
            
               
Theare gad thee Troians:in coach runs helmed Achilles.
            Hee weeps alſo, ſeing flags whit, with Rheſus his holding
            In ſleepe, whom napping, Tydides blooddye betrayed,
            His fierce steeds leading to the camp, er al hungrye they graſed
            On Troian paſturs, or Xanth ſtream gredelye bibled.
            Troilus hee marcked running, deueſted of armour:
            A luckleſſe ſtripling, not a matche too coape with Achilles:
            With steeds he is ſwinged, downe picht in his hudge wagon emptye,
            Thee rayns yeet griping: his neck and locks fal a ſweeping
            Thee ground, his launce ſtaffe thee duſt top turuye doth harrow.
            In thee meane ſeaſon Troy dames too temple aproched
            Of fretting Pallas, with locks vntreſſed al hanging,
            With grief meeklye praying, with breaſt knocks humblye requesting.
            Thee Godes hard louring to the ground her phiſnomye drowped.
            Theare thriſe about Troy wals with ſpight knight Hector is haled.
            For gould his carcaſſe was ſold by the broker Achilles.
            Heere ſighs and ſobbing from breſt vp he mightelye rooted,
            Thus too ſee the wagon, thee ſpoyl, the vnfortunat ending
            Of deere companion, thee lyke cars alſo doe ſting hym,
            For to ſe king Priamus, with his hands owtstreched, vnarmed.
            Hymſelf hee marcked combynd with Greekiſh aſemblye.
            Hee noted Indye pepil, with ſwart black Memnon his armye.
            Theare wear Amazonical woommen with targat, an haulfmoone
            Lykning, conducted by frantick Pentheſilêa,
            No ſwarms or trouping horſmen can apale the virago,
            Her dug with platted gould rybband girded about her.
            A baratreſſe, daring with men, thogh a mayd, to be buckling.
            Whilſt prince Aeneas theeſe picturs woonderus heeded,
            And eeche pane throghly with ſtedfaſt phiſnomye marcked,
            Too churche Queene Dido, thee pearle of bewtye, repayred:
            Of liuely yoonckers with a galland coompanye garded.
            In Cynthus forrest much lyk too ſwift flud of Eurot
            Where Nymphs a thowſand do friſk with Princelye Diana.
            On back her quiuer ſhee bears, and highlye the remnaunt
            Of Nymphs ſurpaſing with talright quantitye mounting.
            Too ſe this, her ſpirit with ſecret gladnes aboundeth.
            Such was Dido ioying, ſo ſhe with regalitye paſſed,
            
               
With Princely preſence thee wurcking coompanye cheering.
            In the gate of the Godeſſe ſhee ſyts, neere temple his arches
            In chayre ſtately throned, with cluſtring garriſon armed.
            Shee frams firmlye ſtatuts, and taſk wurcks equalye parteth.
            Or toyls too pioners by drawcut lotterye ſorteth.
            Now ſees Aeneas with a crowding ſudden aſemblye
            Antheus and alſo Sergeſtus, doughtye Cloanthus,
            And oother Troians with rough ſeas ſtormye beſweltred,
            Too ſoyl vnacquaynted by tempeſt horriblye pelted.
            Hee ſtands aſtonyed, ſo woondreth lykwiſe Achates:
            For to ſhak hands freendly fear bars, now gladnes on haleth.
            But the caſe vnwytted theym lets, thearfor they reſolued,
            With darck clowd ſhaded, too learne theyr formor auentur,
            Wheare ryde theyre veſſels? why they coom? what caus is of haſtning?
            For they the pickt choiſemen dyd cul from nauye, requeſting
            Mercye, to the temple trotting with meruelus houling.
            When they wer in preſence, of pleading pardon afurded,
            Then the braue Ilionus thus ſtout deliured his errand.
            O Queene moſt puſiaunt, too whom king Iuppiter heunly
            Too raiſe a new citty, by rare felicitye, graunted,
            And to rule a countrey, with ſcepter of equitye, ſturdy:
            Wee caytiefe Troians, with ſtorms ventoſitye mangled,
            Doo craue thee (Princeſſe) from flams oure nauye to guerdon.
            Yeeld pytye, graunt mercy; flowrs of gentilitye pardon.
            For we hither ſayld not, thee Moors with an armye to vanquiſh;
            Or from their region with prede too gather an heardflock.
            Such valerus coorradge rarely men conquered haunteth.
            Theare stands a region, by Greeke bards Heſperye named,
            A wel known countrey, for ſtrong and plentiful holden,
            Theare dwelt th'Oenotrians; but in oure adge Italye cleaped,
            So namd of captayn: too this braue countrye we mynded
            Too bend oure iourney.
            But with a flaw ſuddeyn chauffing ſtormbringer Orion,
            Spurnt vs too the waters then ſootherne ſwaſhruter huffling
            Flundge vs on high ſhelueflats, to the rocks vs he buffeted after.
            Heere then a poore remnaunt in this thy ſegnorye landed.
            What fel beastlye pepil reſt heer? ſuch barbarus vſadge
            
               
What ſoyle wyld foſters? On ſands they renounce vs an harboure.
            They doe byd vs battayl, fro the ſhoare thee coompanye puſshing.
            If ye doe ſkorne mankind, and eeche wight mortal his harming,
            Let Gods ſharp Iuſtice in ſoom ſort yeet be remembred,
            Oure king Aeneas vs ruld, who for equitye rightful
            Euerye man owtpaſſed, for feats and martial armoure.
            If this prince matchleſſe no mortal deſtenye daunted,
            But yet is in breathing, from tempeſt ſaulflye recoouerd:
            Firſt begin a freendſhippe, for he wyl make fullye requital.
            In Sicil eek region fayre towneſhips ſundrye be ſetled:
            In that od Iſle raigneth, from Troyblud ſpirted, Aceſtes.
            Graunt foorth thy warrant in docks oure nauye toe ſettle:
            Graunt plancks from forreſt too clowt oure battered inlecks,
            That we our king meeting may paſſe tward Italye ſayling.
            If Libye ſeas raging the liefe of this captayn haue eended,
            If no good coomfort dooth reſt of nobil Iulus:
            Suffer vs at leaſt wiſe, with iagged nauye retyring
            To Sicil oure paſſadge too bend, too famus Aceſtes.
            This ſpeche had Ilionus: that ſong his coompanye chaunted.
            Brieflye then heere Dido, with downe caſt phiſnomye, parled.
            Reſt ye quiet, Troians, your thoghts from danger abandon.
            In great ſundrye peryls, my ſtate ſet rawlye me ſtreineth
            Too keepe thus the ſeacoaſt with ward and garriſon heedeful.
            Who doe not Aeneas, or Troian cittye remember?
            Theire valor and courradge, theyre fyrebrand glorius onſets?
            Wee Moors, lyke dullards, are not ſo wytles abyding,
            Nor Phebe from oure citty dooth ſo far ſunder his horſes.
            Yf ye be determynd, too ſayl to old Italye Saturne,
            Or to Sicil backward to the king, right nobil, Acestes,
            Ile ye man, eſquipping youre ſhips with furniture aptlye.
            Or wyl you ſoiourne in this my feminin empyre?
            In towne you deniſons I do make: let nauye be docked.
            Troians and Tyrians I wyl with one equitye meaſure.
            Would God your captayn with ſootherne blastpuf inhurled
            Heere made his arriual; but a watch tward mouth of eche hauen
            Speedelye ſhal he placed, your chieftayn woorthye to ferret:
            Wheather he through forreſt doeth range, or wandreth in hamlets.
            
               
This princelye promiſſe boldning both manful Achates
            And father Aeneas, thee clowd with greedines eager
            Too cleaue they coouet: to Aeneas thus first ſayd Achates.
            Thow ſun of heunlye Godeſſe, how ſtands thy phanſye reſolued?
            Thow ſeeſt al cock ſure, thy fleete, thy coompanye ſalued.
            One ſhip is only abſent, that in oure ſight ſanckt to the bottom.
            Thy moothers prophecy to the remnaunt fitlye doth aunſwere.
            Scant had he thus ſpoken, when clowd theym droſsye relinquiſht,
            And from earthly thickneſſe, too thinneſſe vanniſhed ayerye.
            Theare ſtud vp Aeneas, with glittring beautye redowning.
            Godlyke in his feauture: for his heunly moother amended
            His buſh with trimming, his ſight was yoouthlye bepurpled:
            His looke ſweete ſimpred, much lyke to the pulliſhed iuerye
            By crafts hand burniſht: or with Phoebe ſiluer enameld:
            Or touch stoane brazed with deepe gould purelye refined.
            Hee then vnexſpected to the Queene thus brauelye replyed.
            Heere do I ſtand preſent, whom you ſo gladlye required,
            Aeneas Troian from ſtormes defalcked of Affrick.
            Of trauayl of Troians, O Queene, thee ſucceres only.
            Wee crooms of Troians with land and ſeafurye moyled,
            Of welth diſpoyled, lyke plodding ſtormebeaten haglers
            From natiue country, from citty exiled abyding,
            For theeſe thy benifits too make lyke freendlye requital
            I may not, Dido: nay the routs of progenye Troian
            Through wilde world ſcatterd, can not make woorthy repayment.
            Thee Gods (yf Deitee worcks of wights godlye regardeth,
            If right bee raigning, yf vertue is too be rewarded)
            Yeeld to the lyke kyndneſſe, What world, what vertuus heunly
            Both father and moother gaue breath to ſo peereles a daughter.
            Whilst hils cast ſhaddows, whilt ſtreams to the ſeas be reuoluing,
            Whilst stars ar twinckling in the orbs of fixed Olympus,
            Thy fame with thine honor ſhal bee by eternitye blazed
            To what coaſt I trauayl: Theeſe ſpeeches duytiful vttred
            Hee ſhaks Ilionus with righthand, alſoe Serestus
            With lefthand, ſo doughtye Gian, ſo doughtye Cloanthus.
            Firſt was Queene Dido with a ſight thus ſudden apaled,
            Next with his hard venturs, and thus ſhee rendred her aunſwer.
            
               
Thow ſun of hautye Godeſſe, what crooked dangerus hazards
            Purſu thy perſon? what ſeas thee terribil hither
            Haue flounst? And art thow Aeneas mightye, begotten
            Of thy ſyre Anchiſes, and of Ʋenus at Simo fountayne?
            I ſaw king Teucer whillon too Sidon aproching
            Expulſt fro his regions, his right with might too recouer,
            And with ayd of Belus: then my ſire Belus in Iſland
            Of Cyprus raigned, that land with victorie may string
            From that tyme forward I knewe thee Troian auenturs,
            Thee name of thee citty, what kings ſucceded in empyre.
            Enne thee veri enimy thee Troians glorye did vtter.
            And from theyre linnadge right hee deriued his ofſpring.
            Whearefor, freend Troians, with draw your ſelues to mye lodgings.
            Mee the lyk hard venturs erst, and aduerſitye ſuffring
            In this new kingdoom good fortun laſtlye repoſed,
            My ſelf erst flighted to reliue thee flicted I learned.
            Thus ſhee diſcourſed: to palaice foorth ſtatelye ſhe leadeth
            Thee prince Aeneas; when ſeruice godlye was eended.
            Thee whilſt to his nauy ſhee cauſed twentye fat oxen
            Straight to be conueighed, with an hundred briſteled hudgebrawns,
            Of ſheepe lyke number with lambs: gods mightye rewarding.
            But the inner lodgings were with regalitye trimmed.
            In mydſt of chaumber thee roume for bancket is apted,
            Thee wals are cloathed with maſſy and purpuled arras,
            Of plate great cuphoords, thee gould emboſſed in anticque
            Patterns, her linnadge by long fetcht pettegre trayling
            Of ſyers thee bedrol with natiue countrye recorded.
            Then the good Aeneas (for carcking natural eggeth
            Thee mynd of the parent) to the veſſels poſted Achates,
            This to tel Aſcanius, conducting hym to the cittye.
            Thee ſyre in his darlings good ſucceſſe chieflye reioyceth.
            Lykwiſe he commaunded too bring from nauye the preſents
            Snacht from Troy ranſackt, with gould frets ritchlye bedawbed.
            Alſo the roabe pretiouſe colored lyke ſaufred Achantus:
            Which plad veſted Helen, from Greece when to Troy ſhe flitted:
            Her weeds of wedlock, that her baut dam Leda dyd offer,
            Of price a rare preſent: alſo thee ſcepter he willed
            
               
Of the fayr Ilionce to be broght: this fayrye was eldeſt
            Of Priamus daughters, this mace too carrye ſhe woonted:
            Thee pearle and gould crowns too bring with garganet heauye.
            With this charge vttred to the veſſels haſtned Achates.
            But Ʋenus in muſing with caers intoxicat hudling
            New ſleights freſh forgeth: the face of trim prittye Cupido
            Too chang with iuggling, whereby bee too Dido reſorting
            In place of Aſcanius, with gyfts might carrye the Princeſſe
            Too brayneſick loouefits, to her boans fire ſmouldered huffling.
            For Ʋenus haulf doubteth thee Moors ſly treacherus handling:
            Juno her rormenteth: by night this terror her haunteth.
            This reaſon her ſturring thus ſpake ſhe to cocknye Cupido.
            My ſweete choiſe bulcking, my force and my power onlye,
            My baby despiſing thee bolts of Iuppiter angrye;
            Of the request I refuge, with meeke ſubmiſſion humbled.
            Thow knoweſt Aeneas, by broothers byrth to the lincked,
            Through ſeas to haue wandred by Iunoes merciles hattred:
            Thow knowſt thee venturs: my grief thy hert often hath anguiſht.
            Dido enterteigneth this guest with curteſye ciuil.
            Yeet do I ſtil feare me theeſe fayre Iunonical harbours.
            In ſtraw thear lurcketh ſoom pad: yeet wyl ſhe be ſturring.
            Thearefor her endewours with counter craftinis hynder.
            Inflame thee Princeſſe with looues affection earnest
            That mye ſun Aeneas with mee ſhee chieflye may dandle.
            This drift too coompaſſe let this my loare be wel heeded.
            At the fathers ſending thee boy to the cittye repayreth.
            (Delicat Aſcanius, whoſe forward ſucces I tender)
            With many rich preſents from Troyflams narrolye ſcaped.
            This child fast ſleeping wyl I lodge in loftye Cythera,
            Els on hil Idalium in ſeat ſacred he ſhal be repoſed.
            Least that he this ſtratagem ſhould find, or woorck wylye founder.
            Thow ſhalt his viſadge for a nights ſpace fitlye reſemble.
            Thee gay boy kindlye playing, thee knowne lads phiſnomye taking:
            That when Queene Dido ſhal col the, and ſmacklye bebaſſe thee,
            When quaffing wynebols, when bancquets deyntye be ſerued,
            When ſhe ſhal embrace thee, when lyplicks ſweetlye ſhe fastneth;
            That then thow be ſuer, too plant thy poyſoned hoat looue.
            
               
Too moothers counſayl thee fyrye Cupido doth harcken
            Of puts he his feathers, fauoring with gatetrip Julus.
            But Venus enfuſeth ſweet ſleepe to the partye reſembled,
            Too woods Idalian thee child nice cocknyed heauing
            In ſeat of her booſom: neere ſenting delicat herbflowrs
            Of pretious. Maioram, with ſhade most temperat houſed.
            But now thee changling with gyfts dooth trudge to the cyttye
            On to the court poſting: his gyde was truſtful Achates.
            When that he too chaumber, moſt ſtately decked, aproched
            Dido ſat on beadsteed with curtens gorgeus hanged.
            Then father Aeneas with Troian cluſter aſembled:
            On palet of ſcarlet they were for coſsherye ſetled.
            Thee wayting ſeruaunts riche baſons maſſye doe carrye
            Alſoe wyping towels: maunchets ſum in pantrye doe baſket
            Fiftye buſy damſels with charge of buttrye be tangled
            With flame eke relligiouſe too fire thee conſecrat aultars.
            Maydens, manſeruaunts, of eche is there numbred an hundred,
            That with princelye viand the tabils al francklye doe furniſh.
            Thee Tyrian lordings too Court moſt freſhlyeer ſorted.
            On neeld wroght carpets theeſe guestes were al vſshered aptly.
            Aeneas preſents they marck, they doe gaze at Iulus.
            His face goodlye roſet, with ſpeaking forgerye feigned.
            They doe look at mantel, with roabs of ſaffrod Achanthus:
            To futur harme lotted: but chiefllye the princes vnhappie
            Is not with gazing contented fullye, but eauer
            Shee doth eye thee preſents: thee mopſy her phantaſye lurcheth.
            On father Aeneas his neck thee dandiprat hangeth.
            And to his great lyking his ſyre ſuppoſed be gayneth.
            Heeſ kips too Dido: thee Queene with curteſye cheereful
            Accepts thee princox: ſoomtyme ſhe hym claſpeth in armes.
            Poore ſoule not wytting what great God her he atlye beſiegeth.
            But this prittye peacock, his dames charge flilye remembring,
            Firſt of al attempteth too raze from phanſye Sichaus.
            With quick looue liuing fro the dead the affection haling:
            Too new flamd liking her mynd, erſt ruſtye, reducing.
            When fare was finniſht the tabils eeke ſtately remooued
            Hudge bols thick they placed, with garlands crownd the they mazars.
            
               
Al the palaice ringeth with ſtamp, a mutterus humming
            Tinckleth through the entryes: the tapers eeke kendled ar hanging
            From gold wyre glittring: thee night with brightnes is owted.
            Heere thee Queene wylled that a maſſiue gould cup, abounding
            With ſtoans coucht pretious, ſhould bee preſented; her owne hands
            Thee goulden goblet with ſpirt wyne nappye replenniſht.
            This cup king Belus with her old ſyers former al vſed.
            Thee rout kept a ſilence, theeſe ſpeeches Dido dyd vtter.
            Iuppiter (of gueſt folcks thee ſtay thwart truelye reported)
            Graunt that this preſent Tyrian with Troian aſemblye
            May breede good fortune to our freends and kynred heer after.
            Let make ſport Bacchus, with good ladye Iuno, be preſent.
            And ye, my freend Tyrians, thee Troian coompanye frollick
            Thus ſayd, with ſipping in veſſel nycelye ſhe dipped.
            Shee chargeth Bicias: at a blow hee luſtelye ſwapping,
            Thee wyne freſh ſpuming with a draught ſwild vp to the bottom.
            Thee remnant lordings hym pledge: Then curled Ioppas
            Twangd on his harp golden, what he whillon learned of Atlas.
            How the moone is trauerſd; how planet ſoonnye reuolueth,
            Hee chaunts: how mankind, how beasts dooe carrye their ofſpring.
            How floods be engendred, ſo how fire, celestial Arcture,
            Thee rainebreede ſeunstars, with both the Trionical orders.
            Why the ſun at weſtward ſo tymely in wynter is houſed.
            And whye the night ſeaſons in ſummer ſwiftlye be poſting.
            Thee Moors hands clapping, thee Troians, plaudite, flapped.
            But with ſundrye motiue demaunds Queene Dido the night ſpace
            Strecht, then vnhappy being with looues ſweet poyſon atached,
            Verye much of Priamus demaunding and much of Hector.
            Alſo how thee darling of bright Aurora was armed?
            How Diameds horſes were ſhapt? how strong was Achilles?
            Nay gueſt, quod the lady, decipher from the beginning
            Thee Greekiſh falſhood, with thy owne ſharp venterus hazards.
            For now ſeun ſummers ar ſpent, ſence thy trauayl hardy
            On land and ſayling, lyk pilgrim, cauſd the to wander.
            Finis libri primi.
         
         
            
            THEE SECVND
BOOKE OF VIRGIL
HIS AENEIS.
            WYth tentiue lyſtning eeche wight was ſetled in harckning.
            Thus father Aeneas chronicled from lofty bed hautye.
            You me byd, O Princeſſe, too ſcarrify a feſtered old ſoare
            How that thee Troians wear preſt by Graecian armye.
            Whoſe fatal miſery my ſight hath wytneſed heauye:
            In which ſharp byckring my ſelf, as partye, remayned.
            What ruter of Dolopans weare ſo cruel harted in harckning,
            What curſt Myrmidones, what karne of canckred Vliſſes
            That voyd of al weeping could eare ſo mortal an hazard?
            And now with moyſture thee night from welken is hastning:
            And ſtars too ſlnmber dooe ſtur mens natural humours.
            How be yt (Princelye Regent) yf that thy affection earnest
            Thy mynd enflameth, too learne our fatal auentures,
            Thee toyls of Troians, and laſt in fortunat affray:
            Thogh my queazy ſtomack that bluddy recital abhorreth,
            And tears with trilling ſhal bayne my phiſnomye deepely:
            Yeet thyn hoat affected deſyre ſhal gayn the reherſal.
            Thee Greekiſh captayns with wars and destenye mated.
            Fetching from Pallas ſoom wiſe celestial engyn,
            Framd a ſteed of tymber, ſteaming lyk mounten in hudgneſſe.
            A vow for paſſadge they faynde, and Brute ſo reported.
            In this od hudge ambry they ramd a number of hardye
            Tough knights, thick farcing thee ribs with cluſtered armoure.
            In ſight is Tenedos of Troy; thee famoſed Iſland;
            Whilſt Priamus flooriſht, a ſeat with ritches abounding.
            But now for ſhipping a rough and dangerus harboure.
            Theare lurckt theeſe minions in ſort moſt ſecret abiding.
            Al we then had deemed, to Grace that the armye retyred
            Thearefor thee Troians theyre longborne ſadnis abandon:
            
               
Thee gates vncloaſed they ſkud with a liuely vagare,
            Thee tents of the enymyes marcking, and deſolat hauen.
            Heere foght thee Dolopans, theare ſtoutly encountred Achilles,
            Heere rode thee nauye: theare bat tayls bluddye wear offred.
            Soom do loke on diſmal preſent of loftye Minerua.
            Alſo they gaze woondring at the horſe his meruelus hudgneſſe
            And firſt exhorteth thee Troians ſeallye Tymetes
            Too bring thee monument in too thee cittye; then after
            For to place in ſtately caſtel thee monſterus Idol.
            Wheather he ment treaſons, or ſo ſtood deſtenye Troian.
            But Capys and oothers diuing more deepely to bottom,
            Warelye ſuſpecting in gyfts thee treacherye Greekiſh,
            Dyd wiſh thee woodden monſter weare drowned, or harbourd
            In ſcorching fyrebrands: or ribs too ſpatter a ſunder.
            Thee wauering Commons in kym kam ſectes ar haled.
            Firſt then among oothers, with no ſmal coompanye garded
            Laocoon ſtorming from Princely castel is hastning,
            And a far of beloing: what fond phantaſtical harebrayne
            Madnes hath enchaunted your wits, you town ſmen vnhappye?
            Weene you (blynd hodipecks) thee Greekiſh nauye retùrned?
            Or that theyre preſents want craft? Is ſubtil Ʋliſſes
            So ſoone for gotten? My lief for an haulf penye (Troians)
            Either heer ar couching ſoom troups of Greekiſh aſemblye,
            Or to cruſh our bulwarcks this woorck is forged, al houſes
            For to prye ſurmounting thee towne: ſoom practis or oother
            Heere lurcks of coonning: truſt not this treacherus enſigne:
            And for a ful reckning, I lyk not barrel or hearing.
            Thee Greeks bestowing theyre preſents Greekiſh I feare mee.
            Thus ſayd: he ſtout reſted, with his chaapt ſtaf ſpeedelye running
            Strong the ſteed he chargeth, thee planckrybs manfuly riuing.
            Then the iade, hit, ſhiuered, thee vauts haulf ſhrillye rebounded
            With cluſh claſh buzing, with droomming clattered humming.
            Had Gods or fortun no ſuch courſe deſtenye knedded:
            Or that al our ſenſes weare not ſo bluntlye benummed
            Thear ſleight and ſtratagems had beene diſcoouered eaſlye,
            Now Troy with Priamus caſtel moſt ſtatelye remayning.
            But loa, the mean ſeaſon, with ſhouting clamorus hallow
            
               
Of Troy towne the ſhepheerds a yoncker mannacled haling
            Preſent too Priamus: this guest ful ſlylye dyd offer
            Hym ſelf for captiue, thearby too coompas his heaſting,
            And Troian citty to his Greekiſh countrye men open.
            A braſſe bold merchaunt in cauſes dangerus hardye.
            In doubtful matters thus ſtands hee flattlye reſolued,
            Or to cog: or certeyn for knauerye to purchas a Tyburne.
            Thee Troian ſtriplings crowding dooe cluſter about hym:
            Soom view thee captiue, ſoom frumping quillites vtter.
            Now lysten lordings, too Greekiſh cooſinage harcken,
            And of one od ſubtil ſtratagem, moſt treacherus handling
Consteral.
            For when this princox in mydſt of throng ſtood vnarmed,
            Heedelye thee Troians marcking with phiſnomye staring:
            Oh, quod he, what region ſhal ſhrowd mee villenus owtcast?
            Whearto ſhal I take me forlorne vnfortunat hoaplost?
            From Greekiſh countrey do I stand quit banniſhed: alſo
            Thee wrath hoat of Troians my blood now fierclye requireth.
            Thus with a ſob ſighing our mynds with mercye relenting
            Greedelye wee coouet, too learne his kinred, his errand,
            His ſtate, eke his meaning, his mynd, his fortun, his hazard.
            Then the ſquyre emboldned dreadles thus coyned an aunſwer.
            King: my faith I plight heere, to relate thee veritye ſoothlye.
            I may not, I wyl not deny my Greecian of ſpring.
            Thogh Sinon a caytiefe by fortun ſcuruye be framed
            A lyer hym neauer may ſhe make, nor cogger vnhoneſt.
            If that, king puſiaunt, ye haue herd earst haplye reported
            Thee name of thee famouſe Palamedes greatlye renowmed:
            Thee Greeks this captayne with villenus iniurye murdred:
            Hym they lying charged with treaſons falſlye, for hyndring
            Forfooth theyre warfars: hym dead now dolfulye mourne they:
            Too ſerue this woorthy, to hym neerely in kinred alyed,
            My father vnwelthy mee ſent, then a prittye page, hither.
            Whilſt he stood in kyngdoom cockſure, whilſt counſel auayled,
            Then we were of reckning; our feats weare duelye regarded.
            But when my cooſen was ſnapt by wycked Ʋliſſes,
            (A ſtorye far publiſht, no gloaſing fabil I twattle)
            
               
With choloricque fretting I dumpt, and ranckled in anguiſh:
            My tongue not charming with fuming fuſtian anger
            Playnelye with owt cloaking, I vowd to be kindlye reuenged,
            Eauery yf I backward too natiue countrye returned.
            And thus with menacing lyp threats I purchaſed hatred.
            Hence grew my croſbars, hence always after Vliſſes
            With new forgd treaſons me, his foa, too terrefye coouets.
            Ofthe gaue owt rumours, hee fabled ſundrye reportes,
            Mee to trap in matters of ſtate, with forgerye knauiſh.
            His malice hee foſtred, tyl that prieſt Calchas he gayned.
            But loa, to what purpoſe do I chat ſuch ianglerye trim trams?
            What needs this 
                  •
               yngring? ſyth Greeks ye hold equal in hatred,
            Syth this eke herd, ſerueth, ſpeede furth your blooddye reuengment.
            So ye may ful pleaſure thee Greeks, and profit Ʋliſſes.
            Thee les he furth pratled, thee more wee longed in harcking,
            Too learne al the reaſons, no Greekiſh villenye doubting,
            Thee reſt chil ſhiuering he with hert deliuered hollow.
            Thee Greeks theyre paſſadge very oft determined homward.
            And clooyd with byckring theeſe wars they thoght to relinquiſh.
            Would God yt had falne ſo: yet yt had ſo truelye; but often
            South wynds with wynter ſtorming theyre iournye dyd hinder.
            Alſo of late ſeaſon, when the horſe was finniſhed holye
            Thee ſkyes lowd rumbled with ringing thunderus hurring.
            With weather astonyed, with ſuch ſtorms geaſon agryſed,
            Wee ſent Euripilus too ſacred Apollo for aunſwer.
            Too ſoon he this meſſadge ruful from the oracle vttred.
            Thee wynds with bloodſhed were ſwagd, with ſlaughter of hallowd
            
               Ʋirgin, to Troy ward when firſt you bended a na
                  •
               ye,
            Youre viage alſo hoamward a ſlaughter blooddye requyreth.
            Thee wynd puffe bluſtring no blood but Greecian aſketh.
            When knight Euripilus this meſſadge crooked had opned,
            Then we were al daunted, with trembling feareful atached,
            What Greek for ſacrafice thee God demaunded Apollo.
            Shortlye the priest Calchas was broght by the ſhrewdwyt Vliſſes,
            And now ſoar laboreth, too know what perſon is aſked.
            Diuerſe dyd propchecy foorth with my deſtenye final.
            That this new practiſe from my old foes treacherye ſprauleth.
            
               
Thee prieſt twiſe fiue dayes thee caſe with ſecreacye ſealeth.
            Hee maks it ſcrupulous forſooth with blooddye reherſal
            Of tongue, too ſacrifice a wight: hym preſſed Ʋliſſes
            This not with ſtanding, with long importunat vrging,
            Of purpoſe Calchas mee wretch too the altar apoincted.
            Thearto the rest yeelded; for what theym priuat had anguiſht,
            On me they ſoone ſetled with publicque ioyful agreement.
            With poſting paſſadge thee day moſt diſmal aproched,
            Thee fruits al be ready, garland to mye temple is apted,
            My ſcape I deny not, my flight from priſon I knowledge,
            Thee woas and the myry foule bogs for an harborye taking
            Vntil they to ſeaward had packt, and ſayles had hoyſed.
            Now ſhal I wayle, poore ſoule, from natiue countrye remoued,
            Of father accoumpting my ſelf, of chyldren al hoapleſſe.
            Whoſe giltleſſe ſlaughter be my flight is lyke to be coompast.
            Thee do I craue, Priamus, by Gods almightye ſupernal
            (Yf truth, yf vnfayned good fayth dooth flooriſh among men)
            For to ſpare a wretched fugitiue thus touzed in hatred.
            Wee thawde with weeping doo pardon francklye the villeyn.
            In perſon Priamus foorth with commaunded his yrons
            For to be diſioyncted, theeſe woords eke gratius adding.
            What wight th'wart, ſtranger, no Greekiſh countrye remember.
            Thow ſhalt be a Troian; yet in one doubt truelye reſolue me.
            What means this burly ſhapte horſe? What perſon is author?
            For what relligion? what drift? what martial engyn?
            This ſayd: my yooncker with Greekiſh treacherye leſſond,
            Too stars vp mounting both his hands vnmannacled, aunſwerd.
            You fires perpetual with rits vnſpotted abyding,
            Too you for wytneſſe do I cal: you mystical altars,
            You ſwoords I fled from, that I woare, you conſecrat headbands,
            I do hold yt lawful, to reueale thee mysterye Greekiſh,
            Too ſcorne theyre perſons, to blab theyre ſecrecye priuat.
            What law canbynd mee, to be trew to ſo wycked a countrey?
            So that you, Troians, in promiſt mercye be conſtant,
            If truth I ſhal manifest, yf gifts bee largelye requited.
            Thee Greeks aſſuraunce in Pallas whoalye remayned
            And with her aſſistaunce theyre were ſhouldered always.
            
               
But ſyth Tydides, eke of euels thee founder Ʋliſſes
            Attempted lewdly fro the church to imbeazel an holy
            Patterne of Pallas, thee keepers filthelye quelling,
            Then they the ſacred image with brude fift blooddye prophaned,
            Thee virgins garlands with contempt impius handling:
            Syth they that attempted, thee Greekiſh ſucces abated
            And ther hoap albackward dyd drag: thee virgin eke angrye.
            And her wrath the Godeſſe with ſigns most ſenſibil opned.
            Scant was this patterne of Pallas ſetled among vs
            When flams of firy flaſshing moſt terribil hiſſed:
            It ſweat with chauffing: three tymes (to to ſtrang to be ſpoken)
            From ground yt mounted, both launce and targat eke holding.
            Through ſeas prieſt Calchas, to retyre back haſtelye, wiſheth
            For that agaynſt Troians thee Greeks doo vaynelye bear armoure.
            Tyl that with the Godeſſe theymſelues too Greece be returned.
            Which they perfourmed. Now that they ſayled ar hoameward
            They puruey weapons and Gods too pacifye purpoſe,
            And to returne haſtly: thus Calchas eeche plat hath ordred.
            They framd this monument to appeaſe celestial anger
            Of the Godeſſe Pallas, the prophet that practis apoincted.
            Howbeyt, Priest Calchas would haue the horſe lifted in hudgneſſe,
            Lest you, thee Troians, through gats ſhould carrye the preſent.
            And ſo to bee ſhielded yet agayn with patronage anticque.
            If you with violence this gyft too ſcatter had hapned,
            Graund heaps of miſchief (Which Gods on the author his hertroote
            Firſt ſet (I doo pray theym) ſhould Troian cittye replenniſh.
            And yf this rellick by you to the cittye wer haled,
            Then, loa, the ſtout Troians in wars ſhould glorye triumphing,
            Wee to ye, lyke bondſlaues, our ſelues for vanquiſhed offring.
            With this gay gloſing of a ſtincking periured hangman
            Wee wer al inueigled, with wringd tears nicetye blended.
            Thoſe whom Tydides, whom Lauiſſoean Achilles
            And al theyre warlick veſſels, in number a thowſand,
            In ten yeers reſpit could not with victorye vanquiſh.
            But marck what foloed: what chaunce and luck cruel hapned
            Iump with this cogging, our mynds and ſenſes apaling.
            As priest Laocoon by lot to Neptun apoyncted.
            
               
A bul for ſacrifice ful ſizde dyd ſlaughter at altars,
            Then, loa ye, from Tenedos through ſtanding deepe flud apeaſed
            (I ſhiuer in telling) two ſerpents monsterus ouglye
            Plaſht the water ſulcking to the ſhoare moste haſtelye ſwinging.
            Whoſe breſts vpſteaming, and manes blood ſpeckled inhaunced
            Hygh the ſea ſurmounted, thee reſt in ſmooth flud is hydden
            Their tayls with croompled knot twiſting ſwaſhlye they wrigled.
            Thee water is rowſed, they doe friſk with flownſe to the ſhoare ward,
            Thee land with ſtaring eyes bluddy and firie beholding:
            Their fangs in lapping they ſtroak with brandiſhed hoat tongs.
            Alwe fle from ſacrifice with ſight ſo griſled afrighted.
            They charg Laocoon, but first they raght to the ſucklings,
            His two yong children with circle poyſoned hooking.
            Theym they doe chew, renting theyre members tender a ſunder.
            In vayne Laocoon the aſſault lyke a stickler apeaſing
            Is to ſone embayed with wrapping girdle ycoompast,
            His midil embracing with wig wag circuled hooping,
            His neck eke chayning with tayls, hym in quantitye topping,
            Hee with his hands labored theyre knots too ſquiſe, but al hoaples
            Hee ſtriues: his temples with black ſwart poyſon aroyncted.
            Hee freams, and ſkrawling to the ſkye brays terribil hoyſeth.
            Much lyke as a fat bul beloeth, that ſetled on altar
            Half kild eſcapeth thee miſsing boucherus hatchet.
            But theeſe blooddye dragons too ſacred temple aproched
            Vnder feete lurcking and ſhield of mightye Minerua.
            A feare then general mens mated ſenſes atached.
            Wee iudge Laocoon to be iuſtly and woorthelye punniſht,
            For that he raſh charged with launce thee myſtical idol.
            Streight to place in citty this image, too pacifye ſwiftly
            Thee Godes offended, they doe crye.
            Downe we beat oure rampiers, our towne wals gapwyd ar opned.
            Al we fal a woorcking, thee wheels wee prop with a number
            Of beams and ſliders, thee neck with cabil is hooped.
            Through wals downe razed wee draw thee miſcheuus engyn,
            Ful bagd with weapons: ſonnets are carroled hymniſh
            By lads and maydens, the roap ons to tip hertelye longing.
            Hit ſlids, and menaceth futur hurt in cittye repoſed.
            
               
Ô Gods, Ô countrey, ô Troywals ſtronglye be rampyerd
            Foure tymes this monument at townegats ſtaggred in entring,
            Foure tymes with the armour cloſe coucht thee paunch bely claſshed.
            How be yt, blynd bayards we plod on with phrenſie beduſked,
            And in thee caſtel we doe pitch this monſter vnhappye.
            By Gods commaundment thee trouth Caſſandra reuealed,
            Neauer in her prophecyes by the Troians ſeallye beleeued.
            Wee for a last farewel doo deck through cittye the temples.
            Thee whilſt night darckneſſe right after ſoonſet aproched,
            With ſhaddow clowding earth, heun, and treacherie Greekiſh.
            Thee Greeks that glyded through wals, al ſoftlye be whuſted.
            Then the Phalanx Greekiſh dyd ſayl with nauye wel ordred
            From Tenedos: ſhinings of moone moſt freendlye doe gyde theym.
            To the ſhoare acquaynted they doe ſhooue: fyre of admiral hoyſed,
            Streight Sinon, aſſured by Gods and deſtenye wrongful,
            Thee ſtuf paunch cloſet from lincking ioynctlye releaſeth.
            Thee doores diſcloaſed, by roaps thee coompanye ſlided.
            Tiſandrus, Sthenelus captayns, hard herted Ʋliſſes.
            And Athamas, next alſo Thoas foorth iſhued hastlye.
            Alſo Neoptolemus, but of oothers chieflye Machäon.
            Downe Menelaus is holpt, of the engyn forger Epëus.
            Oure men ar aſſaulted, with ſleepe, with druncknes aſotted.
            Thee watch they murthred, thee gats ſet eke open, a cluster
            Of theyre companions they let in, thee coompanye lincketh.
            Then was yt a ſeaſon, when ſlumber ſweetlye betaketh
            Eech mortal perſon by woont and natural order.
            I, loa, then in ſleeping, to my ſeeming ſorroful Hector
            Prest furth in preſence, and ſalt tears dolfulye ſhowred.
            Harryed in ſteedyocks as of earst, black bluddye to viſadge
            With dust al powdred, with filthood dustye bedagled.
            His feet ar vp ſwelling with raynes of bridil ybroached.
            Woa me God, how greatly was he chaunged from that od Hector,
            Too Troy that whillon dyd turne with ſpoyls of Achilles,
            Or that with wyld fire thee Greekiſh nauye beſkorched.
            His berd was ſloottiſh, thee blood, thick cluttred, his hears staynd.
            Thoſe wounds wyde bearing, that he neere thee cittye receaued.
            I then, as I deemed by myn own wyl, thearto not aſked,
            
               
Wept, in this maner to hym ſpeeches ſorroful vttring.
            O ſtar of al Troians, of towne thee prosperus holder,
            What lets thee lingred? from what far countrye, ſyr Hector,
            Long loockt for coomſt thow? ſo that after dangerus hazards,
            And diuers burials of freends, of kinred, of oothers
            Wee toſt now doe ſe thee. By what chaunce filthye thy viſadge
            Is thus diſfigured? Theeſe wounds why mortal apeere they?
            Hee litle accoumpted this fond and vanitye childiſh,
            But ſighs vpplucking from breſt ful deepelye, thus aunſwerd.
            Thow ſoon of holye Godeſſe, from flame thy carcas abandon.
            Thee foes haue conquerd, Troytowne is fired of al ſydes.
            Too citty and Priamus lief ynough Gods deſtenye graunted.
            Yf that thee Troians hand ſtroaks could fortefye manful,
            This fiste, Greeks hacking, that fenſiue ſeruice had eended.
            Too the recommendeth Troy towne theyr conſecrat houſgods.
            Take theeſe for the pilots of fats, by theyr ayd ſeke a cittye.
            Which ſtately towne wals by thee ſhal stronglye be founded,
            Through large ſeas paſſadge when thou ſhalt wander hereafter.
            Thus ſayd: thee garland, mee thoght, and Vesta the mightye
            From altars down fetching, thee fiers eternal he quenched.
            Thee whilst in citty there roard a changabil howling,
            Stil the noiſe encreaſeth (yea thogh that verye far inward
            My father Anchiſes his court was ſetled in arbours)
            Thee ſkrich rings mounting, increaſt is the horror of armoure,
            From ſleepe I broad waked, to top hastly of turret I posted,
            And to the ſhril yerning with tentiue greedines harckned.
            Much lyke as in corne ſhocks ſindged with blaſterus hurling
            Of South wynd whizeling: or when from mounten a rumbling
            Flud raks vp foorrows, ripe corne, and tillage of oxen.
            Downe tears yt wynd fals, and thick woods ſturdelye tumbleth.
            Thee crack rack craſhing the vnwytting pastor amazeth.
            Now Greeks moſt playnely their craft, long hammered, opned.
            Vulcan hath, in flaming, quit burnt, by his furnitur heating,
            The houſe of Deiphobus, then next his neighbor his houſframe
            Vcalegon kendleth, Thee ſtrand flams fyrye doe brighten.
            Thee towns men roared, thee trump taratantara ratled.
            Thus then I distracted, with al 
                  ••••
               ning, ran to mye weapons,
            
               
Too ſhock in coombats, or gard with coompanye castels
            Mee my wyl on ſpurreth, thus wrath, thus phrenſye me byddeth.
            And to dye with byckring I tooke for a glorius emprice.
            But ſee: priest Pantbus of towne and ſacred Apollo
            Panthus Otriades thee Greekiſh boucherye ſcaping,
            Heeld in his hands holy rellicques, Gods conquered, alſo
            His yoong prittye nephew, to the ſtrandward ſpeedelye trotting.
            What news, ſyr Panthus? what forte were best to be fenced?
            Scant ſayd I theeſe ſpeeches, when woords to me dolful he rendred.
            Woorthye Syr, our laſt houre is coom, too late to be mourned.
            Wee were in old ſeaſon Troians, Troy cittye was, alſo
            Thee Troian glory flooriſht: now Iuppiter hardned
            Hath the ſtate of Troians ſubuerted wholye. The pertlyke
            Greeks thee flamd citty with ruthleſſe victorye ranſack.
            Theire ſteed hath vpvomited from gorge a ſurfet of armdmen.
            Fals Sinon aduaunced, with fire, conſumeth al houſes,
            And flouts vs kindly: thee gats ar cramd with an armye.
            Such troups as neauer too citty Troian aneered.
            Soom ſtop al od corners, no nouke, no paſſage vnarmed.
            They brandiſh weapons ſharp edgde, to ſlaghter apoincted.
            In first encounter thee watch to to weaklye reſiſted.
            With woords of Panthus, and with Gods herried order
            Kendled, I run forward too ruſh throgh thicket of armoure,
            Wheare ſhouts vpclymbing moſt riſe, wheare is hert ſad Erynnis.
            Theare leags as feloes Ripheus ſtrong, Iphitus hardy.
            By moonſhyne roaming Hipanis, ſo ſyr Dymas eager
            Flanck furth oure vaunt gard: next cooms thee lustye Chroroebus
            Soon to Prince Mygdon, who then not lucklye repayred
            Too Troy: with lyking of mad Caſſandra bewitched:
            Soon to king Priamus by law: thus he lawfather helping,
            His pheers wood prophecyes not at al the yooncker vnhappye
            Herd.
            This band of Troians thus ioynctly aſſembled, I framed
            This ſpeeche: Stout gallants, braue youths, and coompanye manful,
            Yf ye be determynd too ſinck in martial hazards,
            Too lyms, to carcaſſe you ſee what fortun is offred.
            Al things goa backward: thee Gods haue flatlye renounst vs.
            
               
Oure ſtate that whillon preſerud: thee cittye to reſcue,
            Cleene burnt, were fruictles: let vs hardlye be ſlaughtred in armour
            Yamde men haue one ſaulfty, not in hoap to ſettil a ſaulftye.
            Theeſe woords theyre valiant courradge dooe ſcarrifye deeply,
            Lyke rauening woolf dams vpſoackt and gaunted in hunger,
            That range in clowd ſhade: theyre whelps neere ſtarued ar eager
            And expect vdders with dry iaws: ſo doe we iustle:
            Wee keepe thee midpath with darckneſſe nightye beueyled
            Lord, bye whoſe heunly vttraūce may that nights blood be recoūted?
            Or match thee miſery with counteruay labil howling?
            The old towne fals to ruin, that ſummers ſundrye was empreſſe.
            Thee ſtreets and kennels are with ſlayne carcaſes heaped:
            Euery houſe, eech temple with ruful ſlaughter aboundeth.
            And yeet thee Troians are not men vanquiſhed onlye:
            Sparcks of an old courradge to the conquourd freſhlye be turning.
            Thee Greekiſh victours not in eeche ſtroke ſhotfre remayned.
            Loud was thee yelling, great fears and murther of al ſydes.
            Of Greeks thee first man with a gallant coompanye garded
            Fronted vs, Androgeos, for freends vs ſimplye beleeuing.
            In gentil manner thus he ſoone diſcourſed, vnaſked.
            Hast forward feloes: what means this luſkiſh aproching?
            You drawlach loytrers are ſcant from nauye repayring,
            When your companions with ſpoyls of cittye be loaden.
            Hee ſayd: eke on ſuddeyn (for he was not freendlye lik aunſwerd)
            Hee ſpyed his perſon with Troian coompanye wheeled,
            Thence dyd he ſhrinck backward, his woords al ſoftlye repreſſing.
            Lyke when as a trauayler thee ſnake with brambel ycoouerd
            Vnwytting ſquiſeth, with chaunce ſo ſudden amazed,
            Speedelye whips backward from woorme, with poyſoned anger
            
               Ʋpſweld. Androgeos lykwiſe moſt gaſtlye reculed.
            Wee charge thee minions with round and compaſed armoure.
            In ſtreets vnknowne they doe fal, with terror apaled.
            Our firſt encounter by fortun lucklye was ayded.
            This ſucceſſe cheering and fleaſhing luſtye Choraebus,
            Thus ſpake he: Deere ſociats, ſyth we haue this prosperus onſet,
            Now let vs on forward, as luck and deſtenye gydeth.
            And let vs our targets exchange, and Greecian armour
            
               
Al clap on oure bodyes, marching with Greecian enſigne.
            Craft or doughtye manhod what nice wight in foa requyreth?
            Thee Greeks ſhal furniſh weapons. This ſpoken, an helmet
            Of knight Androgeos gliſtring on pallet he pitcheth.
            Hee took eke his target, then in hand his fawchon he griped.
            Thee lyke dyd Ripheus, Dymas, and thee youthful aſembly.
            With new raght weapons eeche wight is newlye refreſhed.
            Too Greeks wee linckt vs, by Gods direction holpen.
            In night ſhade darckneſſe with foes wee ſkyrmiſhed eft ſoons,
            And with hoat aſſalting too Limbo we plunged a number.
            Soom run to veſſels too ſtrondward ſwiftlye retyring
            Soom clymb theyre ſteeds womb, freight with perplexitye dastard,
            Oh, Labor is fruictleſſe, which Gods and deſtenye fruſtrat.
            Lo ye; the wood virgin, with locks vnbroyded is haled
            Caſſandra, and trayled from temple of holye Minerua.
            In vayn her eyes flamed too ſeat celestial heauing:
            Her wriſts eke tender with cord weare mannacled hardlye.
            This ſight foule freighted with woodful phrenſye Choroebus
            Hee runs too reſcu, lyk a bedlem deſperat, headlong.
            Wee the man hoat foloed, wee coapt with Greekiſh aſemblye.
            Now be we peale pelted from tops of barbican hautye
            Maynelye with our owne men by ſtoans downe rouled among vs.
            This dolye chaunce gald vs, with blood, with ſlaghter abounding,
            For that thee townſmen knew not this chaffar of armoure.
            Thee Greeks al furious, too ſee Caſſandra recoouerd,
            Dyd band too geather: but chief thee courraged Aiax
            And both the Atridans, thee stout Deloponian armye.
            Lyke wrastling meete winds with blaſt contrarius huzing,
            Eaſt, weaſt and Southwynd, with pufroare mightelye ramping,
            Hudge trees downe trample: theare with God Neptun awaked
            Thee ſeas with chauffing and ſtrecht mace merciles hoyſeth.
            Alſo ſuch old enymyes: policy that former aflighted
            And coucht in corners, with a vengaunce freſhlye retyred,
            And first diſcoouerd thee ſhields and treacherye feigned.
            Our ſpeech eke and gybbriſh theyre gueſh dyd fortefye ſoothlye.
            Down cooms thee countrey: wheare firſt thee ſturdye Choroebus
            By ſyr Peneleus was ſlayne, neere conſecrat altar
            
               
Of the Godeſſe Pallas: Ripheus lyke villenye ſuffred.
            A man too pietee, to iuſtice whoalye relying.
            So Gods ordayned thee chaunce. Lo oure coompanye ſlaughtred
            Both Dymas and Hypanis: nor thy deuotion holye
            Could ſalue thee Panthus, nor crowne of bliſſed Apollo.
            You boans of Troians and houſes flamed I wytneſſe,
            In this laſt byckring I ſhrunck no danger or hazard,
            With Greeks encountring: and yf ſo fath bad apoincted,
            My fiſt deſerued my deeath. From thence we be tumbled
            Iphitus and Pelias iump with me. But Iphitus aged
            Dragd, and eke Pelias ſore maymd with wound of Vliſſes.
            To Priamus castel thee ſhout doth vs haſtelye carrye:
            Heere was hoat aſſaulting, as thogh no ſkyrmiſh had els wheare
            Beene, ne yet a ſubiect Troian throgh cittye wear harmed.
            Thus we ſe Mars furiouſe, thus Greeks euery harbory ſcaling,
            
               Ʋp fretting the pilers, warding long wymbeled entryes.
            They clinge thee ſcalinges too wals, and vnder a ſowgard
            They clymb, in lefthand, with ſhields, tools fellye rebating,
            With righthands grapling thee tops of turret ar holden.
            In valiant coombat thee Troians ſturdye reſiſted.
            They paſhe thee pallets of Greeks, and rumble a muſter
            Of torne razte turrets, and for defenſibil armoure
            Thee Greeks with rold ſtoans in last extremitye cruſshed.
            And ritch gylt rafters, thee badge, thee glorius enſigne
            Of blood, thee Troians are ſtraynd too ſcatter in hurling.
            Soom bands of Troians with weapons naked in entryes
            Ranck cloſe too geather, thee Greeks most manlye repealing.
            Wee with al encoraged weare ſturd too fortefye caſtel
            Of poore king Priamus, bringing freſh ſtreingth to the vanquiſht.
            Theare ſtood an od corner from vulgar companye ſingled,
            A poſterne ſecret, to the castel Princelye belonging
            Andromachee the woful that paſſage traced had often
            Priuat, whilst Priamus kingdoom with ſaulftye remayned,
            Too graundſyre leading her yoong chield Aſtyanacta.
            Too the typ of turrets I ran, wheare feeblye the Troians
            Cleene tyrde, the aſaultours with weak force vaynely repulſed.
            Theare was a toure ſtanding on a rock, that in altitud euened
            
               
Thee ſtars, too ſeming (whence al thee Troian aſemblye
            Was woont thee Greek fleet to behold, and customed armye)
            Wee that diſioyncted; from ſtoans thee tymber a ſunder
            Wee tearde, thee ioyncturs vnknit, with an horribil hurring
            Pat fals thee turret, thee Greeks with craſh ſwaſh yt heapeth.
            Theyre rowme ſupply oothers; no kind of weapon is abſent,
            Nor ſtoans, nor boans.
            Theare ſtood ek al furiouſe with wrath dan Pyrrhus in entrye
            With brandiſht weapons ruffling, in braſshaped armoure.
            Much lyke the owt peaking from weeds of poyſoned adder,
            Whom nauil of boorrows in wynters ſeaſon hath harbourd.
            His ſlougth vncaſing, hym ſelf now youthfulye bleacheth,
            His tayle ſmoog thirling, ſlyke breast to Titan vpheauing.
            With toonge three forcked furth ſpirts fyre freſhlye regendred.
            Theare foght Syr Periphas, and coachman of old of Achilles
            Automedon named, ſoomtyme that guided his horſes.
            With theeſe ſtout captayns thee youth of Scyria marched,
            They doe pres on forward, vp fire to the rafter is hurled.
            In perſon Pyrrhus with fast wroght twibbil in handling
            Downe beats with pealing thee doors, and post metal heaueth,
            Hudge beams hee bruſteth, ſtrong bars faſt ioyncted he renteth.
            A broad gap yawning with theeſe great puſshes is opned,
            Where with thee chambers ar playne diſcoouered in ward.
            Now Priamus parlours, with long antiquitye nobled,
            Too the ſoa ſtand open, with large far gallerye ſtretched.
            Stronglye the firſt entry thee Troians garded in armoure.
            But the inner lodgins dyd ſhrille with clamorus howting,
            Too ſkyes ſwift climbing was ſent thee terribil owtcrye.
            Then ſhiuering moothers throgh court doo wander agasted,
            Thee posts fast colling, the pilers moſte hertelye buſſing.
            With father his courradge his might dan Pyrrhus enhaunceth,
            No man, no morter can his onſet forcibil hynder.
            With rip rap bouncing thee ram to the chapter is hurled,
            Postes al and parlours vp from foundation heauing.
            Pyks make thee paſſadge: and top ſyd turuye be turned
            Al thee Princelye thraſholds; thee Troians roundlye be murthred.
            No place or od corners of Greekiſh ſouldor ar emptye.
            
               
Not ſo great a ruffling the riuer ſtrong flaſshye reteyneth
            Through the breach owt ſpurging, eke againſt bancks ſturdely ſhogging
            It brayeth in ſnorting, throgh towns through countrye remouing
            Both stabil and oxen. There I ſaw in boucherye bathed
            Fyrye Neoptolemus, both breatherne lyncked Atridans.
            And Hecuba old Princeſſe dyd I ſee, with number, an hundred
            Law daughters: Priamus with blood defiled his own fyre,
            That with his owne traueling too Gods hee ſetled on altars.
            Fiftye nephew ſtriplings, and lemmans fiftye reteynd he.
            Now thee ſtatelye pilers with gould of Barbarye fretted
            Are razde. Wheare flaming dooth ceaſe, thear Greeks doe make hauock.
            Happlye what eende Priamus dyd make, now wyl be requyred.
            His foes old Priamus throgh court and cittye beholding
            On rusty ſhoulders ſloa clapt his vnuſual armoure,
            And booteleſſe morglay to his ſydes hee belted vnhable.
            His lif amydst the enymyes with foyne too finniſh he myndeth.
            In medil of the palaice to ſkyes broad al open an altar
            Stood with greene laurel, throgh long antiquitye, ſhaded.
            Now to this hold Hecuba, and her daughters mourneful aſembled
            In vayne for ſuccoure gryping theyre mystical idols.
            Lyke dooues in tempeſt clinging faſt cloſlye togeather.
            When ſhee ſhaw Priamus yoouthlyk ſurcharged in armoure
            Shee ſayd: What madneſſe thee leads, vnfortunat huſband,
            With theefe mayls maſſiue to be clogd? Now whither I pray the?
            Our ſtate eke and perſons may not thus weaklye be ſhielded.
            No thogh my darling were preſent, courraged Hector.
            Heere pitch thy fortreſſe: let truſt be repoſed in altar:
            This ſhal vs al ſuccour, or wee wyl ioynctlye be murthred.
            This ſayd; her old huſband in ſacred ſeat ſhe repoſed.
            But ſe ye, from Pyrrhus ſcaping thee yoithlye Polytes,
            Soon too king Priamus, through thruſting forcibil armoure
            Ruſht by long entreys, thee paſſadge blooddye begoaring.
            Hym quick dan Pyrrhus purſuing greedelye reatcheth.
            With the puſh and poaking of launce hee perceth his entrayls.
            In ſight of thee ſoarye parents hee fel to the ground ward.
            And liefe with the guſhing bloodſhed to the Gods he releaſed.
            When that king Priamus dyd ſee this boucherye beaſtlye,
            
               
Thogh that he were poſting in fatal iournye to deaths doore
            Yeet this quick cholerick challenge hee could not abandon.
            Now for this tyrany, thee Gods (ſo that equitye raigneth
            And the loare of iuſtice) take, I pray theym, rightlye reuengment.
            In father his preſence with ſpightful villenye cancred,
            Thee ſoon that murthreſt, my ſight with, boucherye ſtayning.
            Not ſo the right valeant (whoſe ſoon thwart feigned) Achilles
            Was to his foa Priamus, but laws of martial armes
            Tendring, dyd render too tumb thee carcas of Hector.
            And me to my kingdoom both gently and truely returned.
            The old man thus bawling, in ſtreingth cleene weakned, here hurled
            His dart at Pyrrhus from the anmoure feeblye rebounding,
            In bos of his target with flagging weaknes yt hangeth.
            Whye then, quod Pyrrhus, thow ſhalt bee ſpeedelye posted
            Too coaſt infernal, thear let my exployts be reported.
            My father aduertiſe, that I was ful truelye begotten,
            Baſelye Neoptolemus was borne, that carrye for errand.
            This ſayd, poore Priamus with force from the altar is haled,
            And then ſyr Pyrrhus with left hand grapled his hoarelocks,
            In the blud hym ducking of his owne ſoon, ſellye Polytes.
            His blad he with thruſting in his old dwynd carcas vphilted.
            This was Prince Priamus last ende and deſteny final,
            Who ſaw thee Troians vanquiſht, thee cittye repreſſed:
            Empror of hudge Aſia, earst ruling with dignitye regal,
            In ſhoare nowe nameleſſe doothly lyke a trunchon al headleſſe.
            This when I perceaued, with ſenſibil horror atached,
            My father Anchiſes heere with do I cal to remembraunce,
            Whilſt I beheld Priamus thus gasping, my ſyre his adgemate,
            I beare eke in memory my wiefe left ſoalye Creüſa.
            And my houſe diſpoyled, then I thinck on my ſoon Iülus.
            In this wiſe muſing myn eye glaunſt to my coompanye fenſiue,
            I doe ſpye no Troian, for ſoom tyerde, tumbled al headlong
            Too ground, and diuerſe were burnt with purpoſed offer.
            Thus then I left naked, by veſtaes temple abyding
            Falſe Helen, in lurcking manner cloſe ſetled, I marcked.
            Thee flaming brightneſſe from ſight dooth darcknes abandon.
            This minion doubting thee Troians blooddye reuengment,
            
               
And alſo fearing thee Greekiſh fyrie requital,
            Thee bane of vs Troians, of Greeks thee mak bate Erinnys,
            Formd her in a corner ſneaking deteſted of altars.
            With choler inflaming I reſt al restles in anger,
            With the death of the lady to requit my countrye repreſſed.
            To Mycen, or Spartans and ſhal ſhe be ſaulfly returned?
            And after conquest as Queene with glorye to flooriſh?
            Her father, her palaces ſhal ſhee ſe, her children, her huſband?
            With the knot of Troian matrons to her ſeruice alotted?
            Slayn lyes king 'Priamus: thee Troian cittye beſkorched.
            Thee ſhoars of Dardan for her oft with bloodſhed abounded.
            No ſuer, I may not ſuch an horribil iniurye cancel.
            For to kil a woonman thogh no greate glorye be gleamed,
            Thogh valor and al honoure from ſuche weake victorye flitteth,
            Yeet to ſlea this fyrebrand, of al hurly burlye the foundreſſe,
            Must bee commended. My mynd eke further is eaſed
            Yf that of oure ſlaughters I ſhal bee partlye reuenged.
            And as I thus muttred, with roysting phrenſye betraynted
            My moother, the Godeſſe (who was accuſtomed algats
            Eare this tyme preſent to be duſk) moſt brimlye dyd offer
            Her ſelf to viſadge, thee night with brightnes auoyding.
            Eeune lyk as her deitee to the Saincts dooth luſter in heunbliſſe.
            Shee claspt my righthand, her ſweet roſe parlye thus adding.
            Soon to what od purpoſe thus meane ye to ruffle in anger?
            What maks you furious? Wyl you care charye relinquiſh
            Of mee youre moother? Too poſt with ſpeedines hoamward
            Too father Anchiſes were beſt: yf ſeallye Creüſa
            Or the lad Aſcanius from murther ſaulflye be breathing.
            Theym Greeks aſſalting had kild, or turned in aſhes
            Had not my deitee theyre ſtreingth ouer highlye reſisted.
            Not thee Greekiſh Helen (whoſe ſight thy paſſion angrye
            Enkendleth) not fautye Paris this cittye repreſſeth.
            This ruin ordeyned thee Gods and deſtenye froward.
            Looke (for I thee moyſture whear with, now mortal, is hyndred
            Thy ſight, doo banniſh, thee darckneſſe clowdye remoouing.
            See, that you doe folow youre moothers deſtinat order,
            What ſhe the commaundeth to obſerue, preciſelye remember)
            
               
Heere loa, whear heaps hudgy thow ſeest diſioyncted a ſunder
            And ſtoans diſmembred from ſtoans, ſmooke foggye beduſted,
            Thee wals God Neptune, with mace threeforcked, vphurleth,
            And cleene theire ioyncturs from deepe foundation heaueth.
            And the Godeſſe Iuno ful fraight with pooyſoned enuye
            Thee gates ſtrong warding, furth from the nauye the Greek foas
            Dooth whoup, ſtreight belted with ſteele.
            In tops of turrets ſee wheare Tritonia Pallas
            Is ſet, thee Troians killing with Gorgon his eyeſight.
            Thee father of deitee thee Greeks dooth mightelye courradge:
            Through his procurement thee Gods thee cittye diſhable.
            Flee, fle, my ſweet darling, let toyls bee finniſhed hastly.
            Thow ſhalt bee ſhielded with my protection alway.
            I wil not fayle thee to tyme thow ſaulflye be ſetled.
            This ſayd, with darckſoom night ſhade quite clowdye ſhe vanniſht.
            Griſlye faces frouncing, eke agaynſt Troy leaged in hatred
            Of Saincts ſoure deitees dyd I ſee.
            Then dyd I marck playnely thee caſtel of Ilion vplayd,
            And Troian buyldings quit topſy turuye remooued.
            Much lykon a mountayn thee tree dry wythered oaken
            Slieſt by the clowne Coridon ruſticks with twibbil, or hatchet.
            Then the tre deepe minced, far chopt dooth terrifye ſwinckers,
            With menacing becking thee branches palſye before tyme,
            Vntil with ſowghing yt grunts, as wounded in hacking.
            Al leingth with rounſefal, from ſtock vntruncked, yt harſsheth.
            With Gods aſſistaunce downe from thee turret I lighted,
            Mye tools make paſſadge through flame and hostilitye Greekiſh.
            Too father Anchiſes old houſe thus ſaulflye retyred,
            Foorth with I dyd purpoſe from thence too deſolat hiltops
            My ſyre too carry, but as I this matter had vttred,
            Too liue now longer, Troy burnt, hee flatlye reneaged;
            Or to dwel as banniſht. But, he ſayd, you lustye iunentus
            In yeers and carcaſſe prime, quick and liuelye remayning
            Flee you.
            If Gods omnipotent my lief too linger had ordred
            They would theeſe lodgings haue fenst. Sufficeth yt alſo
            That Troians miſery dyd I liue too teſtifye mourneful.
            
               
Good ſyrs, bee packing, let my corps heere be repoſed.
            My fiſt ſhal purchaſe my death, my foa mercye wyl offer
            For thee bootye fiſhing. Of graue to be voyded is harmeleſſe.
            Long my liefe I pampred, too Gods celeſtial yrkſoom,
            Syth king of mankind, father of diuinitye total,
            With thundring lightnings, my carcaſſe ſtronglye beblaſted.
            Theeſe woords expreſſing in one heaſt hee ſtieflye remayned
            Round fel I too weeping, with my ſpouſe ſoarye Creüſa,
            With my ſoon Aſcanius, with al eke thee ſorroful houſhold.
            Hym we al deſyred too tame this desperat owtrage,
            Oure final ſlaghter not with ſuch follye to purchaſe.
            Hee reſted wylful lyk a wayward obstinat oldgrey.
            I then alarm ſhouted, too dy dyd I verelye purpoſe,
            For now what counſayl, what courſe may rightlye be taken?
            What? father Anchiſes, hold you my duitye ſo ſclender,
            Too ſlip from Troy towne, and heere you ſoole to relinquiſh?
            From the fathers ſermons ſhal ſuch fond patcherye flicker?
            If Gods eternal thee last diſſeuered offal
            Of Troy determyn too burne, yf you father alſo
            Youre ſelf too murther, too roote youre progenye purpoſe,
            Catch that catch may be, thee ſtreet gate to ſlaghter is open.
            From killing Priamus, dan Pyrrhus ſhortlye wyl hither,
            Thee ſoon fast bye the ſyre; thee ſyre that murthred at altars.
            Waſd for this (moother) that mee throgh danger vnharmed
            You led, now my enymyes to behold too riffle in hous ſeat?
            And my ſoon Aſcanius, my ſyre, my ſeallye Creuſa
            For to ſe deepe bathed, grooueling in bloods of eche oother?
            Nay then I beeſhrew mee: make ye haſt ſyrs: bring me myn armoure.
            Now for a laſt farewel do I take me to Greekiſh aſembly.
            Soom Greeks ſhal find yt bitter, before al we be ſlaghtred.
            I girt my weapons to my ſyde, my tergat I ſetled
            On lift hand ſo ruſhing to the ſtreets I posted in anger.
            But my feete embracing my pheere me in the entrye reteyned.
            Too father owtraging thee ſoon ſhee tendred Iulus.
            If to dye you purpoſe, take vs alſo in coompanye with you.
            If through experience ſoom truſt ye doe ſettel in armoure
            Firſt gard this dwelling, wheare reſts thee childiſh Iulus,
            
               
Wheare father is ſeated, where youre ſpouſe named, is harbourd.
            Theeſe woords owt ſhowting, with her howling the houſe ſhe replē
               niſht
            But look, on a ſuddeyn what chaunce moſt woonderus hapned
            Tweene father and moother thee yong boy ſetled Julus,
            A certeyn lightning on his headtop gliſtered harmeleſſe.
            His criſp locks frizeling, his temples prittelye ſtroaking.
            Heer with al in trembling with ſpeede wee ruffled his hearebuſh,
            With water attempting thee flame too mortifye ſacred.
            But father Anchiſes, mounting his ſight to the ſkyward,
            Both the hands vplifting, hertly thus his oriſon vttred.
            Iuppiter omnipotent (yf that prayer annye the bendeth)
            Vs pitye, thy ſeruaunts, yf eke oght our godlines aſketh,
            Graunt (father) aſſiistaunce this mirracle happye to ſtabliſh.
            Scant had he this finniſht, when that, with ſudden, a thundring
            In the ſkye dyd rumble, foorth with theire flamed a blazing
            Star, ſtreams owt ſhooting, yeelding of cleerenes abundaunce.
            Wee noted yt glyding from tops of manſion houſeplace.
            Lastlye the ſtar ſincking in woods wyde of Ida was hydden,
            Right the waye furth poincting. Thee wood with brightnes appeereth.
            Eech path was fulſoom with ſent of ſulphurus orpyn.
            My father heere conquerd, hymſelf vp luſtelye lifted.
            With the Godhead parling, he the ſtar crinital adoreth.
            Now, quod he, no lingring, let vs hence, I am prest to be packing.
            Saulfe my prittye nephew, you Gods of countrye, my linnadge.
            You do manadge Troy towne; this is eke your proſperus omen.
            Now, my ſoon, on forward, thy ſyre is prest haſtlye to track thee.
            Thus ſayd he. Thee flaming to the townewals more nere aproched,
            And the flaſh of burning with ſkorching ſpeedines hasted.
            Wel father in Gods name, mount on my ſhoulder, I pray you.
            This labor is pleaſaunt, to me t'ys not payneful or yrckſoom.
            What luck ſhal betyde vs, wee wyl be in deſtenye partners,
            Or good hap, or froward: and let my young lad Julus
            Next be my companion, my wief may ſoftlye pace after.
            Syrs, you thee ſeruaunts, ſlack not my woords to remember.
            A tumb to Troy towne and mouldy tempil aneereth
            Vowd to the godlye Ceres, a ciper by the churche ſeat abydeth
            By our old progeniotours long tyme deuoutlye regarded.
            
               
From diuerſe corners to that hewt wee wyl make aſemblye.
            Gripe, father, oure country deitees; ſe ye warelye keepe theym.
            For ſith I with byckrings embrewd ſo blooddye my fingers,
            I may not, I dare not pollute Gods heaunlye, with handling,
            
               Ʋntil I with fountayn mee waſh.
            When that I theeſe ſpeeches deliuered, I twiſted a wallet
            On my broad ſhoulders, my nape dyd I ſettle eke vnder,
            With lion his yellow darck ſkyn my carcaſe I caſed.
            My father on ſhouldeers I ſet, my yoong lad Jülus
            I lead with righthand, tripping with pit pat vnequal,
            My wiefe cooms after, through croſſe blynd allye we iumble.
            And I that in forenight was with no weapon agaſted,
            And litel esteemed thee ſwarms of Greekiſh aſemblye
            Now ſhiuer at ſhaddows, eeche pipling puf doth amaze me.
            For yong companion, for bedred burden abaſhed.
            Danger al eſcaping to the gats I ſaulflye repayred.
            Yeet not with ſtanding a trampling ſudden of hoat foot
            Soldours vs chaſed, to my thincking; my father alſo
            Casting eye backward cryed owt, ſoon flee, they doe track vs.
            I doe ſe theyre brandiſht tergats, and braſshapen harneiſe.
            Now was I from policy fore caſt with terror amooued,
            For whilſt I wandred through ſtreets and paſſages vncooth,
            My wief departed, my coomfort hertye Creüſa.
            Yf death her had goared, ſhe behynd yf weerye remayned,
            Or ſtrayed in foloing, I knew not truelye: but after
            
               Ʋnſeene ſhee reſted, nor backward ſkewd I myn eyeſight,
            Ingraue of holye Ceres tyl that my burden I lighted.
            For ſhee was miſsing, when al our good coompanye cluſtred.
            With ſoon, with famely, with mee ſhee kept not apoinctment.
            Too Gods, too creaturs I belcht owt blaſphemye bawling.
            For to me what miſchief could chaunce in cittye more hurtful.
            My father Anchiſes, my chield I took to my ſeruaunts,
            And Gods of Troians were coucht in cuſtodye ſecret.
            I to the towne turned cloſe clad with burniſhed armoure,
            I was determind fully, too ventur al hazards,
            Al Troy too trauerſe, too ſuffer danger al hapning.
            Firſt dyd I coom backward to the wals, from whence I remooued,
            
               
Too the gat I posted by night, and carefulye dogging
            Thee way with light flams, eeche crooked corner I ranſackt.
            Both with nightye ſilence was I quayld and greatlye with horror.
            Thence dyd I trudge hoamward, too learne yf ſhe haplye returned.
            But theare weare the enymyes with thronging cluſter aſembled.
            Thee fyre heer on fretting with blaze too rafter is heaued.
            Thee flams ſurmounting tenements doo whize to the ſkyward.
            I ran too Priamus razd court, at castel I gazed,
            In cels and temple, that of old too Iuno was apted.
            As keeper Phoenix was made, with ruthles Ʋliſſes
            Of booty and pillage. Theere Troian treaſur is hurded,
            That flames eſcaped, thear ſtood the rich halloed altars.
            Theare maſſiue gould cups bee layd, theare wardrob abundant
            Of roabs moſt pretiouſe, thear ar eke yoong children in order
            With cold hert moothers, for Greekiſh victorye quaking,
            Setled on al ſydes.
            I ſtoutly emboldned with night ſhade rayſed an howting,
            With mournful belling I namde expreſlye, Creüſa.
            In vayne with ſobbing was oft that od eccho repeated.
            In this guiſe frantyck as I ran throgh cittye with howling
            I noted on ſuddeyn the goast of verye Creüſa,
            And her woonted image, to me knowne, mad her elfiſh aparance.
            Heere with I was daunted, my hear ſtard, and ſpeechles I ſtutted.
            Then to me thus ſpeaking, my carck in ſearch ſhe remooued.
            This labor, ò huſband, too no great purpoſe auayleth,
            For this hap is chaunced bye the Gods prefixed apoinctment.
            Hence yt is vnlawful with you too carrye Creüſa.
            That trauayl is ſhortned by the king of ſacred Olympus.
            Thow must with ſurges bee bangd and pilgrimage yrckſoom.
            In land Heſperian thow ſhalt bee ſaulflye receaued,
            Wheare glydes throgh cornefilds, with ſtreaming ſecrecye, Tybris.
            Theare doe lye great kingdooms, and Queene most Princelye be ſpoken
            For the, mye kind huſband for mee grief therefor abandon.
            Now me the Myrmidones for captiue priſoner hold not,
            Nor ſterne ſnuff Dolopans, and Greekiſh matron I ſerue not,
            Of Venus in wedlock thee daughter.
            Of Gods thee moother me in this my countrye reteyneth.
            
               
Fare ye wel, ô huſband, oure yoong babye charely tender.
            This ſayd, ſhee vanniſht, and thogh that I ſadlye requyred,
            Too confer further, yeet ſhee too tarrye renounced.
            Thryce dyd I theare coouet, to col, to claſp her in armes.
            Thryce then thee ſpirit my catching ſwiftlye refuſed.
            Much lyk to a pufwynd, or nap that vanniſhed haſtlye.
            Thee twylight twinckled, furth I to my coompanye poſted.
            Whear ſoone I perceiued with woonder a multitud hudgye.
            Of men with woomen too this layre newlye repayred.
            Thee yoonger Troians, thee meaner wretched aſemblye
            Round to me dyd cluſter, with purſe and perſon abyding
            Prest, throgh ſurgye waters with mee too ſeek ther auenturs.
            Lucifer owtpeaking in tips of mounted hil Ida
            On draws thee dawning. Thee Greeks with custodye watchful,
            Warded thee towngats, hoap here of no ſuccor abydeth.
            I ſhrunck, and my father to the crowne of mounten I lifted.
            Finis libri ſecundi.
         
         
            
            THEE THIRD
BOOKE OF VIRGIL
HIS AENEIS.
            WHen giltleſſe Aſian kingdoom ſterne destenye quaſshed,
            With Priamus country when ſquyſd was the Ilian empyre,
            When Troy was razed, quight from foundation hoyſed:
            Furth to run exiled, too ſeeke ſoom forren auentures,
            By Gods we are warned. Wee rigd our nauye flat vnder
            Haut hil of Antander, not far from mounten of Ida.
            Then we wer vncerteyn too what ſaulf ſoyle to betake vs.
            Men to vs thick crouded: ſcant was prime ſummer aproched,
            When father Anchiſes to the ſeas thee coompanye charged.
            I, ſalt tears ſhedding, my natiue countrye relinquiſht,
            Thee roads and plat fourms where Troy ſtood: ſad to the ſeaward
            With my companions and with my yoong ſon Jülus
            With Gods, mightye patrons, my courſe and paſſage I bended.
            A large wyld region theare ſtands, Mauortia cleaped,
            Thracia ſum terme yt: theare raignd thee bluddye Lycurgus:
            Thee Troian leage ſeat, with faſtned freendſhip abyding
            Whilſt fortune floated. With croſſe blast thither I ſayled,
            On ſhore eke I founded towne wals, by deſtenye luckleſſe:
            Of my name, Aeneidans dwellers, theare ſetled, I named.
            Too Venus and the ſacred remnaunt of thee holye triumphaunts
            I framed a ſacrifice, the begun wurck lucklye toe proſper,
            And toe Ioue omnipotent a bul neere ſeaſide I ſlaughtred.
            A tumb theare rested by chaunce cloſe ſhaded al vpward
            With twigs thick crumpled, with myrtel moſſye thear edging.
            I drew neere, mynding too roote fro cel earthye the thicket,
            With thee ſlips greeniſh too deck thee new ſhaped altars.
            I viewd with wundring a griſly monsterus hazard.
            For the tre ſupplanted, that first fro the roote ſeat is haled,
            With drop drop trilling of ſwart blud filtred abundance.
            
               
Thee ground black ſteyning: then furth with a quiueriſh horror
            My ioyncts child ranſacks, my blud with terror apaling.
            At the ſecund pulling, when an oother wicker is vp pluckt.
            Thearbye the whole matter furth with more deepelye to ferret,
            From that ſtub lykewiſe foorth ſpirt drops bluddelye ſtilling.
            With this hap entangled, thee ſweete Nymphs rural I woorſhipt,
            And God Mars the Regent of that ſoyle crabbed adoring,
            Too turne too goodneſſe this ſight and merciles omen.
            But when I thee third tyme with grype more fiercelye dyd offer,
            Ny knees faſt pitching on ſands, too pluck vp an oother:
            (What? ſhal I chat further? from ſpeeche ſhal ſecrecye bar mee?)
            From pits deepe bottoom dooth ſkritche a woonderus howling,
            With playnts most pitiful to oure ears thus ſadlye rebounding.
            Woorthye ſyr Aeneas, why with this boutcherye teare you
            A cytiefe forlorne? Extend your mercye to dead folck.
            Foule not your ſacred hands: you rack no forrener owtcaſt,
            You rent a Troian: theeſe drops from ſhrubs doe not iſſue.
            Oh, flee this Canibal country, this coouet us Iſland.
            I am namd ſyr Polydor: with darts fel nayled heer vnder
            I lodge: which thicket thus growne me terriblye stingeth.
            I ſtud al astonyed, my hear ſtarde, and ſpeechles I reſted.
            This Polydor whillon with pure gould mightelye loaden,
            Preeuelye by Priamus, thee Troian rector vnhappye,
            Too king Treicius was ſent, to be charelye noozeld.
            But when this gardein perceu'd the aduerſitye Troian,
            And that theyre citty thee Grecian armye beſieged▪
            
            Hee leaues thee conquourd, and clingd to the partye triumphant.
            Al truſt fowlye breaking, thee poore Polydorus is headleſſe
            Through wycked murther, thee gould thee traytor vp hurdeth.
            What feat or endeuours of gould thow conſecrat hungar
            Mens mynds conſtrainſt not with wyels or vertue to coompaſſe.
            When that I tooke courradge, when pangs al feareful I banniſht,
            I told thee chiefteyns, and namelye mye good father adged
            This ſtrange aduenture, theyre iudgements alſo requyring.
            Swiftlye they determind too flee from a countrye ſo wycked,
            Paltocks Inne leauing, too wrinche thee nauye too ſouthward.
            For polydor wee framd an obit: wee tumbled in heapwiſe
            
               
Of stoans a cluſter, with black weede the altar is hanged,
            With tree ſwartye Cipers: Troy dames with customed vſadge
            Trol round, downe tracing with theyre diſcheaueled hearlocks.
            Wee pourd mylck luke warme foaming, and blud ſacred after.
            With mayne noiſe lifted to the ſlayne ſoule lastlye we ſhouted.
            When ſoft gale ſootherne and calme ſeas ſaulftye dyd offer,
            My mates lancht forward theyre fleete, from ſhoare we be glyding,
            Thee roads, thee countrey, thee towns fro oure nauye be gadding.
            In the myd of the ſearowme theare ſtands a plentiful Iſland
            Too thee dame of myrmayds, too Neptune Princelye relying.
            This was roundlye bayed (for ſo the Ioue heunlye dyd order)
            With Mycone, and eke with Giarus, two famoſed Iſlands.
            Theare reſting habitants no wynd flaws ſtormye regarded.
            Too this Ile I ſayled, wee ſaulflye dyd harbor in hauen.
            When we were al landed, we the cittye of Phoebus adored.
            King Anius, king of the habitants, and prieſt of Apollo,
            Crownd with freſh garland, with laurels conſecrat headband,
            Glad met vs, alſo knowing Anchiſes adged, his old freend.
            Theare we ſhake hands kyndly, foorth with we are ſetled in hostrye.
            In the old buylt tempil thus thee God Phoebus I woorſhipt.
            Soom bye place of reſting graunt vs, moſt ſacred Apollo,
            Yeeld wals too vs wery, ſoom ſtock, ſoom towne for abyding,
            Saulue the ſecund Troy towne, thee ſcraaps of wrathful Achilles,
            Of Greeks thee rellicks; by what king ſhal we be ruled?
            What man is oure captayne? Too what ſoyle worldlye to iourney,
            Thow dooſt commaund vs? where ſhal we be lastlye repoſed?
            Shew father a prophecy; poure downe thye good oracle heunly.
            Scant had I thus ſpoken, when ſeats al quiuered about vs.
            Thee doors, thee laurel, thee mount with terribil earth quake
            Doo totter ſhiuering, with rumbling mutterus eccho.
            Then to vs ſquat grooueling in this wiſe the oracle aunſwerd.
            You brawnd hard Troians, what ſoyle youre auncetrye ſeiſed
            Firſt of al old countreys, to the ſame you ſhal be reduced.
            Track owt youre moother, whom long antiquytye graunted.
            With ſeed of Aeneas ſhal coompaſſe earthlye be ruled.
            His ſoons ſoons and ſoons from theire braue progenye ſpringing.
            Thus God Apollo cryed: but wee with an vniſon owtcrye,
            
               
And with iollye tumult, where ſhould that cittye be ſetled
            Streight ways demaunded, what place God Phoebus apoincted,
            My father Anchiſes vp al old antiquitye ripping,
            Heare me, quod hee, lordinges, lerne the expectation hoaped.
            Thee Creet Ile in my dſeas dooth ſtand too Iuppiter hallowd:
            Theare mount Ide resteth, thee ſpringe of progenye Troian.
            A fruictful kingdoam, with towns in number an hundred.
            Hence our progenitour (ſo I fayle not in hiſtorye told mee)
            Surnamed Teucrus firſt came too Rhetean Iſland.
            Theare picht he his kingdoom, for then Troy cittye was vnbuylt,
            And caſtels ſtood not, the habitans in vallye remayned.
            Theare dwelt dame Cybele in forreſt of deſolat Ida.
            And moone wiſe Coribants on braſſe their od harmonye tinckling.
            Thence cooms truſtye ſilence vſd in ſollemnitye ſacred.
            And two ſtately lyons this fine dams gilt wagon haled.
            Wiſely let vs thearefor too Gods direction harcken:
            Let wynds bee ſwadged foorth with, too Candye be packing.
            Short is thee paſſadge (ſo that oure God Iuppiter help vs)
            In three days ſayling wee ſhal too Candye be puffed.
            This diſcourſe eended, too the altars holye returning,
            A Bul too Neptune, wyth a bul too golden Apollo,
            Hee lykewiſe ſlaughtred too roaring wynter a blackbeaſt,
            But to the ſweet weſt wynd a beſt whit lillye was offred.
            Theare fleeth a rumoure, that king of Candye relinquiſht
            His ſeat, that the Iſland is left vnfurniſhed holye.
            Wee left Ortigian countrey, with nauye we paſſed
            By mounts of Nazon too ſkincking Bacchus alotted.
            From thence wee trauayled to the greenedeckt gaylye Donyſa:
            To Oleoron, too lillye Paron, to the Cyclades alſo
            Diſperſd and ſcatterd, and neere creeks ſundrye we ſayled.
            Thee thick ſkyn mariners ſhouted with ſudden agreement.
            My maats aſſented to bend too Candye the paſſadge.
            Thee wynd puft forward with ſweete gale freelye the nauye:
            At loingth by ſayling on land of Candye we lighted.
            First then at oure landing towne wals I ther hastelye founded.
            Pergamea I cald yt, that name they gladlye receaued.
            By me they were counſayld too buyld vp ſumptuus houſes.
            
               
Alſo bye this ſeaſon too docks oure nauye was haled.
            Thee youth too wedlock and tylladge thriftelye clustred.
            Both laws and tenements I framed. But streight on a ſuddein
            A plagye boch ranged, with foule contagion ayrye
            Both bodyes feſtring and fruict trees plentiful harming.
            A yeere too diſmal. For ſweete lief ſwiftlye was eended,
            Thee fields cleene fruictleſſe thee dogstar Sirius heated.
            Thee flours wax withred, thee ſoyle fruicts plentye renegeth.
            My father exhorted too turne too ſacred Apollo,
            For toe craue our pardon, when ſhould this iournye be finniſht,
            Or trauail expyred, by what means might we be furthred.
            Thee night his mantel dooth ſpred: with ſlumber is holden
            Eche liuing creature, then my holye domeſtical houſgods,
            In laſt nights fyrebroyls, that from Troy ſkorched I ſaulued,
            In gliſtred ſhyning in a dreame toe me made thear aparaunce.
            Iump at thee wyndoors, where moonſhyne brimlye dyd enter.
            Thus to me they parled, ſhredding of ſorroful anguiſh.
            Syr, to ye what ſooth ſay to record dooth purpoſe Apollo;
            Heere that he diſchargeth: we be ſent too ſignify his errand
            Wee ſkapte from Troybrands bye thye courradge manfulye ſhielded
            And bye thye good guiding through ſeaplaſh ſtormye we marched.
            Wee thee ſame pilgrims wyl yeeld to thye progenye glorye,
            And rule too citty. Let towne wals mightye be raiſed
            Streight by the for mighty perſons: let no reaſon hold thee
            From flight: this countrey must bee forſaken: Apollo
            Ment not, in his prophecy, thy courſe too Candye to further.
            Theare ſtands a region, by Greeks yt is Heſperye named,
            A ſtout old countrey, with plenty fertil abounding.
            Theare dwelt th' Aenotrians, but now by the coompanye yonger
            Of thee firſt captayn valiaunt, yt is Italye termed:
            Oure ſeat thear reſteth: theare borne was Dardanus adged,
            And father Jaſius: from whence oure auncetrye ſprouted.
            Wherefor in al gladneſſe to thyne old ſire certifye tydings:
            Skud to ſoyl Italian, from Candye the Juppiter haleth.
            With theeſe Gods gingling, with ſight moſte geaſon apaled,
            (For to mye ful ſeeming with ſlumber I was not atached
            I knew theire tucktlocks, I knew theire phiſnomye preſent
            
               
A cold ſweat ſaltiſh through my ioynctes fiercely dyd enter)
            From my bed I ſtarted: to the ſky with meeknes I lifted
            My hands deuoutlye praying, then too my fortunat houſgods
            I framd a ſacrifice: next with ioy tickled I poſted
            Too my ſyre Anchiſes: and told thee matter in order.
            Hee noted his ſtumbling to haue coom from the auncetrye doubtful,
            And dubil acceptaunce of ſyers to haue foſtred his erroure.
            O my ſon Aeneas, with Troian deſtenye toughned,
            Thee ſelf ſame prophecy too mee Caſſandra recited:
            Now cal I too memory that ſhee this countrye remembred,
            Often at Heſperian regions, and Italye glauncing.
            But to ſoyl Hesperian that Troymen ſhould be remooued,
            What wight coniecturde? who would Caſſandra then harcken?
            Accept wee therefor this courſe, and credit Apollo.
            Thus ſayd: we aſſented to his lore with cheereful obeyſaunce.
            Wee leaue Creete country; and our ſayls vnwrapped vphoyſing,
            With woodden veſſel thee rough ſeas deepelye we furrowe.
            When we fro land harbours too mayne ſeas gyddye dyd enter
            
               Ʋoyded of al coast ſight with wild fluds roundlye bebayed,
            A watrye clowd gloomming, ful abooue mee clampred, apeered,
            A ſharp ſtorme menacing, from ſight beams ſoonnye reiecting:
            Thee flaws with rumbling, thee wroght fluds angrye doe iumble:
            Vp ſwel thee ſurges, in chauffe ſea plaſshye we tumble:
            With the rayn, is day light through darckneſſe moystye be wrapped,
            And thundring light bolts from torneclowds fyrye be flaſshing.
            Wee doe mis oure paſſadge through fel fluds boyſterus erring,
            Oure pilot eke, Palinure, through dymneſſe clowdye be duſked▪
            
            In poinccts of coompaſſe dooth ſtray with palpabil erroure.
            Three dayes in darckneſſe from bright beams ſoonny repealed,
            And three nights parted from lightning ſtarrye we wandred.
            Thee fourth day foloing thee ſhoare, neere ſetled, apeered
            And hils vppeaking; and ſmoak ſwift ſteamd to the ſkyward.
            Oure ſayls are ſtrucken, we roa furth with ſpeedines hastye,
            And the ſea by our mariners with the oars cleene canted is harrowd
            On ſhoars of strophades from ſtorme eſcaped I landed,
            For thoſe plats Strophades in languadge Greekiſh ar highted,
            With the ſea coucht Iſlands. Where foule bird foggye Celoeno
            
               
And Harpy is nestled: ſence franckling Phines his houſroume
            From theym was ſunderd, and fragments plentye remooued.
            No plage more perilous, no monster griſlye more ouglye,
            No ſtigian vengaunce lyke too theeſe carmoran haggards.
            Theeſe fouls lyke maydens are pynde with phiſnomye paliſh;
            With ramd cramd garbadge, theire gorges draftye be gulled,
            With tallants prowling, theire face wan withred in hunger,
            With famin vpſoaken.
            When tward theeſe Iſlands oure ſhips wee ſetled in hauen,
            Neere, we viewd, graſing heards of bigge franckye fat oxen,
            And goats eke cropping careleſſe, not garded of heerdman.
            Wee ruſht with weapons, parte of thee bootye we lotted
            First to Ioue. On banck ſyds our ſelues with food we repoſed.
            But loa with a ſuddeyn fluſshing thee gulligut harpeys
            From mountayns flitter, with gagling whirlerye flapping
            Theyr wings: furth the viand fro tabils al greedelye ſnatching,
            With fulſoom ſauour, with ſtincking poyſoned ordure
            Thee ground they ſmeared, theartoo ſkriches harſhye reioyning.
            Then we ſet al the tabils, and fyrde oure mystical altars
            
               Ʋnder a rock arched, with trees thick coouered ouer.
            At the ſecund ſitting from parcels ſundrye repayred
            This coouirauenouſe, and ſwift with a deſperat onſet,
            They gripte in tallants the meat and furth ſpourged a ſtincking
            Foule carrayne ſauoure: then I wild thee coompanye preſent,
            Too take theire weapons, and fight with miſcheuus howlets.
            My wyl at a beckning is doon, they doe run to ther armoure
            In graſſe theyre flachets, and tergats warelye pitching.
            But when at a thurd flight theeſe fowls to the coompanye neered,
            With ſhril braſſe trumpet Miſenus ſowned alarum.
            Oure men marcht forward, and fierce gaue a martial vncoth
            Charge, theeſe ſtrange vulturs with ſkirmiſh bluddye to mayster.
            But strokes theire feathers pearſd not, nor carcaſes harmed:
            And toe ſkye they ſoared, thee victals clammye behynd theym,
            They do leaue haulf mangled with ſent vnſauerye bepoudred.
            On the typ of rockiſh turret ſtood gaſtlye Celoeno
            Vnlucky propheteſſe; and thus ſhe recounted her errand.
            And now Syr Troians, wyl you for ſlaughter of oxen
            
               
And for al our owne good wage war with ſellye poore harpeys?
            And vs from kingdoom banniſh? Then take me this errand:
            And what I ſhal prophecy with tentiue liſtenes harcken,
            What Ioue too Phoebus, too me alſo what vttred Apollo.
            I the chiefe hel fyrebrand of fel furye miſcheuus holden
            Wyl now diſcoouer thee ſelf ſame myſterye told mee.
            Italye you long for, to the land eke of Italye ſaulflye
            You ſhal bee guided with winds, and ſetled in hauen.
            Yeet not with ſtanding ere conquerd cittye be rampyrde,
            For this youre treſpas you ſhal be ſo gaunted in hunger,
            That youre ſmeary tabils you wylmoſt greedelye ſwallow.
            Thus ſhe ſayd: and forward to the wood ſhee flickered hastlye.
            At this hap oure feloes with feareful phantaſye daunted,
            Stood ſtil al astonied with cold blud, lyke gelu, quiuering.
            They doe quayl in courradge, and with no martial armoure,
            But by ther holye prayers they doe practiſe peaceful atoanement.
            If godeſeſſe, yf byrds ſtincking, or bugs they reſembled.
            But father Anchiſes his palms from ſtrond plat inhauncing
            On Gods heunlye cryeth, to ther heſt with duitye relying:
            Gods, quod he, this meſſadge turne you to a proſperus omen.
            Cancel theeſe menacing ſoothings, thee godlye reſeruing.
            Thus ſayd: ſwift we weyed the anchors, and ſayles vphoyſed,
            With northen bluster through fome ſeas ſpeedelye flitting,
            As the gale and the pilot with ſteering ſkylful vs haleth.
            In midil of the ſea deepe wee ſaw thee wooddye Zacynthos,
            Dulichium, Samee, with cragged Neritos hard stond.
            Wee fle the rocks of Ithack, and coast of Princelye Laërtes,
            Alſo we the byrth place deteſt of flinted Ʋliſſes.
            Thee mount Leucates with thick clowds gloommye bedawbed
            Vp peaks to the viewing, with feareful poinct of Apollo.
            Theare we were enſhoared quight tyrde, and on to the borrough
            As we gad, oure veſſels vpdrawne are grapled at anchor.
            Theare we being landed ſaulfly through fortun vnhoaped,
            Too Ioue wee ſacrifice, ſundry hostes are flamed on altars,
            And Troian paſtymes wee practiſe in Actean Iſland.
            Soom feloes naked with larding ſmearye bebaſted,
            With wraſtling gambalds for price, for mayſtrye doe ſtruggle
            
               
Myrrye for eſcaping thee towns and Grecian hamlets,
            Through theire deadly foes theire paſſage luckye recounting:
            Thee whilſt fayre Phoebus thee yeers courſe roundlye reuolued,
            And ſeas, with north blaſt and wynter frostye, be roughned:
            A braſen hudge tergat, that Abans erst fenced in armoure,
            On poſt I nayled, thee clingde ſhield this poſye beareth.
            This Signe AEneas From Grekiſh Conqueror Haled.
            I gaue commaundment fro the port to the ſhips to be packing.
            My maats ſkum the ſea froth there in oars ſtrong cherelye dipping.
            Thee Pheacan turrets foorth with from ſight we relinquiſh.
            Wee coaſt Epëirus, thence wee touche Chaon his hauen.
            And to the great burrough of But throt ſtatelye we ſkudded.
            Heere, loa, throgh oure hyring a report incredibil, vncoth,
            Glides, that Prince Helenus, by Troian lineal of ſpring
            Soon too king Priamus, this Greekiſh countrye reteyneth.
            Thee pheere poſſeſſing and crowne of Pyrrhus his empyre,
            Alſo that Andromachee dooth bed with a countrye man huſband.
            Theeſe news mee mazing, my mynd was greedelye whetned,
            Too parle with the Regent, too lerne this meruelus hapning.
            I ſtept from the hauen, leauing my nauye behynd mee.
            Happelye that ſeaſon ſoom banckets costlye, with oother
            Lamenting preſents (in ſhade to the cittye reioyning
            Neere water of Simois both deepely and warelye ſliding)
            Andromachee framed to the dust, on tumb eke of Hector
            Calling with burial yelling, that al emptye remayned:
            With greene turf circled; from thence right on ſhe repayred,
            For cauſe of further mourning, too conſecrat altars.
            When ſhe dyd eſpy mee posting, and Troiecal armoure
            Too too gyddye viewd, with vnordinat extaſis hamperd,
            Downe ſhe fel on ſuddeyn, thee cold too carcas aprocheth:
            Shee ſowns, and after long pauſing thus ſhe ſayd elflyke.
            Is thye true playne viſadge with tru ſhape natural offred?
            Imp of a ſtatelye Godeſſe bringst thou to me verelye tydings?
            Art thow yeet liuing? or the yf light worldlye relinquiſht,
            Tel me where is my hnſband, my ſweeting delicat Hector?
            Thus ſayd: al in blubbring ſhee floath, with clamorus howling
            Thee place ſhee tinckled: but I through pangs vncoth vnhabled,
            
               
With ſtutting ſtamering at leingth thus fumbled an aunſwer.
            I doe liue, I aſſure thee, thogh dangers ſundrye me taynted,
            Doubtye not, a changling ye ſe none.
            Lord what good fortune thee lack of pristinat huſband
            Hath toe thye contentment with new match luckye releeued?
            Poſſeſſeth Pyrrhus thee ſpouſe of famoſed Hector?
            Downe ſhe ſmote her viſadge, to me thus ful ſmoothlye replying.
            
               Ô Priamus daughter, thee virgin Princelye, thriſe happye
            Thow that by thye foes neere Troy wals ſlaughtered hast beene.
            By this hap eſcaping thee filth of lottarye carnal.
            Too couche not mounting of mayster vanquiſher hoatſpur.
            But we, by croſſe paſſadge from flamed countrye remoued,
            Thee pryde of a ſtripling and ymp of wrathful Achilles
            Haue borne with thraldoom, with ſharp captiuitye fetterd,
            Hee to fyne Hermionee, for Greeks a bootye to peereleſſe,
            Daughter too Queene Helen, faſt and hoat phantaſye bended.
            Me his nyefe to his ſeruaunt Helenus ful firmelye betroathed.
            But yeet vnexſpected with ialoſye kendled Oreſtes
            For los of his beadmate, dyd take too tardye my mayſter,
            Hym by his ſyers altars killing with ſkarboro warning.
            When fro Neoptolemus thee vital ſpirit abated
            This part was to Helenus by wylled parcerye lotted:
            Chaönian countreys of Troian Chaön ycleaped:
            This towne Troy citty, this castel eke Ilion highting.
            But to the what paſſadge thee winds and fortun alotted?
            Or what great deity toſt thee to our deſolat angel?
            How faers Aſcanius? doth he liue, and breathful abydeth?
            Whom to the now Troy towne.
            Dooth the los of moother to the chielde bring ſorreful anguiſh?
            Are ſparcks of courradge in this yong progeny kendled
            By father Aeneas, with his vncle martial Hector?
            Theeſe toyes ſhee pratled mourning, griefs newlye refreſhing
            Thee whilſt king Helenus, with a crowding coompanye garded,
            From towne to vs buſkling vs as his freends freendlye bewelcomd.
            Vs to his new citty with curteſye cheereful he leadeth;
            With tears rief trickling ſaucing eeche queſtion aſked,
            I march on forward: and yoong Troy finelye reſembling
            
               
Thee big huge old monument, and new brooke Zanthus I knowledge.
            With the petit townegats fauoring thee principal old portes.
            Alſo mye companions in country cittye be frollickt:
            In toe the verye palaice thee Prince theym wholye receaueth.
            With whip cat bowling they kept a myrry carouſing,
            Thee goulden mazurs vp ſkynckt for a bon viage hoyſing.
            There we dyd al ſoiourne two dayes: then a proſperus hizling
            Of ſouth blaſt, puffing on ſayles dooth ſummon vs onward.
            Too thee Princely prophet thus I spake, hym freendlye requeſting.
            O ſacred Troian, thee light of miſterye darckned,
            Of Gods thee ſpooks mate, thee truchman of hallod Apollo:
            By the God enſtructed by ſtars for to ominat eeche thing,
            By flight and chirping byrds too prognoſticat aptlye:
            Poure foorth thy prophecy (for too mee proſperus hazards
            Eeche ſound relligion foretold, mee to Italye poſting,
            Only on diſpleaſaunt foule ſhapte byrd, the Harpye Celaeno
            (Forwarns much miſchiefe too coom with dangerus hunger)
            In theeſe ſtormye perils too what ſaulf porte ſhal I take mee?
            King Helenus ſlaughtring, with woont accuſtomed heyfers,
            Peace craues of the Godhead, from front thee label vnhanging,
            Mee, by the hand, trembling hee leads to thye myſterye (Phoebus)
            Thee prieſt this prophecy from Gods direction opned.
            Thow ſoon of holye Ʋenus (for th'art by ſetled apoinctment
            Of Gods mightye power to exployts most doughtye reſerued.
            Thus thy fate eſtabliſht dooth reſt, ſo thye fortun is ordred)
            Of poincts ſundrye wyl I to the ſhape but a curtal abridgment,
            Too the eende in thye trauayl thow mayſt the more heedlye be leſſond,
            And paſſe to Italian region, thus ſhortlye reherſing
            Peece meale prittye parings: for, too tel a ſummarye total,
            Thee fat's king Helenus dooe bar, with Iuno the Saturne.
            Wheare thow ſuppoſest therefor, that here Italye faſt by
            Dooth ſtand, and myndeſt too ſayl with ſpeede to that hauen:
            With draw thy iudgment from that groſſe coſmical erroure.
            Italy is hence parted by long croſſe dangerus inpaths.
            In flud Trinacrian thy great oars muſt deeplye be bathed,
            And the ſea rough wurcking muſt eeke with nauye be trauerst,
            And Circes Iſland ſe ye muſt with Limbo lake helliſh:
            
               
Ere ye ſhal in ſaulf land of a nobil cittye be founder.
            Glaunce I wyl at certeyn tokens, be ye watch ful in harckning.
            When ye ſhal in ſecret with care neere freſh water happen,
            Too spye bye thee banck ſyeds a ſtrange ſow mightelye ſized,
            Coompaſed al roundly with ſucklings thirtye to number,
            White, with lillye colours fayre dect, ſhee ſhal be repoſed
            On ground, dug dieting her mylckwhit farroed hoglings.
            Heere ſhal ceaſe thye labours: heere ſhal thy cittye be buylded.
            Feare not thee manging fort old of burdſeat in hunger,
            Thee fats thee paſſage ſhal ſmooth, yea goulden Apollo,
            If ye wyl hym ſummon, ſhal bee too the furth readye coomming.
            But this neere ſetled country (that of Italy is holden
            Parcel) ſee ye ſhun yt: for theare Greeks yreful ar harbourd.
            Heere the man of Locrus mounted ſteepe ſtatelye the townwals.
            And fields of Salent with trouping cluſtered armye
            Lyctius Idomeneus dooth keepe: ſo duke Meliboeus
            Holds thee prittye Petil round coompast ſtrong bye Philoctect.
            Alſo when in ſaulfty from ſeas thy nauye ſhal harboure,
            When rites relligious thow vowest on new ſhaped altars,
            With purple vesture bee deckt, with purpil eke hooded,
            Leaſt that in aduauncing thee Gods with fyrye cole heating,
            Soom diſmal viſadge foorth peake thee myſterye marring.
            Thow with thy feloes obſerue this cuſtomed order.
            And bye thye poſterytee let theeſe rites duelye be fooſtred.
            With winds neere to Sicil when that thy nauye ſhal enter,
            And ſtrayts ſhal be opned neere craggy vnweildye Pelorus,
            With lifth and ſayling to the lift ſyde countrye be packing:
            What ſtands on right ſyde both land and channel abandon.
            Theeſe ſhoars were ſundred by the plaſh breache, fame ſo doth vtter,
            (So things tranſitory by lengthned ſeaſon ar eaten)
            For when theeſe countryes were grapled ioinctlye to geather,
            Swift the ſea with plaſshing ruſht in, townes terreblye drenching,
            Italye diſioyncting with ſhort ſtreicts from Sicil Iſland,
            Scylla doth on right ſyde rough stand, and deadlye Charybdis
            On left hand ſwelleth with broad iaws greedelye galping,
            In to gut vpſouping three tymes thee flaſh water angrye,
            From paunch alſoe ſpuing toe the ſky the plaſh haſtlye receaued.
            
               
But Scylla in cabbans with ſneaking treacherye lurcketh,
            Cloſe and ſlilye ſpying, too flirt thee nauye to rock bane.
            A man in her viſadge, then a virgin fayre ſhe reſembleth
            Downe to her gastlye nauel, lyke a whale from thee belye ſeeming.
            Monſterus, vnſeemely, then a tayle lyke a dolphin is added
            Iumbled vp of ſauadge fel woulfs, with griſlye lol hanging.
            It wyl bee ſaulfer too paſſe thee countrye Pachynus,
            With leaſure lingring, and far ſtreicts crabbye to circle,
            Than to be ſurpriſed by Scylla in dungeon helliſh.
            Whear curs barck bawling, with yolp yalpe ſnarrye rebounding.
            Alſo yf king Helenus bee now for a truprophet holden,
            If fayth bee reſiaunt, yf trouth to hym graunteth Apollo:
            Thow ſoon of heunlye Godeſſe, this poinct I chieflye ſhal vtter,
            And beſyde al warnings eſt ſoons yt muſt be repeated:
            Let Iunoes deitee with duitye be woorſhiped humble.
            
               Ʋnto her frame thy prayers, let myſtreſſe might ye be vanquiſht
            With meekned preſents, and then lyke a conqueror happye
            From land Trinacrian thow ſhalt bee to Italye poſted.
            When ye in this paſſadge too Cumas cittye ſhal enter,
            And lake with rumbling forreſt of ſacred Auerna,
            A braynſick propheteſſe ſe ye ſhal, whom dungeon holdeth
            In ground deepe riueted, future haps and deſtenye chaunting.
            But yeet al her prophecyes in greene leaues nicelye be ſcribled,
            In theeſe ſlipprye leaues what ſooth thee virgin auerreth,
            Shee frams in Poëtry: her verſes in dungeon howſing.
            They keepe rancks ordred, with aray firſt ſetled abyding:
            But when on a ſuddeyn thee doors winds blaſtye doe batter,
            And theeſe leaues greeniſh with whiſking lightlye be ſcatterd,
            Neauer dooth ſhe laboure to reuoke her flittered iſſue,
            Or to place in cabban, theire floane lyms freſhlye reioyning.
            Thus they fle, deteſting thee lodge of giddye Sibylla:
            Heere for a ſpirt linger, no good opportunitye ſcaping.
            (Al thogh thee to ſeaward thy posting coompanye calleth,
            And winds vaunce fully thy ſayls with proſperus buffing)
            Poſt to this propheteſſe, let her help and ſooth be required.
            Shee wyl geeue notice to the ſtreight of al Italye dwellers:
            How thow wiſelye trauayls ſhalt ſhun, ſhalt manfulye ſuffer.
            
               
Theare ſhe wyl enstruct thee, thy paſſadge fortunat ayding.
            Theeſe be ſuch od caueats, as I to the freendlye can vtter.
            Foorth: and with thy valor let Troian glorye be mounted.
            When this Princely prophet this counſayl faythful had eended,
            Hee wyls that preſents of gould, ful weightelye poyſing,
            Bee brought to our veſſels, and therewith eke iuorye pulliſht:
            Plentye great of ſiluer with plate most ſumptuus adding.
            And a ſhirt mayled with gould, with acreſted vp helmet.
            Latelye Neoptolemus poſſeſt this martial armoure.
            My father Anchiſes rich preſents alſoe receaueth.
            Horſes eke and captayns are ſent.
            And oars to oure veſſels bee broght and weapon abundante.
            Thee whilſt Anchiſes wyls that thee nauye be launched,
            Leaſt that in oure loytring oure paſſadge lucky wer hindred.
            Hym prophet of Phoebus dooth treat with dignitye peereleſſe.
            Anchiſes, whom ſtatelye Venus tak's woorthye for huſband,
            Thee charge of deitee, now twiſe from Troy ruin haled,
            Italye ſee yoonder: thither with nauye be ſqudding.
            How beyt theeſe parcels in ſayling muſt be refuſed;
            Seeke the far and distant country declard of Apollo.
            Fare ye wel, happye parent of a ſoon ſo worthye; what oght els
            Should I ſay? what maks mee this gale ſo fortunat hynder?
            Alſo good Andromachee, with laſt departur al heauye,
            Preſented veſtures of gould most ritchlye bebroyded.
            And my lad Aſcanius with a Troian mantel adorning,
            Weau'd wurcks thwackt with honor, to her gifts this parlye ſhe līcketh.
            Take, myeboy, theeſe tokens by myn owne hands finniſhed holye.
            Let theſe of Andromachee thee good wyl teſtifye laſting.
            Cherriſh theeſe preſents by the pheere to the tendred of Hector.
            O next Aſtianax thee type by me chieflye belooued,
            In viſadge, looking, eke in hands thee fullye reſembling.
            Who had ben, yf hee liued, for yeers now youthlye thine equal.
            I for a long farewel this ſonnet ſorroful vttred.
            Rest ye ſtil heere bleſſed, that now youre fortun haue eended:
            Wee to future miſchiefe from formoure danger ar hurled.
            You rest in fre quiet, thee ſeas you need not vpharrow.
            You reck not, to trauayle, that back goeth, Italye ſerching.
            
               
Heere the image of Zanthus ye behold, and prittye Troy buylded
            By youre Princelye labours, and too this new ſhaped engyn
            Thee Gods ſend fortune, fro aſſaultes too fortifye Greekiſh.
            If that I too Tybris with neere but countrye ſhal enter,
            And that I ſhal fortune to behold thee towne by me founded:
            Italye with the Epeire, too both king Dardanus author,
            Shal be knit in freendſhip, making of two pepil one Troy.
            This leage eke of feloſhip ſhal bee manteyned of iſſue.
            Foorth we goa too the ſeaward, wee ſayle bye Ceraunia ſwiftly.
            Wheare too ioynctlye mearing a cantel of Italye neereth.
            Thee whilste thee ſunbeams are maſkt, hyls darcklye be muffled:
            Wee be put hard ioygning to the booſom of countrye requyred.
            Oure ſelfs wee cheriſht, oure members ſlumber atached.
            Not yeet was mydnight ouerhyed, when that Palinurus,
            From bed nimblye fleeth, too ſe in what quarter yt huffeth:
            How ſtands thee wind blast, with listning tentiue he marcketh,
            Thee lights starrye noting in globe celestial hanging:
            Thee ſeun ſtars ſtormy, twiſe told thee plowstar, eke Arcture,
            Alſo ſad Orion, with goulden flachet, in armoure.
            When that he perceaued, thee coaſt to be cleere, then he ſummond
            Oure men too ſhip boord, thee camp wee ſwiftlye remooued.
            Foorth we take oure paſſadge, oure ſayles ful winged vp hoysting.
            Thee ſtars are darckned, glittring Aurora reſhined.
            Wee doe ſe ſwart mountayns, we doe gaze eke at Italye dymmed.
            Italye loa yoonder, firſt, Italye, ſhowted Achated.
            Italye land naming, lykewiſe thee coompanye greeted.
            Then father Anchiſes a goold boul maſsye becrowning,
            With wyne brym charged, thee Gods celeſtial hayleth,
            In ſhip thus ſpeaking.
            You Gods, of ſayling, of land ſtats might ye remayning,
            Graunt to vs milde paſſadge, and tempest mollifye roughning.
            Sweete gales are breathing, and porte neere ſeated apeereth:
            In the typ of mountayne thee temple of hautye Minerua
            Glad we ſpye: thee mariners ſtrike ſayles, and roa to the ſhoareward.
            The hauen from the eaſtcoast, in bowewiſe, crooked apereth.
            Thee rocks ſternelye facing with ſalt fluds ſpumye be drumming.
            Downe the road is lurcking, yeet two peers loftye run vpward
            
               
From stoans lyke turrets: fro the ſhoare thee tempil auoydeth.
            Heere for a firſt omen fowre fayre ſteeds ſnow whit I marcked,
            Thee paſture ſhredding in fields: this countrye doth offer,
            Quod father Anchiſes, garboyls, ſo doe ſignifye war steeds.
            Yeet ſtay: the ſelf horſes in waynes erst ioinctlye were hooked,
            Al yoked, and matchlyke teamed with common agreement.
            This loa, quod hee bringeth firme hoape ſor peaceable vſadge.
            Then we honored Pallas, that graunted a luckye beginning:
            Alſo before the altars oure heads with purpil ar hooded,
            In Troy rites, Helenus faythful direction holding.
            And with ſetled honor thee Greekiſh Iuno we woorſhipt.
            Heere we doe not lynger; thee vowd ſollemnitye finniſht,
            Vp we gad, owt ſpredding oure ſayls and make to the ſeaward:
            Al creeks mistruſtful with Greekiſh countrye refuſing.
            Hercules his dwelling (yf bruite bee truelye reported)
            Wee ſe, Tarent named, to which heunlye Lacinia fronteth,
            And Caulons caſtels we doe spy, with Scylla the wreckmake.
            Then far of vplandiſh we doe view thee fird Sicil Aetna.
            And a ſeabelch grounting on rough rocks rapfulve frapping
            Was hard; with ramping bounce clapping neer to the ſeacoaſt
            Fierce the waters ruffle, thee ſands with wrought flud ar hoyſed.
            Quod father Anchiſes, heere loa that ſcuruye Charybdis.
            Theeſe ſtoans king Helenus, theeſe ragd rocks ruſtye fore vttred.
            Hence hye, mye deere feloes, duck the oars, and ſtick to the tacklings.
            Thus ſayd he, then ſwiftly this his heast thee coompanye practiſe.
            Firſt thee pilot Palinure thee ſteerd ſhip wrigs to the lifthand.
            Right ſo to thee ſame boord thee maysters al wrye the veſſels.
            
               Ʋp we fle too ſkyward with wild fluds haut ye, then vnder
            Wee duck too bottom with waues contrarye repreſſed.
            Thus thriſe in oure diuing thee rocks moſte horribly roared:
            And thriſe in oure mounting to the ſtars thee ſurges vs heaued.
            Thee winds and ſoonbeams vs, poore ſouls weerye, refuſed,
            And to ſoyl of Cyclops with wandring iournye we roamed.
            A large roade fenced from rough ventoſitye bluſtring.
            But neere ioynctlye brayeth with rufflerye rumboled Aetna.
            Soomtyme owt yt balcketh from bulck clowds grimlye bedymmed.
            Lyke fyerd pitche ſkorching, or flaſh flame ſulphurus heating:
            
               
Flownce to the ſtars towring thee fire, lyke a pellet, is hurled,
            Ragd rocks vp raking: and guts of mounten yrented
            From roote vp hee iogleth: ſtoans hudge ſlag molten he rowſeth:
            With route ſnort grumbling, in bottom flaſh furye kendling.
            Men ſay that Enceladus with bolt haulf blaſted here harbrouth,
            Dingd with this ſquiſing and maſſiue burthen of Aetna,
            Which pres on hym nayled from broached chymnye ſtil heateth.
            As oft as the giant his broyld ſyds croompeled altreth,
            So oft Sicil al ſhiuereth, there with flaks ſmoakye be ſparckled.
            That night in forrest to vs pouke bugs gastlye be tendred.
            Thee cauſe wee find not, for noiſe phantastical offred.
            Thee ſtars imparted no light, thee welken is heauye:
            And the moon enſhryned with cloſet clowdye remayned.
            Thee morning brightneſſe dooth luſter in east ſeat Eous,
            And night ſhade moysturs glittring Aurora repealeth.
            When that on a ſuddeyn we behold a windbeaten hard ſhrimp,
            With lanck wan viſadge, with rags iags patcherye clowted;
            His fiſts too the ſkyward rearing: heere wee ſtood amazed.
            A meigre leane rake with a long berd goatlyke; aparrayld
            In ſhrub weeds thorny: by his byrth a Grecian holden.
            One that too Troy broyls whillon from his countrye repayred.
            When the ſkrag had marcked far a loof thee Troian atyring,
            And Troian weapons, in steps he ſtutted, apaled:
            And fixt his footing, at leingth with deſperat offer
            Too the ſhore hee neered, theeſe ſpeeches merciful vttring.
            By stars I craue you, by the ayre, by the celical houſhold,
            Hoyſe me hence (O Troians) too ſum oother countrye me whirrye.
            Playnelye to ſpeake algats, for a Greeke my ſelf I doe knowledge,
            And that I too Troy towne with purpoſed emnitye ſayled.
            If this my treſpaſſe now claymeth duelye reuengment
            Plunge me deepe in the waters, and lodge me in Neptun his harboure.
            If mens hands ſlea mee, ſuch manniſh ſlaughter I wiſh for.
            Thus ſayd he, downe kneeling, and oure feete mournefuly claſping.
            Then we hym deſyred first too diſcoouer his ofſpring,
            After too manifeſt this his hard and deſtenye bitter.
            My father Anchiſes gaue his hand to the wretch on a ſuddeyn,
            And with al a pardon, with ſaulfe protection, offred.
            
               
Thee captiue, ſhaking of feare, too parlye thus entred.
            Borne I was in the Itacan countrey, mate of haples Vliſſes,
            Named Achoemenides, my ſyre alſo cald Adamaſtus,
            A good honeſt poore man (would we in that penurye lasted)
            Sent me toe youre Troywars, at last my coompanye ſkared
            From this countrye cruel, dyd poſting leaue me behynde theym,
            In Cyclops kennel, thee layſtow dirtye, the foule den.
            In this griſlye palaice, in forme and quantitye mightye,
            Palpable and groaping darckneſſe with murther aboundeth.
            Hee doth in al miſchiefe ſurpaſſe, hee mounts to the ſky top.
            (Al the heunly feloſhip from the earth ſuch a monster abandon)
            Hard he is too be viewed, too ſe hym no perſon abydeth.
            Thee blud with the entrayls of men, by hym ſlaughtred, he gnaweth.
            And of my feloes I ſaw that a couple he grapled
            On ground ſow grooueling, and theym with villenye cruſshed,
            At flint hard daſshing, thee goare blood ſpowteth of eeche ſyde,
            And ſwyms in the thraſhold, I ſaw fleſh bluddye toe ſlauer,
            When the cob had maunged the gobets foule garbaged haulfe quick.
            Yeet got he not ſhotfree, this butcherye quighted Ʋliſſes:
            In which doughtye peril the Ithacan moſte wiſelye bethoght hym.
            For the vnſauerye rakhel with collops bludred yfrancked,
            With chuffe chaffe wyneſops lyke a gourd bourrachoe replenniſht,
            His nodil in croſſewiſe wreſting downe droups to the growndward,
            In belche galp vometing with dead ſleape ſnortye the collops,
            Raw with wyne ſouſed, we doe pray toe ſupernal aſemblye,
            Round with al embaying thee muffe maffe loller; eke hastlye
            With toole ſharp poincted wee boarde and perced his oane light,
            That ſtood in his lowring front gloommiſh malleted onlye.
            Lyke Greekiſh tergat gliſtring, or Phoebus his horebeams.
            Thus the death of feloes on a lout wee gladlye reuenged.
            But ſe ye flee caytiefs, hy ye hence, cut ſwiftlye the cables.
            Pack fro the ſhoare.
            For ſuch as in priſon thee great Polyphemus is holden,
            His ſheepflocks foddring, from dugs mylck thriftelye ſquiſing,
            Thee lyke heere in mountayns doo randge in number an hundred,
            That hee curſd Cyclopes in naming vſual highted.
            Thee moone three ſeaſons her paſſadge orbical eended
            
               
Sence I heere in forreſt and cabbans gaſtlye dyd harboure,
            With bestes fel ſaluadge: and in caues ſtoany: Cyclopes
            Dayly I ſe, theire trampling and yelling helliſh abhorring.
            My ſelf I dieted with ſloas, and thinlye with haw thorns,
            With mast, and with roots of eeche herb I ſwadgde my great hunger.
            I pryed al quarters, and first this nauye to ſhoare ward
            Swift, I ſcryed, ſayling too which my ſelf I remitted,
            Of what condicion, what country ſo eauer yt had beene.
            Now tis ſufficient that I ſkape fro this horribil Iſland.
            Mee rather extinguiſh with ſoom blud murther or oother.
            Scant had he thus ſpoaken: when that from mountenus hil toppe
            Al wee ſee the giaunt, with his hole flock lowbylyke hagling.
            Namde the ſhepeherd Polyphem, to the wel knowne ſea ſyd aproching.
            A fowle fog monſter, great ſwad, depriued of eyeſight.
            His fiſts and stalcking are propt with trunck of a pynetree.
            His flock hym doe folow, this charge hym chieflye reioyceth.
            In grief al his coomfort on neck his whiſtle is hanged.
            When that too the ſeaſyde thee ſwayne Longolius hobbled,
            Hee rinſt in the water thee droſſe from his late bored eyelyd.
            His tuſk grimlye gnaſhing, in ſeas far waltred, he groyleth:
            Scantly doo the water ſurmounting reache toe the ſhoulders.
            But we being feared, from that coaſt haſtlye remooued,
            And with vs embarcked thee Greekiſh ſuitur, as amplye
            His due request merited, wee chopt of ſoftlye the cables.
            Swift wee ſweepe the ſeafroth with nimble lustilad oare ſtriefe.
            Thee noiſe he perceaued, then he turning warelye liſteth.
            But when he conſiderd, that wee preuented his handling,
            And that from foloing oure ſhips thee fluds hye reuockt hym,
            Loud the lowbye brayed with belling monſterus eccho:
            Thee water hee ſhaketh, with his owt cryes Italye trembleth.
            And with a thick thundring thee fyerde fordge Aetna rebounded.
            Then runs from mountayns and woods thee rownſeual helſwarme
            Of Cyclopan lurdens to the ſhoars in coompanye clustring.
            Far we ſe theym distaunt: vs grimly and vaynely beholding.
            Vp to the ſky reatching, thee breetherne ſwiſh ſwaſh of Aetna.
            A folck moaſte fulſoom, for ſight moſte fitlye reſembling
            Trees of loftye cipers, with thickned multitud oakroas:
            Or Ioues great forreſt, or woods of mightye Diana.
            
               
Feare thear vs enforced with poſting ſpeedines headlong
            Too ſwap of oure cables, and fal to the ſeas at auenture.
            But yeet king Helenus tump twixt Scylla and the Charybdis
            For to ſayl vs moniſhed, with no great dangerus hazard.
            Yeet we wer ons mynded, backward thee nauye to mayſter.
            Heere loa behold Boreas from bouch of north blo Pelorus
            Oure ſhips ful chargeth, thee quick rocks ſtoanye we paſſed:
            And great Pantagia, and Megarus with Tapſus his iſland.
            Theeſe ſoyls fore wandred to oure men were truelye related
            By poore Achoemenides, mate too thee luckles Ʋliſſes.
            Face too countrye Sicil theare ſtands a dangerus Iſland
            Plemmyrium ſtormy, but yt old paſt auncetrye cleaped
            Ortygia: Alpheüs, men ſay, thee great flud of Elis
            
               Ʋnder ſeabottoms this paſſadge ferreted, and now
            Swift fro Arethuſa going meets in fluds of Sicil Iſland.
            That country deitee, thogh wild, wee woorſhiped, and thence
            Wee ſayld and trauayled to the coaſt of fertil Elorus.
            Then we grate on rockrayes and bancks of ſtoanye Pachynus,
            And Camarina riuer, to remooue by deſtenye barred.
            Alſo we through paſſed thee fields of ſtatelye Geloüs.
            And thee mightye water, by cuſtoom great Gela named.
            Thence strong buylt Agragas his huge high wals loftelye vaunceth,
            That ſteeds courrageous with racebrood plentiful offred.
            And with lyke ſayling wee paſſe thee wooddye Selinis:
            And deepe gulfs ſyncking of blind Lilybeia rockiſh.
            After too Drepanus bad roade not luckye we ſayled.
            Heere loa being ſcaped from rough tempestuus huffling,
            My father Anchiſes, in cares my accustomed helper,
            I looſe: ô my father, wyl you forſake me, thus eending
            My toyls and my trauayls, why then dyd I mayſter al hazards?
            Nor propheting Helenus, when he foretold dangerus hard haps
            Forſpake this burial mourning, nor filthye Celoeno.
            This was laſt my laboure, thee knot claſpt of myn auentures.
            From thence God mee ſhoou'd too this your gratius empyre.
            Thus father Aeneas ſoly toe the coompanye liſtning
            His long dryrye viadge, and Gods ſet deſtenye chaunted.
            At leingth kept he ſilence, with finniſhed hiſtorye reſting.
            Finis libri tertij.
         
         
            
            THEE FOVRTH
BOOKE OF VIRGIL
HIS AENEIS.
            BVt the Queene in meane while with carks quādare deepe anguiſht,
            Her wound fed by Venus, with firebayt ſmoldred is hooked.
            Thee wights doughtye manhood leagd with gentilytye nobil,
            His woords fitlye placed, with his heunly phiſnomye pleaſing,
            March throgh her hert mustring, al in her breſt deepelye ſhe printeth.
            Theeſe carcking cratchets her ſleeping natural hynder.
            Thee next day foloing Phoebus dyd clarifye brightlye
            Thee world with luſter, watrye ſhaads Aurora remooued,
            When to her deere ſister, with woords, haulf gyddye ſhe raueth.
            Siſter An, I merueyle, what dreams mee terrefye napping,
            What newcoom trauayler, what gueſt in my harborye lighted?
            How braue he dooth court yt? what ſtrength and coorrage he carryes?
            I beleue yt certeyn (ne yet hold I yt vaynelye reported)
            That fro the great linnadge of Gods his pettegre ſhooteth.
            Feare ſhews pitfle crauens: good God, what deſtenye wayward
            Hath the man endured? what bickrings bitter he paſſed?
            Had not I foreſnaffled my mynde by votarye promiſe,
            Not toe yoke in wedlock too no wight earthlye mye perſon,
            When my firſt feloſhip by murther beastlye was eended,
            Had not I ſuch daliaunce, ſuch pipling bed gle renounced,
            Haplye this oane faulty treſpas might bring me toe bending.
            An (toe the my meaning and mynd I doe playnelye ſet open)
            Sence the death of my huſband, too wyt, the Sichoeus vnhappye,
            Sence mye cruel broother defilde the domestical altars:
            Onlye this od gallant hath bowd my phanſye toe lyking,
            And my looue hath gayned: thee ſkorcht ſtep of old fyre I ſauoure.
            But firſt with vengaunce let the earth mee ſwallo toe bottom,
            Or father omnipotent with lightnings dyng me toe lymbo,
            And to Erebus ſhading darckneſſe, too dungeon helliſh,
            
               
Eare that I ſhal thye ſtatutes (ô ſhamefaſt chaſtitye) cancel.
            Hee, that first me yoked for wiefe, dyd carrye my first looue,
            Hardlye let hym ſhrowd yt, cloſe claſpt in graue let yt harboure.
            When ſhe thus had ſpoaken, with tears her breſt ſhe replenniſht.
            Then ſayd An (ô ſiſter, than light more deerely belooued)
            Wyl ye ſtil in pining youre youthful ioylitye ſtiefle?
            Wyl ye not haue children, nor ſweete Venus happye rewarding's?
            Weene ye that oure lyking a ſcalp of a charuel In heedeth?
            Graunt, earst that noe woer could catche youre phanſye to wedlock,
            Nor Lybye land lordinges, ne by Tyre deſpiſed I arbas,
            Nor manye ſtat's lofty, that reſt in plentiful Affrick:
            Wyl ye ſtil endeuoure with pleaſd looue vaynelye to iuſtle?
            Wyl ye be forgetting in what curſt countrye ye ſoiourne?
            Heere towns of Getuls doo ſtand, a nation hardye,
            Heere ye ſit embayed with Moors, with Syrtis vnhowſed.
            Theare pepil of Barcey through ſoale wyld barrenes harboure.
            What ſhal I tel further, what broyle Tyrus angrye doth hammer,
            What threats your broother thunders.
            I thinck, that the Godhead, with Junoes proſperus ayding,
            Thee Troian veſſels too this youre ſegnorye pelted.
            Loa what a fayre citty ſhal mount, what ſtabliſhed empyre
            By this great wedlock: with might of the vnitye Troian.
            How far ſhal be fleing thee glorie renowmed of Affrick.
            Of Gods craue pardon, then, when youre ſeruice is eended,
            Youre new guest frollick, his stay let forgerye linger,
            Til winters lowring bee paſt, and rayne make Orion.
            Til they rig al veſſels, vntil tyme stormye be ſwaged.
            With theeſe woords flaming her breſt was kendled in hoat looue:
            Shee graunts to her tottring mynd hoape, ſhame baſhful auoyding.
            First to the church gad they, rest and peace meekelye requeſting,
            In ſacrifice killing, by woont accuſtomed, hogrels:
            Firſt to Ceres makelaw, too Phoebus, then to Lyoeus:
            Chieflye to Queene Iuno, that wedlocks vnitye knitteth.
            Thee bol in hand firmely Queene Dido, the bewtiful, holding,
            Pourd yt a mydſt both the horns peaking of lillye white heyfer.
            Soomtyme to the altars, diſtant, of Gods ſhe reſorteth:
            And makes freſh ſacrifice, the catal, new ſlaughtered, heeding.
            
               
Shee weens her fortune by guts, hoate ſmoakye, to conſter.
            
               ô the ſuperſtitions of beldam trumperye ſooth ſays.
            Now what auayle temples, or vows, whilſt deepelye the flamd fire
            Kendleth in her marrow, whilſt wound in breſt cel is aking.
            Dido, the wretch, burneth, neere mad through cittye ſhe ſtalketh:
            Much lyke a doa wounded too death, not marcked of heerdman,
            His dart ſharp headed through forreſt Caſſian hurling,
            On the doa iump lighteh by ſoom chaunce medlye: the weapon,
            Thee bodye ſore ranckling dooth ſtur thee deere to the frithward,
            Or to falow ſtraining, in corps thee deadlye staf hangeth.
            Often about thee wals Aeneas ſlilye ſhe trayneth:
            Too welth Sidonian poincting, too cittye nere eended.
            Her bye tale owt hauking amyd oft her parlye ſhe chocketh.
            Soomtyme ſhe inuites theym too deynty bancquet in eeuening:
            Now freſh agayne crauing of Troian toyle the recital,
            From lyps of Chronicler with blincking liſtenes hanging.
            When they be departed, when light of mooneſhine is houſed,
            And stars downe gliding at due tyme of ſlumber ar ayming,
            Restles aloane ſobbing on left benche ſoalye ſhe ſytteth:
            Her ſelfe not preſent ſhe both hyers and ſees the man abſent.
            Or the ſlip Aſcanius (for ſainct thee ſhrinecaſe adoring)
            Shee cols for the father: with buſſe to lenifye loouefits.
            Thee towrs new founded mount not, thee coompanye youthful
            Surceaſe from warfeats, there toyls no ſwincker in hauen;
            Nor maſon in bulwarck: wurcks interrupted ar hanging.
            And wals hudge menacing, thee ſky top in altitud eeuening.
            When the plage of pacient thee ſpouſe of Iuppiter heeded,
            And noe reporte wandring thee looue furye kendled abated,
            Thus toe Ʋenus turning ſpake thee Saturnical empreſſe.
            A praiſe of high reckning, eke a catche to be greatlye renowmed
            You with youre pricket purchast, loa the victorye famouſe:
            With two Gods packing one woomman ſellye to cooſen.
            Wel dyd I know, miſtreſſe, that you my great harborye feared,
            Mightelye mistrusting thee ſeats of Carthage, hye mounted.
            When ſhal, Hoa, bee ſhouted? too what drift feede we this anger?
            Why be we not forward theeſe mat's too marrye to geather
            And a leage eternal conclude? thy long wiſh is heſted.
            
               
Dido with hertlyking dooth burne, her boans furye fretteth.
            Let theeſe ſundrye pepils theare for bee lincked in one loare.
            Alſo let oure Dido vayle her hert too bedfeloe Troian:
            And Tyrian kingdooms to the ſhal, for dowrye, be graunted.
            Then to her (for wiſely ſhee found thee treacherye feined
            Too fetch too Tyrians the great empyre of Italye woorcking)
            Thus Ʋenus her ſpeeches dyd bend. What niddipol hare brayne
            Would ſcorne this couenaunt? would with thee gladlye be iarring?
            If ſo this happye trauayle ſhal ſo be with happines ayded.
            But fates mee stamering doo make, yf Iuppiter holdeth
            Best, that the Tyrians and Troian progenye couple,
            That they be conioigned, that both they freendlye be leaged.
            You to hym bee spouſed: thee trouth with pillotoy ferret.
            On before, and I folow. Too this ladye Iuno replyed.
            That labor I warrant. Now by what craftinis are wee
            Too wurck this ſtratagem: marck wel, for I brieflye wyl open.
            Thee Prince Aeneas and eke Queene Dido the poore ſoule
            For to hunt in forrest too morro be fullye reſolued,
            So ſoon as in eaſt coaſte with bright beams Titan apeereth.
            Then wyl I round coompaſſe with clowd grim foggye theſe hunters.
            When they ſhal in thickets thee coouert maynelye be drawing.
            Al the ſkye ſhal ruſtle with thumping thunderus hurring.
            Thee men I wyl ſcatter, they ſhal be in darcknes al hooueld.
            Dido and thee Troian captayne ſhal iumble in one den.
            If with his my trauayle thy mynd and phanſye be meeting
            Then wyl I thee wedlock with firme affinitye fasten:
            This ſhal bee the bryde hymne. To the drift Venus, vttred, agreed,
            Smoothlye with al ſimpring, too groape ſuche treacherus handling.
            Thee whilſt thee dawning Aurora fro the Ocean haſtned,
            And the May freſh yoonckers to the gates doo make there aſemblye
            With nets and catch toyls, and hunt spears plentiful yrond:
            With the hounds quick ſenting, with pricking galloper horſman.
            Long for thee Princeſſe thee Moors gentilitye wayted,
            As yet in her pincking not pranckt with trinckerye trinckets:
            As they ſtood attending thee whilſt her trapt genet hautye
            Deckt with ritche ſcarlet, with gould ſtood furniture hanging,
            Praunſeth on al ſtartling, and on byt gingled he chaumpeth.
            
               
At leingth foorth ſhe fleeth with ſwarming coompanye circled,
            In cloke Sidonical with rich dye brightlye beſprinckled.
            Her locks are broyded with gould, her quiuer is hanging
            Backward: with gould tache thee veſture purple is holden.
            Thee band of Troians lykewiſe, with wanton Iülus
            Doo marche on forward: but of al thee Lucifer heunlye
            In bewty Aeneas hymſelf to the coompanye rancketh.
            Lyke when as hard frozen Lycia and Zanth floods be relinquiſht
            By Pheebe, to Delos, his natiue contrye ſeat, hastning.
            Hee poinctes a dawnſing, foorth with thee rustical hoblobs
            Of Cretes, of Dryopes, and payncted clowns Agathyrſi
            Dooe fetch theyre gambalds hopping neere conſecrat altars.
            Hee trips on Zanthus mountayn, with delicat hearelocks
            Trayling: with greene ſhrubs and pure gould neatly becrampound
            His ſhafts on ſhoulder rattle: the lyke hautye reſemblaunce
            Carried Aeneas with gliſtring coomlines heunlye.
            When they toe thee mountayns and too layrs vncoth aproched,
            Then, loa, behold ye, breaking thee goats doo trip fro the rocktops
            Neere toe the playne: the heard deare dooth ſtray frō mounten vnharbourd.
            Thee chaſe is enſued with paſſadge dustye bepowdred.
            But the lad Aſcanius, with praunſing courſer hye mounted,
            Dooth manage in valley, now theym, now theeſe ouerambling.
            Hee ſcornes theeſe raſcal tame games, but a ſounder of hogsteers,
            Or thee brownye lion too ſtalck fro the mounten he wiſheth.
            Thee whilſt in the ſkye ſeat great bouncing rumbelo thundring
            Ratleth: downe powring too ſleete thick hayle knob is added.
            Thee Tyrian feloſhip with yoouthful Troian aſemblye
            And Venus hautye nephew doo run too ſundrye ſet houſes.
            Hudge fluds lowdlye freaming from mountayns loftye be trowlling,
            Dido and thee Troian captayne doo iumble in one den.
            Then the earth crau's the banes, theare too watrye Iuno, the chaplayne,
            Seams vp thee bedmatch, the fyre and ayre teſtifie wedlock.
            And Nymphs in mountayns high typ doe ſqueak, bullelo, yearning.
            That day cros and diſmal was cauſe of miſchief al after,
            And bane of her killing; her fame for ſleight ſhe regarded.
            No more dooth ſhe laboure too maſk her Phanſye with hudwinck,
            With thee name of wedlock her carnal leacherye cloaking,
            
               
Straight through towns Lybical this fame with an infamye rangeth.
            Fame the groyl vngentil, then whom none ſwifter is extant;
            Limber in her whiſking: her streingth in iournye ſhe trebbleth;
            First lyke a ſhrimp ſquatting for feare, then boldlye ſhe roameth
            On ground prowd letting: ſhee ſoars vp nimblye toe ſkyward;
            The earth, her dame, chauffing with graund Gods celical anger,
            Litterd this leueret, the ſyb, as men ſundrye reherſed,
            Too the giant Coeus, ſiſter to ſwad Encelad holden.
            Furth ſhe quicklye galops, with wingflight ſwallolke haſtning.
            A foule fog pack paunch: what feathers plumye ſhe beareth,
            So manye ſquint eyebals ſhee keeps (a relation vncoth)
            So manye tongues clapper, with her ears and lip labor eeuened.
            In the dead of nighttyme to the ſkyes ſhee flickereth, howling
            Through the earth ſhade ſkipping, her ſight from ſlumber amoouing.
            Whilſt the ſun is ſhyning the bagage cloſe lodgeth in houſroofs,
            Or tops of turrets, with feare towns loftye ſhe frighteth.
            As readye forgde fittons, as true tales vaynelye toe twattle.
            Thee pepil in iangling this raynebeaten harlotrye filled:
            Meerelye furth chatting feats paſt, and feats not atempted.
            That the duke Aeneas from Troians auncetrye ſprouting,
            In Lybye coaſt landed, with whom fayre Dido, the Princeſſe,
            Her perſon barterd, and that they both be reſolued,
            Thee winter ſeaſon too waſt in leacherye wanton.
            Retchles of her kingdoom, with rutting bitcherye ſauted.
            This that pratpye cadeſſe labored too trumpet in eeche place.
            Furth ſhe fleeth poſting to the kingly rector Iarbas.
            With the brute enflaming his mynd ſhe doth huddle on anger.
            Soon to the Prince Ammon, Garamans thee fayrye, bye rapeſnacht,
            His moother named; this king too Iuppiter heunly
            Temples twiſe fifty dyd buyld, lyke number of altars,
            With fire continual theeſe ſeats too conſecrat vſing,
            With the blud of ſacrifice floating, with delicat herbflowrs.
            Netled with theeſe brackye nouels as wild as a marche hare
            In the myd of the Idols (men tel) neere furniſhed altars,
            Theeſe woords, vplifting both his hands, he toe Iuppiter vttred.
            Juppiter almighty, whom men Mauruſian, eating
            On the tabils verniſht, with cuprit's magnifye dulye:
            
               
Eyest thow this filthood? ſhal wee, father heunlye, be careleſſe
            Of thy claps thundring? or when fiers glimrye be liſted
            In clowds grim gloomming with bounce doo terrifye worldlings?
            A coy tyb, as vagabund in this my ſegnorye wandring,
            That the plat of Carthage from mee by cooſinage hooked,
            T'whom gaue I fayre tilladge, and eeke lawes needful enacted,
            Hath ſcornd my wedlock: Aeneas lord ſhe reteyneth.
            Now this ſmocktoy Paris with berdleſſe coompanye wayted,
            With Greekiſh coronet, with falling woommaniſh hearelocks
            Lyke fieſt hound mylckſop trimd vp, thee victorye catcheth.
            And wee beat the buſhes, thee ſtil with woorſhip adoring.
            Onlye for oure ſeruice ſoom prayſed vanitye gleaming.
            Thee prayer of playntiefe, grappling thee conſecrat altars,
            Iuppiter hard; foorth with to, the courte hee whirled his eyeſight,
            And viewd theeſe bedmat's no ſound reputation heeding.
            With woords imperial thus he ſpeaks and Mercurye chargeth.
            Flee my ſun, and buſk on, let ſweete winds ſwiftlye be ſoommond,
            And toe the duke Troian, that vaynelye in Carthage abydeth,
            Thee towns neglecting, that to hym ſet destenye lotteth,
            Theeſe woords deliuer, from mee to hym carrye this errand.
            His paragon moother to vs framd a promiſe of hudgger
            Accoumpt and reckning, then he now perfourmeth, vpon that
            Hoape future expected, from Troy flam's twiſe ſhe reliu'd hym.
            Too me ſhe dyd promiſe, that he ſhould bee the emperor hautye,
            That would, with bickring, fierce martial Italye vanquiſh:
            Thee Troian famely with wide ſpread glorye reuiuing:
            And globe of alregions with laws right equitye bridle.
            Too feats ſo valiant yf that no glorye doth haſt hym,
            Or to hym thee catching of fame ſo woorthye be toyle ſoom:
            Shal, by ſyre, Aſcanius from Roman cittye be loytred?
            What doth he forge: wherefore wil he reſt in countrye ſo freendleſſe?
            Why the Lauin regions, and ſtock he ſo ſlilye reputeth?
            Thee ſea let hym trauerſe: this is al: to hym ſignifye this muche.
            Ioue ſayd: eke hee the fathers commaund to accompliſſe apoincteth.
            Firſt of al his woorcking too his feete ſhooes goulden he knitteth,
            By which he with wind blaſt ruffling oft flittereth vpward,
            Wheather he land regions or rough ſeas ſurgye doth harrow.
            
               
His rod next he handleth: by which from the helly Bocardo
            Touzt tost ſouls he freeth: diuerſe to the priſon he plungeth.
            Hee cauſeth ſleeping and bars: bye death eyelyd vphasping.
            With the rod eke he ſheareth thee winds, and ſcattereth high clowds.
            As thus he dyd flicker, thee top wyth ſideryb of Atlas
            Hee ſees, that proppeth, with crowne, the ſupernal Olympus,
            Atlas, whoſe pallet with pynetrees plentiful hooueld,
            In grim clowds darckned, with ſhowrs and windpuf is haunted.
            Thee ſnoa whit his ſhoulders dooth cloath, fluds mightye be rowling
            From the chyn oldlye riueld, his beard with frost hoare is hardned.
            Firſt on this mounteyn thee winged Mercurie lighted:
            From thence too the waters his courſe hee bended al headlong.
            Muche lyke a byrd neſtled neere ſhoars or deſolat hilrocks:
            Not to the ſky maynely, but neere ſea meanelye ſhe flickreth.
            So with a meane paſſadge twixt ſky and ſea Mercurye ſlideth
            To Lyby coaſt ſandy; thee ſharp wynds ſpeedelye ſhauing,
            Mercurye thee Cyllen, bye the mount Cyllene begotten.
            On Lyby land tenements with winged feete when he lighted,
            Hee ſpyed Aeneas new caſtels thriftelye founding,
            And howſrowms altring: hee woare then a gorgeus hanger
            With iaſpar yellow: hee ſhynde with mantel ypurpled,
            From ſhoulders trayling: this braue roabe Dido, the ritch Queene,
            Soalye with her handwurck dyd weaue: with gould wyre yt heaping.
            Mercurye thus greets hym: Now ſir; you wholye be careful
            Too found new Carthage, with youre braue bedfelo ſotted
            You buyld a cittye, youre owne ſtate ſlilye regarding.
            Now to the God ſentmee from ſhining brightned Olympus,
            The God of al the godheads, managing heune and places earthlye,
            Hee gaue commaundement, too thee too carrye this erraund.
            What doe ye forge? wherefore thus vaynely in land Lybye mitche you?
            Too feats ful valiant yf that no glorye doth egge the,
            Or toe the thee catching of fame ſoo woorthye be toyl ſoom,
            Caſt care on Aſcanius riſing, of the heyrs of Iülus.
            Tw'hom the ſtat Italian with Roman cittye belongeth.
            When this round meſſage thee Cyllen Mercurye whiſperd,
            In myd of his parling from gazing mortal he ſhrincketh:
            From lookers eyeſight too thinnes he vanniſhed ayrye.
            
               
But the duke Aeneas with ſight ſo geaſon agaſted,
            His buſh ſtarck ſtaring with feare, cleene ſpeecheles abyded.
            Hee to fle ſoare longeth, this ſweet ſoyl ſtreight to relinquiſh,
            By Gods imperial moniſhing auctoritye warned.
            Heere but alas he myred what courſe may be warelye taken;
            How ſhal he too Princeſſe, with looues hoat phrenſye reteyned,
            Breake this cold meſſadge? what woords ſhal ſhape the beginning.
            From thee poast toe piler with thoght his rackt wyt he toſſeth.
            Now to this od ſtratagem, now too that counſeyl alying.
            After long mooting, this courſe for better he deemed.
            Mnestheus hee called, Sergeſt and manlye Cloanthus,
            For to rig in ſecret theyre ſhips, and coompanye ſummon,
            With weaponsready: Thee cauſe alſo of changabil hastning
            Deepelye toe diſſemble: when eke opportunitye ſerued,
            Whilſt no breche of freendſhip thee good ladye `Dido remembers,
            And due place of ſpeaking ſweetly with ſeaſon is offred,
            They would theire paſſadge cloſe ſteale. Thee knightes agreed,
            With wil moſte forward, to haſte on too iournye reſolued.
            How beyt thee Princeſſe (what wyle can iuggle a loouer?)
            Found owt this cogging: in thoght what firſt ſhe reuolued
            That toe doe they mynded: things ſtanding ſaulflye ſhe feareth.
            Fame, the blab vnciuil, fosters her phanſye reciting,
            That the fleete is ſtrongly furniſht, theire paſſage apoincted.
            Deuoyd of al counſayle ſcolding through cittye ſhe ploddeth.
            Mutch lyke Dame Thyas with great ſollemnitye sturred
            Of Bacchus third yeers feaſting, when quaftyde aproacheth,
            And ſhowts in nighttyme doo ringe in loftye Cithoeron.
            At last ſhe Aeneas thus, not prouoked, aſaulteth.
            And thoghst thow, faythleſſe coystrel, ſo ſmoothlye to ſhaddow
            Thy packing practiſe? from my ſoyle priuelye ſlincking?
            Shal not my lyking, ne yet earſt fayth plighted in handclaſpe,
            Nor Didoes burial from this croſſe iourney withold the?
            Further; in a winters ſoure ſtorme muſt nauye be launched?
            Mind'st thow with northen bluſter thee mayne ſea to trauerſe
            Thow cruel hert haggard? what? yf hence too countrye the paſſage
            Thow took'st not ſtranged: ſuppoſe Troy cittye remayned:
            Through the ſea fierce ſwelling would'st thow to Troy cittye be packīg?
            
               
Shunst thow my preſence? By theeſe tear's, and bye thye righthand
            (Sence that I, poore caytiefe, noght els to mye ſelf doe relinquiſh)
            By the knot of wedlock, by looues ſollemnitye ſealed,
            If that I deſerued too fore ſoom kindnes, or ennye
            Part of my perſon to the whillon pleaſur a furded
            To my ſtate empayring let yeet ſoom mercye be tenderd.
            I doe craue (yf toe prayers as yeet ſoom nouke be reſerued)
            Beat downe thy purpoſe, thy mynd from iournye reclayming.
            For thy ſake in Lybical regions and in Nemod hateful
            I liue: my Tyrian ſubiectes purſue me with anger.
            For thy ſake I ſtayned whillon my chaſtitye ſpotleſſe:
            And honor old battered, to the ſky with glorye me lifting.
            And now, gueſt, wheather doe ye ſkud from deaths fit of hostace?
            That terme muſt I borowe, ſyth I dare not cal the myne huſband.
            Why do I breath longer? ſhal I liue til cittye mye broother
            Pigmalion ranſack? or too tyme I be priſoner holden
            By thee Getul Järb? yf yeet ſoom progenye from me
            Had crawld, by the fatherd, yf a cockney-dandiprat hopthumb,
            Prittye lad Aeneas, in my court, wantoned, ere thow
            Took'st this filthye fleing, that thee with phiſnomye lyckned,
            Ine then had reckned my ſelf for deſolat owtcaste.
            Shee ſayd: he perſiſting too doo what Iuppiter heaſted,
            Sturd not an eye, graueling in his hert his ſorroful anguiſh.
            At length thus briefly dyd he parle: I may not, I wil not
            Deny thy beneficts ful as amply, as can be recounted,
            Vnto me deliu'red: ſo long ſhal I Dido remember,
            Whilſt I my ſelf mynd ſhal: whilst lyms with ſpirit 
                  〈◊〉
                orderd.
            Brieflye for a weighty matter few woords I wil v
                  ••
               er.
            Neauer I foremynded (let not mee falſlye be threpped)
            For toe ſlip in ſecret by flight: ne yet eauer I thralled
            My ſelf too wedlock: I toe no ſuch chapmenhed harckned.
            If toe mye mynd priuat my fatal fortun agreed,
            If ſo that al ſorrows iump with my phanſye were eended,
            Then ſhould bee chiefly bye me Troian cittye redreſſed,
            And kinreds rellieques woorſhipt: then ſhould be renewed
            Thee courte of Priamus: yea thogh that victorye razed
            Theeſe monuments, yet agayne by mee they ſhould be repayred.
            
               
But now to Italian kingdooms vs ſendeth Apollo,
            And vs to Italian regions ſet deſtenye warneth.
            Theare reſts oure lyking: there eke oure wiſht countrye remayneth.
            If ye be delighted, too ſee new Carthage vp hoouering,
            And a Moore in Moriſh citty youre phanſye ye ſettle:
            Why ſo may not Troians theire courſe to good Italye coompaſſe?
            What reaſon embars theym, ſoom forreyn countrye to ferret?
            Of father Anchiſes thee goaſt and griſlye reſemblaunce,
            When the day dooth vanniſh, when lights eke ſtarrye be twinckling,
            In ſleepe mee moniſheth, with viſadge buggiſh he feareth.
            And my ſun Aſcanius mee pricks, by me rightlye belooued:
            Whom from the Italian regions toe toe long I doe linger.
            Latelye toe mee posted from Ioue thee truch ſprit, or herrald
            Of Gods (thee deityes this ſooth too wytnes I ſummon)
            Hee dyd, in expreſſed commaund, to me meſſage his erraund.
            I ſaw moſt liuely, when that neere towne wal he lighted;
            In this eare hee towted thee ſpeeche. Ceaſe therefor, I pray you,
            Mee to teare, and alſo youre ſelf, with drirye reherſals.
            Italye not willing I ſeeke.
            Whilst he thus in pleading dyd dwel, ſhee ſurlye beheeld hym:
            Heere ſhe dothe her viſadge, thear ſkew, eeche member in inchmeale
            In long mummye ſilence limming: then ſhrewdlye ſhe ſcoldeth.
            No Godes is thye parent, nor th'wart of Dardanus ofſpring,
            Thow periurde fay toure: but amydst rocks, Caucaſus haggiſh
            Bred the, with a tigers ſoure milck vnſeaſoned, vdderd.
            What ſhal I diſſemble? what poincts more weightye reſerue I?
            At my tears ſhowring dyd he ſigh? dyd he winck with his eyelyd?
            Ons dyd he weepe vanquiſht? dyd he yeeld ons mercye toe loouemate?
            What ſhal I firſt vtter? wyl I not graund Iuno with hastning,
            Nor thee father Saturne with his eyes bent rightlye behold this?
            Fayth quite is exiled: fro the ſhoare late a runnagat hedgebrat,
            A tarbreeche quyſtroune dyd I take, with phrenſye betraſshed
            I placed in kingdoom, both ſhips and coompanye gracing.
            Woa to me thus stamping, ſutch braynſick foolerye belching.
            Marck the ſpeake, I pray you, wel coucht: Now ſothtel Apollo,
            Now Lycian fortuns, from very Iuppiter heunlye
            A menacing meſſage, by the Gods ambaſſador, vttred.
            
               
Foorſooth; this thye viadge with care Saincts celical heapeth,
            Theire brayns vnquieted with this baldare be buzing.
            I ſtay not thye body, ne on baw vaw tromperye deſcant.
            Pack toe ſoyl Italian: croſſe thee ſeas: fiſh for a kingdoom.
            
               Ʋerely, in hoape rest I (yf Gods may take duelye reuengment)
            With gagd rocks coompaſt, then vaynely, Dido, reciting,
            Thow ſhalt bee punniſht. Ile with fyre ſwartiſh hop after.
            When death hath vntwined my ſoule from carcas his holding,
            I wyl, as hobgoblin, foloa thee: thow ſhalt be ſoare handled:
            I ſhal hyre, I doubt not, thy pangs in lymbo related.
            Her talck in the mydel, with this last parlye, ſhe throtled.
            And from his ſight parted, with tortours queazye diſorderd.
            Hym ſhee left daunted with feare, woords duitiful harming.
            For to reply. The lady ſowning mayds carrye to ſmooth bed
            Of marble glittring, on beers her ſoftlye repoſing.
            But the good Aeneas (al thogh that he cooueted hertlye,
            For to ſwage her malady, with woords to qualifye ſorrows)
            In groans deepe ſcalding, his kindmynd ſindged in hoat looue,
            Yeet the wyl of the Godheads foloing, too nauye returneth.
            Thee Troian mariners now drudge: theire fleet they doe lavnch foorth:
            And veſſels, calcked with roaſen ſmearye, be floating.
            Vp they trus oars boughed with plancks vnfinniſhed, haſtning
            From thence theire paſſadge.
            Now to the ſtrond may ye ſee from towne thee multitude hopping.
            Much lyk when piſmers theire corne in granar ar hurding,
            Careful of a winter nipping, in barns they bepiling.
            Thee blackgarde marching dooth wurck, in path way, ther harueſt.
            Parte of theeſe laborers on ſhoulders carrye the burdens
            Of ſhocks: ſoom grangers with goade iads restye be pricking,
            And ſpur on ants luſkiſh. with ſwinck eeche corner aboundeth.
            But toe the, poore Dido, this ſight ſo ſkearye beholding,
            What feeling creepeth? what ſobbing ſorroful here ſigh
            In thy corps hized, when from towre, loftelye mounted,
            Thow ſaw'ſt thee banckſydes coouerd, and right to thyne eyeſight
            Thow ſaw'st ſeas ringing with cheering clamorus hayſſayle?
            Scuruye looue, in pacients what moods thow mightelye forceſt.
            Now ſhe is conſtrayned, too formoure tears toe be turning.
            
               
With ſuit freſhlye praying, too looue ſhee tendereth hommage.
            No meane vnattempted, ne vnſoght, ear that ſhe dye, leauing.
            Sister An, in cluſter you ſee thee coompanye ſwarming
            On the ſhoare in flockmeale: for wind theire ſayles ar hoysted.
            On sterne thee mariners haue ſetled meerelye garlands.
            If that I foremynded this greefe ſo miſcheuus hapned,
            Then ſhould I, ſister, moderat this ſorroful hazard.
            Yeet good An, I pray thee, doe me wretch this pleaſure in one thing.
            For the chiefe of woomen this breake now naughtye regarded,
            Chieflye to the hee wounted to recount his priuitye ſecret.
            His daps and ſweetening good moods to the ſoalye were opned.
            Post to hym (good ſiſter) toe mye proud foa tel ye this erraund.
            I dyd not ranſack, with Greeks conſpiracye, Troytowne.
            Nor yet agaynst Troians ſend I enuy veſſel apoincted.
            Nor father Anchiſes boans cruſht I, ne ſcattred his aſhes.
            What reaſon hym leadeth to my ſuite too boombas his hyring?
            Wheather is hee flitting? To his leefe pheere graunt he this one boone,
            Too ſtay for a better paſſadge, for a proſperus hufgale.
            I clayme no old wedlock, that he fowly and falſlye betrayed.
            Nor that he thee regiment doo looſe of his Italye kingdooms.
            I craue a vayne reſpit, but a ſpirt toe mye phrenſye relenting,
            Til my fate hath ſchoold mee too mourne my deſtenye drowping,
            Theeſe I craue in pardon for last (yeeld mercye to ſister)
            Which when you tender, toe mye death that ſhal be requighted.
            In this wiſe ſhe prayed: ſuch tears her ſiſter vnhappye
            Dooth to and fro carry: but he with no tearedrop is altred:
            Nor to vayne entreatings with liſtning tractable harckneth.
            Thee fat's are pugnant, God, his ears quight ſtifned in hardneſſe.
            Much lyke as in forrest a long ſet dottrel, or oaktree,
            With northen bluſters too parts contrayrye retoſſed:
            Thee winds ſcold ſtrugling, the threſhing thick cruſh craſh is owtborne,
            Thee boughs frap whuarring, when ſtem with blaſtbob is hacked:
            Yeet the tre ſtands ſturdy: for as yt toe the ſkytyp is haunced,
            So far is yt crampornd with roote deepe dibled at helgat's:
            So this courragious gallant with cluſtered erraunds
            Is cloyed and ſtinging ſharp car's in brest doe lye thrilling.
            His mynd vnuariant doth ſtand, tears vaynelye doe gutter.
            
               
Dido the poore Princeſſe gauld with ſuch deſtenye cutting,
            Crau's mortal paſſadge: too looke toe the ſky ſhe repyneth.
            And toe put her purpoſe forward, this light toe relinquiſh,
            When ſhe the gift ſacrifice with the incenſe burned on altars
            (Griſlye to bee ſpoaken) thee moyſture ſwartlye was altred:
            And the wyne, in powring, lyke blood black ſootiſh apeered.
            This too no creature, no, not to her ſiſter is opned.
            Further eke in the palaice a chapel fayre marbil abydeth,
            
               Ʋowd to her firſt huſband, which cel ſhee woorſhiped highlye.
            With whit lillye fleſes, with garland greeniſh adorned:
            Heere to her ful ſeeming ſhe dyd hyre thee clamor of elfiſh
            Goaſt of her old huſband, her furth to his coompanye wafting,
            When the earth with thee ſhaads of night was darcklye bemuffled.
            Alſo on thee turrets the ſkrich howle, lyke fetchliefe y ſetled,
            Her burial roundel dooth ruck, and cruncketh in howling.
            Sundrye ſuch od prophecyes, many ſuch prognoſticat omens,
            In foretyme coyned, theire threatnings terrible vtterd.
            Yea cruel Aeneas in dreame to her ſeemeth apeering,
            Her furious chaſing: her ſelf left alſo, ſhe deemed,
            Post aloan, and ſoaly from woonted coompanye ſingled,
            Too trauayl a iourney toe toe long, and that ſhe returneth,
            Too ſeek her owne Tyrians, through cragged paſſages vncooth.
            Much lyke when Pentheus thee troups fel of helliſh aſemblye,
            And two ſoons ſhyning, and two Thebs vaynely beholdeth.
            Or lyke as, in ſkaffold theaters, is touzed Oreſtes
            From his dame gaſtlye fleeing, with flam's and poyſoned adders:
            Or black ſcaalde ſerpents, and when that in entrye he ſetled
            Sour feends grimlye gnaſhing, ramping with griſlye reuengment.
            When ſhe thus in raging dyd ſwel: when plunged in anguiſh,
            For to dye ſhee mynded, the mean and thee ſeaſon apoincted,
            Theeſe forged ſpeeches to her ſister ſorroful vttring,
            Shee ſhrowds her purpoſe, falſe hoape with phiſnomye ſeigning.
            Sister, an od by knack haue I found (now reſt ye triumphaunt)
            Either this gadling ſhal ſwiftlye to mee be returned,
            Or fro this hoat looue 
                  •
               its I ſhal bee ſhortlye retrayted.
            Where the ſun is woonted too ſet, neere the Ocean cending,
            Thee laſt poinct farthest of dwellers Aethiop: Atlas
            
               
Mighty in this region bolſters thee starred Olympus.
            From thence came a mayd prieſt, in ſoyle Maſſyla begotten,
            Seixten of Heſperides Sinagog, this ſorceres vſed,
            For too cram the dragon: ſhe, on trees, ſlips conſecrat heeded.
            Hoonnye liquid ſprinckling and breede ſleepe wild popye ſtrawing.
            For to fre mynds, ſnared with looue, this Margerye voucheth,
            Whom ſhe wil, and oothers with loouetraps ſtronglye to fetter.
            Alſo to stay the riuers, and back globs ſtarrye returning.
            In night too cooniure ſpirits: theare ſhal ye ſe (ſister)
            Thee ground right vnder too groane, trees bigge to fal headlong.
            Thee Gods too witneſſe, ſo thee, deare ſister, I lykewiſe
            Cal, bye thye ſweet pallet, me this hard extremitye forceth
            For to put in practiſemagical feats, ſorcerye charming.
            Wherefor in al ſecret let logs of tymber, in inner
            Court, with ſpeede, be reked, thee ſky with loftines bitting.
            Alſo ſe, that thither you bring thee martial armoure,
            That the peaſaunt left heere, with al his miſfortuned enſigns.
            Theare bed muſt he placed, thee wedlock bed, where I, poore wretch,
            Al my bane haue purchaſte: theeſe rit's thee Cooniures aſketh,
            Too burne al monuments of this curſd villenus hoap loaſt.
            This ſayd ſtreight a ſilence ſhee keep's: her phiſnomye paleth.
            And yet An had nothing deemed that Dido, the ſiſter,
            Preparde theeſe burials to her ſelf, ſhe no ſuch furye caſteth.
            Or that woorſe miſchief might bee to her ſister aproching,
            Then when ſhee mourned the death of spouſe ſoarye, Sichoeus.
            Theare for her encheaſon ſhee purueys.
            But the Queene, as tymber was broght, and piled in order,
            And holme logs cleaued with creſſets mounted ar added:
            With twiſted garland and leau's, ſpred greenlye, ſhe garniſht
            Thee place of her burial: there his armours al ſhe repoſed.
            On the bed his picture ſhee ſet, ful plarnely bethincking,
            What would bee the ſequel. There about ſtand conſecrat altars:
            With which eke embayed, the ſhe prieſt, vntreſſed in heare locks,
            Hundreds of the Godheds thriſe tolde al giddylye calleth:
            Shee crieth on the Erebus darckneſſe and on Chaos hoch poch.
            And the tripildam Hecatee, with three faced angrye Diana.
            Shee pours eeke the liquours vntruely of founten Auernus.
            
               
Alſo by thee moone ſhyne yoong buds ſcant ſpirted a boone ground,
            Are ſoght too be loped with a braſsye ſieth alſo the poyſon
            Cole black commixed with mylck: enquyrye was eke made,
            For to ſnip, in the foaling, from front of fillye the knapknob
            That the mare al greedy dooth ſnap.
            Her ſelf with preſents ſtanding neere the halloed altars,
            Naked in her oane foote, with frock vnlaced aparrayld;
            Calleth at her parting on Gods: and destenye wytting
            Thee ſtars: too the Godhead, with meeke ſubmiſſion, hartlye
            Shee prayeth: yf deitee with no loare rightlye regadeth
            Thee ſlip of al faythleſſe break leages, that unequalye looued.
            Neere toe dead of midnight yt drew, when member of eeche thing
            Quick, and fore labored was, with ſweet ſlumber, atached.
            Thee woods are noyſeleſſe, thee ſeas late ſtormye be calmed.
            Thee ſtars from the ſky top with glyding ſlippry be ſhooting:
            Thee fields and the catal bee mum: most queintlye bedecked
            Fayre ſowls, cloſe lurcking in lak's, or ſhrowded in hard bed
            Of thorny thickets, through rural country be napping,
            In the ſilent nightyme, from thoght theire daytoyl amoouing.
            But the poore vnresting Dido could catch no ſuch happye
            Seaſon, too be quiet, ſhee ſleeples is onlye remayning.
            Now routs of carcking troubles, with ſighs, be reſorting:
            Soomtyme fits tickling of her old looue in hertroote ar itching.
            Then freſh on a ſuddeyn ſhee frets, and warpeth in anger.
            And bayted in tugging ſkirmiſh then thus the bethoght her,
            What ſhal I doo therefore? ſhal I now, lyk a caſt away milckmadge,
            On mye woers formoure bee fawning: Too Nemod emprour
            Now ſhal I meeke be ſuing, oft by mee coylye refuſed?
            Therefor I muſt ſwiftly too Troian nauye be trudging,
            Theare me toe bynd prentiſe, theyr wil, lyk a gally ſlaue, heeding.
            And reaſon I trauayled too theym, that, by me ſo ſhielded,
            My formoure beneficts defrayde ſo kindelye requited.
            Wel, wel: graunt I trauayld, who would mee ſuffer? or of theym
            What man, in his veſſel, prowd borne, would carrye me ſcorned?
            And alas ô ſelly woomman: yeet muſt ye be leſſond
            Thee freaks, thee fickle promiſe, thee periurye Troian?
            What then? with my fleeing ſhal I track theire nauye triumphing?
            
               
Or ſhal I purſu theym with ſtrong and furniſhed armye?
            And my pepil ſubiect, that I broght from Sidon in hazard
            Of liefe, too the ſea ward with danger ſhal they be preſſed?
            Nay, nay, thye ſelf ſlaughter: thy bad lief vnhappye death aſketh.
            Thow, thow, decre ſister, with my tears woommaniſh anguiſht,
            With my phrenſie moued, to my foa dydſt caſt me ful open.
            Might not I my lief tyme, luſt fleſhly and ſinful auoyding.
            Spend lyk an vnreaſoned wild beaste, and ſuch care abandont
            I kept no promiſe to the boans of godlye Stchoeus.
            Such playnts and quarrels in burnt breſt stronglye ſhe cruſshed.
            Now the good Aeneas embarckt in veſſel of hudgneſſe,
            Certen of his paſſadge, dyd ſleepe; things duelye wel orderd.
            Then toe the ſame captayne valiant, in ſlumber, apeered
            Thee ſelfe ſame viſadge, that face, that phiſnomye bearing
            In color, in ſpeaking, thee ſelf ſame Mercurye likning,
            Forſeene in his goulden fine locks, and youthlye reſemblaunce
            Thus thee wight ſleeping with a newcoom meſſage he greeteth.
            Thow ſun of heunlye Godeſſe, dar'st thow to ſlumber in hazards?
            See ye, ò madman, what dangers ſundrye betyde you?
            Heyre ye not, in liſtning, thee westerne fortunat huffling?
            Shee coyn's curſd dangers, and miſchiefs forgeth on anuyl.
            Too dye ſhe ſtands reſolut: ſhee ſtormeth ſweltred in anger.
            Wil ye not haste ſwiftly, whilst leaſur is offred of hastning?
            Perdye ye ſhal ſhortly perceaue, thee ſeas toe be coouerd,
            With boats, and flaming fyre worcks toe be flaſshed of eeche ſyde
            Thee ſhoars, yf dawning in this fel countrye ſhal hold you.
            On loa, cut of loytring, a wind fane changabil huf puffe
            Always is a wooman. Thus ſayd, through nightfog be vanniſht.
            Then the duke Aeneas, with ſhaddow ſudden agryſed,
            Vpstarts from flugiſh ſleeping and coompanye waketh.
            My men ariſe ſwiftyly: to the tacklings ſpeedelye ſtick yee:
            Hoiſe ſayl's with poſting: for a God from celical heunſeats
            Sent, toe fle commaunds vs; lykewiſe toe cut hastlye the cabels.
            Loa yet agayne ſpurs hee. We rely toe thyn hautye beheſtings
            Who th'wart, mightye Godhead; thus agayne toe thy wil we be forward.
            Send thye pliaunt ſeruants thye good ayde, let ſtars of Olympus
            Lucky aſſiſt the viadge: thus he ſayd: then naked his edgd ſword
            
               
Brandiſht from the ſcabard hee drew: thee cabil he ſwappeth.
            Al they the lyke poſte haste dyd make, with ſcarboro ſcrabbling.
            From the ſhoare owt ſayle they: thee ſea with great fleet is hooueld.
            Fluds they rake vp ſpuming, with keele froth fomye they furrow.
            Thee next day foloing lustring Aurora lay ſhymring,
            Her ſaffrond mattreſſe leauing to her bedfelo Tithon.
            Thee Queene, when the daylight his ſhining brightnes afurded,
            Peeps from loftye beacons, and ſayling nauye beholdeth.
            Thee ſtronds and the hauens of veſſels emptye ſhe marcketh.
            Thriſe, nay ſhe foure ſeaſons on fayre brest mightely bouncing,
            And her heare owt rooting yellow: God Iuppiter, ogh lord:
            Quod ſhe, ſhal hee ſcape thus? ſhal a ſtranger geue me the ſlampam?
            With ſuch departure my regal ſegnorye frumping?
            Shal not al oure ſubiects purſu with clamorus hu crye?
            With my fleete boate foloing ſhal not theire nauye be burned?
            On men; alarme; fyrebrands ſe ye take; ſayls hoyſe; roa ye ſwiftly
            What chat I foole? What place me doth hold? What phrenſye me witcheth?
            Ô Forlorne Dido, now now wrawd destenye grubs the.
            This ſpite ſhould be plyed, when thow thy auctoritye yeeldedst.
            Marck the fayth and kindneſſe, that he ſhews, who is ſoothlye reported
            Too carry his rellicques and countrye domeſtical houſe gods,
            And to clap on ſhoulders his bedred graueporer old ſyre.
            Could not I with my power both haue backt and minced eke inchemeale
            Thee coyſtrels carcaſſe, next in the ſea deepelye toe drenche yt?
            Could not I then murther, with ſwoord, his coompanye stragling?
            Yea the lad Aſcanius wel I might haue ſlaughtered, after
            At tabil of the father too ſet thee chield to be maunged.
            Thee chaunce in battayle, ye wil hold, is doubtful: I graunt yt.
            What man had I feared, toe dye preſt? I had flamed of eecheſyde
            Theare tents and nauy, thee child, and thee father eending.
            Yea the race extirping: my ſelf had I walloed on theym.
            Ô ſun in heaune hye beaming, who behold'ſt ful woorckes al earthlye:
            Of theeſe drirye dolours eeke thow Queene Iuno the ſearchreſſe,
            And Godes hauty Hecatee, that dooeſt wights terrifye nightlye
            In pathways traueling, ye bug hags ſierce ſet to reuengments,
            You Gods al muſtring to the eende of wretched Eliſa,
            Eare this; I doe craue you: for ſin's due torture amoouing.
            
               
Lyſten too my Prayers. Yf this falſe traytor in hauen
            Of force must be placed, toe the land yf destenye fling hym,
            If facts of the Godheds ſo wil: theyre wyl be don hardly.
            Yet let thee raſcal with ſoldiours doughtye be lugged,
            Spoyled of his weapons, wandring lyke a banniſhed owtlaw:
            Haalde from the embracing of his onlye belooued Iülus:
            And to beg his ſuccoure: too ſee thee funeral eendinges
            Wretched of his kynred: lykewiſe when be ſhal be relying
            Too ſtreict condicions of peace, to vnlawful agreement:
            In wiſht Princelye quiet let not thee cullion harboure:
            But before his fixed death tyme let his eende be cut haſtlye,
            In nauel of quick ſands his corps vntumbed abyding.
            Theeſe poincts humblye craue I, with blood this laſt wil I ſtabliſh.
            And you my Tyrian ſubiects, this linnage heere after
            Purſue with hate bitter, this gift ſe ye graunt toe myne aſhes.
            Let no looue or lyking, no fayth nor leage be betweene you,
            Let there one od captayne from my boans ruſtye be ſpringing,
            With fire eke and weapons thee caytiefs Troian auenging:
            Now; then; at eeche ſeaſon; what ſo eare ſtreingth mightye ſhal happē,
            Let ſhoare bee too ſhoars, let ſeas contrarye toe ſeas ſtand,
            And to armours, armours I do pray, let progenye bicker.
            Shee ſayde; eke her vexte mynd ſhee toſt and tumbled in eeche ſyde,
            From thee light unſauerye to flit, with gredines, aſking.
            Shee ſpeaks too Barſen thee nurſe of ſeallye Sichoeus
            (For then her owne mylckdame in byrth ſoyl was breathles abyding)
            Good nurſe take the trauayle, too bring my ſister An hither.
            With the waters streaming let her hoale corps haſtlye be clenſed.
            Thee beaſts bring ſhe with her, with theym thee forenoted offrings.
            Thus let her haſte hither: let they pate godlye be coouerd.
            Too the God infernal what rits bye me bee readye, furth with
            For to ende I purpoſe, my troubles wholye to finniſh
            And toe put in fire brands this Troian pedlerye truſh traſh.
            This ſayd: ſhee trots on ſneyling, lyk a tooth ſhaken old hagge.
            But Dido affrighted ſtift alſo in her obstinat onſet,
            Her bluddy eyes wheeling, her lyers with ſwart ſpot yduſked,
            And eke al her viſage waning with murther aproching,
            Too the inner quadrant runneth, then madlye ſhe ſcaleth
            
               
Thee top of her banefyors, his ſwoord ſhee grappleth in handling;
            I ſay the ſwoord brandiſht, toe ſuch a wild part not apoincted.
            When ſhe the weeds Troian dyd marck, and ſporte breder old bed:
            In tears ſalt blubbring, in muſing ſtiddye remayning,
            Shee fel on her mattreſſe: theeſe woords for a farewel awarding.
            O my ſweet old leauings, whilſt mee good deſtenye ſuffred,
            And God of his goodneſſe you mee too pleaſure alowed,
            Take ye mye faynt ſpirit, mee from theeſe troubles abandon,
            I liu'de and the trauayl, graunted by fortun, I traced:
            Alſo my goaſt ſhortly too pits of lymboe ſhal hobble.
            A citty I founded ſtately, thee wals dyd I ſee rayſd.
            And the death of my huſband on freendleſſe broother I venged.
            Bleſſed had I reſted, yee thriſe moſt bleſſed, yf onlye
            In theeſe my regions to Troian veſſel had anchord.
            Thus ſhe ſayd, and thruſting in couche her phiſnomye cheereleſſe,
            But ſhal I dy ſheepe lyke, not taking kindlye reuengment?
            Yea wil I dy, quod ſhee, what? ſo? yea, ſo wyl I pack hence.
            Let the cruel Troian, this flame from mayne ſea beholding,
            His panch now ſatiat, with this my destenye fatal.
            Thus ſhe ſayd; and falling on blade with deſperat offer,
            Her damſels viewd her: thee ſwoord al bluddye begoared,
            And hands owt ſpreadding they beheeld; thee raiſd crye doth eccho
            In the palaice: Rumor thee death through cittye doth vtter.
            With ſighs, with yelling, with ſkrich, with woommaniſh howling,
            Thee rafters rattle: with ſhouts thee perst ſkye reboundeth.
            With no les hudge bawling, than yf al Carthago wer enterd
            By the enymy riffling, with flaming flaſshye toe ſcorch al
            Thee roofs of tenements, of Gods thee conſecrat howſes.
            Furth runs her ſister, theeſe newes vnfortunat hyring,
            With nayles hir viſadge ſkratching, and mightilyerapping
            Her brest with thumping frap knocks, throughrout ſhe doth enter,
            And the dying ſiſter, with roaring, lowdlye ſhe named.
            Was this, deere ſiſter, youre drift? therefore ye begyld me?
            And for theeſe bancquets made I fiers, and halloed altars?
            What ſhal I firſt mourne now, poore caytief, deſolat owtwayle?
            In this youre parting youre ſiſters coompanye ſkornd you?
            Had ye toe that blood ſhot mee byd: wee both, with one edgtoole,
            
               
And eke in one moment, oure paſſadge fatal had ended.
            This labor endurd I toe this ende? waſte therefor I called
            On Gods, from thye dying ſharp pangs to be, wretch cruel abſent.
            The and my ſelf haue I quight forlorne, thee nation hautye
            Of Sidon, thy woorthy pepil, thy towne braue I batterd.
            Speedelye bring me water, thee greene wound ſwiftlye toe ſouple;
            And yf in her carcaſſe ſoom wind yeet ſoftlye be breathing,
            With lip I wil nurſe yt: thus ſayd ſhee climd toe the woodpile,
            Claſpt in her arms bracing thee panting murtheres haulfquick,
            With grunt wyde gaſping: thee blackned gellyeblud,hardning,
            Shee ſkums with napkings; ſhee would haue lifted her eyebal,
            Feeble agayne weixing ſhee droups; thee deadlye puſh yrcks her.
            Thriſe ſhe dyd endeuoure, too mount and rest on her elbow;
            Thriſe to her bed ſliding ſhee quayls, with whirlygig eyeſight
            Vp to the ſky staring, with belling ſkrichcrye ſhe roareth,
            When ſhe the deſyred ſoonbeams with faynt eye receaued.
            Then Iuno omnipotent long pangs, with mercye beholding,
            And this her hard paſſadge; dyd ſend, from propped Olympus,
            Thee luſtring raynebow, from corps thee ſpirit auoyding,
            With rustling coombat buckling, with ſlayne bodye iuſtling.
            For where as her parture noe due death, nor deſtenye cauſed,
            But before her ſeaſon thee wretch through phrenſye was ended,
            Her locks gould yellow therefore Proſerpina would not
            Shaue from her whit pallet, ne her ding too damnable Orcus.
            Than loa the fayre Raynebow ſaffronlyke feathered, hoou'ring
            With thowſand gay colours, by the ſoon contrarye reſhyning,
            From the ſkye downe flickring, on her head moſte ioyfulye ſtanding,
            Thus ſayd: I doo Gods heast, from corps thy ſpirit I ſunder.
            Streight, with al, her fayre locks with right hand ſpeedelye ſnipped:
            Foorth with her heat fading, her liefe too windpuf auoyded.
            FINIS.
Deo Gratias.
Opus decem dierum.
         
         
            
            HEERE AFTER ENSVE
CERTEYN PSALMES OF
Dauid, tranſlated in too Engliſh, according
to thee obſeruation of thee
Latin verſes.
            AS thee Latinists haue diuerſe kindes of verſes beſydes the
Heroiacal: ſo our Engliſh wyl eaſelye admyt theym, althogh
in thee one language or oother they ſowne not al ſo pleaſinglie
too the eare (by whoſe balance thee rowling of thee verſe is
too bee gaged) as the ſole heroical, or the heroical and thee elegical
enterlaced one with the oother. I haue made proofe of the Jämbical
verſe in thee tranſlation of thee firſt Pſalme of Dauid, making bold
with thee curteous reader, too acquaynt hym there with.
            
               THEE FIRST PSALME OF DAVID,
named in Latin, Beatus vir, tranſlated in too
Engliſh Iämbical verſe.
               
                  1
                  THat wight is happy and gratious,
                  That tracks noe wicked coompanye;
                  Nor stands in il mens ſegnorye;
                  In chayre ne ſits of peſtilence.
               
               
                  2
                  But in the ſound law of the lord
                  His mynd, or heast is reſiaunt:
                  And on the ſayd law meditat's,
                  With hourlye contemplation.
               
               
                  3
                  That man reſembleth verelye
                  The graffe bye riuer ſituat;
                  Yeelding abundant plentines
                  Of fruict, in harueſt ſeaſoned.
               
               
                  4
                  With heunlye ioyce ſtil nurriſhed
                  His leafe bye no means vanniſheth;
                  What thing his hert endeuoureth,
                  
                     
Is proſperouſly accompliſhed.
               
               
                  5
                  Not ſo the ſinful creaturs,
                  Not ſo there acts are proſperous;
                  But lyke the ſand, or chaffye dust,
                  That wynddye pufs fro ground doe blow.
               
               
                  6
                  Therefor in houre iudicial,
                  The vngodlye ſhal vnhaunſt remayne;
                  And ſhal be from the coompanye
                  Of holye men quit ſundered.
               
               
                  7
                  Becauſe the lord preciſelye knows
                  The godlye path of goastlye men;
                  The fleſhlye trace of filthye deeds
                  Shal then be cleene extinguiſhed.
               
               TOo my ſeeming (wheather I am caryed too that conceit by the
vnacquaynted nooueltye, or the meigerneſſe of this kind of
verſe) the Iämbical quantitye reliſheth ſō what vnfauorlye in oure
language, being in truth not al too geather of thee toothſoomeſt in
thee Latin. Thee Hexametre entermingled with the Pentametre
doothe carrye a good grace in the Engliſh, as alſo among thee Latins:
in which kind I haue endeuoured thee tranſlation of thee ſecund
Pſalme.
               
            
            
               THEE SECVND PSALME, QVARE
fremuerunt gentes, tranſlated in too Engliſh
Heroical and Elegiacal verſe.
               
                  1
                  WYth franticque madneſſe why frets thee multitud heathen?
                  And to vayn attemptings what furye sturs the pepil?
               
               
                  2
                  Al thee worldlye Regents, in cluſtred coompanye, crowded,
                  For toe tread and trample Chriſt with his holye godhead.
               
               
                  3
                  Breake we there hard fetters, wee that be in Chriſtian houſhold,
                  Alſo from oure perſons pluck we there yrnye yokes.
               
               
                  4
                  Hee ſkorns theire woorcking, that dwels in bleſſed Olympus:
                  And at thiere brainſick trumperye follye flireth.
               
               
                  
                  5
                  Then ſhal he ſpeake too thoſe in his hard implacabil anger,
                  And ſhal turmoyle theym, then, with his heauye furye.
               
               
                  6
                  I raigne and doe gouerne, as king, by the lord his apoinctment,
                  Of mount holye Si
                        •
                     n; his wyl eke heunlye preaching.
               
               
                  7
                  Thee father hath ſpoaken: thow art my deerelye begotten;
                  This day thy perſon for my great iſſue breding.
               
               
                  8
                  Too mee frame thye prayers, eke of ethnicks the heyre wil I make the,
                  Alſo toe thy ſeiſin wyde places earthlye giue I.
               
               
                  9
                  With the rod hard ſteeled thow ſhalt theyre villenye trample;
                  Lyke potters pypkin naghtye men eaſlye breaking.
               
               
                  10
                  You that ar earthlye Regents, Iudges terrestrial harcken,
                  With the loare of vertu warelye too be ſcholed.
               
               
                  11
                  Too God youre ſeruice with feareful duitye be take yee;
                  With trembling gladneſſe yeeld to that highnes honor.
               
               
                  12
                  Lerne wel youre leſſons, leaſt that God ruffle in anger,
                  And fro the right ſtragling, with furye ſnacht, ye periſh.
               
               
                  13
                  When with ſwift posting his dangerus anger aprocheth,
                  They ſhal bee bleſſed which in his help be placed.
               
               IN thee ſecund verſe I tranſlate, Chriſte with his heunlye Godhead,
and yeet thee Latin renneth, aduerſus dominum & aduerſus Christumeius
Wherein I offer no violence too thee mynd and meaning
of thee Prophet. For his drift in this Pſalme tendeth too thee reclayming
of earthlye potentats from thee vayne enterprice they take in
hand, in thee ſuppreſsing of Christ his kingdoō: which by two meanes
hathe beene attēpted. Thee one whē oure Saluioure was heere in
thee earthe, whom thee Iewes and gentils crucified: thee oother after
his Aſcention, when his elect weare and now are daylye perſecuted
by thee miſcreaunts, which perſecution Chriſt dooth accoumpt his
owne,
                  Act. 9. 4. as when he challenged Saul, hee demaunded why he dyd perſecute
hym: accoumpting thee perſecution of his members too be his
owne. And to thee lyke purpoſe thee apoſtels applye this Pſalme in
thee 4. of the Actes.
                  Actor. 4. 25 Now thee Prophet vnfoldeth thee vanitye of
thee Jewes and gentils in conſpiring too geather too ſurprice thee
regimēt of Chriſte, in that hee is God, and that he is the eternal Soon
of thee father,
                  Matt. 28. 18. too whom al power is geeuen in heuen and earth, as
wel with iuſtice too cruſhe thee reprobat, as with mercye too ſalue

thee elect. Therefor yt ſtandeth with thee meaning of thee Prophet,
too aduouch thee empugning of Christ, too bee the impugning of
God, in that hee is both God and man: God of thee ſubſtance of his
father begotten before thee worlds,Athan. in Symb. and man of thee ſubſtāce of his
moother borne in thee world. And that thee ſoō was before al worlds
begotten of thee father is playnelye notified in thee ſeuenth verſe,
where thee father ſayeth too thee ſoon, this day I haue begotten thee:
ſignifiing, by this day, Eternitye: in which generation is neither tyme
too coō, nor tyme paſt, nor anye changeable ſeaſon, but alwayes
thee ſelf ſame immutable eternitye too bee conſidered. And therefor
in thee 12. verſe, thee Prophet layeth downe an exhortation too
theeſe men of ſtate, not onlye not too band agaynſt Chriſte, but alſo
too ſubmit theymſelues too his loare, as too God, who would haue
his ſoon honored: which verſe I haue tranſlated according too thee
vulgar edition, apprehendite diſciplinam, where with thee Greeke
text, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and alſo the Chaldye interpretoure agreeth,
as Petrus Galatinus hath obſerued:Petrus Galat. de arch. Catho. Veri. lib. 3. cap. 6. yeet thee Hebrue Nas ku bar, or
Naſſecu Bar, may bee too more aduantadge of vs Chriſtans, and
too thee confuſion of thee Iewes ootherwiſe tranſlated. S. Hierom
turneth yt,Hierony, in Pſal. 2. 
                  adore purely, or adore thee ſoon, which approoueth thee
deitye of Christ: Felix tranſlateth yt, kiſſe thee ſoon, or embrace thee
ſoon: wherein alſo the prerogatiue of Chriſt is manifeſted. For by
thee kiſſing of thee ſoon is ſignifyed thee embracing of his power and
doctrin: which hath beene deliuered from thee mouth of thee almightye
too his ſeruaūtes by thee handes of his 'Prophets and Apoſtles.
And therefore thee auncient Talmudiſtes expound, in this wife,
that of thee Canticles,
                  Canti. 1. 1. 
                  Oſculetur me oſculo oris ſui, let hym kiſſe
mee with thee kiſſe of his owne mouth: that is, let thee Meſſias, who
is the ſoō of God,
                  Exodi 4. 10. inſtruct mee with his owne mouth. Let not Moyſes
bee ſent,Eſai. 6. 5. who is tongue tyed; nor Eſaias, that acknowlegeth his
lips too bee polluted,Ierem, 1. 6. Nor Ieremye, that ſayd hee could not ſpeake;
but let thee verye soon of God, who is thee fathers wiſdoom and force
coom, and with his mouth leſſon and enſtruct mee. So that al
beyt thee word (Bar) may emport ſoomtyme learning, ſoomtyme
corne, ſoōtyme that which is pure or eleene, yet eftſoōs yt notifieth
a ſūne. As Barptolomeus, yf we reſpect the etymologye of thee woord,
ſignifieth thee ſoon of Ptolomeus, Barnabas, thee ſoon of a Prophet,
                  
as is learnedly expounded by S. Hierom in his apologye agaynſt Ruffinus.
                  Hieron. in apologi. cont. Ruffin. cap. 5 But too returne too oure Engliſh verſes, I haue attempted thee
tranſlation of thee third Pſalme in thee Aſclepiad kind: which alſo,
in my phantaſye, is not alſo pleaſaunt in thee Engliſh: but that I refer
too thee iudgment of thee reader.
            
            
               THEE THIRD PSALME, NAMED,
Domine, quid multiplicati ſunt, tranſlated in
too Engliſh Aſclepiad verſe.
               
                  1
                  LOrd, my drirye foes why doe (they) multiplye?
                  Mee for too ruinat ſundrye be coouetous.
               
               
                  2
                  Hym ſhields not the godhead, ſundrye ſay too mye ſoule.
               
               
                  3
                  Th'art, lord moſt vigilant, wholye mye ſuccorer,
                  And in the al mye staying ſhal be ſtil harbored:
                  Tw'art my moſte valiant victorye glorious.
               
               
                  4
                  To our lord lowd I cryed: from holye place herd he mee.
               
               
                  5
                  In graue new buryed faſt haue I ſlumbered.
                  I roſe too liefe agayn through God his hollines.
               
               
                  6
                  I feare not furious multitud infinit,
                  With coompaſſe laboring, my bodye for toe catche.
                  Riſe Lord omnipotent, help me, mye champion.
               
               
                  7
                  Lord, thy cleere radiaunt righteus equitye
                  Hath ſquiſd al mye foes, falſlye me ranſaking.
               
               
                  8
                  Oure Lord participats ſaulftye with happines:
                  With gifts, heunlye Godhead, thy pepil amplye bliſſe.
               
               BVt of al theeſe bace and foote verſes (ſo I terme al ſauluing thee
Heroical and Elegiacal) thee Saphick, too my ſeeming, hath thee
prehemynencye, which kind I haue aſſayed in thee paraphraſtical
tranſlation of thee fourth Pſalme.
               
            
            
               THEE FOVRTH PSALME, NAMED,
Cùm inuocarem, paraphraſticalye tranſlated
in too Engliſh Saphick verſe.
               
                  1
                  WHen that I called, with an humbil owtcrye,
                  Thee God of Iuſtice, meriting mye ſaulftye,
                  
                     
In many dangers mye weake hert vpholding
                  Swiftlye dyd hyre mee.
               
               
                  2
                  Therefor al freſly, lyke one oft enured
                  With thye great goodneſſe, yet agayne doe craue thee,
                  Mercye too render, with al eeke toe graunt mee
                  Gratius harckning.
               
               
                  3
                  Wherefore of mankind ye that are begotten,
                  What ſpace and ſeaſon doe ye catche for hardneſſe,
                  
                     Ʋanitee loouing, toe toe fondlye ſearching
                  Trumperye falſhood.
               
               
                  4
                  Know ye for certeyn, that our heunlye rectoure
                  His ſacred darling ſpecialye chooſed:
                  And the lord therefor, when I pray, wil harcken
                  Too mye requeſting.
               
               
                  5
                  For ſyn expyred ſe ye reſt in anger,
                  And future treſpas, with al haſte, abandon:
                  When that in ſecret ye be fleaſhlye tickled,
                  Run toe repentaunce.
               
               
                  6
                  Righteous incenſe ſacrifice heere after
                  In God, oure guider, your hole hoape repoſing.
                  Fondlye doo diuerſe ſay, what hautye great lord
                  Vs doth inhable.
               
               
                  7
                  Thy ſtar of goodneſſe in vs is reſhining,
                  Sound reaſon graunting, with al heunlye coomfort:
                  With theſe budge preſents toe myne hert afurding
                  Gladnes abundant.
               
               
                  8
                  Theare wheat and vineyards, that ar haplye ſprouting,
                  And oyle, in plenty toe the ſtore cel hurded,
                  With pryde, and glory to the ſtars inhaunceth
                  Worldlye men huffing.
               
               
                  9
                  Thogh that I ſee not, with a carnal eyſight,
                  Thee blis and glory, that in heun is harbourd:
                  Yeet with hoape stand I, toe be theare repoſed,
                  And toe be reſting.
               
               
                  10
                  By reaſon that thow, my God heunlye, ſet ledſt
                  Mee, thye poore ſeruaunt, in hoape, and that highlye:
                  Too be partaker with al heunlye dwellers
                  Of thye blis happye.
               
            
         
         
            
            A PRAYER TOO THEE TRINITYE.
            
               TRinitee bleſſed, deitee coëqnal,
               Vnitee ſacred, God one eeke in eſſence,
               Yeeld toe thy ſeruaunt, pitifullye calling
               Merciful hyring.
            
            
               
                  Ʋertuus liuing dyd I long relinquiſh,
               Thy wyl and precepts miſerablye ſcorning,
               Graunt toe mee, ſinful pacient, repenting,
               Helthful amendment.
            
            
               Bleſſed I iudge hym, that in hert is healed:
               Curſed I know hym, that in helth is harmed:
               Thy phyſick therefore, toe me, wretch vnhappye,
               Send, mye Redeemer.
            
            
               Glorye too God, thee father, and his onlye
               Soon, the protectoure of vs earthlye ſinners,
               Thee ſacred ſpirit, laborers refreſhing,
               Stil be renowmed. Amen.
            
         
         
            HEERE AFTER ENSVE
certayne Poëtical Conceites.
            
               A diuiſe made by 
                     Ʋirgil, or rather by ſoom oother vpon a
Riuer ſo hard frozen, that waynes dyd paſſe ouer yt: varyed
ſundrye wayes, for commendacion, as yt ſhould
ſeeme, of the Latin tongue, and thee ſame varietye dubled
in thee Engliſh.
               
               
                  1
                  QVa tatis egit iter, iuncto boue, plauſtra trahuntur;
                  Poſtquam triſtis hyems frigore vinxit aquas.
               
               
                  2
                  Suſtinet vnda rotam, patulae modò peruia puppi:
                  Vt concreta gelu marmoris inſtar habet.
               
               
                  3
                  Quas modò plauſtra premunt vndas, ratis antè ſecabat:
                  Poſtquam brumali diriguere gelu.
               
               
                  4
                  Vnda rotam patitur, celerem nunc paſſa carinam:
                  In glaciem ſolidam verſus vt amnis abit.
               
               
                  5
                  Quae ſolita eſt ferre vnda rates, fit peruia plauſtris:
                  Vt ſtetit in glaciem marmore verſa nouo.
               
               
                  
                  6
                  Semita fit plauſtro, quà puppis adunca cucurrit:
                  Poſtquam frigoribus bruma coëgitaquas.
               
               
                  7
                  Orbita ſignar iter, modò quà cauus alueus exit:
                  Strinxit aquas tenues vt glacialis hyems.
               
               
                  8
                  Amnis iter plauſtro dat, qui dedit antè carinae:
                  Duruit vt ventis vnda, fit apta rotis.
               
               
                  9
                  Plauſtra boues ducunt, quà remis acta carina eſt:
                  Poſtquam diriguit craſſus in amne liquor.
               
               
                  10
                  Vnda capax ratium plauſtris iter algida praebet:
                  Frigoribus ſaeuis vt ſtetit amnis iners.
               
               
                  11
                  Plauſtra viam carpunt, quà puppes íre ſolebant:
                  Frigidus vt Boreas obſtupefecit aquas.
               
            
            
               THEE SAME ENGLISHED.
               
                  1
                  WHeare ſhips ſayld, the wagons are now drawn ſtronglye with oxen:
                  For that thee ſeaſon froſtye dyd hold the water.
               
               
                  2
                  Theare the wagon runneth, wheare whillon veſſel hath bulled:
                  For that thee marbil frostye made hard the riuer.
               
               
                  3
                  Theare placed is the wagon, wheare boats road grapled at anchour:
                  When that a could wynter thee water hastye ſtayed.
               
               
                  4
                  Now the car is trayled, wheare barges latelye repayred:
                  When that cold Boreas chillye did hold the riuer.
               
               
                  5
                  Where ſhips haue trauayled, theare now cars ſundrye be tracing:
                  When nipping wynter thee riuer hardlye stoped.
               
               
                  6
                  Theare the coch is running, wheare latelye the nauye remayned:
                  When that the northen froſtye gale hemd the riuer.
               
               
                  7
                  Now the naue hath paſſage, wheare keele was latelye repoſed:
                  By reaſon of wynters froſt, that hath hyd the water.
               
               
                  8
                  Thee water vp the wagons dooth prop, that veſſel hath harbourd:
                  Beecauſe that the riuer froſtines y ſye tyed.
               
               
                  9
                  Now the wagon rowleth, wheare ligturs hulled in hauen:
                  When that a froſt knitting ſtronglye witheeld the riuer.
               
               
                  10
                  Wheare the ſhip earst ſayled, the cart his paſſage on holdeth:
                  When thee froſtye weather thee water hardlye glued.
               
               
                  11
                  Now the wayn is propped, whear to earſt thee gallye reſorted:
                  For that thee winters hoare glue reteynd the water.
               
            
            
               
               SO MANY TYMES IS THE LATIN
varyed, and yeet as manye tymes more for the
honoure of thee Engliſh.
               
                  1
                  THeare chariots doe trauayle, wheare late the great argoſye ſayled:
                  By reaſon of the riuer knit with a frostye ſoder.
               
               
                  2
                  Wheare the great hulck floated, theare now thee cartwheele is hagling:
                  Thee water hard curded with the chil yſye rinet.
               
               
                  3
                  Where ſkut's furth laūched, theare now thee great wayn is entred:
                  When the riuer frized by reaſon of the weather.
               
               
                  4
                  Wheare rowed earſt mariners, theare now godye carman abydeth,
                  Thee flud, congealed ſtifllye, relats the reaſon.
               
               
                  5
                  Now the place of ſayling is turnd to a carter his entrye,
                  This change thee winters chillines hoarye bredeth.
               
               
                  6
                  Now wayns and chariots are drawne, wheare nauye dyd harrow:
                  This new found paſſadge froſtines hoarye ſhaped.
               
               
                  7
                  Wheare barcks haue paſſed, with cart's that parcel is haunted:
                  From woonted moysture for that ice heeld the water.
               
               
                  8
                  Wheare ſtems haue trauerſd, there haue oxen traced in headſtal:
                  By reaſon yſe knitting thee water heeld froe floing.
               
               
                  9
                  Wheare the flye boat coaſted, theare cart wheels clustred ar hobling
                  This new ſtrange paſſadge winter his hoarnes habled.
               
               
                  10
                  Earſt the flud, vpbearing thee ſhip, now the cartwheele vpholdeth.
                  When water is ioygned firmlye with hoarye weather.
               
               
                  11
                  Whear ruther steered, thee goad theare poaked hath oxen:
                  Thee winters coldneſſe thee riuer hardlye roching.
               
            
            
               Thee deſcription of Liparen, expreſſed by Ʋirgil in thee eight
booke of his Aeneis, in which place, thee Poët played, as yt
weare, his price, by aduauncing at ful thee loftines of his
veyne: doon in too Engliſh by thee tranſlatoure for his laſt
farewel too thee ſayd Virgil.
               TW'ard Sicil is ſeated, toe the welken loftelye peaking,
               A ſoyl, ycleapt Liparen, from whēce, with flownce furye ſlinging,
               Stoans, and burlye bulets, lyke tamponds, maynelye be to wring.
               Vnder is a kennel, wheare Chymneys fyrye be ſcorching
               Of Cyclopan toſters, with rent rocks chamferye ſharded,
               
                  
Lowd dub a dub tabering with frapping rip rap of Aetna.
               Theare ſtroaks ſtronglye threſhing, yawl furth groans, ſtamped on anuyl.
               In the den are drumming gads of steele, parch fulye ſparckling;
               And flam's fierclye glowing from fornace flaſshye be whiſking.
               
                  Vulcan his hoate fordgharth, namde eeke thee Vulcian Iſland.
               Downe from the heunlye palace trauayled thee fyrye God hither.
               In this caue the rakehels yrne bars, bigge bulcked, ar hamring.
               
                  Brotes, and Steropes, with baerlym ſwartye Pyracmon.
               
               Theeſe thre were vpbotching, not ſhapte, but partlye wel onward,
               A clapping fyerbolt (ſuch as oft, with rownce robel hobble,
               
                  Ioue toe the ground clattreth) but yeet not finniſhed holye.
               Three ſhowres wringlye wrythen glimring, and forceblye ſowcing;
               Three watrye clowds ſhymring toe the craft they rampyred hizing,
               Three wheru's fyerd glyſtring, with Soutwynds rufflered huffling.
               Now doe they rayſe gaſtly lyghtnings, now griſlye reboundings
               Of ruffe raffe roaring, mens herts with terror agryſing.
               With peale meale ramping, with thwick thwack sturdelye thundring.
               Theyre labor hoat they folow: toe the flame fits gyreful awarding.
               And in an od corner, for Mars they be ſternfulye flayling
               Hudge ſpoaks and chariots, by the which thee ſurlye God, angerd,
               Haſtye men enrageth, too wrath towns bat'ful on eggeth.
               And they be freſh forging toe the netled Pallas an armoure,
               With gould ritchlye ſhrined, wheare ſcaals be ful horriblye clincked
               Of ſcrawling ſerpents, with ſculcks of poyſoned adders.
               
               In breſt of the Godeſſe Gorgon was cocketed hardlye,
               With nodil vnioyncted, by death, light vital amoouing.
               Voyd ye fro theeſe flamfews, quoa the God, ſet a part the begun wurck.
            
            
               THEE LOOVER LONG SOGHT VNtoo by his freēd, at laſt repayreth too her preſence: and after a
fevv meetinges ſmelling thee drift of thee moother, vvhich
earſt hee dyd forcaſt, too tēd too the preferring of her daughter
in marriadge, refrayneth the gentle vvomans coompanye,
thogh eftſoones too thee contrarye ſollicited, as one vnvvylling
too marry at al, and verye loath too mar ſo curteous a dame:
and therfor, for thee preſeruatiō of her honoure, and too
auoyd the encoūbraunce of looue, hee curbeth affectiō vvith
diſcretion, and thus deſcanteth on the playne ſong.
               
                  
VNtoe this hard paſſadge (good God) what phrenſye dyd hale mee?
               From thye quiet ſeruice my ſelf too ſlau'rye betaking.
               Vntoe the lure ſmoothly, with faynd ſolemnitye, trayned.
               Fiue moonths ful ſhe plyed: means made: dreams ſundrye related.
               If we met in walcking, what ſcarlet bluſh ſhe reſembled?
               Her color oft altreth: with loou's hoat palſye ſhe trembleth.
               Back goth her eye glauncing: a ſigh herd; moods chaungabil vttred.
               I litle accoumpted, God knows, thee curteſye proferd.
               Stil dyd I keepe backward, what I find, tym's ſundrye forvttring.
               For toe loue a ſtranger, ſcarce ſeene, what ſound reaſon egs her?
               But reaſon in loouepangs who ſeeketh? a wooman eke hateth,
               Or loou's extreemely: no meane, no meaſure is extant.
               At length woon bye prayer to her lodge my paſſage I bended;
               Lumps of looue promist, nothing perfourmed in earnest.
               Forgerye thee pandar: thee meſſadge mockrye: the moother
               Thee knot of al the lying, thee virgin faultles is onlye.
               But ſhal I looue the lady, ſo as Petrarck Laura regarded?
               In paper her dandling? her perſon neauer atayning
               Such ſport fits the Poëts, whom rauing phantaſye ſotteth.
               I doe wake, I dreame not: noe ſuch ynckhorne vanitye feeds mee.
               Thee bodye, not ſhaddow: no woords, but wurckes I coouet.
               Marriage is profred: that yoke thee loouer abhorreth.
               And toe mar a virgin, to a freend ſuch curteſye tendring,
               Were not a practiſe honest, not a preede toe be greatlye recounted.
               Thee rinet of freendſhip, vertu, ſuch treacherye damneth.
               What man of ennye reaſon with villenye vertue requyteth.
               Rest the quiet therefore: flee from theeſe dangerus hard rocks,
               Whereto loue oft leadeth, with ſtormes thee paſſage is haunted.
               Great trauaylin the ſueing, thee profred curteſye ſkorned.
               If ſhe coye, that kendleth thee fondling loouer his onſet:
               Greedelye wee coouet, that was to vs flatlye refuſed.
               Queynt of a kiſſe publicque, lewd luſt with nicitye maſking.
               Such woomens negatiues for a yeelding, yea Syr, ar holden.
               What doth auayl, minion, this ſleight and treacherye cogging.
               Cleaue toe the ſound Caſtè, flee from thee patcherye Cautè.
               
               Then freſh agayne prayeth hee, percaſe thee ſuitur is eared.
               Wel: the woer gayneth the requyred victorye. What then?
               
                  
Is the trauayl finniſht? are pleaſurs onlye then hoouering?
               Nay: then thy miſery, thine hel eeke theare taketh his entraunce.
               Now thye ſleepe is ſcanted, now ſtinging ieloſye fretteth.
               Dame Ʋenus and kingdooms can no riualitye ſuffer.
               Her fauor hee gayned with a beck: that burneth in entrayls.
               Who deems yt wiſdoom with glaſſe too rampyre a Bulwarck?
               Men ſay, that a changing of pasture maketh a fat calfe.
               A Calf yt maketh; toe the fat let a graſier annſwere.
               That wil a way, who can hold? ſuch challeng therefor abandon.
               
                  Robbrye toe bee purchaſe, ſoom terme eeke leacherye ſolace.
               
               She kept no promiſe: that would be a quarrel in earneſt.
               Now wars proclaymed, peace agayne now freſhlye renewed.
               Now theeſe ſuſpicions, now that ſurmiſes ar opned.
               Now beldam Brokreſſe muſt bee with moonnye rewarded.
               Veritye detesting, noght els but vanitye babling.
               This gowne youre looue mate, that kyrtil coſtlye ſhe craueth,
               This pearle, that diamond, this maſſiue garganet aſking.
               Noght may ye forſake her: that would bee felonye deemed.
               
                  Ieloſye thee perſon, thee purſe eeke penurye pincheth.
               Is this an heun, trow you? fro that heun Gods mercye wythold mee.
               Pleaſure is vnpleaſaunt that purchaſeth heauye repentaunce.
               In ſo much as therefore this great vexation haunteth
               Al ſuch as are loouers, and wiſhed bootye doe coompaſſe:
               I doe renounce flatly thee fielde, ſuch victorye ſkorning,
               Too mye fredoom formere my ſelf from ſlauerye reclayming.
            
            
               AN ENDEVOVRED DESCRIPtion
of his Mystreſſe.
               NAture in her woorcking ſoomtyme dooth pinche lyke a niggard,
               Diſfiguring creatures, lyms with deformitye duſking.
               This man is unioyncted, that ſwad lyke a monſter aby deth;
               Shee limps in the going, this ſlut with a cammoyſed hancks noſe,
               And as a Cow waſted plods on, with an head lyke a lutecaſe.
               Theeſe faultes fond Hodipecks impute too Nature, as yf ſhe
               Too frame were not habil gems with rare dignitye luſtring.
               Wherfor in aduiſment laboring too cancel al old blots,
               
                  
And toe make a patterne of price, thee mayſtrye toe pubbliſh:
               For toe ſhape a peerleſſe paragon ſhee mynded, aſembling
               Her force and cunning: for a ſpirt lands ſundrye refuſing,
               And with al her woorckmat's trauayling ſhee lighteth in Holland,
               
               Round too the Hage posting, to the world Marye matchles auauncing.
               In bodye fine fewterd, a braue Brownnetta; wel handed;
               Her ſtature is coomly; not an ynch toe ſuperfluus holding;
               Gratius in viſage; with a quick eye prittelye glauncing;
               Her lips lyke corral rudye, with teeth lillye whit eeuened.
               Yoong in age, in manners and nurture ſage ſhe remayneth;
               Baſhful in her ſpeaking; not raſh, but watchful in aunſwer;
               Her look's, her ſimpring, her woords with curteſye ſweetning;
               Kynd and alſo modeſt; lyking with chastitye lyncking;
               And in al her gesturs obſeruing coomlye Decorum.
               
               But toe what eend labor I, me toe preſſe with burden of Aetna:
               Thee ſtars too number, poincts playnely vncounctabil opning.
               Whust: not a woord: a ſilence ſuch a taſk impoſſibil aſketh.
               Her vertu meriteth more prayſe, than parlye can vtter.
            
            
               HIS DEVISE WRYTTEN
in his myſtreſſes booke.
               HAga Hollandorum vario ſplendore refulget;
               Solis in hac lumen ſola Maria tenet.
            
            
               THEE SAME ENGLISHED.
               THee fine Hage excelleth with lusturs ſundrye reſhyning,
               Thee Sun hath his brightneſſe in Marye ſolye placed.
            
            
               THREE ESPECIAL GIFTES,
wherein his mystreſſe excelleth.
               THree poincts my myſtreſſe with paſſing dignitye garniſh.
               
                  Coomlynes of perſon thee first ranck rightlye reteigneth:
               
                  Curteſye keeps the Secund: thee third row Chaſtitye claymeth:
               For ſo fayre a Paragon, with booxom deboynar vſadge;
               And ſo pure a Virgin, with ſo rare vertue bedecked:
               Sundrye may wel wiſh for. Marye must be the Principal holden.
            
            
               
               OF A CRAKING CVTTER,
extracted owt of Syr Thomas Moore
his Latin Epigrams.
               LInckt was in wedlock a loftye Thraſonical huf ſnuffe:
               In gate al on typſtau's ſtalcking, in phiſnomye daring.
               This cutter valiant in warfare ſoght his auenture.
               Thee whilſt his minion, with carnal wantones itching,
               Chooſte for a freend ſecret no woorſe, then a countrye lob heerd ſwayne.
               A pray for a paragon: but what? thee knurrye knob oake tree,
               Thogh craggyin griping, in ſtrength ſurpaſſeth a ſmooth ſlip.
               When Thraſo from bickrings, not bluddye, returned is homeward,
               Of this hap aduertiſde, with frantick ielloſye taynted,
               Hee ſeeks in thee fields, with ſwift enquirye, the riual.
               Stay vagabund raſkal (ſo he ſpake when he ſpyde the lob heerd hyne
               Thee clowne stout ſtandeth with a leſhe of bulleted hard ſtoans;
               Then Thraſo with naked flatchet, with thunderus owtcrye
               Sayd: thow ſcuruye peaſaunt, my wiefe th' hast, villen, abuſed.
               My bed defiled: lyke a breaklooue mak'bat adultrer.
               Al this I deny not, quoa the clowne: and what then: I pray thee?
               Doost thow confeſſe yt? Thraſo ſayd: bye the bleſſed a ſemblye
               Of the heunly ſociats, hadſt thow thy knauerye reneaged,
               This mye blade in thye body ſhould bee with ſpeedines haſted.
            
            
               OF A TEMPEST QVAYLING
certeyn paſſengers borowed of thee ſame
Syr Thomas Moore.
               THeare roſe in ſayling a rough tempeſtuus owtrage,
               With watrye plaſh bouncing, thee ribs of giddyeſhip hitting.
               Thee mariners fearing, al hoap eeke of ſalftye reiecting,
               Sayd: that a bad liuing eke a bad death rightlye requyred.
               Al that are in paſſadge to a munck father holye, reſorted,
               Who was eke embarcked, to hym theyre confeſſion opning.
               Howbeyt thee ſtormy ruffling is no whit abated;
               But thee rough billows the ſhip toe toe terriblye charged.
               Twiſh, what woonder is yt, quod one of thee coompanye, chauffing,
               
                  
Yf that thee veſſel with weight moſte ſinful is heauye.
               Duck we the munck therefor, that al oure falts wholye receaued,
               Haſtlye let hym toe the ſeas oure ſyns and villenye carrye.
               Al they be contented, thee munck they ſpedelye plunged:
               Ceaſt was thee tempest, yf truth bee truelye related.
               Heereby wee be ſcholed, what poyſe ſin ponderus holdeth,
               That with an hudge and weightye balas ſurchargeth a veſſel.
            
            
               HESPERVS HIS CONFESSION,
written in Latin by the Sayd Syr
Thomas Moore.
               HEſperus his faulty liuelood too cal toe recounting
               Mynding, too be ſhriuen with woont accuſtomed haſtned.
               When that he told playnely, what crym's most ſinful he practiſd,
               Yeet thee goaſtlye father laboring more deepelye toe ranſack
               His formere liuing; by diſtinct article aſked
               Eu'rye ſyn, and naming by peecemeal curius eche fault,
               At leingth demaunded, wheather, with ſorcerye blinded,
               Erſt he beleefe yeelded toe the bugs infernal? here aunſwerd
               Heſperus: holye father, doe ye thinck me ſoe madlye bewitched
               Too beleue in the deuils? I tel you truelye, toe great payn's
               Stil I take enduring, in God yeet ſcantlye beleeuing.
            
            
               OF TYNDARVS, THAT FRVMped
a gentlewoman for hauing a long
noſe, deliuered by the former
author in Latin.
               TYndarus attempting too kis a fayre laſſe with a long noſe,
               Would needs bee finiſh, with bitter frumperye taunting.
               In vayn I doo coouet my lips too linck toe thye ſweete lips,
               Thy noſe, as a ſtickler, toe toe long vs parteth a ſunder.
               Heere the mayd al baſhful, the vnſau'ry ſaucines heeding:
               With choler oppreſſed, thus ſhrewdlye toe Tyndarus aunſwerd,
               Syth mye noſe owtpeaking, good ſyr, your liplabor hindreth,
               Hardlye ye may kiſſe mee, where no ſuch gnomon apeereth.
            
            
               
               SYR THOMAS MOORE HIS
receipt for a ſtrong breath tranſlated
owt of his Latin Epigrames.
               FIrst for a ſtrong ſauoure stincking, a leeke may be taken:
               That ſent too banniſh, thee beſt is an Onion eaten.
               And toe repeal lykwiſe that ſauoure, garlik is holſoom.
               If that theeſe ſimples wyl not thee filthod abandon,
               
                  Aroſe, or els nothing that drafty infirmitye cureth.
            
         
         
            HEERE AFTER ENSVE CERteyn
Epitaphes framed as wel in
Latin as Engliſh
            
               AN EPITAPH DEVISED VPON
thee death of thee right honourable James earle of Ormond
and Oſſorye, who deceaſed at Elye houſe in Holborne
about thee yeere 1546. thee xviij. of October,
and lieth buryed in S. Thomas Acres church, Extracted
owt of thee third booke of thee Hiſtorye of Irelād.
               COr patriae fixum viuens, iam redditur illi
               Poſt mortem, patriae quae peracerba venit.
               Non ſine corde valet mortalis viuere quiſquam;
               Vix tua gens vita permanet abſque tua.
               Quae licet infoelix extincto corde fruatur,
               Attamen optato viuere corde nequit.
               Ergo quid haec faciat? quem re non poſsit amorem,
               Cordi vttam charo reddere corde velit.
               THis earle was a goodlye and perſonable man: ful of honour,
which was not only lodged inwardly in his mynd, but alſo hee
bare yt owtwardlye in countenaunce. As franck and as liberal as his
calling requyred. A deepe and a far reatching head. In a good quarel
rather ſtout then ſtubborne, bearing hym ſelf with no leſſe courage,

when hee reſiſted, than with honourable diſcretion where hee
yeelded. A fauourer of peace, no furtherer of war, as one that preferd
vnlawful quietneſſe beefore vpright troubles, beeing notwyth ſtanding
of as great wiſdoom in thee one, as of valour in thee oother.
An earneſt and zealous vpholder of his countrye, in al attemptes rather
reſpectig thee publicque weale, than his priuat gayne. Wherebye
hee bound his coūtrye ſo greatly vntoo hym, that Irelād might
with good cauſe wiſh, that either hee had neauer beene borne, or
elles that hee had neauer deceaſed, ſo yt were lawful, too craue hym
immortal, that by courſe of nature was framed mortal. And too giue
ſufficient proof of thee entyre affection hee bare his countrye,
and of thee zealouſe care hee dyd caſt thereon, hee beetoke in his
death bed his ſoule too God, his carcaſſe too Chriſtian burial, and his
hert too his countrye, declaring thereby, that where his mynd was
ſetled in his liefe, his hert ſhould bee theare entumbed after his
death. Which was according too his wyl accompliſht. For his hert
was conueighed in too Ireland, and lyeth engraued in thee chore of
thee cathedral church in Kilkennye, where his aucetours, for thee
more parte, are buryed. Vpon which kind legacye thee abooue wryten
Epitaph was deuiſed.
            
            
               VPON THEE DEATH OF THEE
lord of thee owt Iſles of Scotland: of whom
mention is made in thee third book
of thee Hiſtor. of Ireland.
               Vique manuque mea patriae dum redditur exſul,
               Exſul in externa cogor & ipſe mori.
               THis noble man aſsiſting thee earle of Lennox eended his lief at
Howth preſently vpon his arriual, and was with great ſolemnitie
buried in S. Patrick his church at Dublin: circa Annum Domini
M. D. XLIII.
            
            
               
               VPON THEE DEATH OF HIS
father, James Stanyhurst Eſquyer, who deceaſed
at Dublyn Anno 1573. xxvij. of
December, aetatis LI.
               VIta breuis, mors ſancta fuit (pater optime) viſa:
               Vita timenda malis, mors redamanda bonis.
               Vrbs eſt orba ſopho; legum rectore tribunal;
               Cauſidicoque cliens; atque parente puer.
               Plurima proferrem, ſed me prohibere videtur
               Pingere vera dolor, fingere falſa pudor.
               Non opus eſt falſis, ſed quae ſunt vera loquenda,
               Non mea penna noter, buccina fama ſonet.
               Hoc ſcripſiſſe ſatis; talem, quandoque, parentem
               Eſt habuiſſe decus, ſed caruiſſe dolor.
               Filius haec dubitans talem vix comperit vſquam
               Vllus in orbe patrem, nullus in vrbe parem.
               Mortuus ergo, pater, poteris bene viuus haberi,
               Viuis enim mundo nomine, mente deo.
            
            
               VPON THEE DEATH OF
his father in law Syr Chriſtofer
Barnewal knight.
               LAeta tibi, ſed moeſta tuis mors accidit iſta:
               Regna dat alta tibi, damna dat ampla tuis.
               Laetus eſt in coelis vllo ſine fine triumphans,
               Moeſtus at in terris diues inopſque iacent.
               Nam ſapiente caret dieus, qui parta gubernet,
               Nec, qui det miſero munera, pauper habet.
               Te generipſe caret, viduae, te ruſtica turba,
               Atque vrbana cohors te (Soceralme) caret
               Non eſt digna viro talis reſpublica tanto,
               Nam ſanctos ſedes non niſi ſancta decet.
               Mira loquor, ſed vera loquor, non ficta reuoluo,
               Si maiora loquar, nil niſi vera loquar.
               
                  
Mortuus es? nobis hoc crimina noſtra dederunt.
               Mortuus es? virtus hoc tibi ſacra dedit.
               Viuus es in coelo, dedit hoc tibi gratia Chriſti,
               Viuus vt in mundo ſis, tibi fama dabit.
               CHriſtophorus Barnewallus, vir equeſtris ordinis, vetere ac illuſtri
familia procreatus, cùm eſſet admodū adoleſcens ad clariſſimam
Oxonienſem Academiam à praeſtantiſsimis parentibus miſſus
ſummè erat eloquentiae atque philoſophiae ſtudioſus. Quae cùm
magno ſtudio curaue diſceret; Londinum profectus eſt, vbi in hoſpitium
Graienſe cooptatus cognitionem Britannici iuris bene laudabilem
erat conſecutus. Cùm verò non multùm à tanti operis perfectione
abeſſet, optimus & amantiſsimus eius pater hoc interim
ſpacio (anima à corpore ſemota & diſcluſa) hinc demigrauit. Quo
audito, Chriſtophorus ſe ſtatim in patriam, cum omniū applauſu,
contulit, atque ibi patrimonium ſuum, quod ei iam tum ſatis amplum
pater reqliquerat, ſumma aequabilitate ac recta conſcientia, ſine
vllius offenſione amplificauit. Mira erat vitae eius integritas; praedicabilis
erga deum ſanctitas; admirabilis in patriam pietas. Nulla
verò in tota regione erat hoſpitalitas, quae vix poſſet cum illius hoſpitalitate
conferri. Sapientia praeditus profectò ſingulari. In vrbe
gratia, ruri auctoritate florebat. Vir erat vt corpore, ita valetudine
plaerunque imbecillior, natura mitiſsimus, in iniurijs ferendis patientiſsimus,
in repellendis fortiſsimus, in repub. defendenda acerrimus.
Nono Calend. Auguſti ex itinere in febrim incidit, cuius dolore
paucis poſt diebus, cum totius reipub. eiulatu ac lamentatione,
conſumtus eſt: annos natus 42. Anno Domini 1575.
            
            
               VPON THEE DEATH OF HIS
wief Genet, daughter too Syr Christofer Barnewal
knight, who deceaſed, at Knight his bridge,, of Chieldbyrth
Anno 1579. Auguſt xxvj aetatis xix. and lieth
entered at Chelſye.
               MOrs tua quanta tuis moeroris vulnera fixit,
               Multorum gemitus, me reticente, ſonant.
               
                  
Nobilis ortus erat, tua clarè vita peracta,
               Corpore pulchra ſatis, moribus alma ſacris.
               Heu mihi, ſed ſubito ſublata haec dona fuerunt,
               In teneris annis dum mihi dona dabas.
               Quam dederas natae vitam, tibi nata negauit,
               Quam dederas lucem, luce (Genetta) cares.
               Qualis erat mater ſola breuitate relicta
               Vitae) ſit talis nata relicta precor.
               Quos iunxit mundo, Chriſtus coniungat Olympo,
               Vt thorus vnus erat, ſic thronus vnus erit.
            
            
               VPON THEE DEATH OF THEE
right honourable and his moſte deere cooſē, thee lord
Baron of Louth, who was trayterouſlye murthred by
Mackmaughoun, an Iriſh Lording, about thee yeere
1577.
               THus loa, thyne haſt (cooſen) bred waſte too cittye, toe country.
               Thee bearbrat boucher thy corps with villenye mangled.
               Not by his manlye valour, but through thy deſperat offer.
               As the liefe is lasting too ſutch, as in armes ar heedye,
               Eun ſo death is poſting too thoſe, that in armor ar headye.
               Haulf penye, far better then an houſful cluſter of angels,
               Althogh habil, would not fro thye danger deadlye be parted.
               Whom lief combyned, death could not ſcatter a ſunder.
               Sutch is thee faſtneſſe of foſter brootherhod Iriſh.
               Thogh Sydny and Deluyn thee murther partlye reuenged:
               A loſſe ſo pretiouſe may not bee fullye requited.
               Thee death of a thowſand Maghouns is vnequal amendment.
               Thee nobles may not but a death ſo bluddye remember,
               Thee Plunckets wyl not from mynd ſuch boutcherye banniſh.
               Thy Ladye, thy kinred doo miſſe thy freendſhip aprooued;
               Thee cittee mourneth the lack of a counſalor holſoom;
               And thee countrye moneth thee want of a zealus vpholder;
               Vertu eeke lamenteth thee lack of an holye repentaunt.
               How beyt dame Ʋertu thy goodneſſe kindlye rewardeth,
               In memory thin honour, thy ſoul eeke in glorye repoſing.
            
            
               
               VPON THEE DEATH OF THEE
right honourable thee Lord Girald fitz Girald L. Baron
of Offalye, who deceaſed at S. Albans in thee
yeere 1580. thee laſt of Iune, thee xxj. yeere of his
adge.
               SOomtyme liu'lye Girald in graue now liu'les is harbourd.
               A matchleſſe gallant, in byrth and auncetrye nobil.
               His nobil linnadge Kyldaer with Mountegue warrants.
               Proper in his perſon, with gyfts ſo hym nature adorned.
               In valor and in honor wel knowne too no man vnequal.
               And a true ſound ſubiect, to his Prince moſt faythful abyding.
               Theeſe not with ſtanding his liefe too to hastelye vanniſht.
               Nipt were thee bloſſooms, eare fruictful ſeaſon aproched.
               Wherefor his acquayntaunce his death ſo vntymelye bewayleth.
               
                  Maynoth lamenteth, Kilka and Rathangan ar howling.
               Nay rather is mated bye this hard hap deſolat Ireland.
               
               Such claps of batter that ſeally vnfortunat Iſland.
               
               O that I thy prayſes could wel decipher in order,
               Lyke Homer or Virgil, lyke Geffray Chauncer in Engliſh:
               Then would thy Stanyhurſt in pen bee liberal holden.
               Thee poët is barrayn, for prayſe rich matter is offred.
               Heere percaſe carpers wyl twight his iollitye youthful.
               Strong reaſon vnſtrayned that weake obiection aunſwers.
               Hee muſt bee peerleſſe who in yong yeers faultes abydeth.
               Such byrds flee ſeldoom, ſuch black ſwans ſcantyle be floating.
               In world of miſchiefe who finds ſuch glorius angels?
               Soom ſtars paſſe oothers; al perls doe not equalye luſter.
               Thee ſoundeſt wheat corne with chaffy filthod is huſked.
               What ſhal I ſay further, this loare diuinitye telleth;
               Vertuus hee liued, through grace that vertuus eended.
               What may be then better, than a godly and gratius vpſhot?
               Too God in al pietee, too Prince in dutye remayning.
               Whearefor (woorthye Girald) ſyth thy eend was hertye repentaunce,
               Thy ſoul God gladdeth with ſancts in bleſſed Olympus,
               
               Thogh tumbd bee carcaſſe in towne of martyred Alban.
               
               
                  
THis noble man, yf wee reſpect thee giftes that God planted in
hym, was doubtleſſe ful of good partes. Of diſpoſition kind
and loouing, eaſelye mooued, and as ſoone appeaſed; apt too al maner
of actiuitye, cooueting in eeche laudable enterprice not only
too bee commendable, but alſo ſurpaſsing. In wyt quick and pregnaunt,
and of good forecaſt, namely as far as his yeeres would beare:
yeet ſoomwhat wantonly geeuen, where too Youth, Nobilitee and
lewd coompanye dyd carrye hym, the one ſturring, thee oother warranting,
thee third eaſelye trayning a man of deeper iudgment too
ſuch fond phantaſyes, yf by his God his gratious guerdon hee bee not
thee ſtronger garded. But a litle beefore his death hee beecame ſuch
a changling, as hee dyd not only purchaſe thee commendacion of
ſtrangers, but alſo bred admiration in his freendes, who greatlye reioyced,
too ſee ſo penitent and godly an alteration from vice to vertue.
In which tyme finding his conſcience deepelye gauld with thee
owtragious oathes hee vſed too thunder owt in gamening, hee made
a few verſes, as yt were his cygnea oratio: which, not ſo much for
thee meeter, as thee matter, I thinck good, too bee diuulged verbatim,
as I found theym, after his deceaſe, ſcribled with his owne hand.
And yf thee reader hap too ſtumble at thee vnderſtanding of any
staffe, let yt bee ſufficient, that thee maker his meaning was good.
            
            
               A PENITENT SONNET WRITten
by thee Lord Girald a litle
beefore his death.
               BY loſſe in play men oft forget
               Thee duit ye they dooe owe,
               Too hym that dyd beſtow thee ſame,
               And thow ſands millions moe.
               I loathe too ſee theym ſweare and stare,
               When they the mayne haue lost;
               Forgetting al thee byes, that weare
               With God and holye goaſt
               By wounds and nayles they thinck too wyn,
               But truely yt is not ſo:
               
                  
For al thayre frets and fumes in ſyn,
               They mooniles muſt goa.
               Theare is no wight that vſd yt more,
               Then hee that wrote this verſe;
               Who cryeth, peccaui, now therefore
               His othes his hert doe perce.
               Therefor example take by mee,
               
               That curſe thee luckleſſe tyme,
               That cauer dice myne eyes dyd ſee,
               Which bred in mee this crime.
               
               Pardon mee for that is paſt,
               I wyl offend no more:
               In this moſte vile and ſinful caſt,
               
               Which I wyl ſtil abhore.
            
            
               AN EPITAPH ENTITVLED
Commune Defunctorum, ſuch as oure vnlearned Rythmours
accuſtomablye make vpon thee death of euery
Tom Tyler, as yf yt were a last for euerye one his foote,
in which thee quantitees of ſyllables are not too bee
heeded.
               COom toe me, you muſes, and thow moſt chieflye, Minerua,
               
               And ye that are dwellers in dens of darckned Auerna:
               
               Help mye pen in wryting, a death moſte ſoarye reciting,
               Of the good old Topas, ſoon too thee mightye ſyr Atlas.
               
               For grauitee the Cato, for wyt Mars, Bacchus, Apollo:
               
               
                  Scipio for warfare, for gentyl curteſye Caeſar.
               
               Agreat Alexander, with a long whit neck lyke a gaunder.
               
               In yeer's a Neſtor, for wars a martial Hector,
               
               Hannibal and Pompey, with Triſtram, Gallahad, Orckney:
               
                  Hercules in coaſting, a Vulcan mightelye toaſting.
               In wiſdoom Salomon, for ſtreingth and currage a Sampſon.
               
               For iuſtice Radamanthus: in equitye woorthye Lycurgus.
               
               And not a Therſites, but he was a ſubtil Vliſſes.
               
               In learning Socrates, in faythful freendſhip Achates.
               
               Yea, thogh he ſtand nameleſſe, hee was in prowes Achilles.
               
               
                  
A Damon 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Ripplye.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Alcon,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Arafornes,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   good ſoon of Atlas?
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  oe ye ſlea thee fayre ladye Thiſbee.
               
               A Sara for goodneſſe, a great Bellona for hudgneſse.
               For myldenſſe Anna, for chastitye godlye Suſanna.
               
               
                  Heſter in a good ſhift, a Iudith ſtout at a dead lift.
               Alſo Iulietta, with Dido, rich Cleopatra.
               With ſundry nameleſſe, and woomen more manye blameleſse.
               Is not he wel garded, thee wooman richlye rewarded?
            
            
               AN EPITAPH WRYTTEN BY SYR
Thomas More vpon thee death of Henrye Abyngdon,
one of thee gentlemen of thee chappel: which deuiſe
thee authour was fayne too put in meeter, by reaſon
thee partye that requeſted his trauaile, dyd not lyke
of a verye proper Epitaph that was firſt framd, beecauſe
yt ran not in rythme, as may appeere at ful in his
Latin Epigrammes: where vpon Syr Thomas More
ſhapte theeſe verſes enſuing, with which thee ſuppliant
was exceedinglye ſatiſfyed, as yf thee author
had hyt thee nayle on the head.
               HIc iacet Henricus, ſemper pictatis amicus:
               
               Nomen Abyngdon erat, ſi quis ſua nomina quaerat:
               
               Wellis hic eccleſia fuerat ſuccentor in alma,
               
               Regis & in bella cantor fuit ipſe capella.
               
               Milibus in mille cantor fuit optimus ille.
               
               Praeter & haec iſta fuit optimus orgaquenista.
               
               Nunc igitur Christe, quoniam tibi ſeruijit iste,
               
               Semper in orbe ſoli da ſibi regna poli.
               
               Thee ſame thogh not verbatim conſtrued, yeet in effect thus may

                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  yd not verye prec
                     •••••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               HEere lyeth old Henry, no 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Surnamd Abyngdon, to a
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Clerck he was in wellis, where ting
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Alſo in thee chappel hee was not counpted 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               And ſuch a lowd ſinger, in a thowſand not ſuch a ringer.
               
               And with a concordance, a man moste ſkilful in organce.
               
               Now God I craue duly: ſence this man ſaru'd the ſoe truelye,
               
               Henrye place in kingdoom,, that is alſo named Abyngdon.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            JOHN PATES PRINTER
too thee curteous reader.
            I Am too craue thy paciēce and paynes (good reader) in bearing
wyth ſuch faultes as haue eſcapte in printing; and in correcting
as wel ſuch as are layd downe heere too thy view, as al oother
whereat thow ſhalt hap too ſtumble in peruſing this treatiſe. Thee
nooueltye of imprinting Engliſh in theeſe partes, and thee abſence
of thee author from peruſing ſoom proofes could not chooſe but
beede errours. But for thee abridging of thy trauayle I wyl lay
downe ſuch faultes as are at this preſent found too bee of greateſt
importaūce. And as for thee wrōg placing of an V for an N, or an N
for an V, and in printing two EE for one E, or one for two, and for
thee miſpoyncting of periods; thee correction of theeſe I muſt bee
forced for this tyme too refer too thye friendlye paynes.
            
               
                  
                     FAVLTES.
                     CORRECTION.
                  
                  
                     In thee dedicatorye epiſtle.
                      
                  
                  
                     Pag. 1. lin. 4. Endevvours, reade, lin. 22. ac.
                     Endeuours. as.
                  
                  
                     Pag 3. lin. 32. cooke in ſoom copyes.
                     booke.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         beene.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         pan.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Reader.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           ••
                        tôgraphy.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        aying.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        eeing.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     miſsing.
                  
                  
                     lin. 
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        ang.
                     
                        
                           •••
                        dge.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 17. lin. 6. ſanckt.
                     
                        
                           •
                        anck.
                  
                  
                     lin. 25. vvilde.
                     vvyde.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 19. lin. 22. Endevvours.
                     endeuours.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 23. lin. 29. vvith hischaapt ſtaf,
                     vvith chaapt ſtaf.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 25. lin. 1. choloricque.
                     Cholericque.
                  
                  
                     lin. 33. ſacrifice.
                     ſacrifice.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 36. lin. 22. ſhavv Priamus
                     ſavv Priamus.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 38. lin. 13. vvoonman.
                     vvooman.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 41. lin. 13. aſſijſtaunce
                     Aſſiſtaūce.
                  
                  
                     lin. 36. progeniotours.
                     progenitours.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 54. lin. 26. deſolat angel.
                     deſolat angel.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 60. lin. 18. fyrd Sicil.
                     fyerd Sicil.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 63. lin. 36. A folck moaſte.
                     A folck moate. 1. acoōpanye
                  
                  
                     Pag. 106. lin. 24. Faultes abydeth.
                     Faultles abydeth.
                      
                  
               
            
         
         
            Imprinted at Leiden in Holland by Iohn Pates.
Anno M.DLXXXII.
         
      
   