
      
         
            
            
               
A TRVE DECLARATION OF THE eſtate of the Colonie in VIRGINIA, With a confutation of ſuch ſcandalous reports as haue tended to the diſgrace of ſo worthy an enterpriſe.
            Publiſhed by aduiſe and direction of the Councell of VIRGINIA.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON, Printed for William Barret, and are to be ſold at the blacke Beare in Pauls Church-yard. 1610.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
A true declaration of the eſtate in VIRGINIA.
            
               THERE is a great diſtance, betwixt the vulgar opinion of men, and the iudicious apprehenſion of wiſe men. Opinion is as blind Oedipus, who could ſee nothing, but would heare all things, Hinc aucupari verba rumoris vagi, to hawke after the winged report of a vagabond rumor. But iudgement, is as Salomon in his throne, able by the ſpirit of wiſedome, to diſcerne betwixt conteſting truth, and falſhood: neither depending on the popular breath of fame, which is euer partiall, nor vpon the euent of good deſignes, which are euer caſuall. Theſe two commanders of our affections, haue diuided the vniuerſall ſpirits of our land, whilſt (in the honorable enterpriſe for

plantation in Virginia) ſome, are caried away with the tide of vulgar opinion, and others, are encouraged, by the principles of religion, and reaſon. But becauſe, it is for hawkes and not for men, to build their neſts in aires, and becauſe the honor and proſperity of this ſo noble an action, is eclipſed by the interpoſition of clamorous & tragicall narrations: the compiler of this relation endeuoureth to waſh away thoſe ſpots, which foule mouths (to iuſtifie their owne diſloialty) haue caſt vpon ſo fruitfull, ſo fertile, and ſo excellent a country. Wherein he profeſſeth, that he will relate nothing (concerning Virginia) but what he hath from the ſecrets of the iudiciall councell of Virginia, from the letters of the Lord La Ware, from the mouth of Sir Thomas Gates, whoſe wiſedomes (he conceiueth) are not ſo ſhallow, as eaſily to be deceiued of others, nor conſciences ſo wretched, as by pretences to deceiue others.
            But when a matter of ſuch conſequence, is not to be ſhufled ouer with ſupine negligence, and when no man raiſeth a faire building, that laith not a firme foundation, it will

not be impertinent, to dig a little deeper, that we may build a great deale higher: and from the vniuerſall policie of all ciuill ſtates (in repleniſhing the world with colonies of domeſticall ſubiects) to deriue this wiſedome to our populous ſtate and country.
            
               Colonies. That which Origen ſaid of Chriſts actions in vertues morall, holdeth proportion with Gods actions in gouernment politicall, Dei facta, ſunt noſtra praecepta, Gods actions, are our inſtructions: who (in the eleuenth of Geneſis) turned the greateſt curſing, into the greateſt bleſsing, and by confuſion of tongues, kept them from confuſion of ſtates; ſcattering thoſe clouen people, into as many colonies ouer the face of the earth, as there are diuerſities of languages in the earth. Now if Tertullians rule be true, Omne genus ab origine cenſendum that euery action is moſt beutifull in the originall. Can there be a better beginning then from God, whoſe wiſedome is not queſtioned, and whoſe footſteps in all ſucceeding ages haue beene followed. Search the records of diuine truth, and humane monuments of ſtate, you ſhall find, Salmanaſar tranſporting the Babilonians,

and other Gentiles, to Samaria: and repleniſhing with the captiues of Iſraell, the diſpeopled confines of Media.
            
            You ſhall find that 140. yeeres after the deſtruction of Troy the Ionian colony, was carried from Greece, to Aſia: by which that famous City of Epheſus was firſt builded, and inhabited. You ſhall find the Egiptians, planted Babilon, Argos, and Athens. The Phenicians firſt inhabiting Carthage, Vtica, and Thebes. That Timolcon and the city of Corinth, at one time repeopled Sicilie, with 10000. ſoules. That the Romans deduced 53. colonies out of the City of Rome into the wombe of Italy. That Bremius an Engliſhman by birth, but ſonne in law to the King of France, with an equall third part of the kingdome, entred into the hart of Italy, gaue the prime ſacke to the City of Rome, and diuerted from thence to Gallograecia, whoſe ofſpring poſſeſſe that land vnto this day.
            That the Admirall of France, among all the feares and diſcouragements of ciuill wars, neuer gaue ouer the proiect of plantation in Florida.
            
            Which heroicall actions, haue not beene

vndertaken by ſo mighty ſtates and Princes, vpon triuiall and vulgar motiues, when by theſe courſes that firſt bleſſing (of creſcite and multiplicamini, increaſe and multiplie) hath beene ſanctified: the meaner ſorte haue beene prouided: the matter of plagues, famine and ſedition, hath beene exhauſted: the fennes of a ſtate politique were drained: the enemies of their peace were bridled: the reuenues of their treaſury were augmented: and the limites of their dominions were enlarged.
            Which diuine, humane, externall, and domeſticall, examples, doe ſhine before vs, as a Pharaoes towre, that wee ſhould not make ſhipwracke of our intentions, concerning Virginia.
            
            Blacke enuie, and pale feare, being not able to produce any arguments, why that ſhould bee lawfull for France, which is (in vs) vnlawfull: that which to Rome was poſſible, (to vs) is impoſſible: that which to others is honourable, and profitable,

(in vs) ſhould bee traduced, as incommodious, baſe, and contemptible: Three Heads. Lawfull, Poſſible, Profitable.wherefore vnder theſe three heads of lawfulneſſe, poſſibility, and commoditie, will I marſhall all thoſe reaſons, which may reſolue the religious, encourage the perſonall, confirme the noble, and ſatiſfie the timorous aduenturer.
            Firſt, if it bee vnlawfull: it muſt be ſo, either in reſpect of the law of God, or in regard of the lawe of man. If in reſpect of Gods lawe, (conſidering our primarie end is to plant religion, our ſecondarie and ſubalternate ends are for the honour and profit of our nation) I demand a reſolution of this plaine queſtion: whether it bee not a determinated truth, that the Goſpell ſhould bee preached, to all the world, before the end of the world? If, it muſt bee preached, (as heauen and earth muſt paſſe awaie, but Gods word ſhall not paſſe awaie) then muſt it bee preached, one of theſe three waies: Either meerly Apoſtolically, without the

helpe of man, (without ſo much as a ſtaffe (or meerely imperiallie, when a Prince, hath conquered their bodies, that the Preachers may feede their ſoules; Or mixtly, by diſcouerie, and trade of marchants; where all temporall meanes are vſed for defence, and ſecurity, but none for offence, or crueltie. For the firſt (to preach Apoſtolicallie) it is ſimplie impoſſible: except wee had the gift of tongues, that euerie nation might heare the word of God in their owne language; or the guift of miracles, that it might be confirmed, with wonders from heauen; which two beeing ceaſed, queſtionleſſe the identicall commiſſion of the Apoſtles is expired: Or if yet the matter bee vrged, that God by fiſhers did conuert Emperors and therefore that wee muſt aduenture our liues without humane helpe; yet muſt it bee remembred, that there is no Apoſtolicall preaching, but where wee may expect eitheir their conuerſion, or our martyrdome. But we can expect neither,

not their conuerſion who cannot vnderſtand vs, nor our martyrdome, when the people of Florida, did deuoure the Preachers of the word, without ſpeaking any word. Non quia Chriſtiani, ſed quia homines, not becauſe they were chriſtian men, but becauſe they were men, wee cannot be ſaid to be martyrs, when wee are not killed becauſe wee are chriſtians. And therefore the Ieſuite Acoſta confeſſeth (notwithſtanding Bellarmines relation of Indian miracles) that they haue no tongues, they haue no ſignes from heauen, and they can haue no martyrdome, and by conſequent there is no meanes left of Apoſtolicall preaching.
            For the ſecond, to preach the Goſpell to a nation conquered, and to ſet their ſoules at liberty, when we haue brought their bodies to ſlauerie; It may be a matter ſacred in the Preachers, but I know not how iuſtifiable in the rulers. Who for their meere ambition, doe ſet vpon it, the gloſſe of religion. Let the diuines of Salamanca,
               
diſcuſſe that queſtion, how the poſſeſſor of the weſt Indies, firſt deſtroied, and then inſtructed.
            The third, belongs to vs, who by way of marchandizing and trade, doe buy of them the pearles of earth, and ſell to them the pearles of heauen; which action, if it be vnlawfull, it muſt proceede from one of theſe three grounds, either becauſe we come to them, or trade with them, or tarrie and dwell and poſſeſſe part of their country amongſt them.
            Is it vnlawfull becauſe wee come to them? why is it not a dutie of chriſtianitie, to behold the imprinted footſteps of Gods glorie, in euery region vnder heauen? Is it not againſt the lawe of nations, to violate a peaceable ſtranger, or to denie him harbour. The Ethiopians, Egyptians, and men of China, are branded with a foule marke of ſanguinarie and barbarous inhumanity, for bleſſing their Idols, with the bloud of ſtrangers. It is not vnlawfull to trade with them, except Salomon
               
ſhall bee condemned for ſending for gold to Ophir, Abraham for making a league with Abimelech, and all chriſtendome ſhall bee traduced, for hauing comerce with Turks and miſcreants.
            Finallie, it is not vnlawfull, that wee poſſeſſe part of their land, and dwell with them, and defend our ſelues from them. Partlie becauſe there is no other, moderate, and mixt courſe, to bring them to conuerſion, but by dailie conuerſation, where they may ſee the life, and learne the language each of other.
            Partlie, becauſe there is no truſt to the fidelitie of humane beaſts, except a man will make a league, with Lions, Beares, and Crocodiles.
            Partlie becauſe there is roome ſufficient in the land (as Sichem ſometime ſaid) for them, and vs: the extent of an hundred miles, being ſcarce peopled with 2000. inhabitants.
            Partlie, becauſe they haue violated the lawe of nations, and vſed our Ambaſſadors

as Ammon did the ſeruants of Dauid: If in him it were a iuſt cauſe to warre againſt the Ammonites, it is lawfull, in vs, to ſecure our ſelues, againſt the infidels.
            But chieflie becauſe Paſpehay, one of their Kings, ſold vnto vs for copper, land to inherit and inhabite. Powhatan, their chiefe King, receiued voluntarilie a crowne and a ſcepter, with a full acknowledgement of dutie and ſubmiſſion.
            Principallie when Captaine Newport was with Powhatan at Warow a comaco hee deſired him to come from Iames towne as a place vnholeſome, and to take poſſeſſion of an other whole kingdome which he gaue vnto him. If any man alleadge, that this was done in ſubtlety, not that they euer meant we ſhould poſſeſſe them, but that they might firſt gaine by vs, and then deſtroy vs. This makes our cauſe, much the iuſter, when God turned their ſubtletie, to our vtilitie: giuing vnto vs a lawfull poſſeſſion, (as Pharaoe gaue Goſhen
               
to Iſraell; or Ephron ſold his caue to Abraham) and freeing vs, from all impious and ſiniſter conſtruction. If anie man alleadge, that yet wee can poſſeſſe no farther limits, than was allotted by compoſition, and that fortitudo ſine iuſtitia, eſt iniquitatis Materia, fortitude without iuſtice, is but the firebrand of iniquitie. Let him know that Plato defineth it, to bee no iniuſtice, to take a ſword out of the hand of a mad man; That Auſten hath allowed it, for a lawfull offenſiue warre, quod vlciſcitur iniurias that reuengeth bloudie iniuries. So that if iuſt offences fhall ariſe, it can bee no more iniuſtice to warre againſt infidells, than it is when vpon iuſt occaſions wee warre againſt Chriſtians. And therefore I cannot ſee, but that theſe truths, will fanne away all thoſe chaffie imputations, which anie Romiſh boaſters (that challenge a monopolie of all conuerſions) will caſt vpon it, or any ſcrupulous conſcience can impute vnto it. Certainlie the Church of Geneua in the

yeere 1555. determined in a Synode, whereof (Caluine) was preſident, to ſend Peter Richier, and William Quadrigarius, vnder a French Captaine to Braſilia, who although they were ſupplanted, by the comming of the Cardinall of Loraine, and the trecherie of their double hearted leader, yet would not the Church of Geneua, (after a Synodicall conſultation) haue ſent their miniſters to ſuch an aduenture, had not all ſcruples, (in their iudgement) beene cleared by the light of Scripture.
            When therefore, it is a ſweete ſmelling ſacrifice, to propagate the name of Ieſus Chriſt, when the Babyloniſh Inchantreſſe (if her owne Calenders, are to bee credited) hath compaſſed ſea, and land, to make, ſixe, eight, or ten millions, of Romiſh proſelites. When there is no other, mixt, moderate, courſe, to tranſport the Virginian ſoules to heauen. When there hath beene a reall conceſſion

from their rurall Emperour, that hath licenſed vs to negotiate among them, and to poſſeſſe their countrie with them. When there is more vnpeopled continent of earth, than wee and they (before the diſſolution of the pillars of heauen) can ouerburden with multitude. When we neuer intend to play the Rehoboams, and to ſcourge them with ſcorpions. It is not good, to create more ſinnes, then God euer cenſured: nor to brand that action with impietie, which God hath begun for promulgating of his glorie Nunquid ideo deforme eſt, quia figura mentitur? is the action therefore deformed, becauſe a falſe glaſſe doth ſlaunder it?
            Concerning the other braunch of this diſcourſe, wherein ſome ſlie whiſperers would ſeeme to caſt an aſperſion of iniuſtice vpon the action, ſuppoſing ſome forraine Prince to haue a former intereſt.
            
               
Certainlie hee is but a rotten ſubiect that quarells the actions of his countrie, deſcrying a ſerpentine ſtinge vnder the faire leaues of pietie. And though it bee not for a theoreticall Schollar, to circumſcribe the dominions of Princes, yet a few proofes from antiquitie, ſhall ſuffice to controwle ignorant or preſumptuous follie.
            In the yeere 1170. Madocke the ſonne of Owen Guyneth Prince of Northwales (leauing the land in contention betwixt his two brethren Howell and Dauid) ſailed into the Weſt Indies, and after a ſecond, and a third returne, and ſupplie, ſetled himſelfe in thoſe dominions.
            In the yeere 1495. Iohn Cabot a Venetian, but the indenized ſubiect of King Henrie the ſeauenth diſcouered the North parts of America, to Meta incognita, and ſo it was annexed to the Crowne of England.
            
            
               
As for the donation of Alexander the ſixt; it is but a reciprocall clawing, when Emperors create their ſeruants Biſhops vniuerſall, and ſhauelings create their Lords, Emperors generall.
            If the donation of Conſtantine were not more vertuall for Saint Peters patrimonie, wee ſhould haue neede of more purgatories, to maintaine fuell in the Popes kitchen: for if the kingdome of Chriſt was not on earth, what a tranſubſtantiated power, doth the pretended Vicar of Chriſt claime, to diſpoſe all the kingdomes of the earth. Petrarch recordeth a memorable hiſtorie, of Sautius brother to the King of Spaine, who was elected generall againſt the Saracens of Egypt, and comming to Rome for that purpoſe, the Biſhop of Rome, made it to bee proclaimed in the Conſiſtorie that hee beſtowed the kingdome of Egypt vpon Sautius. Sautius vnderſtanding this fauour, (by his interpreter)

commanded to proclaime the Pope, great Caleph of Baldacho: perfuming the ſonne of pride, with his owne ſmoke.
            The Pope hauing no more power, to make Sautius a King, then Sautius had power to make the Pope a Caleph. Let ſuch retailers of Crownes remember, who it was that ſometime ſaide, all theſe will I giue thee if thou wilt fall downe, and worſhip me, And yet with this item that the diuell pretended to giue no more than he ſaw.
            Theſe points beeing thus defined, I come to the poſsibility. Againſt which three maine impediments are obiected. Firſt the daungerous paſſage by ſea, ſecondlie the barrenneſſe of the countrie, thirdly the vnholeſomneſſe of the climate: the ſtorme that ſeperated the admirall from the fleete proouing the firſt, the famine amongſt our men importing the ſecond, the ſickneſſe of our

men arguing the third. All which diſcouragements doe aſtoniſh our men with feare, as though our expences were vnprofitable, when our ends are impoſſible.
            But before I ſhall enter into this diſcourſe I muſt craue leaue to make a neceſſarie digreſſion, and to iuſtifie his reputation whoſe worth is of ſpeciall regard in this plantation.
            Sir Thomas Gates ſuppoſeth himſelfe accuſed publiquelie and in print of a treeble defect.
            Firſt that hee ranne ſo farre Southerlie and into the Tropique, that the heat cauſed the infection in the ſhips.
            Secondlie that hee gaue a ſealed direction, that if they were ſeperated by anie ſtorme, that they ſhould make for the Baruada in the Weſt Indies, which direction himſelfe following, it cauſed his ſhipwracke, but the other ſhippes, (vpon better iudgement) declining

theſe inſtructions, ariued ſafelie in Virginia.
            
            Thirdlie that hee caried in one bottome all the principall Commiſſioners who ſhould ſucceſſiuelie haue gouerned the Colonie. Againſt all which imputations, hee maketh this iuſt Apologie.
            Firſt hee confeſſeth that a little before they came vnto the Canaries, that hee entred into conſultation with Sir George Summers, Captaine Newport, and the other of chiefe regarde in the fleete, wherein it was reſolued by an vniformitie of conſent, to runne Southerlie into the Tropique, which they did, till they came to the height of foure and twentie, but hee denieth that this courſe was anie cauſe of infection. For in the Faulcon, the Bleſsing, the Lyon, (and in the Admirall wherein were one hundred and fiftie ſoules) there was not

one ſicke of the peſtilence nor other diſeaſe; In the other two ſhips the infection was ſomewhat hote, but they ſhipped the ſame from London; To the ſecond hee affirmeth, that hee firſt gaue them ſealed inſtructions (not to bee opened till a time of ſtorme) which directed them to the Baruada, But after when they came to the height of foure and twentie, hee countermaunded thoſe directions by word of mouth, and aſſigned them, (that if they were ſcattered) that they ſhould make with all ſpeede for Virginia. Which himſelfe (eſteeming the price of time vnualuable) woulde haue executed, had not the violent leake of the ſhippe hindred him, So that the other ſhips ſafe ariuall in Virginia, proceeded originallie from his aduiſe and authoritie.
            To the third, he briefly ſignifieth, that no

other Commiſsioners were in his Ship, but ſuch, (as for eſpeciall reaſons) were preciſely and peremptorily appointed, by the Councell of Virginia. And thus you ſee, that Tacitus wiſely obſerued two great enemies of great actions, Ignorantiam veri, & Inuidiam, the ignorance of Truth, and the emulation of Vertue.
            To returne therefore vnto the maine channell of this diſcourſe, and to diſpell the clouds of feare, that threaten ſhipwracks, and ſea-dangers: For we are not to extenuate the ſeas tempeſtuous violence, nor yet therefore to diſpaire of Gods aſsiſting prouidence. For true it is, that when Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and Captaine Newport, were in the height of 27. and the 24. of Iuly 1609. there aroſe ſuch a ſtorme, as if Ionas had been flying vnto Tarshiſh: the heauens were obſcured, and made an Egyptian night of three daies perpetuall horror; the women lamented; the hearts of the paſſengers failed; the experience of the ſea Captaines

was amaſed: the skill of the marriners was confounded: the Ship moſt violently leaked, and though two thouſand tunne of water by pumping from Tueſday noone till Fryday noone was diſcharged, notwithſtanding the Ship was halfe filled with water, and thoſe which laboured to keepe others from drowning were halfe drowned themſelues in labouring. But God that heard Ionas crying out of the belly of hell, he pittied the diſtreſſes of his ſeruants: For behold, in the laſt period of neceſsitie, Sir George Summers deſcryed land, which was by ſo much the more ioyfull, by how much their danger was deſpairefull. The Iſlands on which they 
                  •
               ell were the Bermudos, a place hardly acceſſable, through the inuironing rocks and dangers: notwithſtanding they were forced to runne their Ship on ſhoare, which through Gods prouidence fell betwixt two rockes, that cauſed her to ſtand firme and not immediately to be broken, God continuing his mercie vnto them, that with their long

Boats they tranſported to land before night, all their company, men, women, and children, to the number of one hundred and fiftie, they carryed to ſhoare all the prouiſion of vnſpent and vnſpoyled victuals, all their furniture and tackling of the Ship, leauing nothing but bared ribs, as a pray vnto the Ocean.
            Theſe Iſlands of the Bermudos, haue euer beene accounted as an inchaunted pile of rockes, and a deſert inhabitation for Diuels; but all the Fairies of the rocks were but flocks of birds, and all the Diuels that haunted the woods, were but heards of ſwine. Yea and when Acoſta in his firſt booke of the hyſtories of the Indies, auerreth, that though in the continent there were diuerſe beaſts, and cattell, yet in the Iſlands of Hiſpaniola, Iamaica, Marguarita, and Dominica, there was not one hoofe, it increaſeth the wonder, how our people in the Bermudos found ſuch abundance of Hogs, that for nine moneths ſpace they plentifully ſufficed: and yet the number ſeemed

not much diminiſhed. Again, as in the great famine of Iſraell, God commanded Elias to flie to the brooke Cedron, and there fed him by Rauens; ſo God prouided for our diſconſolate people in the midſt of the Sea by foules: but with an admirable difference: vnto Elias the Rauens brought meat, vnto our men the foules brought (themſelues) for meate: for when they whiſteled, or made any ſtrange noyſe, the foules would come and ſit on their ſhoulders, they would ſuffer themſelues to be taken and weighed by our men, who would make choiſe of the fatteſt and faireſt, and let flie the leane and lighteſt. An accident, I take it, that cannot be paralleld by any Hyſtorie, except when God ſent abundance of Quayles to feed his Iſrael in the barren wilderneſſe. Laſtly they found the berries of Cedar, the Palmeto tree, the prickle peare, ſufficient fiſh, plentie of Tortoiſes, and diuers others kinds, which ſufficed to ſuſtaine nature. They found diuerſity of woods, which miniſtred materials

for the building of two Pinaces, according to the direction of the three prouident Gouernours.
            Conſider all theſe things together. At the inſtant of neede, they deſcryed land, halfe an hower more, had buried their memorial in the Sea. If they had fel by night, what expectation of light, from an vninhabited deſart? They fell betwixt a laberinth of rockes, which they conceiue are mouldred into the Sea, by thunder and lightning. This was not Ariadnes threed, but the direct line of Gods prouidence. If it had not beene ſo neere land, their companie or prouiſion had periſhed by water: if they had not found Hogs, and foule, and fiſh, they had periſhed by famine: if there had not beene fuell, they had periſhed by want of fire: if there had not beene timber they could not haue tranſported themſelues to Virginia, but muſt haue beene forgotten foreuer. Nimium timet qui Deo non credit, he is too impiouſly fearefull, that will not truſt in God ſo powerfull.
            
               
What is there in all this tragicall Comaedie that ſhould diſcourage vs with impoſſibilitie of the enterpriſe? when of all the Fleete, one onely Ship, by a ſecret leake was indangered, and yet in the gulfe of deſpaire, was ſo graciouſly preſerued. Quae videtur poena, eſt medicina, that which we accompt a puniſhment of euill, is but a medicine againſt euill.
            After nine Moneths aboade in theſe Iſlands, on the tenth of May 1610. they imbarqued themſelues in their two new built Pinaces, and after ſome eleuen daies ſaile, they arriued neere point Comfort vpon the coaſt of Virginia: where they had intelligence of ſo wofull miſerie, as if God had onely preſerued them, to communicate in an new extremitie.
            From which calamitie, the other arguments of impoſsibilitie are framed; For if the Countrie bee barren, or the ſcituation contagious; as famine, and ſickneſſe, deſtroy our Nation: wee ſtriue againſt the ſtreame of reaſon, and make our ſelues the

ſubiects of ſcorne and deriſion. Therefore in this maine point of conſequence, I will propound this plaine and ſimple Methode; Firſt to demonſtrate that there is, and may be in Virginia a ſufficient meanes (in all abundance) to ſuſtaine the life of man; Next that the Climate is wholeſome and temperate, agreeing with the conſtitutions of our men; Thirdly, that thoſe extremities proceeded from accidentall and not inherent euils. Laſtly, I will delineate the ſtate of the the Colony, as Sir Thomas Gates left it vnder the gouernment of the honorable L. Laware: whereby it ſhall appeare, that all difficulties are amended, and that the State of that Countrie is ſufficiently mannaged.
            
               To begin, with the ſtaffe of bread. It is auowed vnto mee, in writing, in the words of the Author, that hath been there, as followeth. They vſe to put their wheat into Corne.the ground, fiue cornes in one ſpit of earth, and two beanes with them: which wheat cornes multiplying into diuers ſtalks, grow vp twelue,

or fourteene foote high: yeelding ſome foure, fiue, or ſix eares, on euery ſtalke; and in euery eare, ſome fiue hundred, ſome ſix hundred, ſome ſeauen hundred cornes: the two beanes, runne vpon the ſtalkes of the wheat, as our garden peaſe vpon ſtickes, which multiplie to a wonderous increaſe. I cannot let ſlip a great ſecret, (ſaith the Author) whereof I will auouch no more, then with my hands and eyes I haue handled and ſeene, and whereof to my great comfort, J haue often taſted: The wheat beeing ſowen thicke, ſome ſtalkes beare eares of corne, and ſome (like ſiences in trees) beare none: but in thoſe barren ſtalkes, there is as much iuice as in ſome ſugar cane, of ſo delicate a taſt, as no fruit in England, is comparable to it; out of which Sir Raph Lane conceiued, that wee may extract ſugar, in great quantity. But Sir Thomas Gates affirmeth that our men doe make cordiall drinke thereof, to their great comfort.
            
               Peaſe. Beſides, the naturall Peaſe of the Countrie Fruits.returne an increaſe innumerable, our Hearbs.garden fruits, both roots, hearbes, and

flowers, doe ſpring vp ſpeedily, all things committed to the earth, do multiply with an incredible vſurie.
            
               Beaſts. The Beaſts of the Countrie, as Deere, red, and fallow, do anſwere in multitude (people for people conſidered) to our proportion of Oxen, which appeareth by theſe experiences. Firſt the people of the Countrie are apparelled in the skinnes of theſe beaſts; Next, hard by the fort, two hundred in one heard haue been vſually obſerued: Further, our men haue ſeene 4000. of theſe skins pyled vp in one wardroabe of Powhaton; Laſtly, infinite ſtore haue been preſented to Captaine Newport vpon ſundry occurrents: ſuch a plentie of Cattell, as all the Spaniards found not in the whole kingdome of Mexico, when all their preſents were but hennes, and ginycocks, and the bread of Maize, and Cently.
            There are Arocouns, and Apoſsouns, in ſhape like to pigges, ſhrowded in hollow roots of trees; There are Hares and Conies, and other beaſts proper to the Countrie

in plentifull manner.
            Our tranſported Cattell, as Horſes, Kine, Hogs, and Goats, do thriue moſt happily: which is confirmed by a double experiment; one, of Sir Raph Lane, who brought Kine from the Weſt Indian Iſland; the other of our Colony, who need take no other care of them, but leaſt they ſhould ſtraie too farre, or be ſtolne from them. The Turkyes of that Countrie are great, and fat, and exceeding in plentie. The riuers from Auguſt, or September, till February, are couered with flocks of WlidfouleWildfoule: as ſwannes, geeſe, ducke, mallard, teal, wigeons, hearons, bitters, curlewes, godwights, plouers, ſnights, dottrels, cormerants, (to vſe the words of Sir Thomas Gates) in ſuch abundance, as are not in all the world to be equalled.
            
               Fruits. The Fruits: as apples, running on the ground, in bigneſſe and ſhape of a ſmall lemmon, in colour and taſt like to a preſerued Apricock: grapes and walnuts innumerable; the vines being as common as

brambles, the walnut trees as the elmes in England. What ſhould I ſpeake of cucumbers, muske melons, pompions, potatoes, parſneps, carrets, turnups, which our gardens yeelded with little art and labour. God in this place is euer concurring with his gracious influence, if man ſtrangle not his bleſsings, with careleſſe negligence. It ſhall ſuffice to conclude in the words and phraſe of that noble Gouernour, the Lo. Laware, as it is warranted to mee by the copie of his Letters ſent to the Virginian Councell.
            Howſoeuer, men haue belyed both it and themſelues, heretofore, yet let no rumor of the Countrie (as if in the wombe thereof lay not theſe elementall ſeedes of plenty and increaſe) waue any mans faire purpoſes, or wreſt them to a declyning and falling off from the buſineſſe.
            
               Temperature. For the healthineſſe and temperateneſſe of the Clymate, agreeing to our conſtitutions, much neede not be related, ſince in all the former written Treatiſes, it is expreſly

obſerued.
            No man ought to judge of any Countrie by the fennes and marſhes (ſuch as is the place where James towne ſtandeth) except we will condemne all England, for the Wilds and Hundreds of Kent and Eſſex. In our particular, wee haue an infallible proofe of the temper of the Countrie: for of an hundred and odd, which were ſeated at the Falles, vnder the gouernment of Captaine Francis Weſt, and of an hundred to the Sea-ward on the South ſide of the riuer, (in the Countrie of the Nanſamunds) vnder the charge of Captaine Iohn Martin; of all theſe two hundred, there did not ſo much as one man miſcarrie: when in Iames Towne, at the ſame time, and in the ſame moneths, 100. ſickned, and halfe the number died.
            The like experiment was long ſince in the regiment of Sir Raph Lane, where, in the ſpace of one whole yeare, not two of one hundred periſhed. Adde vnto this the diſcourſe of philoſophie, when in that

Countrie fleſh will receiue ſalt, and continue vnputrified (which it will not in the Weſt Indies) when the moſt delicate of all flowers, grow there as familiarly, as in the fields of Portingale, where the woods are repleniſhed with more ſweet barks, and odors, then they are in the pleſanteſt places of Florida. How is it poſsible that ſuch a virgin and temperat aire, ſhould work ſuch contrarie effects, but becauſe our fort (that lyeth as a ſemy-Iland) is moſt part inuironed with an ebbing and flowing ſalt water, the owze of which ſendeth forth an vnwholſome & contagious vapour? To cloſe vp this part with Sir Thomas Gates his experiment: he profeſſeth, that in a fortnights ſpace he recouered the health of moſt of them by moderat labour, whoſe ſickneſſe was bred in them by intemperate idlenes.
            If any man ſhall accuſe theſe reports of partiall falſhood, ſuppoſing them to be but Vtopian, and legendarie fables, becauſe he cannot conceiue, that plentie and famine, a temperate climate, and diſtempered bodies,

felicities, and miſeries can be reconciled together, let him now reade with judgement, but let him not judge before he hath read.
            The ground of all thoſe miſeries, was the permiſsiue prouidence of God, who, in the fore-mentioned violent ſtorme, ſeperated the head from the bodie, all the vitall powers of regiment being exiled with Sir Thomas Gates in thoſe infortunate (yet fortunate) Ilands. The broken remainder of thoſe ſupplies made a greater ſhipwrack in the continent of Virginia, by the tempeſt of diſſention: euery man ouervaluing his own worth, would be a Commander: euery man vnderpriſing an others value, denied to be commanded. The emulation of Caeſar and Pompey, watered the plains of Pharſaly with bloud, and diſtracted the ſinewes of the Romane Monarchy. The diſſentions of the three beſieged Captains betraied the Citie of Hieruſalem to Veſpaſian. how much more eaſily might ambitious diſcord teare in peeces an infant Colony, where no eminent and reſpected magiſtrats had authoritie to

puniſh preſumptuous diſobedience. Tacitus hath obſerued, that when Nero ſent his old trained ſouldiers to Tarantum and Autium, (but without their Captains and Centurians) that they rather made a number, then a Colony: euery ſouldier ſecretly glided into ſome neighbour Prouince, and forſooke their appointed places: which hatched this conſequent miſchiefe; the Cities were vninhabited, and the emperour was fruſtrated: when therfore licence, ſedition, and furie, are the fruits of a headie, daring, and vnruly multitude, it is no wonder that ſo many in our colony periſhed: it is a wonder, that all were not deuoured. Omnis inordinatus animus ſibi ipſi fit poena, euery inordinate ſoule becomes his owne puniſhment.
            The next fountaine of woes was ſecure negligence, and improuidence, when euery man ſharked for his preſent bootie but was altogether careleſſe of ſucceeding penurie. Now, I demand whether Sicilia, or Sardinia, (ſometimes the barnes of Rome) could hope

for increaſe without manuring? A Colony is therefore denominated, becauſe they ſhould be Coloni, the tillers of the earth, and ſtewards of fertilitie: our mutinous loiterers would not ſow with prouidence, and therefore they reaped the fruits of too dearebought repentance. An incredible example of their idlenes, is the report of Sir Thomas Gates, who affirmeth, that after his firſt comming thither, he hath ſeen ſome of them eat their fiſh raw, rather than they would go a ſtones caſt to fetch wood and dreſſe it. Dij laboribus omnia vendunt, God ſels vs all things for our labour, when Adam himſelfe might not liue in paradice without dreſſing the garden.
            Vnto idleneſſe, you may ioyne treaſons, wrought by thoſe vnhallowed creatures that forſooke the Colony, and expoſed their deſolate brethren to extreame miſerie. You ſhall know that 28. or 30. of the companie, were appointed (in the Ship called the Swallow) to truck for Corne with the Indians, and hauing obtained a great quantitie

by trading, the moſt ſeditious of them, conſpired together, perſuaded ſome, & enforced others, to this barbarous proiect. They ſtole away the Ship, they made a league amongſt themſelues to be profeſſed pirates, with dreames of mountaines of gold, and happy robberies: thus at one inſtant, they wronged the hopes, and ſubuerted the cares of the Colony, who depending vpon their returne, fore-ſlowed to looke out for further prouiſion: they created the Indians our implacable enemies by ſome violence they had offered: they carried away the beſt Ship (which ſhould haue been a refuge, in extremities:) they weakned our forces, by ſubſtraction of their armes, and ſuccours. Theſe are that ſcum of men that fayling in their piracy, that beeing pinched with famine and penurie, after their wilde rouing vpon the Sea, when all their lawleſſe hopes failed, ſome remained with other pirates, they men vpon the Sea, the others reſolued to returne for England, bound themſelues by mutuall oath, to agree all in one

report, to diſcredit the land, to deplore the famyne, and to proteſt that this their comming awaie, proceeded from deſperate neceſſitie: Theſe are they, that roared out the tragicall hiſtorie of the man eating of his dead wife in Virginia; when the maſter of this Ship willingly confeſſed before 40 witneſſes, that at their comming awaie, they left three moneths victuals, and all the cattell liuing in the Fort: ſometimes they reported that they ſaw this horrible action, ſometimes that Captaine Dauies ſayd ſo, ſometimes that one Beadle the Lieutenant of Captaine Dauies did relate it, varying this report into diuerſitie of falſe colours, which hold no likeneſſe and proportion: But to cleare all doubts, Sir Thomas Gates thus relateth the tragedie.
            
               There was one of the companie who mortally hated his wife, and therefore ſecretly killed her, then cut her in pieces and hid her in diuers parts of his houſe: when the woman was miſſing, the man ſuſpected, his houſe ſearched, and parts of her mangled body were diſcouered,

to excuſe himſelfe he ſaid that his wife died, that hee hid her to ſatisfie his hunger, and that he fed daily vpon her. Vpon this, his houſe was againe ſearched, where they found a good quantitie of meale, oatemeale, beanes and peaſe. Hee thereupon was araigned, confeſſed the murder, and was burned for his horrible villany.
            
            Now ſhall the ſcandalous reports of a viperous generation, preponderate the teſtimonies of ſo worthie leaders? ſhall their venemous tongues, blaſt the reputation of an auncient & worthy Peere, who vpon the ocular certainty of future bleſsings, hath proteſted in his Letters, that he will ſacrifice himſelfe for his Countrie in this ſeruice, if he may be ſeconded; and if the company doe giue it ouer he will yet lay all his fortunes vpon the proſecution of the plantation? ſhall ſworne lyes, and combined oathes, ſo far priuiledge trechery, and piracy as to rob vs of our hopes, & to quell our noble reſolutions? God forbid: Qui in mendacio confidit, cito diffidit, a lyers confidence,

is but a blazing diffidence.
            Vnto Treaſons, you may ioyne couetouſneſſe in the Mariners, who for their priuate lucre partly imbezeled the prouiſions, partly preuented our trade with the Indians, making the matches in the night, and foreſtalling our market in the day: whereby the Virginians were glutted with our trifles, and inhaunced the prices of their Corne and Victuall. That Copper which before would haue prouided a buſhell, would not now obtaine ſo much as a pottle: Non habet euentus ſordida praeda bonos, the conſequent of ſordid gaine is vntimely wretchedneſſe.
            Ioyne vnto theſe an other euill: there is great ſtore of Fiſh in the riuer, eſpecially of Sturgeon; but our men prouided no more of them, then for preſent neceſsitie, not barrelling vp any ſtore againſt that ſeaſon the Sturgeon returned to the ſea. And not to diſſemble their folly, they ſuffered fourteene nets (which was all they had) to rot and ſpoile, which by orderly

drying and mending might haue been preſerued: but being loſt, all help of fiſhing periſhed. Quanto maiora timentur diſpendia, tanto promptior debet eſſe cautela, fundamentall loſſes that cannot be repealed, ought with the greateſt caution to be preuented.
            The ſtate of the Colony, by theſe accidents began to find a ſenſible declyning: which Powhatan (as a greedy Vulture) obſeruing, and boyling with deſire of reuenge, he inuited Captaine Ratclife, and about thirty others to trade for Corne, and vnder the colour of faireſt friendſhip, he brought them within the compaſſe of his ambuſh, whereby they were cruelly murthered, and maſſacred. For vpon confidence of his fidelitie, they went one and one into ſeuerall houſes, which cauſed their ſeuerall deſtructions, when if but any ſixe had remained together, they would haue been a bulwarke for the generall preſeruation. After this, Powhatan in the night cut off ſome of our boats, he draue away all the

Deere into the farther part of the Countrie, hee and his people deſtroyed our Hogs, (to the number of about ſixe hundred) he ſent none of his Indians to trade with vs, but laied ſecret ambuſhes in the woods, that if one or two dropped out of the fort alone, they were indaungered.
            Caſt vp this reckoning together: want of gouernment, ſtore of idleneſſe, their expectations fruſtrated by the Traitors, their market ſpoyled by the Mariners, our nets broken, the deere chaſed, our boats loſt, our hogs killed, our trade with the Indians forbidden, ſome of our men fled, ſome murthered, and moſt by drinking of the brackiſh water of Iames fort weakened, and indaungered, famyne and ſickneſſe by all theſe meanes increaſed, here at home the monies came in ſo ſlowly, that the Lo. Laware could not be diſpatched, till the Colony was worne and ſpent with difficulties: Aboue all, hauing neither Ruler, nor Preacher, they neither feared God

nor man, which prouoked the wrath of the Lord of Hoſts, and pulled downe his iudgements vpon them. Diſcite iustitiam moniti. Now, (whether it were that God in mercie to vs would weede out theſe ranke hemlockes; or whether in iudgement to them he would ſcourge their impieties; or whether in wiſedome he would trie our patience, Vt magna magnè deſideremus, that wee may beg great bleſsings earneſtly) our hope is that our Sunne ſhall not ſet in a cloude, ſince this violent ſtorme is diſperſed, ſince all neceſſarie things are prouided, an abſolute and powerfull gouernment is ſetled, as by this inſuing relation ſhall be deſcribed.
            When Sir Thomas Gates arriued in Virginia, the ſtrange and vnexpected condition wherein he found the Colony, gaue him to vnderſtand, how neuer was there more neede of all the powers of judgement, then at this preſent; it being now his charge, both to ſaue ſuch as he found

ſo forlorne and wretched, as to redeeme himſelfe and his from fal ing into the like calamities. All which conſidered, he entred into conſultation with Sir George Summers, and Captaine Newport, and the Gentlemen and councell of the former gouernment. They examined firſt their ſtore, which after two cakes a day to a man, would hold out but ſixteene dayes, (it being fiue moneths betwixt the ſtealing away of the Swallow, and his landing) the Corne of the Indians but newly ſowed, not an eye of Sturgeon, as yet appeared in the riuer: And therefore at the ſame conſultation it was concluded by a generall approbation, That they ſhould abandon the Countrie, and in the foure Pinaces (which remained in the riuer) they ſhould make for the New found land, where (it beeing fiſhing time) they might meete with many Engliſh Ships, into which they hoped to diſperſe the moſt of the Company.
            
               
This concluſion taking effect, vpon the ſeuenth of Iune Sir Thomas Gates (hauing appointed euery ſhip her complement and number, and deliuered likewiſe to each a proportionable weight of prouiſion) cauſed euery man to repaire aboord; his company (and of his company himſelfe) remained laſt on ſhore, to keepe the towne from being burned, which ſome of our owne company maliciouſly threatned. About noone they fell downe with the tyde to the Iland of Hogges, and the next morning to the Mulbury Iland: at what time, they diſcouered the long Boate of the Lord Laware, which his Lordſhip (hearing of this reſolution by the Captaine of the Fort, which ſtandeth at the mouth of the riuer) ſuddenly diſpatched with letters to Sir Thomas Gates, which informed him of his Lordſhips arriuall. Vpon receite of theſe letters, Sir Thomas Gates bore vp the Helme, and that night with a fauourable winde relanded all our men at the

Fort. Before which, the tenth of Iune (being Sunday) his Lordſhip came with all his Fleete, went aſhore in the afternoone, heard a Sermon, read his Commiſsion, and entred into conſultation for the good of the Colony.
            In which ſecret counſell, I will a little leaue his Lordſhip, that wee may duly obſerue the reuealed counſell of God. He that ſhal but turne vp his eye, and behold the ſpangled Canopie of heauen, ſhall but caſt down his eye, and conſider the imbroidered Carpet of the earth, and withall ſhall marke, how the heauens heare the earth, the earth heare the corne and oyle, and they relieue the neceſsities of man, that man wil acknowledge Gods infinite prouidence. But hee that ſhall further obſerue, how God inclineth all caſuall euents, to worke the neceſſary helpe of his Saints, muſt needs adore the Lords infinite goodneſſe. Neuer had any people more iuſt cauſe to caſt themſelues at the foot-ſtoole of God, and to

reuerence his mercy, then our diſtreſſed Colony: for if God had not ſent Sir Thomas Gates from the Bermudos within foure daies, they had all beene famiſhed: if God had not directed the heart of that worthy Knight, to ſaue the Fort from fire at their ſhipping, they had been deſtitute of a preſent harbor, and ſuccor; if they had abandoned the Fort any longer time, and had not ſo ſoone returned, queſtionleſſe the Indians would haue deſtroied the Fort, which had beene the meanes of our ſafety among them, and a terrour vnto them. If they had ſet Saile ſooner, and had lanched into the vaſt Ocean, who could haue promiſed, that they ſhould haue encountred the Fleet of the Lo. La-ware? eſpecially when they made for the New-found land, a courſe contrary to our Nauies approaching. If the Lord La-ware had not brought with him a yeares prouiſion, what comfort could thoſe ſoules haue receiued, to haue beene relanded to a ſecond deſtruction? Brachium
               
               Domini, this was thearme of the Lord of Hoſts, who would haue his people to paſſe the redde Sea and Wilderneſſe, and then to poſſeſſe the land of Canaan: It was diuinely ſpoken of heathen Socrates, Si Deus ſit ſolicitus prote, cur tu tibi ſis ſolicitus? if God for man be carefull, why ſhould man be ouer diſtruſtfull?
            The noble Lord gouernor, after mature deliberation, deliuered ſome few words to the company, laying iuſt blame vpon them for their haughty vanities, and ſluggiſh idleneſſe; earneſtly entreating them to amend thoſe deſperate follies, leſt he ſhould be compelled to draw the ſword of Iuſtice, and to cut off ſuch delinquents, which he had rather draw (euen to the ſhedding of his vital blood) to protect them from iniuries; heartning them with relation of that ſtore hee had brought with him; conſtituting officers of all conditions to rule ouer them, alotting euery man his particular place to watch vigilantly and worke painefully.

This Oration and direction being receiued with a generall applauſe, you might ſhortly behold the idle and reſtie diſeaſes of a diuided multitude, by the vnity and authority of this gouernment, to be ſubſtantially cured. Thoſe that knew not the way to goodnes before, but cheriſhed ſingularity and faction, can now chalke out the path of all reſpectiue duetie and ſeruice: euery man endeuouring to out-ſtrip each other in diligence: the French preparing to plant the Vines, the Engliſh labouring in the woods and groundes; euery man knoweth his charge, and diſchargeth the ſame with alacrity. Neither let any man be diſcouraged, by the relation of their daily labor, (as though the ſappe of their bodies ſhould be ſpent for other mens profite) the ſetled times of working (to effect all themſelues, or the Aduenturers neede deſire) requiring no more pains then from ſixe of clocke in the morning vntill ten, and from two of the clocke in the afternoone

till foure: at both which times they are prouided of ſpiritual and corporall relie
                  •
               e. Firſt, they enter into the Church, and make their prayers vnto God; next, they returne to their houſes, and receiue their proportion of foode. Nor ſhould it be conceiued, that this buſines excludeth Gentlemen, whoſe breeding neuer knew what a daies labour meant; for though they cannot digge, vſe the ſquare, nor practiſe the axe and chizell; yet may the ſtayde ſpirits of any condition finde how to employ the force of knowledge, the exerciſe of counſell, the operation and power of their beſt breeding and qualities. The houſes which are built are as warme and defenſible againſt winde and weather, as if they were tiled and ſlated; being couered aboue with ſtrong boordes, and matted round within, according to the faſhion of the Indians. Our forces are now ſuch as are able to tame the fury and treachery of the Sauages: our Forts aſſure the Inhabitants,

and fruſtrate all aſſailants. And to leaue no diſcouragement in the heart of any, who perſonally ſhall enter into this great action, I will communicate a double comfort: firſt, Sir George Summers (that worthy Admiral) hath vndertaken a dangerous aduenture, for the good of the Colony.
            Vpon the fifteenth of Iune (accompanied with Captaine Samuel Argoll) he returned in two Pinaces vnto the Bermudos; promiſing (if by any meanes God will open a way to that Iland of Rockes) that he would ſoone returne with ſixe moneths prouiſion of fleſh, and with liue Hogges to ſtore againe Virginia. It is but eleuen daies ſaile, and we hope that God will ſend a pillar of fire to direct his iourney. The other comfort is, that the Lord gouernour hath built two new Forts (the one called Fort Henry, and the other Fort Charles, in honor of our moſt noble Prince and his hopefull brother) vpon a pleaſant hill, and neere a little riuelet,

which we call South▪hampton riuer. They ſtand in a wholſome ayre, hauing plenty of ſprings of ſweete water; they command a great circuit of ground, containing wood, paſture and meadow; with apt places for vines, corne and gardens. In which Forts it is reſolued, that all thoſe that come out of England ſhall be at their firſt landing quartered; that the weariſomnes of the ſea may bee refreſhed in this pleaſing part of the countrey.
            The fertility of the ſoile, the temperature of the climate, the form of gouernment, the condition of our people, their daily inuocating of the name of God, being thus expreſſed; Why ſhould the ſucceſſe (by the rules of mortall iudgement) be deſpaired? Why ſhould not the rich harueſt of our hopes be ſeaſonably expected? I dare ſay, that the reſolution of Caeſar in Fraunce, the deſignes of Alexander in Greece, the diſcoueries of Hernando Cortes in the Weſt, and of Emanuel, King

of Portugale in the Eaſt, were not incouraged vpon ſo firme grounds of ſtate and poſsibility. All which I could demonſtrate out of their owne Records, were I not preuented with haſt, to ſatisfie their longings, who with an open care, hearken after the commodities of the countrey: whoſe appetites I will no longer fruſtrate, then their eyes can runne ouer this ſuccinct Narration.
            I called it a ſuccinct Narration, becauſe the commodities in former Treatiſes haue beene largely deſcribed, which I will only here epitomiſe, leſt any man ſhould change his reſolution, when the ſame grounds remaine, which were the cauſe of his former aduenture.
            The Councell of Virginia (finding the ſmalneſſe of that returne, which they hoped ſhould haue defraied the charge of a new ſupply) entred into a deepe conſultation, and propounded amongſt themſelues, whether it were fit to enter into a new contribution, or in time to ſend for

home the Lord La-ware, and to abandon the action. They reſolued to ſend for ſir Thomas Gates, who being come, they adiured him to deale plainely with them, and to make a true relation of thoſe things which were preſently to be had, or hereafter to be hoped for in Virginia▪ Sir Thomas Gates with a ſolemne and ſacred oath replied, that all things before reported were true: that the country yeeldeth abundance of wood, as Oake, Wainſcot, Walnut tres, Bay trees, Aſhe, Sarſafraſe, liue Oake, greene all the yeare, Cedar and Firre; which are the materials, of foape aſhes, and pot aſhes, of oyles of walnuts, and bayes, of pitch and tarre, of Clap boards, Pipe▪ſtaues, Maſts and excellent boardes of forty, fifty and ſixtie length, and three foote bredth, when one Firre tree is able to make the maine Maſt of the greateſt ſhip in England. He auouched, that there are incredible variety of ſweet woods, eſpecially of the Balſamum tree, which diſtilleth a pretious

gum; that there are innumerable white Mulberry trees, which in ſo warme a climate may cheriſh and feede millions of ſilke wormes, and returne vs in a very ſhort time, as great a plenty of ſilke as is vented into the whole world from al the parts of Italy: that there are diuers ſorts of Minerals, eſpecially of Iron oare, lying vpon the ground for ten miles circuite; of which we haue made triall at home, that it maketh as good Iron as any is in Europe:) that a kinde of hempe or flax, and ſilke graſſe doe grow there naturally, which will affoord ſtuffe for all manner of excellent Cordage: that the riuer ſwarmeth with Sturgeon; the land aboundeth with Vines, the woodes doe harbor exceeding ſtore of Beauers, Foxes and Squirrils, the waters doe nouriſh a great encreaſe of Otters; all which are couered with pretious furres: that there are in preſent diſcouered dyes and drugs of ſundry qualities; that the Orenges which haue beene planted, did proſper

in the winter, which is an infallible argument, that Lymmons, ſugar Canes, Almonds, Rice, Anniſeede, and all other commodities which we haue from the Staights, may be ſupplied to vs in our owne countrey, and by our owne induſtry: that the corne yeeldeth a trebble encreaſe more then ours; and laſtly, that it is one of the goodlieſt countries vnder the ſunne; enterueined with fiue maine Riuers, and promiſing as rich entrals as any Kingdome of the earth, to whom the ſunne is no neerer a neighbour.
            VVhat theſe things will yeelde, the Merchant beſt knoweth, who findeth by experience, that many hundreth of thouſands of pounds are yearly ſpent in Chriſtendome in theſe commodities. The Merchant knoweth, that Caueare and Traine which come from Ruſsia, can be brought hither but once in the yeare, in regard of the Ice: and that Sturgeon which is brought from the Eaſt countries, can come but twice a yeare; and

that not before the end of Aprill, or the beginning of May; which many times in regard of the heat of thoſe moneths, is tainted in the tranſportation: when from Virginia they may be brought to vs in foure and twenty daies, and in al the colde ſeaſons of the yeare. The Merchants know, that the commodity of ſope and pot aſhes are very ſcant in Pruſsia; that they are brought three hundred miles by land, and three hundred miles by riuers, before they come to the Sea; that they pay a cuſtome there, and another in Denmarke, which enhanceth the prices exceedingly: But in Virginia they may haue them without carriage by land or cuſtom (becauſe fiue Nauigable Riuers doe lead vp fiue ſeuerall waies into the bowels of the whole countrey.) As therefore the like Riuers, are the cauſe of the riches of Holland, ſo will theſe be to vs a wondrous cauſe of ſauing of expences. The merchant knoweth, that through the troubles in Poland & Muſcouy,

(whoſe eternall warres are like the Antipathy of the Dragon & Elephants) all their traffique for Maſtes, Deales, Pitch, Tarre, Flaxe, Hempe, and Cordage, are euery day more and more indangered, and the woods of thoſe countries are almoſt exhauſted. All which are to be had in Virginia with farre leſſe charge, and farre more ſafety. Laſtly, the Merchant knoweth, that for our commodities in the Staights, as ſweet wines, orenges, lemmonds, anniſeeds, &c. that we ſtand at the deuotion of politique Princes and States, who for their proper vtility, deuiſe all courſes to grinde our merchants, all pretences to confiſcate their goods, and to draw from vs al marrow of gaine by their inquiſitiue inuentions: when in Virginia, a few yeares labour by planting and husbandry, will furniſh all our defects, with honour and ſecurity; eſpecially ſince the Frenchmen (who are with the Lord Gouernour) do confidently promiſe, that within two

yeares we may expect a plentifull Vintage.
            VVhen therfore this noble enterpriſe, by the rules of Religion is expreſly iuſtified; when the paſſages by Sea are all open and diſcouered; when the climate is ſo fruitfully tempered; when the naturall riches of the ſoile are ſo powerfully confirmed: will any man ſo much betray his owne inconſiderate ignorance, and bewray his raſhneſſe; that when the ſame Sunne ſhineth, he ſhould not haue the ſame eies to beholde it; when the ſame hope remaines, he ſhould not haue the ſame heart to apprehend it? At the voyage of Sir Thomas Gates, what ſwarmes of people deſired to be tranſported? what alacrity and cheerefulneſſe in the Aduenturers by free wil offerings, to build vp this new Tabernacle? Shall we now be deiected? Shall we caſt downe our heads like Bull ruſhes? becauſe one ſtorme at ſea hath deferred our ioyes and comforts! VVe are too effeminate in our

longings, and too impatient of delaies. Gods al-diſpoſing prouidence, is not compellable by mans violence. Let any wiſedome giue a ſolide reaſon, why his purpoſe ſhould be changed, when thoſe grounds which gaue life to his firſt purpoſe, are not changed. It is but a golden ſlumber, that dreameth of any humane felicity, which is not ſauced with ſome contingent miſerie. Dolor & voluptas, inuicem cedunt, Griefe and pleaſure are the croſſe ſailes of the worlds euer-turning-windmill. Let no man therefore be ouer wiſe, to caſt beyond the moone and to multiply needleſſe doubts and queſtions. Hannibal by too much wiſedome, loſt opportunity to haue ſacked Rome Charles the eighth of Fraunce, by temporiſing, loſt the Kingdome of Naples, and the gouernement of Florence: Henry the ſeuenth by too much ouer-warines, loſt the riches of the golden Indies. Occaſion is pretious, but when it is occaſion. Some of our neighbours would ioine in

the action, if they might be ioynt inheritors in the Plantation; which is an euident prooſe, that Virginia ſhall no ſooner be quitted by vs, then it will be reinhabited by them. A diſhonor of that nature, that will eternally blemiſh our Nation; as though we were like the furious Pyrrhus, or impetuous Swiſſers, who in a brunt can conquer any thing, but with wiſedome can maintaine nothing. It is time to wipe away ſuch an imputation of Barbariſme, eſpecially ſince the conſequence is ſo pregnant, that without this or the like, the ſtate cannot ſubſiſt without ſome dangerous and imminent mutation. He is ouer blinde that doth not ſee▪ what an inundation of people doth ouerſlow this little Iland: Shall we vent this deluge, by indirect and vnchriſtian policies? ſhal we imitate the bloody and heatheniſh counſell of the Romanes, to leane a Catthage ſtanding, that may exhauſt our people by forraine warre? or ſhall we nouriſh domeſticall faction,

that as in the dayes of Vitellius and Veſpaſian, the ſonne may imbrew his hands in the blood of the father? Or ſhall we follow the barbarous foot-ſteps of the ſtate of China, to impriſon our people in a little circle of the earth, and conſume them by peſtilence? Or ſhall we like the beaſt of Babylon, denie to any ſort the honourable eſtate of mariage, and allow abhominable ſtewes, that our people may not ouer increaſe in multitude? Or ſhall we take an inhumane example from the Muſcouite, in a time of famine to put tenne thouſand of the poore vnder the yce as the Mice and Rats of a ſtate politique? If all theſe be diabolicall and helliſh proiects, what other means remaines to vs, but by ſetling ſo excellent a Plantation, to diſimbarke ſome millions of people vpon a land that floweth with all manner of plenty?
            To wade a little further, who euer ſaluted the monuments of antiquity, and doth not finde, that Carthage aſpired to

be Empreſſe of the world, by her opportunity of hauens and multitude of ſhipping? What hindereth the great Mahumetane Prince, from ſeazing vpon al the territories of Europe, but onely the want of skilfull marriners? What created the rich and free ſtates of Holland, but their winged Nauy? It was a fit embleme that painted death ſtanding vpon the ſhoares of Fraunce, Germany and Spaine, and looking ouer into England: intymating vnto vs, that ſo long as we are Lords of the narrow ſeas, death ſtands on the other ſhoares, and onely can looke vpon vs: but if our wooden wals were ruinated, death would ſoone make a bridge to come ouer, and deuoure our Nation. When therefore our mils of Iron, and exceſſe of building, haue already turned our greateſt woods into paſture and champion, within theſe few years; neither the ſcattered Forreſts of England, nor the diminiſhed Groues of Ireland, will ſupply the defect of our Nauy. When in Virginia

there is nothing wanting, but onely mens labours, to furniſh both Prince, State and merchant, without charge or difficulty. Againe, whither ſhall wee tranſport our cloth, and how ſhall we ſuſtaine our Artiſans? Shall we ſend it into Turkey? Some priuate and deceitfull auarice hath diſcredited our merchandize. Into Spaine? it aboundeth with ſheepe and wooll. Into Poland and Muſcouy? the daunger doth ouer-ballance the gaine in times of contention. Into Fraunce and Germany? they are for the moſt part ſupplied by their owne peace. VVhen if our Colony were peopled in Virginia, mutabit vellera merces, we ſhall exchange our ſtore of cloth for other merchandize. Let any man reſolue why the Councell of Virginia, doe now moſt earneſtly continue their aduentures? why thoſe that were (eye witneſſes) of the former ſuppoſed miſeries, do voluntarily returne with ioy and comfort? why thoſe noble and worthy perſonages, doe

offer to make the action good vpon the hazard of their liues & fortunes? And why Sir Thomas Gates longeth and haſteneth to go thither again, and the Lord La-ware deſireth ſo earneſtly to ſtay there? Are not all theſe things as deere to them as to any other of the Aduenturers? Haue not their hopes the ſame wings? their feares the ſame fetters? their eſtates the ſame rockes? their liues and ſoules greater gulfes of perill and deſpair? And yet neither the imbracements of their wiues, nor indulgence to their babes, nor the neglect of their domeſticke fortunes, nor baniſhment from their natine ſoile, nor any experimented dangers haue broken their noble reſolution.
            And therefore, he that deſireth to purchaſe inf
                  •
               llible hope of priuate vtility; hee that aimeth at the honor & wealth of his natiue country; he that eſteemeth his owne repute as deere as his owne eies; he that ende
                  •
               uo
                  •
               reth to enlarge the dom nions of his Prince, and the Kingdome of his God: let him remember what hee hath already ſpent, which is all buried; let him conſider

the conſequences of ſtate, which are all vaniſhed into ſmoake; let him conceiue what a ſcorne we ſhall be made to the maligners of our ſtate abroad, and our il affected at home; let him meditate, the external riches of other Kingdoms, able to buy and ſell the monarch of the weſt; let him heare the triumphant boaſting of the beaſt of Rome, as though God would not ſuffer our ſchiſmaticall and hereticall Religion, to be infuſed into a new conuerted Region: O all ye worthies, follow the euer-ſounding trumpet of a bleſſed honour; let Religion be the firſt aim of your hopes, & caetera adijcientur, and other things ſhall be caſt vnto you: your names ſhall be regiſtred to poſterity with a glorious title; Theſe are the men, whom God raiſed to augment the State of their countrey, and to propagate the Goſpell of Ieſus Christ. Neyther ought any man to liue vnder Auguſtus, as if he liued vnder Domitian, quibus inertia eſt pro ſapientia; to whom ſluggiſhnes & priuacy is imputed for wiſedome and pollicy. The ſame God that hath ioyned three Kingdomes vnder one

               Caeſar, wil not be wanting to adde a fourth, if wee would diſſolue that froſty Ioineſſe which chilleth our zeale, and maketh vs ſo cold in the action. But it is a meere Idaea, ſpeculation and fancy, to ſow ſparingly, and yet expect for to reape plentifully; when a penurious ſupply is like the caſting on of a little water vpon a great fire, that quencheth not the heat, but augments it: when procraſtinating delayes, and lingring counſels, doe loſe the oportunity of flying time; whereby we rather bewray our Colony then releeue them: let no man adore his golde as his God, nor his Mammon as his Maker. If God haue ſcattered his bleſſings vpon you as ſnow, will you returne no tributary acknowledgement of his goodneſſe? If you will, can you ſelect a more excellent ſubiect, then to caſt downe the altars of Diuels, that you may raiſe vp the Altar of Chriſt: to forbid the ſacrifice of men, that they may offer vp the ſacrifice of contrite ſpirites; to reduce Barbariſme and infidelity, to ciuill gouernement and Chriſtianity? Sifrigido loquor, nihil loquor;
               
If I ſpeake to a man void of piety, I ſpeake but the words of winde and vanity; otherwiſe how doth that man groane vnder the worlds corruption, that doth not actually or vocally haſten the worldes conuerſion? Doubtye not but God hath determined, and demonſtrated (by the wondrous preſeruation of thoſe principal perſons which fell vpon the Bermudos) that he will raiſe our ſtate, and build his Church in that excellent climate, if the action be ſeconded with reſolution and Religion.
            
               Nil diſperandum Chriſto Duce, & Auſpice Chriſto.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   