
      
         
            
            
            A
TRVE AND SINCERE
declaration of the purpoſe and ends
of the Plantation begun in 
                  Ʋirginia,
of the degrees which it hath receiued; and meanes by
which it hath beene aduanced: and the reſolution and
concluſion of his Maieſties Councel of that Colony,
for the conſtant and patient proſecution thereof,
vntill by the mercies of GOD it ſhall
retribute a fruitful harueſt to the kingdome
of heauen, and this Common-Wealth.
            Sett forth by the authority of the Gouernors
and Councellors eſtabliſhed
for that Plantation.
            A word ſpoken in due ſeaſon, is like apples of
Gold, with pictures of ſiluer.
            Prouer. 25. 11.
            Feare is nothing elſe, but a betraying of the ſuccors
which reaſon offereth.
            Wiſ. 17. 11.
            AT LONDON,
Printed for I. Stepneth, and are to be ſold at the ſigne
of the Crane in Paules Churchyard.
1610.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A true and ſincere declaration
of the purpoſe & ends of the Plantation begun
in Virginia; of the degrees which it hath
receiued; and meanes by which it hath
bene aduanced: And the reſolution and
concluſion of his Maieſties Councell of that
Colony, for the conſtant and patient proſecution
thereof, vntill by the mercies of
God it ſhall retribute a fruitfull harueſt to
the Kingdom of Heauen, and to this Common-wealth.
            
               
                  IT IS RESERVED, AND
onely proper to Diuine wiſedome
to fore-ſee and ordaine,
both the Endes and
Wayes of euery action. In humaine
prudence it is all can be
required, to propoſe Religious and Noble, and
Feaſable ends; & it can haue no abſolute aſſurance,
and infallibleneſſe in the Waies and
Meanes, which are contingent, and various,
perhaps equally reaſonable, ſubiect to vnpreſent
circumſtances, and doubtfull euents,
which euer dignifie, or beetray the Councells,
               
from whence they were deriued. And the
higher the quality, and nature, and more remoued
from ordinary action (ſuch as this is,
of which we diſcourſe) the more perplexed
and miſty are the pathes there-vnto. Vpon
which Grounds, we purpoſe to deliuer roundly
and clearely, our endes and Wayes to the
hopefull Plantations begun in Virginia: and to
examine the truth, and ſafety of both, to redeeme
our ſelues and ſo Noble an action,
from the imputations and aſpertions, with
which ignorant rumor, virulent enuy, or impious
ſubtilty, daily callumniateth our induſtries,
and the ſucceſſe of it: wherein we doubt
not, not only to ſatisfie euery modeſt and welaffected
heart of this Kingdome; but to excite
and kindle the affections of the Incredulous,
and lazy; and to coole and aſſwage the curioſity
of the iealous, and ſuſpitious; & to temper
and conuince, the malignity of the falſe, and
treacherous. The Principall and Maine Ends
(out of which are eaſily deriued to any meane
vnderſtanding infinit leſſe, & yet great ones)
weare firſt to preach, & baptize into Chriſtian
Religion, and by propagation of that Goſpell, to
recouer out of the armes of the Diuell, a number
of poore and miſerable ſoules, wrapt vpp
vnto death, in almoſt inuincible ignorance; to

endeauour the fulfilling, and accompliſhment
of the number of the elect, which ſhall be gathered
from out all corners of the earth; and
to add our myte to the treaſury of Heauen,
that as we pray for the comming of the kingdome
of glory, ſo to expreſſe in our actions,
the ſame deſire, if God haue pleaſed, to vſe ſo
weak inſtruments, to the ripening & conſummation
thereof. Secondly, to prouide and
build vp for the publike Honour and ſafety of
our gratious King and his Eſtates (by the fauor
of our Superiors euen in that care) ſome ſmall
Rampier of our owne, in this opportune and
generall Summer of peace, by tranſ-planting
the ranckneſſe and multitude of increaſe in
our people; of which there is left no vent, but
age; and euident danger that the number
and infiniteneſſe of them, will out-grow
the matter, whereon to worke for their
life, and ſuſtentation, and ſhall one infeſt and
become a burthen to another.
            But by this prouiſion they may bee ſeated
as a Bulwarke of defence, in a place of
aduantage, againſt a ſtranger enemy, who
ſhall in great proportion grow ritch in
treaſure, which was exhauſted to a lowe
eſtate; and may well indure an increaſe of
his people long waſted with a continuall

warre, and diſperſed vſes and loſſes of them:
Both which cannot chooſe but threaten vs,
if wee conſider, and compare the ends, ambitions
and practiſes, of our neighbour Countries,
with our owne.
            
               Laſtly, the apparance and aſſurance of Priuate
commodity to the particular vndertakers,
by recouering and poſſeſſing to them-ſelues a
fruitfull land, from whence they may furniſh
and prouide this Kingdome, with all ſuchCopper, Iron. Steele, Timber for ſhipps, Yards, Maſts. Cordage, Sope-aſhes.
neceſſities, & defects vnder which we labour,
and are now enforced to buy, and receiue at
the curteſie of other Princes, vnder the burthen
of great Cuſtomes, and heauy impoſitions,
and at ſo high rates in trafique, by reaſon
of the great waſte of them from whence they
are now deriued, which threatens almoſt an
impoſſibilty long to recouer them, or at leaſt
ſuch loſſe in exchange, as both the kingdome
and Merchant, will be weary of the deereneſſe
and perrill. Theſe being the true, and eſſentiall
ends of this Plantation, and correſponding
to our firſt rule, of Religious, Noble, and
Feaſeable, two of which are not queſtioned,
the third eaſie, and demonſtrable in the ſecond
limme, when wee ſhall examine the cauſes
of ſome diſaſter and diſtemper in the
wayes vnto them: Theſe beeing admitted of,

for ſuch as we pretend them to bee, and ſtanding
yet firme and ſafe in them-ſelues, we hope
eaſily to iuſtifie the firſt part of our vndertaking,
and preſume to auerre, that in this
branche there ariſeth to no peaceable man,
any ſcruple or doubt, to ſuſpect the iſſue, or
to with-draw his affection and aſſiſtance, or
to Callumniat the Proiect, or our choiſe of it.
            In diſcuſſion and examination of the ſecond
part, which is the wayes, by which wee hope
to arriue at theſe ends, and in which no humaine
reaſon can ſo prouide but that many
circumſtances, and accidents, ſhall haue as great
a ſtroake in the euent, as any Councell ſhall
haue; wee muſt firſt briefly deliuer the courſe
of this Plantation, from the Infancie thereof;
and then let vs equally conſider, whether
from ſo ſmall a roote, it hath not had a bleſſed
and vnexpected growth: Next, wee will call
before vs all the obiections, and confeſſe ingenuouſly
all the errors & diſcouragements,
which ſeeme to lye ſo heauie, as almoſt to
preſſe to death this braue and hopefull action;
and releeue it, wee doubt not, from that,
which with reaſonable men, can at moſt bee
but a pauſe, and no entire deſertion, and
reſtore it to the Primarie eſtate, lîfe, and
reputation.
            
               
In the yeare 1606. Captaine Newport, with
three ſhips, diſcouered the Bay of Cheſsiopeock
in the height of thirty ſeauen degrees of
Northerly latitude, and landed a hundred perſons
of ſundry qualities and Arts, in a Riuer
falling into it; and left them vnder the Gouernment
of a Preſident and Councell, according
to the authority deriued from, and limitted
by his Maieſties Letters Pattents. His returne
gaue vs no hope of any extraordinary
Conſequence, yet onely vpon report of the
Nauigableneſſe of the Riuer, pleaſure, fertility,
and ſcituation of the land, to our proiected
ends, wee freſhly and cheerefully ſent in the
next yeare a like number: and yet alſo receiuing
nothing new, wee had courage and
conſtancie to releeue them the third time,
with one hundred more: at which returne experience
of error in the equality of Gouernors,
and ſome out-rages, and follies committed
by them, had a little ſhaken ſo tender a body;
after Conſultation and aduiſe of all the
inconueniences in theſe three ſupplies, and
finding them to ariſe out of two rootes, the
forme of Gouernment, and length and danger of
the paſſage, by the Southerly courſe of the
Indyes: To encounter the first, wee did reſolue
and obteine, to renew our Letters Pattents,
               
and to procure to our ſelues, ſuch ample and
large priuiledges and powers, by which wee
were at liberty to reforme and correct thoſe
already diſcouered, and to preuent ſuch as
in the future might thteaten vs; and ſo, to
ſett and furniſh out vnder the Conduct of
one able and abſolute Gouernor, a large ſupply
of fiue hundred men, with ſome number
of families, of Wife, Children, and Seruants,
to take faſt holde and roote in that land, and
this reſolution was with much alacritie and
confidence. And to meete the ſecond Inconuenience,
wee did alſo prepare to ſett out, one
ſmall ſhipp, for diſcouery of a ſhorter way,
and to make tryall of the Fiſhing within our
Bay, and Riuer.
            Hetherto, vntill the ſending of this Auiſall
for experience, and Fleete for ſetling the Gouernment,
appeares no diſtaſte, nor deſpaire;
for euery ſupply in ſome reſpect, was greater
then other, and that in preparation greater
then them all in euery reſpect, and muſt
in reaſon hold Anologie and proportion with
our expectations and hopes at the diſ-inboging
of it.
            So that what-ſo-euer wound or Palſie this
Noble action hath gotten, & the ſickneſſe vnder
which it ſeemes to faint, muſt needs ariſe

out of the ſucceſſe of theſe two: which wee
will now examine apart with all equitye and
cleereneſſe, and waigh, whither there bee any
ſuch reaſon, to deſiſt from the proſecution
thereof, in rectified iudgement; or to fall ſo
lowe in our reſolutions, and opinions of it, as
rumor and ignorance doth pretend wee doe,
or haue cauſe to doe.
            For the Diſcouerie, Captaine Argoll receiued
our Commiſſion vnder our Seale, with
inſtruction (to auoide all danger of quarrell
with the Subiects of the King of Spaine) not
to touch vpon any of his Dominions actually
poſſeſſed, or rightly entituled vnto, and
to ſhape his courſe free from the roade of
Pyrotts, that hang vpon all ſtreights and
skirts of lands; and to attempt a direct and
cleare paſſage, by leauing the Canaries to
the Eaſt, and from thence, to runne in a
ſtreight Weſterne Courſe, or ſome point
neere there-vnto. And ſo to make an experience
of the Windes and Currents
which haue affrighted all vnder-takers by the
North. By which diſcouery, there would
growe to vs much ſecuritie, and eaſe,
and all occaſion of offence remooued, and
wee ſhould husband and ſaue a moyetie of
the charge in victuall and freight, which

was expended, and loſt in the South erne
paſſage.
            To theſe endes hee ſett ſayle from Portsmouth
the fift day of May; and ſhaping his
courſe South-ſouth-weſt to the height of
thirty degrees, leauing the Canaries a hundred
leagues to the Eaſt, hee found the
windes large, and ſo tooke his courſe direct
Weſt, & did neuer turne nearer the South: &
beeing in the longitude of the Barmudos hee
found the winde a little ſcant vppon him, yet
ſo, that on the thirteenth of Iuly he recouered
our harbor: and in tryall found no currant,
nor any thing elſe which ſhould deter vs from
this way.
            Hee made his iourney in nine weekes, and
of that, was becalmed fourteene dayes: whervpon
hee hath diuers times ſince his returne
publikely auowed, and vndertaken to make
this paſſage within ſeauen weekes: and that
the windes in all this courſe, are as variable, as
at other places, and no apparant inconuenience
in the way.
            So that the maine end of this aduiſe hath
ſucceeded almoſt beyond our hopes; The
ſecond for fiſhing, proued ſo plentifull, eſpecially
of Sturgion,He that went for that purpoſe dyed in the way. of which ſort hee could haue
loaded many ſhips, if he had had, ſome man of

ſkill to pickell and prepare it for keeping,
whereof he brought ſufficient teſtimony both
of the fleſh and Caueary, that no diſcreet man
will queſtion the truth of it, ſo it appeares
cleerely that from hence there can bee deriued
no cauſe to ſuſſpect or deſiſt from our
firſt endes, but ſo contrary, that in this proiect
both our purpoſes and waies were happy
and ſucceſſefull euen to our deſires. But from
this Ship ariſeth a rumor of the neceſſity and
diſtreſſe our people were found in, for
want of victuall: of which, though the noiſe
haue exceeded the truth, yet we doe confeſſe
a great part of it; But can lay aſide the cauſe
and fault from the deſſigne, truely and home
vpon the miſgouernment of the Commāders,
by diſſention and ambition among themſelues,
and vpon the Idleneſſe and beſtiall
ſlouth, of the common ſort, who were actiue
in nothing but adhearing to factions and
parts, euen to their owne ruine, like men
almoſt deſperate of all ſupply, ſo conſcious,
and guilty they were to them-ſelues
of their owne demerit, and laſineſſe. But
ſo ſoone as Captaine Argoll arriued among
them, whoſe preſence and example gaue
new aſſurance of our cares, and new life to

their indeauours, by fiſhing onely in few
daies, they were all recouered, growne
hearty, able, and ready to vndertake euery action:
So that if it bee conſidered that without
induſtry no land is ſufficient to the Inhabitants:
and that the trade to which they truſted,
betrayed them to looſe the opportunity
of ſeed-time, and ſo to ruſt and weare out
them-ſelues: for the Naturals withdrew from
all commerce and trafficke with them, cunningly
making a war vpon them, which they
felt not, who durſt no other-way appeare an
enemye: And they beeing at diuiſion among
themſelues, and without warrant from hence,
could not reſolue to inforce that, which might
haue preſerued them, and which in ſuch a
neceſſity is moſt lawfull to doe, euery thing
returning from ciuill Propryety to Naturall,
and Primary Community: Laſtly if it bee
remembred, that this Extremitie in which
they were now relieued, (which is as happy
in the preſage of Gods future bleſſing as in his
preſent prouidence and mercy) was but an
effect of that, we did fore-ſee in the firſt Gouernment,
and for which the forme was
chaunged, and the new in proiect, and therfore
cannot bee obiected as any iuſt exception
to the ſucceſſe of this, but a conſequent

Conſidered, and digeſted in the former: It
is then I ſay euident, that in al the progreſſe of
this diſcouery, or any thing accidentall to it,
there cannot bee rack'd nor preſſed out any
confeſſion, either of error in the ends, or miſcarriadges
in the waies vnto them.
            To the eſtabliſhment of a gouernment, ſuch
as ſhould meete with all the reuealed inconueniences;
wee gaue our Commiſſion to an
able & worthy Gentleman, Sr. Thomas Gates,
whome we did nominat and appoint ſole and
abſolute Gouernor of that Colony, vnder diuers
limitations, & inſtructions expreſſed in writing:
and with him wee ſent Sir George Summers
Admirall, and Captaine Newport Vice-Admirall
of Virginia, and diuers other perſons
of rancke and quality, in ſeauen ſhippes,
and two pinnaces, with ſeuerall Commiſſions
ſealed, ſucceſſiuely to take place one after
another, conſidering the mortality, and vncertainty
of humaine life, and theſe to be deuided
into ſeuerall ſhips.
            Our fleete weighed anchor from Falmouth
the eight of Iune, the winde beeing fayre, they
ſhaped a courſe for the height of the Canaries;
within few dayes ſayle, the Gouernor calling a
Councel of al the Captaines, Maiſters and Pilots,
it was reſolued, they ſhould runne ſoutherly

vnto the Tropicque, and from thence beare
away Weſt: (which error will take vpp all the
obiections of ſickneſſe, the ſun being then in
it, was the cauſe of all the infection, and diſeaſe
of our men) At this conſultation, was deliuered
an inſtruction vnder ſeale, to euery
Maiſter, with a prouiſion what courſe ſhould
bee taken, if the fleete were ſeperated; which
was that if the windes ſcanted, or were contrary,
or that any loſt ſight of the Admirall,
they ſhould ſteere away for the Weſt Indies,
and make the Baruada an Iland to the North
of Dominico, and there to haue their Rendevous,
and to ſtay ſeauen daies one for another.
            In this height and reſolution, ſhort of the
Weſt-Indies 150. leagues, on S. Iames day a terrible
tempeſt ouer-took them, and laſted in
extremity 48. houres, which ſcattered the
whole fleete, and wherein ſome of them
ſpent their maſts, and others were much
diſtreſſed: Within three daies foure of the
fleete mette in conſort, and hearing no
newes of their Admirall, and the windes
returning large for Virginia, and they wearied
and beaten, it was reſolued among
them, to beare right away for our Bay,
and to decline their commiſſion, which

within fewe dayes they made, and arriued
in the Kings Riuer, on the eleuenth of
Auguſt: In this paſſage, foureteene degrees
to the South-ward of Virginia, ran no current
with them, which ſhould hinder or
make difficult that in Propoſition by the
North-weſt. Within ſixe dayes after came
in one, and within fiue, another of our fleete,
the Maiſters of both hauing fallen vpon the
ſame Councell, by the opportunity of the
winde, not to ſeeke the Baruada, but to ſteere
away for our Harbor, which doubtleſſe the
Admirall him-ſelfe did not obſerue, but obeyed
his owne directions, and is the true or
probable cauſe of his beeing caſt ſo farre into
ſuſpition; where perhapps bound in with
winde, perhaps enforced to ſtay the Maſting
or mending of ſome what in his ſhip, torne or
loſt in this tempeſt, wee doubt not, but by the
mercy of God hee is ſafe, with the Pinnace
which attended him, and ſhall both, or are by
this time arriued at our Colony.
            Not long after theſe, another of our ſmall
Pinnaces, yet alſo vnaccounted for, recouered
the Riuer alone; and now ſeauen of our
Fleete beeing in, they landed in health neere
foure hundred perſons; who beeing put a
ſhore without their Gouernor, or any order

from him, (all the Commiſſioners and principall
perſons beeing aboord him,) no man
would acknowledge a ſuperior: nor could
from this headleſſe and vnbrideled multitude,
bee any thing expected, but diſorder and ryott,
nor any councell preuent, or fore-ſee, the
ſucceſſe of theſe wayes.
            Now if wee compare the diſaſters of this
ſupply, with the maine ends, it will appeare
they haue weakened none of them, but that
they ſtill remaine ſafe and feaſable, for any
thing ariſeth in obiection out of them. For
that theſe accidents and contingencies, were
euer to bee expected, and a reſolution was to
bee put on at firſt, armed againſt the probability
of them. Who can auoid the hand of God,
or diſpute with him? Is hee fitt to vnder-take
any great action, whoſe courage is ſhaken
and diſſolued with one ſtorme? Who
knows, whither he that diſpoſed of our hearts
to ſo good beginnings, bee now pleaſed to
trye our conſtancie and perſeuerance, and to
diſcerne betweene the ends of our deſires,
whither Pyety or Couetouſneſſe carryed vs
ſwifter? For if the first were the principall
ſcope, hence ariſeth nothing to infirme
or make that impoſſible: But as it falleth out
in buſineſſe of greateſt conſequence, ſometime

the nobleſt ends, vpon which wee are
moſt intenſe, are furtheſt remooued from the
firſt ſtepps made vnto them, and muſt by leſſer
and meaner bee approched; ſo Plantation
of religion beeing the maine and cheefe purpoſe,
admitts many things of leſſe and ſecondary
conſequence of neceſſity to bee done
before it: for an error or miſcarriage in one
of which, to deſiſt or ſtaggar, were to betray
our principall end cowardly and faintly, and
to drawe vpon our ſelues iuſt ſcorne and reprehenſion.
            Whither we ſhall diſcourſe out of reaſon,
or example; that euery action hath Proportionall
difficulties, to the greatneſſe thereof,
ſuch as muſt neceſſarily bee admitted from
the firſt conception, and ſuch as euen in the
paſſage, dignifie both the actors and the
worke, if with prudence they fore-ſee all
the hazards, and with Patence and Conſtancie,
meete and encounter them. It muſt eyther
bee confeſſed, that it was folly from the
Origen and first ſtepp, not to haue beene prepar'd
for ſuch as theſe; or that it is none
now, not to quitt it, for them, but the greateſt
of all to ſay, who would haue expected
this? If wee caſt our eye vpon the Spaniſh
Conqueſt of the Indyes, how aboundant their

ſtories are of Fleets, Battailes, & Armies loſt:
eighteene vpon the attempt of Guiana, and
more then ſeuentie in both the Indies, and
yet with how indefatigable induſtrye, and
proſperous fate, they haue purſued and vanquiſhed
all theſe, their many Armies maintained
in Europe, can witneſſe, with too lamentable
an experience.
            If wee compare the beginnings, they were
meaner then ours, and ſubiect to all the ſame,
and much more vncertainty, If the Religion,
which ſhall crowne the ſucceſſe, it admitts no
Controuerſie nor Compariſon, among thoſe,
to whome we write: if the Commodities, they,
which wee haue in aſſurance and knowledge,
are of more neceſſity, and thoſe in hope equally
rich and aboundant.
            But to come home to our purpoſe: that
which ſeemes to diſharten or ſhake our firſt
grounds in this ſuppyle; ariſeth from two
principall ſources, of which, one was cauſe of
the other; Firſt, the Tempest: and can any man
expect an anſwer for that? next, the abſence of
the Gouernour, an effect of the former, for
the loſſe of him is in ſuſpence, and much
reaſon of his ſafetye againſt ſome doubt;
and the hand of GOD reacheth all the
Earth. Now if theſe two onely bee the maine

croſſes, which ſtaggar the feaſableneſſe, conſider
that of three voyadges before, no man
miſcaried in the way, and that all other depend
on theſe, as the miſgouernment of our men, their
Idleneſſe, their want, and the empty returne of
out fleet, wherein if wee recouer and correct the
Cauſe, we vanquiſh al things conſequent vnto it,
and yet in apparance, if with theſe wee compare
the aduantages which we haue gotten, in
the Shortneſſe and ſecurity of the paſsadge, in the
intelligence of ſome of our Nation planted by
Sir Water Raleigh (yet a liue) within fifty mile
of our fort, who can open the wombe and
bowells of this country: as is teſtefied by two
of our colony ſent out to ſeeke them, who,
(though denied by the Slauages ſpeech with
them) found Croſses, & Leters, the Characters &
aſſured Teſtimonies of Christians newly cut in
the barkes of trees:With euery werowan or king, is buried al his wealth, for they beleeue that hee that dieth ritcheſt liueth in another world hapieſt. if wee conſider the aſſuredneſſe
of the commodities, Wines, Pitch,
Sope-aſhes, Timber for al vſes, Iron, Steele, Copper
Dyes, Cordage, Silke-graſſe, Pearle, which,
(though diſcoulered and ſoftned by fire, for
want of skill in the Naturalls to peirce them)
was found in great aboundance in the houſe
of their ſepultures.
            If wee conſider I ſay, and compare theſe

certainties and truthes, as leſſe endes to
ſtrengthen, and produce our firſt and principall,
with thoſe caſuall and accidentall
miſaduentures and errors, which haue befalne
vs, before euery equall and reſolued
heart, they will vaniſh and become ſmoake
and ayre, and not only keep vpright, but raiſe
our ſpirits and affections, and reconcile our
reaſons to our deſires.
            If any obiect the difficulty of keeping
that wee ſhall poſſeſſe; if this diſcourſe could
admit a diſputation of it, it ſhould eaſilye
appeare, that our confidence againſt any
enemy, is built vppon ſolid and ſubſtantiall
reaſon: And to giue ſome taſte thereof;
Our enemies muſt bee eyther the Natiues, or
Strangers; Againſt the firſt the war would be
as eaſie as the argument. For the ſecond; a
few men may diſpute the poſſeſſion of any
place wherin they are fortified, where the enemy
is ſo much a ſtranger, as that hee muſt
diſcouer and fight at once: vpon al diſ-aduantages
of Streights, Foords, and Woods; and
where hee can neuer march with horſe, nor
with ordinance without them; nor can abide
to ſtay many months, when all his releefe
muſt bee had from his ſhipps, which cannot
long ſupply a number competent to beſiege:

Neither is it poſſible to blocke vs vp, by
planting betweene vs and the Sea, the Riuers
beeinge ſo broad, and ſo many out-lets from
them into the Bay. Beſides the protection and
priuiledge of Subiects to ſo Potent a King,
whome any wiſe eſtate wilbe wary to affront
or prouoke.
            Wee doubt not, but by examination of
what is ſaid, our firſt ends are yet ſafe, and
the waies vnto them in no ſort ſo difficult, as
ſhould more affright and deter vs now, then
at the firſt meditation of them. But if theſe
bee not ſufficient to ſatiſſie, and encourage,
euery honeſt affection we will not ſo deſiſt, but
vrge the neceſſity of a preſent ſupply, to redeeme
the defects, and miſaduentures of the
laſt: that ſeeing all the dangers and ſickneſſes
haue ſprung from want of effecting our purpoſe
of Sending an able Gouernor: wee haue concluded
and reſolued to ſet forth the Right Honor:
the Lord de la Warr by the laſt of Ianuary, and
to giue him all the liberties and priuiledges,
which wee haue power to deriue vpon him,
and to furniſh him with all neceſſaries fit for
his quality, perſon, and the buſineſſe which he
ſhall vndergoe, and ſo by Gods grace to perſiſt
vntill we haue made perfect our good and
happy beginnings.
            
               
If theſe ſhall not yet ſuffice to reſolution,
that a Baron and Peere of this kingdom (whoſe
Honour nor Fortune needs not any deſperate
medecine) one of ſo approued courage, temper,
and experience, ſhall expoſe him-ſelfe
for the common-good to al theſe hazards and
paines which we feare and ſafely talke off,As a doore turneth vpon his hinges, ſo doth the ſluggard vpon his bed. that
ſitt idle at home; & beare a great part vpon
his owne charge, and reuiue and quicken the
whole by his example, conſtancy, and reſolution?
If you haue no implicite faith nor truſt in
vs,Prou 26. 14. that gouerne this buſineſſe; to whom there
muſt be ſome aduantage granted in our practiſe,
and intelligence (eſpecially in this) aboue
ordinary perſons; that we haue no will nor intent,
to betray our poore Country-men, nor to
burthen our owne conſciences, nor to draw
ſo iuſt ſcorne, and reproach vppon our reputations?
If our knowledge and conſtant perſwaſion,
of the fruitfulneſſe and wholeſomneſſe of
this Land, and of the recompence it ſhall in
time bring to this Kingdome, and to euery
particular member of this plantation, be of no
authority? If this ſeem not to you ſome argument,
that euery man returned is deſirous to
go backe to that which they account and call
their owne home: and doe vppon their liues
iuſtifie, which elſe they wilfully betray; that if

the Gouernment be ſettled, and a ſupply of
victuall for one yeare ſent, ſo that they may
haue a ſeed and Harueſt before them,
they will neuer neede nor expect to charge
vs with more expence, for any thing of neceſſity
to mans life; but they will haue leaſure
and power, to retribute with infinite
aduantage all the coſt beſtowed vpon them:
If all theſe bee yet too weake to confirme
the doubtfull, or awake the drouſie, then
let vs come nearer, and ariſe, from their reaſons
and affections to their Soules, and Conſciences:
remember that what was at firſt but of
Conueniency, and for Honor, is now become
a caſe of neceſſity, and piety: let them conſider,
that they haue promiſed to aduenture and
not performd it, that they haue encouraged &
expoſed many of Honorable birth, and which
is of more conſequence 600. of our Bretheren
by our common mother the Church, Chriſtians
of one faith, and one Baptiſme to a
miſerable and vn-euitable death, Let not any
man flatter himſelfe, that it concernes not
him: for hee that forſakes another, whome
he may ſafely releeue, is as guilty of his death
as he that can ſwimme, and forſakes himſelfe
by refuſing, is of his owne.
            
               
Let euery man looke inward, and diſperſe
that clowd of auarice, which darkeneth his
ſpirituall ſight, and hee will finde there, that
when hee ſhall appeare before the Tribunall
of Heauen, it ſhall be queſtioned him what hee
hath done? Hath hee fed and cloth'd the hungry
and naked? It ſhall be required, what hee
hath done for the aduancement of that Goſpell
which hath ſaued him; and for the releefe
of his makers Image, whome hee was bound
to ſaue: O let there bee a vertuous emulation
betweene vs and the Church of Rome, in her
owne Glory, and Treaſury of good workes! and
let vs turne all our contentions vpon the
common enemy of the Name of CHRIST.
How farre hath ſhee ſent out her Apoſtles
and thorough how glorious dangers? How is
it become a marke of Honor to her faith, to
haue conuerted Nations, and an obloquie
caſt vppon vs, that wee hauing the better
Vine, ſhould haue worſe dreſſers and husbanders
of it?
            If Piety, Honour, Eaſineſſe, Profit, nor
Conſcience, cannot prouoake, and excite
(for to all theſe wee haue applyed our diſcourſe.)
Then let vs turne from hearts
of Stone and Iron, and pray vnto that mercifull
               
and tender God, who is both eaſie & glad
to be intreated, that it would pleaſe him to
bleſſe and water theſe feeble beginnings, and
that as he is wonderfull in all his workes, ſo to
nouriſh this graine of ſeed, that it may ſpread
till all people of the earth admire the greatneſſe,
and ſeeke the ſhades and fruite thereof:
That by ſo faint and weake indeuors his great
Councels may bee brought forth, and his ſecret
purpoſes to light, to our endleſſe comforts
and the infinite Glorye of his Sacred
Name. Amen.
            
            
               
TO render a more particular ſatisfaction
and account of our care, in prouiding to
attend the Right Honourable the Lord de la War,
in this concluded and preſent ſupply, men of
moſt vſe and neceſſity, to the foundation of a
Common-wealth; And to auoyde both the
ſcandall and perill, of accepting idle and wicked
perſons; ſuch as ſhame, or feare compels
into this action; and ſuch as are the weedes
and ranckneſſe of this land; who beeing the
ſurfet, of an able, healthy, and compoſed body;
muſt needes bee the poyſon of one ſo
tender, feeble, and yet vnformed: And to divulge
and declare to all men, what kinde of
perſons, as well for their religion and conuerſations,
as Faculties, Arts, and trades, we purpoſe
to accept of: wee haue thought it conuenient
to pronounce that for the firſt prouiſion,
wee will receiue no man, that cannot bring or
render ſome good teſtimony of his religion
to God, and ciuill manners and behauiour to
his neighbour, with whom he hath liued; and
for the ſecond, wee haue ſet downe in a Table
annexed, the proportion, and number wee
will entertaine in euery neceſſary Arte, vpon
proofe and aſſurance, that euery man ſhall bee
able to performe that which hee doth vndertake,
whereby ſuch as are requiſite to vs, may

haue knowledge and preparation, to offer
themſelues, and wee ſhall bee ready to giue
honeſt entertainment and content, and to recompence
with extraordinary reward, euery
ſit and induſtrious perſon, reſpectiuely to his
paines and quality.
         
         
            The Table of ſuch as are required
to this Plantation.
            
               Foure honest and learned
Miniſters.
               2. Surgeons.
               2. Druggiſts.
               10. Iron men for the Furnace
and Hammer.
               2. Armorers.
               2. Gun-founders.
               6. Black-ſmiths.
               10. Sawyers.
               6. Carpenters.
               6. Ship-wrights.
               6. Gardeners.
               4. Turners.
               4. Brick-makers.
               2. Tile-makers.
               10. Fiſher-men.
               6. Fowlers.
               4. Sturgion dreſſers, and
preſeruers of the Caneary.
               2. Salt-makers.
               6. Coopers.
               2. Coller-makers for
draught.
               2. Plow-wrights.
               4. Rope-makers.
               6. Vine dreſſers.
               2. Preſſe makers.
               2. Ioyners.
               2. Sope-aſhe makers.
               4. Pitch Boylers.
               2. Minerall men.
               2. Planters of Sugar
Cane.
               2. Silke dreſſers.
               2. Pearle Drillers.
               2. Bakers.
               2. Brewers.
               2. Colliers.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   