
      
         
            
            
            By his Maieſties Councell for VIRGINIA.
            
               
                  SIGILVM REGIS MAGNAE BRITANIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE
               
               
                  PRO CON SILIO SVO VIRGINIAE
               
            
            
               WHereas ſundrie the aduenturers to Uirginia in their zeale to that memorable worke, the plantation of that country with an Engliſh Colonie, for the eſtabliſhing of the Goſpell there, and the Honour of our King and country, haue publiſhed a little ſtanding Lotterie, conſiſting but of 12. pence for euery Lot: And therein haue proportioned to the aduenturers more then the one halfe to be repayed in money or faire Prizes without any abatement, beſides ſundry other Welcomes and Rewards: hoping that the inhabitants of this honourable Citie aduenturing euen but ſmall ſummes of money, would haue ſoone ſupplied ſo little a ſumme appointed to ſo good a worke: which wee did purpoſe to draw out in Candlemas Tearme laſt: yet now ſeeing that the ſlow bringing in of their money hath croſſed our intents, either becauſe there was no certaine day nominated for the drawing thereof, or for ſome lewd aſperſions that no good ſucceſſe was likely to enſue to this action.
            Wee doe therefore ſignifie, that a moneth paſt, we ſent away a ſhip thither with her competent number of good men and munition, and doe purpoſe continually to ſupply them to the vtmoſt of our meanes. The rather for that wee haue information from them, that they are now able to ſubſiſt of themſelues, and want only more able labouring men, and conuenient clothing for them.
            In conſideration whereof, we do certifie all men, that we do purpoſe (God willing) to begin the drawing of this Lotterie the 10. day of May next. And that the laſt day of bringing in any money ſhall be the 3. day of the ſame moneth: Betwixt which times the books ſhall be brought in, and made vp, and the Lots written out proportionablie according to the moneys that ſhall come in.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for William Welby, dwelling at the ſigne of the Swanne in Pauls Churchyard. 1613.
         
      
   