
      
         
            
            
            
            A Pamphlet of the Offices, and duties of euerie particular sworne Officer, of the Citie of Excester:
            
               Collected by Iohn Vowell alias Hoker, Gentleman & Chamberlaine of the same.
            
            
               Numb. 30.
            VVho so euer sweareth an oth to bind him selfe, he shall not breake his promise.
            Imprinted at London by Henrie Denham. 1584.
         
         
            
            
               Psal. Cxxvij. verse. 2.
               Except the Lord keepe the Citie, the watchman waketh but in vaine.
            
            
               
                  Exeter's coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
            
               To the Right worshipfull the Maior, Bailiffes, Recorder, Aldermen, and all others, the sworne officers of the Citie of Excester.
            
               IT is most truelie written by the ancient father Lactantius (Right worshipfull) that God made man for two causes: the one that he should acknowledge and confesse him, to be the true and immortall God, and to honour him in all holinesse and righteousnes. The other was for mans owne sake, that ech one should loue and defend the other. For if, of one man whome God made, all others had their offspring: then are all they bretheren, and of one and the same blood. But for brethren to be diuided and not to loue ech one the other, it is most vnnaturall and execrable before God and man. And for asmuch as such is the state & condition of man, that he was neither borne for him selfe alone, nor yet can liue by himselfe alone, it is most necessarie, that he doo endeuour himselfe vnto those endes for which he was made and created. That is, that he doo first and cheestie serue and honour the eternall God (for whose honour he was made) in all holinesse and righteousnes: & then to yeeld vnto man (to whose comfort he was borne) those offices of humanitie whereby mans societie is conserued: which doo stand and consist in this, that euerie one doo prosecute another, in all beneuolence, beneficence, gratefulnes and humanitie. For who so is not thus affected, dooth degenerate from the true nature of man in his first creation, & is become worse than the brute beast. Wherefore in the former ages, not onelie the children of God, and the professors of his word, haue beene carefull herein: but the Gentiles also, and the nations which knew not God, haue beene earnest to maintaine the common societie, and to performe one to the other all offices of humanitie. For as Cicero saith, Nihil magis ad humanae vitae societatem tuendam, & ad amicitias conciliandas & confirmandas adiuuat: Nothing doth more nourish loue, and preserue common societie, than good will performed in the offices of humanitie. Who so then is carelesse herein and breaketh the bondes hereof, he is as the godly father saith, Nefarius, parricida, & omnium pessimus.
            
            This is so excellent a vertue, so much tending to the honor of God, so agreable to nature, and so most necessarie for man: as it had his beginning and was ingraffed in man, euen in his first creation, so hath it had his effect among good men in all ages, and in all well gouerned Cities and common wealths, euen among the verie nations: whereof to recite manie examples which are to be drawne from the Israelites, Persians, Assyrians, Grecians, Romanes, and sundrie other nations, it were too long and almost an infinite discourse. And therefore leauing all them I will come to this realme of England, our owne natiue countrie, which though it be the remotest Iland in all the Ocean seas, & taken as it were for a new world of itselfe: yet is it not inferiour to anie nation or people whatsoeuer, either in true religion towardes God, or in dutifulnes to the Prince and Magistrates, or in anie action tending to the conseruation of the common societie, and the nourishing of good will among men. And besides that, this land hath these things in common with others: yet, it hath also certaine particular

branches and vsages of beneuolence, loue and good will, among priuate men peculiar to themselues, and which in other countries is not vsed. Among manie others, I doo note and obserue the old and ancient manner of giuing of new yeares gifts. I know the Persians of certaine times did with great reuerence offer presents vnto their kinges. And the Parthians would neuer come emptie handed before their Princes. And likewise the Romane souldiers would at the beginning of euerie yeare, present their Emperours with some one thing or other: euen as the noble men of England for euer from time out of minde haue doone, and yet vpon new yeares daie doo humblie present to the Kings and Princes of the same, some strene or present, dutiefullie witnessing a bounden duetie of their part, as also the Princes by a like gift returned, doo testifie their good will of the other part. But the like course of courtesie, beneficence, and beneuolence to be vsed among the common people, and the inferior sort among themselues: I take it to be proper and onelie vsed within this Realme of England. For besides the yearelie haruest dinners, and other like meetings, vnto which one neighbour conuiteth an other: the tenants also to their landlordes, the seruants to their Maisters, and one neighbour to an other, faile not at new yeeres tide to congratulate a good successe of the yeare past, and wish the like of the yeere to come, with some present or gift: but among none is it more firmely obserued, than by the babes or little children, named godchildren, who at that time make their repaire to their Compatres, named godfathers and godmothers: before whom they doo humblie kneele downe, and by the name of a blessing, doo as it were, giue thankes, bicause they were witnesses to their baptisme, and doo craue their helpes for their increase and continuance in that faith which they promised for them. And therewith doo present vnto their said godfathers and godmothers some one thing or other, in token of their thankfulnes, which giftes in the elder ages were for the most part Akornes, Nattes and Apples.
            Of this manner and vsage ensued manie and great commodities both common & priuate, which turned to the benefit of the common wealth, & to the increase of the societie of man: for the Akornes, nuttes, and the kernels of apples were then vsed to be cast and sowed in the ground, whereof in course of time did grow and increase the great abundance of timber, and the plentie of fruites, which their posteritie could not lacke, and the common wealth cold not want: further it bred such a loue betweene the godfathers and the children, as next vnto the naturall parents could not be a firmer. The one alwaies reuerencing, and other louing each other. The parents also being as it were alied by this kind of courtesie doo call one the other gossop, as who saith, Gods helpers, they louing as brethren each one the other, most sincerelie and friendlie. And their children and offsprings treading the trace of their parentes, are affected one to the other as brethren of one and the same familie. These and such other like things when I had considered, it came to my minde and remembrance, how that I my selfe haue beene sometimes a foster childe to this Citie & common welth, being a free citizen borne, and descended of parents, who in their times sate in the cheefest seate and chaire of gouernment: and was by them in my tender yeares & minoritie committed and commended to the credit and gouernment of the Magistrates of this citie. Wherefore as vnto deere parents I thought it my part not onelie as a foster child, but rather as a naturall sonne to yeeld some remembrance of duetie vnto you. And therefore taking the oportunitie of the time present, and the occasion of some things otherwise offered, I haue thought

good by waie of a strene or new yeares gift to offer and present vnto you this litle Pamphelet. Which in outward apperance is slender as the hasell nut; but as by breaking the shell you shall find a kernell, so if you open this booke you shall learne the things most expedient and necessarie for you to know. It is the abridgment or summarie of such speciall points, as be incident to euerie of your particuler officers: which you ought not onelie to know and to vnderstand, but also to see to be doone and exequuted. You haue in an open assemblie giuen your oth, and sworne by the name of the Almightie and eternall God, and protested by the great Iehouah so to doo: wherefore to be remisse, negligent or carelesse therein, you shall not onelie offend against the common wealth, but most grieuouslie sinne against the diuine Maiestie, whose name by your sollies is dishonored, and which so great a sinne cannot of his iustice be vnpunished nor vnreuenged. And for as much as the Magistrates are Gods Ministers, substitutes and vicars vpon earth, and from whom all power and authoritie is ordained; I am here vpon some occasion, to aduertise and remember you, that there be two speciall things required at your hands. The one is concerning God and his seruice in religion, the other concerning your selues and your office in politike gouernment. The latter dependeth vpon the first, and cannot haue any good successe where the first is not kept and regarded: for as a learned man at the common lawes saith, Seeing that lawes must be obeied for God, it foloweth of necessitie that he which will haue them to be obeied rightly, must first learne to honor God truelie: or else where this foundation faileth (euen as a house builded vpon sand) the other falleth. It is therefore and ought to be your most cheefe and speciall care, that not onelie you your selues, but all and euerie such as be vnder your gouernment, doo honor and serue the euerlasting God in true religion, and according to his prescripts and commandements, and then of consequence your politike gouernment must and shall prosper & haue successe. And that you are thus bounden to doo, read the volumes of Moses, who was Magistrate vnder God of the Israelites, and he did both deliuer them lawes how they should honor the true God of Israel, as also set downe punishments for the breakers thereof. The like after him, did Iosua, and the Iudges ouer Israel, and the kings ouer Iehuda: as in the bookes of the Iudges and in the Chronicles of the Kings dooth appeere.
            For all things to be well doone must take their beginning from religion, as the godly diuine saith, Nulla politia feliciter constitui potest, nisi prima curapietatis sit. Preposterous then is the iudgement of those who would haue that religion should perteine onelie to the bishops and clergie, and that the ciuill Magistrate should deale onelie in matters of policie: but the law of Moses, and the lawe of the Gospell doth determine the contrarie, and chargeth the ciuil Magistrate with both, making the same to be his talent, for which he must as a good Steward make his accompt. If this be true as it is most true, how carefull and vigilant ought the Magistrates of this citie to be, that the people committed to their gouernment, should not thus in the light of the Gospell walke in darkenes, and liue most dissolutelie and looselie? I know the Gospell is preached most sincerelie, and the Sacraments ministred most purelie, and yet small is the number which imbrace the same sincerelie, and liue thereunto accordinglie. For looke you vpon the face of this common wealth, and you shall find it in as bad or worse state, than was the state of the common wealth of the Israelites in the time of Ezechiel, or rather woorse concerning religion. For Atheistes. Papistes, & blasphemers of Gods holie name, swarme as thick as butter flies, without checke

or controlment. The Sabboth of the Lord appointed to be kept holie, and we commanded to sanctifie the same, & to giue our selues to the exercise of good workes, to be diligent in praiers, & to be attentiue to the hearing of Sermons, is of all other daies most licentiouslie spent in sinne and wickednes, the same being counted so much the more holie, as it is spent most idelie and wickedlie. For be the Preachers neuer so godlie and earnest to call, let all the great belles of S. Peters ring out neuer so lowd, there will not be halfe so manie gained into the Church: as one with a pipe and a whistle shall gaine into the streetes to see vaine and foolish spectacles. For let there be a beare baiting, a bull baiting, an enterlude, or anie such vanitie, euerie man is in hast to runne headlong to it, & the time neuer too long to haue there fill thereof. And yet if there be no such plaies or games, they will rather sit idle in the streetes, than be well occupied in the churches.
            Euen as it was said merilie of a preacher, that when he sawe the people to depart out of the church from the Sermon, spake vnto his auditorie: saieng, Good people, it is said there is a man in the Moone, but beleeue it not, for there is no such thing, but if you will goo forth into the Churchyard, you shall find twentie knaues in the sunne. And this is most true: for whensoeuer there is anie Sermon, send you one out into the streetes, and there shall you find the greatest number, some to knocke there heeles against the stalles, some to walke vp and downe the streetes, some sitting at the tauerne gulping and drinking, some at gaming and plaieng, some piping and daunsing, and finallie none well occupied. This is most true, the matter is apparant, the fault is knowen, a redresse is wished, but nothing is doone, which thing is much bewailed by the good and godlie. It hath beene oftentimes mooued by some one man of great honor, calling, and authoritie; it hath beene aduised and persuaded by most learned and godlie preachers, and it is wished by all good and godlie men, that some one good and learned preacher were appointed in this Citie, who vpon the Sabboth daies might catechize the children, teach the old, and instruct the people, whereby they might be reclaimed to God, nurtered in religion, and amended in life. But Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard saieng, and who can abide it? And therefore manie be the deuises to stoppe so good a course. Some altogither being like to the Aspis, who stoppeth both hir eares against the voice of the enchanter, alleging that there is too much preaching. And of their opinion am I, that preaching is to much, but to no other than too the lost sheepe of Israel, and to the children of condemnation: for as S. Paul saith, If our Gospell be hid, Iis qui pereunt est absconditum, it is hid to them that are lost. The bread of the Angels was vnsauerie, but to those onelie who were to perish whiles the flesh which they lusted was in their teeth. Some doo like verie well to haue the catechizing, so that they might be no contributors, and so would shift it ouer vnto the church men, as though it were their onelie duetie to doo it, and these shew themselues to be the children of the corrupted Adam, who being reprooued for his transgression, chargeth his wife with it, and she shuffleth it ouer to the diuell: and so in this, euery man so thrusteth it one from another, that nothing is doone. And what wilbe the end thereof, it is easilie to be knowen, if men would either beleeue the booke of God, or consider & call to remembrance what hath befallen in the like in times past. The Poets among their manie goddes, haue deuised & imagined, that one of them hath two faces, the one before looking foreward, & the other behind looking backwards, & this god they call Ianus, of whom the moneth of Ianuarie taketh his name, and the first daie of the same is called

Newyeeres day. By this is means & moralized a man of great wisedome, knowledge, and experience, and who looking to the times past and obseruing the euents thereof, doth forecast the sequele of the like to come. If you then as euerie wise Magistrate ought to do, would as a Ianus looke backe into the old world, and read the bookes and histories of that age, shall find that Noah the preacher of righteousnes, did teach and persuade the people to repentance almost one hundreth yeeres togither, but bicause they were werie of his preaching, & would no more thereof, God sendeth the great deluge and drowned the whole world. Sodoma would not listen to the counsell of Loth, wherefore God with fire and brimstone from heauen consumed them to ashes. The foolish Israelites not contented with such incenses and manner of religion as God by Moses had ordeined, would needs haue another of their own deuise, & in offering the same, the earth opened and swallowed them vp all aliue. The same people were fed with Manna, the foode of Angels, which God from heauen prouided for them, and they waxed werie thereof, and would needes haue chaunge of meates (as we of religion) but the meate was no sooner in their mouthes, than was Gods vengeance vpon them, and stroke them with a great plague.
            The foolish Israelite neglecting the obseruing of the Lords Sabboth, would needes folow his worldlie causes and gather wood, had his reward, and was stoned to death. The whole nation of the Iewes were called by the Lord Iesus to the doctrine of the Gospell, but they would not vnderstand nor accept the time of their visitation, wherefore they felt the heauie hand of God, and were vtterlie consumed with famine, pestilence and the sword, and the citie & temple (wherof they made a great aduante) was not one stone thereof left vpon an other. The cities of Capernaum, which reached vp euen vnto the heauens, Ephesus, Corinth, Antiochia, and sundrie others among whom the Apostles had planted the Gospell, when they lothed it and waxed wearie thereof, the Lord lothed and waxed wearie of them, and all they some by earthquakes, some by fire, and manie by the enimies were vtterlie wasted and consumed. And as he hath thus doone with cities, townes, and countries, so hath he shewed the like power vpon mightie Princes and Monarches, which haue not harkened vnto his voice nor obeied his commandements. Nabuchadnezer, Pharo, Herod, Nero, Caligula, Domitianus, Traianus, Hadrianus, and a number of other Atheistes, who denied the Lord God, his Christ and his Gospell, he tormented them with such plagues, torments and troubles, that of their miserable liues they made most miserable ends. If then the Lord God hath thus dealed with all the nations of the world, and with his owne peculiar people, if he haue not spared the children of his owne familie, nor fauoured the vineyard of his owne planting, nor yet regarded his owne countrie, nor accompted of his owne citie, what shall it be thought he will doo with this ingratefull citie of Excester, which haue tasted of infinite his blessings, and haue a long time beene fedde with his heauenlie Manna, and yet haue and doo dailie contemne his lawes, cast awaie his commandements, and be wearie of his doctrine: what is it, that we can iustlie claime or chalenge for ourselues, why the Lord should not shorten his hand, and be no longer fauorable vnto vs? Is it our antiquitie? Be it that this citie is verie ancient, and was builded at the first comming of Brutus into this land, about two thousand fiue hundred yeeres past, before or when London was: yet the cities of Enoch, Nineue, Babylon, Corinth, Athens, Troia, and Carthage were long before it.
            Is it for religion? I grant, that the Gospell is truelie preached, and the Sacraments sincerely ministred. And so was it at Hierusalem, Antiochia, Corinth,
               
               Ephesus, and manie other places. Is it bicause it is pleasantly seated, and standeth vpon the top of a hill, in the open prospect of the world, & neere the seas? So was Hierusalem, Capernaum, Tyrus, and sundrie other cities. Is it bicause it is rich and inhabited with rich marchants and occupiers? So was Tyrus and Sydon, and others. Is it for the fertilitie of the soile, and the abundance of all things, wherewith God hath blessed it? So was the whole land of Palestina, who for the great blessings of God in nature, was said to be a land to flow with milke and honie. And yet all these peoples, nations and countries, lothing his word, for their vnthankfulnes and not seruing God in true religion were vtterlie destroied by the mightie hand of God, and now remaineth scarse anie signe or memoriall of them.
            And shall this citie of Excester which is but a sower grape, a wild Oliue, & is of his good mercie ingrafted in the place of the naturall branch, and yet hath doone the like or woorse transgressions, shall shee I saie be free from the like punishments? No, no: although God in mercie haue long & oftentimes borne and winked at the sinnes of this citie, yet he will not so doo foreuer. It is an old saieng: Go the pot neuer so often to the water, yet at length it commeth home broken. Sundrie and manie times (like vnto the citie of Hierusalem) hath it beene in great perils by the Brytons, Romanes, Saxons, and Danes, and manie times hard assailed with intestine warres, and the Lord hath alwaies from time to time deliuered it, but they still continuing or rather increasing in sinne, haue and doo dailie greeue the Lord, and doo accoler at his heauie hand. Be you but indifferent viewers of your present state, and be you your owne Iudges, and you shall not denie (vnles you be like vnto the Fairies, called Lamiae, whose nature is that being within their owne house, they be blind and cannot looke vpon their owne faults, but being abroad can see euerie other mans dooings. But that pride, couetousnesse, whoredome, malice, enuie, excesse, gluttonie, drunkenes, vsurie, extortion, dissimulation and hypocrisie, and almost all kindes of sinnes dooth swimme and abound in euerie place of this citie, and shall it not be reuenged? The Prophet condemned Sodoma but for foure speciall sinnes, pride, fulnes of bread, idlenes, and carelesnes of the poore, but looke into Excester, & you shall find fortie times foure, and yet we can lie snorting and sleeping in our sinnes, as though it were Omnia bene. The more is our securitie and carelesnes, the greater wilbe our plagues in the daie of vengeance, and so much the more, bicause against our knowledge and profession we doo offend God: for as Christ saith, If I had not come & spoken vnto them, they should not haue sinned, but now they haue no cloake for their sinne, vnlesse we doo the sooner conuert and amend.
            Well you are Gods ministers, and he hath appointed you to be his Moyses vnto vs, and therefore you must in this dangerous case, stand before him betweene him and the people, and likewise to stand in the middle of the people betweene the liuing and the dead, wherebie is meant, that you are not onelie to present yourselues before the Lord in a perfect and a pure religion, but also must procure and prouide your Aarons and godlie preachers, who hauing in their brest plate Vrim and Thumim, doo catechize, teach and instruct your citizens to know God and the grounds of Christian religion, wherebie they may be a holie people vnto the Lord. And then also you yourselues must be men of corage, fearing God, dealing truelie, and hating couetousnes, and so to stand in the middle of the people, betweene the quicke and the dead; that when the people doo come vnto you, you doo exequute iustice, and iudge vprightlie in punishing the offender, and acquiting the innocent. For your direction in these

two pointes you haue for the first, Gods holie word and Testament, which the Lord hath commanded, should neuer depart out of your mouths, and continuall meditations: for the other you haue sundrie good and politike constitutions, and ancient ordinances of this your citie, out whereof I haue drawen this litle Pamphlet and strene, referring you for your further instructions to the great Leger or blacke booke, wherein at large I haue set downe whatsoeuer concerneth the state of this citie, and the gouernment of the same.
            Which good courses if you will folow, notwithstanding the ship of your common wealth being ouerladen with sinne and iniquitie, is in great danger of shipwracke, and to be ouerwhelmed, yet Christ will be in readines to calme the seas, and to saue both you and your ship, if you shall awake him, and conuert vnto him. And then this your ancient citie which hath continued for these manie hundreds of yeeres, shall as the mount Syon be firme and neuer be mooued, but God shall saue keepe and defend it, that you and your posteritie maie still dwell in it and haue it in possession, and you yourselues when you are called to an accompt shall for the well imploieng of your talent, bee rewarded, and enter into the ioie of your Lord. And thus commending my selfe and this my strene vnto your good acceptation, I doo take my leaue.
            
               
                  Exon the last of the old yeere, and the beginning of the New, 1583.
               
               Your Chamberlaine and assured in the Lord,
Iohn Hoker.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  POST MORTEM VITA
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
               
               The office and duetie of a Freeman.
               
               THe Freeman is the cheefest and principallest member of the common wealth of the Citie: and as it were out of his loines doo proceed all such as be officers, and haue any gouernment or charge in the same. And albeit there be three degrees of freemen, yet they doo all enioie the same and the like priuileges; & none can vse nor exercise any trade, art, calling, or office in the Citie, vnlesse he be first sworne to the libertiee of the Citie. Manie are the points wherewith the freeman is charged, and is bound to obserue; but the most speciall are these.
               
                  
                     FIrst he is to be true and faithfull to the Quéenes Maiestie, hir heires and successors, & vnder hir to be obedient to the Maior, bailife, and commonaltie.
                  Also he is to kéepe the peace, and defend the liberties of the citie.
                  Also he is to come before the Maior and common counsell, whensoeuer he shall be therevnto required.
                  Also he shall not sue nor implead anie franchised man of the citie, but onelie in the courts of the citie, in all matters determinable in the same, except for lacke of iustice.
                  Also he shall not be a reteiner, nor weare the cloth, liuerie, badge, nor cognisance of anie person, being not a franchised person.
                  Also he is to be iustifiable and guildhable to all scots and lots, taxes and tallages, and all other contributions.
                  Also he may not colour anie mans euill dooings, nor anie forreners goods, whereby anie hurt or preiudice may turne to the Quéenes Maiestie, or to the magistrates and state of the citie.
                  Also he must come yearelie to the election of the Maior and officers, and then and there to giue his voice, if he haue no reasonable cause of absence.
                  Also he must be alwaies loiable, and of good behauiour, and no longer shall he be a franchised man than he is so, neither shall he enioie the liberties of the citie than when he is resiant and dwelling within the same, or the franchises thereof. Sundrie other articles are incident to his charge, which partlie in the oth of a fréeman, and partlie in the generall lieger of the citie are conteined.
               
            
            
               
               The office of the Maior of the citie of Excester.
               
               THe office of the Maior is the highest and cheefest in the citie, and is named in the Latine, Maior, and in the Saxon Mayer, both which importe one, and the same thing; namelie one more excellent and aboue the rest. And as he is in authoritie aboue all others, so much the more is he in godlines, wisdom and knowledge to excell and exceede them. He is the eie and the head of the whole common-weale, and therefore must he see and vnderstand all things incident and apperteining both to the common gouernement of the citie, and to the preseruation of the publike state. His office consisteth in manie branches, of which some in particularitie are as followeth.
               
                  FIrst he is not onelie to be godlie and religious in his owne person, but also to haue care, that all others vnder his gouernment be the like. If therefore there be anie inhabitant, that doo mainteine anie false religion or heresie, or doo not resort to his church, at or vpon the sabaoth daies, he is to punish him, or to take order with him according to the lawes.
                  Also he is vpon sundaies and holie daies, to send abroad his officers, to sée if anie be sitting vpon the stalles, walking the streates, or sitting in tauernes, or vsing anie gaming at the time of preaching and praiers: and to compell them either to go to the church, or commit them to ward, or to take further order with them, as shall be thought good.
                  Also he must vpon the first fridaie after he hath taken his oth, cause to be proclamed his generall proclamation, for and concerning the gouernment of the citie.
                  Also when anie proclamation is to be made for hir Maiestie, or otherwise, it is to be doone in decent maner, namelie in the open market and assemblie of the people, the sword-bearer with the sword, and the sargeants with their maces, standing before him & his brethren.
                  Also he is with the bailiffes, vpon euerie mondaie through the whole yeare, to kéepe the Quéenes court, in the open Guildhall, and then and there, vprightlie to minister iustice, and to giue true iudgements in all matters depending before them, and to sée true records to be kept.
                  Also he is to sée the peace and common tranquillitie to be kept and

obserued, and the offenders punished.
                  Also he and his officers is to attend wéekelie the markets, for all maner corne and victuals, that the same be wholesome and good, and at reasonable prices.
                  Also that no victuals nor wares be forestalled, ingrossed, or regrated, contrarie to the lawes.
                  Also that he doo from time to time, as occasion shall serue, take the view and search of all maner of measures, weights, and vessels, whether they be according to the statute; and being defectiue to reforme the same.
                  Also vpon euerie mondaie to giue to the bakers the assise of bread, and wéekelie to examine and weigh their bread, whether the same be according to the assise giuen or not.
                  Also that he giue to the brewers the assise of their drinke, and to set reasonable prices for and vpon the same.
                  Also he shall command his stewards, constables, and other his officers to make search euerie moneth once; in all & euerie suspect place, for plaiers at games vnlawfull, kéepers of ill rule, night-watchers, vagarant, naughtie, and suspect persons, and such strangers, as who cannot giue account for their honest life, and them to commit to ward, to be kept or be punished, according to their offense, and by order of the lawes.
                  Also he shall take bonds and sufficient suerties of euerie innekéeper, tipler, and for kéeping of good rule in their houses.
                  Also he is yearelie to kéepe lawe courts, and cause inquisition to be taken of all things concerning the state of the citie, and liberties of the same.
                  Also he is to sée the nightwatches in the times appointed, to be kept.
                  Also he shall yearelie make his perambulations round about the citie, and about the limits & bounds of the same; and shall also cause the like perambulations to be made euerie rogation wéeke, about the limits and bounds of the countie.
                  Also he shall twise in the yeare at Michelmas and Easter, visit the almeshouses of the cities, and examine whether the same be ordered as it apperteineth.
                  Also he shall yearelie call to account all the collectors for the poore in euerie parish, and to sée that the poore be prouided for, according to the statute.
                  Also the Maior being the eschetor of the citie, and warden in socage,

is from time to time to cause at euerie mondais court, presentment to be made of the death of euerie citizen and inhabitant, what heires and orphanes he left behind him, and that there vpon he doo take order for the preseruation of the orphanes, and of all such goods and rents as doo growe vnto them, as also not to admit anie person to the fréedome of the citie, but that he be sworne vnto the order of the orphanes.
                  Also he is at all time and times conuenient, to call and assemble the common counsell of the xxiiij, vnto the counsell chamber, when matter and occasion shall require; and then and there to determine what by their deuise and counsell is to be determined.
                  Also he is then and there to sée and command euerie one of the said xxiiij, and all other persons, comming there, to behaue and vse themselues modestlie, soberlie, and in all good maner: according to the orders of the said house: and whoso shall offend therein, to be punished accordinglie.
                  Also he is to appoint six of the forsaid xxiiij, to be auditours as well of the account of the generall receiuer, as of all other accounts, for and concerning anie of the cities rents, receipts, or reuenewes.
                  Also he may not be absent from out of the citie anie night, except it be for some necessarie and vrgent cause; and in his absence he is to appoint his lieutenant in writing vnder his hand seale.
                  Diuers other things doo belong to his office, which more at large are to be séene in the great lieger booke.
               
            
            
               The office of the Stewards.
               THe Stewards are verie ancient officers of this citie, and were in the time of the Saxons, named in Latine Praepositi, & in the Saxon tong Portegreues, that is to saie; The wise, graue gouernours of the citie or towne: after the conquest they were named Praefecti, which in the Normand & French toong, are called Prouorstes: the name of the person is worne out, but the court of their iurisdiction reteineth his former name, being called the prouorst court; after this in respect of the courts kept before them, they were called Senescalli, that is to saie stewards; and not long after, bicause they or some one of them was put in trust for collecting of the cities reuenewes, they were called Balliui, bailiffes. These two latter names are still reteined and

indifferently vsed at these presents. Their offices consist in manie points, whereof some in particular as followeth.
               
                  FIrst they al, or two at the least of them, are to be attendant, present and sitting, as well with the Maior vpon euerie mondaie, in the court of the Guildhall, as also in their own court, called the Prouorst court, which they may adiourne and kéepe, from daie to daie, at their owne will and pleasure.
                  Also they are to sée true records to be kept, true iustice to be ministred, and true iudgements to be giuen in all causes, depending in either of the courts before them.
                  Also they are to attend the Maior, at his going to the sermons at S. Peters, vpon the sondaies at the forenoone, and at his going and returning, at the Guildhall court, vpon euerie mondaie, and at the markets and proclamations: and vpon euerie saturdaie, at the shambles, and at all other times, whensoeuer they shall be called and required.
                  Also forasmuch as they are clarkes of the market, they are to execute and doo, what dooth apperteine to the clarke of the market, that is to saie; That corne and victualles brought to the market, be good and wholesome, and sold at prices reasonable. That no victualles or wares brought to the citie, or in market, be forestalled, ingrossed, nor regrated. That all vessels, weights and measures, be veiwed and searched, and being found defectiue, to be redressed according to the lawes. That bakers doo kéepe their assise, and brewers doo sell according to the price appointed vnto them. With manie other articles belonging to the clarke of the market.
                  Also that they doo monethlie, and as often as néed shall require, make search throughout the citie, for all lewd, idle, & vagarant persons, for all plaiers at vnlawfull games, for nightwatchers, and suspected persons, and for all manner of misdemeanors, whatsoeuer.
                  Also that they doo sée the peace and tranquillitie to be kept, and that euerie inhabitant haue in readines, some sufficient weapon in his house, for kéeping of the same, & restraining of the distoiall and vnrulie persons.
                  Also that they doo sée and cause, all annoiances, which they know of themselnes, or which be presented of others, to be remooued and amended.
                  Also that at all times, when night watches be appointed, they or some one of them, be at the Guildhall, and to giue the charge to the

watchmen.
                  Also that they nor anie of them, be absent anie one night out of the citie, without licence of the Maior, and that at all times, two at the least, be still continuing within the citie. The residue of their charge, is conteined in the blacke lieger.
               
            
            
               The office of the Receiuer.
               THe Receiuer is alwaies one of the foure bailiffes, and hath the like and the same charge, as euerie of them hath: but the office of the Receiuer is particular to himselfe, and none is chosen therevnto, except he be one of the number of the common counsell, or xiiij. And concerning this office, these are the things which are speciallie required of him.
               
                  FIrst that he doo collect & gather all such summe or summes of money, rents, reuenewes, issues, and profits, belonging to the citie, as well ordinarie as extraordinarie, and incident vnto his office and charge.
                  Also he is to disburse, desraie and paie, all such summe and summes of monie ordinarie and extraordinarie: for charges, expenses, fées, rents, annuities whatsoeuer, due and paiable by the chamber of the citie: so that in extraordinarie charges, he haue a sufficient warrant for the same.
                  Also he is to haue a speciall care to the edifices, howsings, buildings, walles, water conduicts, and all other works of the citie, and to sée the same to be builded, repaired, and sustained, in all things néedfull and necessarie, sauing that in anie new worke, he shall not bestowe therein aboue fortie shillings, without the consent of the Maior and the xxiiij.
                  Also he shall attend or cause to be attended, all the labourers and workemen in all the cities works, and so sée them to be wéekelie paid and satisfied of their wages, and thereof to kéepe a true booke of accompt.
                  Also he shall receiue into his custodie by in nentorie all the powder, shot, ordinances, armour, and artillerie, and all other things belonging to the citie, and safelie and in good order to kéepe the same, and at the yeares end, to deliuer the same vp, or a iust accompt thereof.
                  Also he shall kéepe the keies of the counsell chamber, and kéepe in

safetie, the records, immunities, euidences, and all other things there kept, and to be kept, without disclosing of anie secrets thereof.
                  Also he shall, after the end of his yeare and office, yéeld, and deliuer, and make a true and perfect accompt, before the auditors appointed, of all his receits, and paiments, and that the same be fullie concluded and determined, before the election of a new Maior and officers. And what he shall be found to owe vpon his account, the same to be foorthwith paid.
                  Also he shall attend the common counsell, at all time and times, whensoeuer they shall assemble and méete, for, and about, anie of the cities affaires, and not to be absent without some speciall cause.
               
            
            
               The office of the Recorder.
               THe Recorder is an officer of the best credit, and in cheefest place next to the Maior, and chosen there vnto for his wisedome, knowledge, and learning, that thereby the gouernement of the citie in ech degree and estate, should well and orderlie be directed. His name is deriued out of the Latine toong, Recordator, which signifieth a rememberer, or aduiser: that is to put euerie man in remembrance of his dutie, both according to the course and order of the lawes, and according to the orders and customes of the citie, and to see all things in gouernment, to be directed accordinglie. And bicause the vse of his seruice was continuallie necessarie, therefore in times past he was euer resident and dwelling within the citie, or verie neere to it, whereby accesse at all times presentlie was had vnto him, for his aduise and counsell in all matters of weight. His office consisteth cheefelie in these points following.
               
                  FIrst he is to aide, attend and assist the Maior and bailiffes, in all their courts, and to direct the same according to the course and order of the lawes, and that iustice be vprightlie ministred.
                  Also he is to sée that the records of the court be made and entred truelie, and that they be safelie kept and preserued.
                  Also he is at the end of euerie yeare, to sée the records of the yeare past, and all rolles of accounts, to be brought into the counsell chamber of the citie, and there to be laid vp in the treasurie and place appointed, safelie to be conserued.
                  
                     Also he is to attend the Maior and common counsell, from time to time, and at all times, whensoeuer he shall be called: as also to be at the yearelie elections of the Maior and officers.
                  Also he is to attend and be, at euerie quarter sessions, and gaole deliuerie, if he haue not some vrgent and necessarie let, and that then he is to appoint some other wise and graue man in his stead.
                  Also he is to defend and mainteine the orphanes and the liberties, franchisies and priuileges of the citie.
                  Sundrie other articles be incident to his charge, which more at large are conteined and set downe in the blacke booke or leiger.
               
            
            
               The office of the xxiiij. of the common counsell, and of euerie of them.
               
               THe common counsell of the citie, named the xxiiij. is a selected and a chosen companie, of the most wise and grauest citizens of the citie, and who haue beene tried, and borne the office of one of the baliffes of the same. They were sometimes xxxvj. in number, and of which the Maior then was none: but sithens, the kings of this realme haue reduced them, to the number of xxiiij. and there of the Maior is alwaies one. They haue no authoritie nor iurisdiction in anie matters iudiciall, be it ciuill or criminall, other than to aduise, aide and assist the Maior and bailiffes: but they are to mainteine, deuise, order, and establish all good acts, orders, and ordinances, as be most conuenient and good, for the preseruation of the bodie of the common wealth, and of ancient customes, liberties and orders of the same, and of the rents and reuenues of the citie. The particular and most speciall points incident to their charges and offices, are as followeth.
               
                  FIrst they are vpon reasonable summons, to come and to appeare at the counsell chamber of the said citie, as well yerelie at the times appointed and accustomed, for the election of the Maior and officers, as at all other time and times, when they shall be summoned vpon paine of such penalties, as by the orders of this citie are limitted, vnlesse he haue a lawfull cause of absence.
                  
                     Also when they are assembled and come togither at the time appointed, they shall then and there take their proper place appointed, and in all modestie, wisedome, and sobrietie, behaue and vse themselues, and not to depart from thence, during the times of their counsell and consultations, vnlesse they be licenced, vpon paine of the penalties alreadie ordered, and assessed.
                  Also when anie matter is proposed, then euerie one who is to speak his mind, shall stand vp, in all reuerence and butifull manner: and then to speake, and declare his opinion vprightlie, without anie maner of affection, and as shall be for the best behoofe of the common wealth.
                  Also whatsoeuer shall be there concluded, and determined, they are to sée the same to be set downe, and registred, in their booke of acts, and before their departure, to heare the same read openlie vnto them.
                  Also they shall not discouer, nor disclose anie of their secrets, or counsels, to anie person or persons, to the hurt or preiudice of the citie, vpon the paines which be limitted: and as by the saied Maior, and common counsell, shall be further ordered, and set downe.
                  Also they shall not let, set, demise, sell, nor allenate, anie parts of the cities lands, rents, reuonewes, or other commodities, but to and for the best aduantage, benefit, and commoditie of the citie, and common wealth of the same.
                  Also there shall no assemblie be made to passe, doo or conclude anie thing, vnder the number of twelue persons at the least, and what shall be agréed vpon and concluded by the said whole assemblie, or the more part of them being present, to be of effect; and for a perfect order. Prouided, that if in anie matter proposed, the voices be equall and of like number, then the Maior shall giue his double voice, and so the matter to be determined.
                  Also none of xxiiij. shall misuse or misname one the other in word or déed, vpon paine of such penalties as be for such offenses prouided.
                  Also the said xxiiij. shall attend and accompany the Maior vpon the festiuall daies, and vpon the election daies, and to bring him home to his house from S. Peters, and from the guildhall.
                  Also they shall haue a speciall care and regard to the preseruation of all the liberties, priuiledges, and orders of the citie, and especiallie to the charter of the orphanes, according to the statute and ordinance therefore prouides.
                  
                     Also they shall yearelie attend the Maior, for the viewing of the limits, bounds, and walles of the citie.
               
            
            
               The office of an Alderman.
               THe Alderman, is a verie ancient officer, in all cities and townes, and in great estimation and credit, in the times of the Saxons and Brittons. They were alwaies the most ancient, graue, and wisest men, and thereof they tooke their name, as who saith Elder men; not altogither in respect of age, but for their wisedome, grauitie, and good counsels: they haue beene officers, in all the best commō wealths in all ages, as in Roome, where they were called Senators, in Athens, where they were called Areopagitae, & in Sparta, & there named Ephori, & so the like in all other good cities; their offices were rather inquisitiue than iudiciall, that is, to make inquirie and search, whether that all things were in good order, and what were the abuses to bee amended, which being knowne and vnderstood, then by their aduise and counsels, and according to the lawes, reformatiō insued. The order and maner of their inquisitions, is the like, or the same, as in times past was vsed in this citie, and at these presents is kept and obserued in the citie of London, and there called by the name of the wardemotes inquest. The speciall points whereof be as followeth.
               
                  FIrst they are euerie moneth, to make a search throughout their wards; and twise in the yeare, to make inquirie by the othes of a iewrie, whether that the peace be kept, and whether euerie inhabitant haue a club, sword, or some other sufficient weapon in readines, for kéeping the peace, and also whether euerie man be assistant, and in readines, to helpe and succour the officer therein.
                  Also whether anie stranger, or new come, be receiued into anie house, and there harbored aboue a conuenient time.
                  Also whether anie vndertenants be admitted, without licence of the alderman of the quarter.
                  Also what iournimen, and apprentises, euerie artificer hath, and in what order.
                  Also whether there be anie outlawes, felons, riotars, barrators,

night-watchers, bawdes, whoores, or anie misliuing, or suspect persons in the warde.
                  Also whether the Maiors Proclamation be obserued and kept.
                  Also whether anie person do breake anie the orders to be enquired by the clarkes of the market: that is, for forestalling, ingrossing and regrating: Whether victuals be good and whoalesome, and solde at prices reasonable: Whether vessels, weightes, and measures, be sealed, marked, and true.
                  Also whether the Bakers do kéepe the assise appointed, and whether euery one haue his marke vpon his bread.
                  Also whether anie hostler or Innekéeper do bake his bread within his house and sell it.
                  Also whether the brewers do brewe according to the Maiors price, and his vessels do conteine their iust contentes, and be marked.
                  Also whether there be anie noisance or purpestures in the Citie, as by setting of pales, wales, stales, bulkes, porches, windowes, and such like, whereby any incroching is vsed: or anie timber, stones, doonghils, or heapes of durt, or any other thing be cast and laid in the stréets to the letting or hindering of anie waie, or to the anoisance of anie person.
                  Also whether anie doo kéepe slaughtering within the Citie, or doo kéepe and féede anie hogges, duckes, or anie other filthie beast.
                  Also whether the stréetes be kept cleane, and swept twise in the wéeke atleast.
                  Also whether anie house be ruinous, and stand dangerouslie, and whether anie chimney, ouen, or fornace, or backes, or heathes for fire do stand dangerously and in perill of fire, and the same not presented by the scauenger.
                  Also whether there be crookes, ladders, and buckets in readines to serue if néede should be in perill of fire: and whether euerie man haue in a readines a vessell of water at his doore when anie house is aduentured with fire, and not aduertised by the scauengers.
                  Also whether anie leprosie or sicke person, vagabonds or beggers do go abroade a begging within the Citie, other than such as be licenced, and be not brought to the cage or other prison.
                  Also whether euerie officer do attend his office and do his dutie, and whether any do vse any extortion, briberie, or anie inordinate meanes by waie of corruption.
               
            
            
               
               The office of the Chamberlaine.
               THe Chamberlaine is an officer of a late erection, and was made and ordered by act of Parleament. His office chiefly and especiallie concerneth the orphanes, and then consequentlie in all things concerning the gouernement and the state of the common wealth: and therefore it is verie requisite that he be wise, learned, and well acquainted in all the orders, ordinances, customes, and the whole estate of the common wealth. The chiefest points incident and apperteining to his office in particularitie are as followeth.
               
                  FIrst he is to attend the Maior and common counsell at all times, being lawfullie summoned, and according to his knowledge to aduise, instruct, and informe them in all things concerning the gouernement, vsages, customes, liberties, and priuiledges of the Citie.
                  Also he if he be therevnto required, in the absence of the towneclearke, shall sit downe and write all such actes, orders, and determinations, as by the Maior and common counsell shall be concluded and agreed vpon.
                  Also he shall not discouer nor open the secrets and counsels of the Maior and common counsell to the hurt of them, or of the common wealth.
                  Also he shall sée that all the records, charters, miniments, euidences, and other writings of the chamber shall be safely kept in the treasurie of the counsell chamber, and shall not deliuer, carrie out, nor shew them, or anie of them out of that place, to any person or persons without the consent of the Maior, or some necessarie & vrgent cause.
                  Also he shall be present and attendant at all and euerie the Cities audits, and all the accompts to be heard and passed before the auditors, he shall sée and cause to be put vp in the treasurie of the counsell chamber.
                  Also he shall from time to time suruey and take the view of all the cities, manors, lordships, woods, lands, and housings, and to sée that no part thereof be impaired, imbecilled, or lost, and the same or anie part being ruinous or in decaie, to be in time conuenient repaired and amended.
                  Also he shall aide, helpe, and instruct the receiuer, and all other officers in all things to their office apperteining, as well for anie thing concerning the cities works, as for the ouerséeing of the workemen,

and prouiding all things necessarie for the same.
                  Also he shall haue a speciall care to the defending and preseruation of the common wealth, and of all the priuiledges of the same, and especiallie of the orders of the orphanes according to the charter, orders, and ordinances of the same.
               
            
            
               The office of the Towneclarke.
               THe Towneclarke was an officer euen as old as the oldest, and in times past he was yearely chosen as other officers, and most commonlie he was one of the stewardes or bailiffes: of which number one was alwaies learned and of good experience and knowledge in the lawes, vsages, customes, and orders of the citie: but in the ende for sundrie reasons and considerations, this office was altogether cast vpon one man, who beeing once chosen, did continue therein so long and vntill he died, or for some reasonable cause was remooued. The office is of great credite and importance, for he is not onlie to write and trulie to set downe both in records and in bookes what is done by the Maior and bailiffes in their courts, and by their offices, and by the common counsell in their assemblies, but also to informe and instruct them what is to be done, and what euerie of them ought to do: and therefore his seruice is so requisite and necessarie, that he can at no time be absent, or elong himselfe from out of the citie without specall licence. The chiefest points of his office are these.
               
                  FIrst he must be honest, wise, and learned, and well acquainted in the knowledge of the charters, records, customes, liberties and orders of the citie, which he shall defend.
                  Also he must attend the Maior and bailiffes at and in all their courts, and at and in doing their offices at all time and times, and is to instruct and informe them how they are to proceed in the execution thereof.
                  Also he may not lie out or be absent out of the citie anie one night, without speciall leaue and licence.
                  Also he is to make true entries, & to kéepe true records of all the whole processe of the Maior and bailiffes courtes, and the same to engrosse wéekelie in parchment, and at the yeares end to deliuer them into the treasurie.
                  
                     Also he is to attend the Maior and common counsell, and to giue them his best aduise in all their dooings, and whatsoeuer by them or the more part of them shall be determined, shall register and write in their booke of actes: these nor anie other the secrets of the citie shall he not disclose to the hurt or preiudice of them or of the citie.
                  Also he shall aide and assist, instruct and informe all and euerie officer and officers for the true doing of their offices and duties.
                  Also he shall attend to kéepe the audites of the citie, and all the accompts he shall ingrosse in parchment.
                  Also he must maintaine and defend all the liberties and priuiledges of the citie, and the right of the orphanes to his vttermost.
                  Also he is to attend the markets and the waying of bread, furing of weights and measures, making of proclamations, and finally, whatsoeuer else apperteineth to be done for and concerning the gouernement of the citie. Many other things are required to be done by him, and which are incident to his charge, and which are more at large set downe in the blacke booke.
               
            
            
               The office of the Sergeants.
               THe Sergeants are verie auncient officers, and had their beginning when the magistrate had. First they were called Subballiui, bicause vnder the head bailiffs they were wont to collect and gather the issues of the citie, and to execute their precepts and commaundements: after this, they were called Ministricuriae, bicause their greatest seruice then was to attend the court, and to execute seruices therevnto apperteining. And lastly, they were and are yet called Seruientes ad clauam. And according to the speciall point of their seruice they take their seuerall names Sergeants at the mace: for that is chiefely required of them, to summon, attach, and arrest all such persons as against whome anie action or suite is commenced in anie of the courts within this citie, and by their mace which is their warrant, they are knowne to be the ministers to that end. They are also the generall seruitures in all or the most part of all the affaires in the common weale, and in whose seruices resteth the performance and execution of all things to be done, wherein, if they should be corrupted, slouthfull, carelesse, and negligent, then should all the trauels of the magistrates, the gouernement of the common wealth, and the execution of all lawes and orders be frustrate

and come to small effect. It is requisite therefore that they be of good name, credite, and honestie, voide and free from all corruption and briberie, and also diligent and carefull to execute and performe what to their offices apperteineth and belongeth. Many are the things and sundrie which are incident and apperteining to their ministeries and seruices, and all which were too long to be set downe in these presents, but of manie, these few heere following may suffice.
               
                  FIrst that they be men of honest fame and of good credit and behauiour, and sworne to the liberties of the citie, that they be loiall and obedient to the magistrates and gouernors, and carefull to kéepe and mainteine the common peace and quietnesse, and readie to do and performe all such things as to them shall be commanded and inioined by the Maior and magistrates.
                  Also they must serue and attend the Maior at all time and times conuenient, namely, to bring him vpon sundaies and festiuall daies to the churches at diuine seruices and preachings: at the Guild hall vpon euerie mondaie to and from the court: at the markets vpon wednesdaies and fridaies, and at the shambles vpon saturdaies, at making of proclamations, &c.
                  Also some one of them by course is speciallie to attend the Maior himselfe, and not to be absent from him nor his house.
                  Also they are to attend the bailiffes at the prouorst court, and at the markets, and in all things to be doone at their commandements.
                  Also they are to summon, attach, and arrest all and euerie such person and persons as are to be summoned, attached, and arrested by action or commandement, and all such as be so summoned, attached, or arrested, to carrie and bring to the counter or place appointed for ward, vnlesse he or they do put in sufficient baile, if the matter be baileable.
                  Also they shall impanell indifferent inquests betwéene partie and partie, and shall certifie the same to the court, before the same be returned.
                  Also they shall leuie and execute all maner of distresses, condemnations, iudgements, and executions awarded in anie of the courts: they shall likewise do and execute all maner of commandements and precepts of the Maior and common counsell, iustices, and Aldermen.
                  Also they shall from time to time giue summons to euerie inhabitant

for their watchmen and marketmen when their turne commeth.
                  Also they shall not take anie bribes, nor be corrupted to do any thing for and concerning the executing of their office.
                  Also they shall vpon euerie mondaie at the court present all breakers of the peace, all maner of misdemeanors which they knowe to haue bene done the wéeke before.
                  Also they, or one of them at the least, shall attend the auditors of the citie, at the time when the audits shall be kept.
                  Also they shall not lie out of the citie anie one night without speciall licence.
                  Also they shall not, so long as they shal be sergeants, weare the liuerie, or serue anie man in anie office or otherwise.
                  Also they shall not discouer nor disclose the counsels or secrets of the citie to anie person or persons, to the hurt of the citie.
                  Also what seruice soeuer is to be done concerning the citie and gouernement of the same, they are, and must be at all commandements, and in readines to execute the same.
                  Also they shall vpon euerie mondaie present the death of euerie inhabitant of the citie, which leaueth anie heire or orphanes behind him.
                  The rest of their charge and offices are written in the blacke booke.
               
            
            
               The office of the Constables.
               THe office of a Constable is verie ancient, and in times past the chiefest within ye realme for conseruation of the peace, and thereof taketh his name Constabularius, quasi cuncta stabiliens, one that establisheth and setteth all things in peace, good order and quietnesse. What constables by law may do, and in times past were wont to do, it is needelesse now to set downe, bicause a great part of their office is shortned and committed by statute to the iustices of the peace: and vnto whome and to whose commandements they are now seruitors and to attend, yet manie things are incident and belonging to their charge, of which, these which follow, are the chiefest to be kept by such as are within cities and townes.
               
                  
                  FIrst they must kéepe, and sée to be kept the Quéenes peace, and the common tranquillitie of the citie and countie.
                  Also they must take and apprehend, all malefactors, peacebreakers, rowters, and rioters, all men going armed, or carieng any pistols, and wearing any priuie coate, all traitours, felons, murtherers, and euerie other person or persons, offending against the peace, and the crowne, and them to commit, and bring to the ward, to be safelie kept, vntill he be brought before the Maior and Justices.
                  Also they are to take, and arest all such persons as liue idelie, and suspiciouslie, night-watchers, dronkards plaiers at vnlawful games, roges, vagabonds, whores, and bawds, and all such as cannot giue good account, how and in what vocation they doo liue.
                  Also they are from time to time, to search, both by daie and by night, all suspected houses, and all innehouses, for all suspected persons, and strangers, and such as haue lien aboue iij. daies and iij. nights, in any inne, or other house, hauing no sufficient businesse, or other cause so to doo, and them they are to commit and send to ward, there to remaine, vntill they be further examined.
                  Also they are to search and view, whether euerie inhabitant, and house-kéeper, haue in his house, and in readines, a club, or some sufficient weapon, for defense of himselfe, and for kéeping of the peace.
                  Also they must vpon Sundaies and holiedaies, at the time of praiers and preachings, walke the stréets, to sée and search, whether anie person and persons, be sitting or standing idelie in the stréets, or be at anie alehouse, or tipling house, or be at anie game or games, and without iust cause be absent from the sermons, preachings, and praiers, and these either to commit to ward, or send to the church.
                  Also they are vpon Sundaies and holidaies, vpon the court daies, and quarter session daies, to attend the Maior, from thence to his house.
                  Also they are to attend the Maior and Justices, to doo and obeie their commandements, for all things concerning their offices, and by them to be doone.
                  Also they are vpon euerie mondaie, to present the death of euerie frée citizen, for that wéeke past, leauing anie heire or orphane behind him, or hauing any lands, or tenths, and who is his next heire.
                  Also they are to ioine with the scauengers, and other expert men, whensoeuer anie question is betwéene the Lord, and the tenant, or occupier of any house, for and concerning paiments, of rents, reparations,

ammisances, remoouing of implements, &c.
                  Also to view and search, whether any brewer, baker, or other person, haue their ouens, fornaces, chimneis, or backs, ruinous and in danger and perill of fire.
                  Finallie they are to attend in all matters touching the Quéenes seruice, the kéeping of the peace, the repressing of malefactors, and of the commandements of the Maior, the iustices and the aldermen.
                  Also they are speciallie to attend the Maior, as well vpon sundaies to and from S. Peters at the sermons, as vpon mondaies to and from the court of the Guildhall, as at all other times conuenient and being therevnto required.
                  For other things concerning their offices, looke in the blacke booke.
               
            
            
               The office of the Scauengers.
               THe Scauingers are necessarie officers, and who cannot be wanting in anie well gouerned citie or towne; bicause by them and their seruice, all things noisome to the health of man, and hurtfull to the state of the bodie of the common wealth, are aduertised vnto the magistrate, and so they be a meanes of the redresse thereof. And therefore they be called scauengers, as who saith, shewers or aduertisers, for so the word soundeth. The speciallest points incident to their offices, are these.
               
                  FIrst they are to sée the peace and common tranquillitie of the citie to be kept.
                  Item that the stréetes be well paued, and méete for all passages of man, horse, and cart, and that they be wéekelie swept and made cleane, and the swéeping carried awaie: and that none laie timber, stones, or anie like thing in the stréets, but during the time of building.
                  Item that there be no slaughter of cattell or beast, kept within the walles: that no pigges or filthie beast be kept within the same: no doong hils, nor anie noisome thing kept, whereby the aire be corrupted, or the people annoied.
                  Item that there be no houses, peutises, chimneis, nor walles, nor anie other thing, hanging or standing dangerouslie, to the perill and danger of such as shall passe thereby.
                  
                     Item that they doo make view and search, whether euerie inhabitant, doo yearelie and from time to time, as occasion shall require, cleanse and swéep their chimnies, and that all ouens, fornaces, mantels, backes, and such like, be kept in such order, as thereby no perill of fire may happen.
                  Item that when anie house is aduentured with fire, that then they do take order as well for voiding of the presse of people, as to sée and to bring ladders, crookes, water, and all things necessarie in place for quenching of the fire.
                  Item that euerie householder haue at all time and times in the summer and hote and drie weather, a tub or some other vessell full of water in readines, at or néere their foredore, for the quenching of fire if anie house should happen to be aduentured, and for cleansing of the stréetes.
                  Item that the common conduites be cleane and orderlie kept, and the pipes which conuaie the water from the spring to the said conduits be well repaired and mainteined from time to time, and that no priuate person do incroch the common commoditie of the waters therein for brewing, washing, or anie such like vse, other than for dressing of their meates and such like.
                  Item that no maner of person do incroch anie part of the stréetes or waies to his priuate vse, nor do build nor set anie porch, boulke, stall, windowes, wall, chimneie, or anie other edifices vpon the said stréets or soile, or anie part thereof, before a composition be made with the Maior and common counsell.
                  Item that whensoeuer anie controuersie doth happen betwéene lord and tenant, for and concerning the orderly paiments of rents, or remouing of implements, or other buildings, that they call vnto them the constables and other expert artificers & men of knowledge, & then according to the truth & customs of the citie, to decide the same.
                  Item that they wéekelie vpon euerie mondaie at the court do present all breaches of peace, misorders, and all other defaults appertaining to their office.
                  Item that they do vpon euerie sundaie, festiuall daie, and mondaie, attend the Maior to and from his house to the court, and to the church at S. Peters at the sermons.
                  Item that they be attendant to the Maior, bailiffes, and all other officers at all time and times whensoeuer they shall be required concerning anie seruice of the prince and common wealth.
                  The rest of their charge is conteined in the blacke booke.
               
            
            
               
               The office of the Swordbearer.
               THe office of the Swordbearer is of a late erection, and had his beginning when King Henry the vij. in the xiij. yeare of his reigne came to this citie for the resisting of Perkin Warbecke, at which time, for the good seruice of the Maior and citizens, he gaue his owne sword from his waste vnto the Maior, with the priuiledge that the same and the hat of maintenance should for euer at all times conuenient be borne before him, and for the doing of this seruice, the swordbearer was then chosen, the points of whose office are these, and such like as followeth.
               
                  FIrst he is to attend the Maior for bearing the sword before him vpon sundaies and festiuall daies, when he goeth to S. Peters to the sermons, vpon mondaies and session daies when he goeth to the hall, and vpon and at all other times and daies when anie proclamation shall be made, or he thereto required.
                  Also he shall attend the Maior at the markets, and at the waying of the assises of the bakers bread, and all other like seruices.
                  Also he is to attend the Maior at his table, and at all other conuenient times when he shall be therevnto required.
                  Also he shall kéepe the common peace, apprehend malefactors, and preserue the state and priuiledges of the citie as much as in him lieth.
                  Also he shall not discouer nor disclose anie secrets or counsels of the citie to the preiudice of the same, nor consent to anie hurt to be done against the said citie or anie officer, but shall discouer it to such officer or officers as it shall appertaine.
                  Also as being a sergeant at armes he shall attend the causes of the orphanes, as well at the court of the orphanes, as at all other times, and in all other things pertaining to the behoofe of orphanes, according to the orders of the same, that is to saie, he shall vpon euerie mondaie present the name of euerie inhabitant of the citie dead, and leauing anie orphanes: he shall call for the testament and inuentorie of euerie such decessed man, he shall call the praisers appointed before the Alderman of the quarter to be sworne, he shall sequester the goods, and execute the writs of Scire facias & fieri facias, and all processe to him directed for the behoofe of the orphanes: he shall summon the courts for orphanes as to him shall be commanded. Sundrie like

things are incident to his charge, and which at large are set downe in the booke of orders for orphanes.
               
            
            
               The office of the wardens of the Magdalen and of the poore.
               
               THese officers are of trust, and committed to such as should take a speciall care for the poore, as well for the good ordering of them in persons, as for the preseruation of such lands and goods as are prouided for their sustenance & maintenance.
               
                  FIrst therefore the warden of the Magdelen is to gouerne and to sée to be gouerned all such Lazar people, as shall be receiued for sicke persons into the Magdelen house, according to the orders of the said house, and according to the direction of the Maior and common counsell.
                  Also that they be wéekelie paide of such salaries and stipends as to them is and shall be assigned by the Maior and common counsell.
                  Also the wardens proctor shall prouide and sée to be proinded meate, drinke, washing, cleansing, and all other things necessarie for them.
                  Also the said warden shall sée their church, houses, and buildings from time to time to be repaired.
                  Also he shall be carefull to saue, kéepe, and preserue the lands, rents and profits whatsoeuer, appointed and allowed for the maintenance of the said hospitall.
                  Also they shall not admit anie person or persons to be one of the said hospitall, without the consent of the Maior and common counsell, and that the same be a sicke person in the disease of the leprosie.
                  Also they shall not set, let, nor demise anie the lands belonging to the said hospitall, without the consent and agréement of the Maior and xxiiij.
                  Also they shall yearelie yéeld vp and make a true accompt before the auditors of the citie of all their receipts and paiments, and vpon the determination of the said accompt, shall discharge, paie, and satisfie what shall be found remaining in their hands, and to be due by them.
                  The like is required of euerie warden of the poore, and for euerie almeshouse, and of euerie collector for the same.
               
            
            
               
               The office of the wardens of the bridges.
               THe wardens of the bridges, commonlie called by the names of the wardens of Exbridge, are verie auncient officers, and of great credite, and in times past great circumspection was had in the choise of them, and for the most part they were most graue citizens. They were alwaies two in number, the one being the elder, and the other the yonger. The things which are incident to their offices, are as followeth.
               
                  FIrst they both iointly are to haue the care to view and search from time to time the two bridges, which belong to the cities reparations, as namely, Exbridge, and Cowleighbridge, and the banks next adioining on euerie side of saint Leonards weare, and what defaults soeuer they shall finde and sée to be amended, or be aduertised thereof by the Receiuer or Chamberlaine of the citie, that they do cause the same to be repaired and amended.
                  The head warden is to collect, receiue, and gather all the rents, reuenewes, profits and issues belonging to the bridges, and shall after the end of his yeare, at the time appointed, make a true and perfect account of all his receipts and paiments, before the auditors of the citie, asking no allowance, but as shall be iust and true.
                  Also he shall procure and prouide from time to time, by the aduise and direction of the chamberlaine of the citie, all things méete and necessarie, as well for the reparations of the houses belonging to the bridge, as for the bridges themselues, and all things therevnto apperteining.
                  Also he shall prouide and procure by the aduise aforesaid, méete and conuenient workemen and labourers, for and about all the aforesaid buildings and reparations, and to sée them wéekelie and from time to time to be paied for their salaries and wages.
                  Also he shall sée and command the bridge called Exbridge, to be clensed and swept from time to time, and that no doonghils, nor heapes of durt doo lie vpon the same.
                  Also the yoong warden, is to attend and take the ouersight of the workemen, that they doo kéepe their times and worke, and that nothing doo want them being necessarie.
                  Also he is to kéepe account of the number of the workemen, and to sée that there be no wast or spoile, either of the worke, or of anie thing prouided for the worke.
                  
                     Also they are to attend the Maior vpon sundaies and feastiuall daies, to and from S. Peters church, as other officers doo, and are bound to doo.
               
            
            
               The office of the wardens of the Shambles.
               
               THe office of the wardens of the Shambles, are verie ancient, and chosen yearelie by the Maior and common counsell, when other officers are, and their office is speciallie to attend all things as be necessarie, for and concerning flesh victuals, and the good ordering of the same, and of the Shambles. The speciall points are these.
               
                  FIrst they are vpon euerie saturdaie, except it be some holie daie, or festiuall daie, at or about one of the clocke, in the afternoone, to come to the Maiors house, and to bring him to and from the shambles.
                  Also they are to sée, then and at all other times, the shambles to be furnished with meate, good, wholsome, and sufficient for the citie.
                  Also that no slaughters be kept in anie place, within the walles of the citie.
                  Also that no pigs be nourished, nor doonghilles, nor anie corrupt thing bréeding a corrupt aire, be kept within the walles of the citie.
                  Also that no bull vnbaited, nor sow brenning, nor yew tupping, nor anie beast vnseasonable be slaughtered, nor flesh blowen, foistered, salted, or vnreasonable, be set to sale.
                  Also that no butcher doo ingrosse, forestale, nor regrate, anie victuals, nor doo sell the same, but at reasonable prices.
                  Also that euerie butcher, vpon euerie market daie, doo bring with the carcase, the fell or skinne, of euerie beast slaughtered.
                  Also that they doo attend vpon euerie sundaie, and festiuall daies, the Maior to the church, and vpon euerie mondaie, to the guildhall court, as other officers are bound to doo, and that vpon euerie mondaie, at the court, they doo present all such faults, as haue the wéeke before béene committed, and ought to be presented.
                  Item that none of the butchers doo kéepe anie market or open shop, vpon the sundaies.
               
            
            
               
               The office and dutie of the Porters.
               
               THe Porters, are officers of good trust, and vnto whose credit is committed the safetie of the citie: for when euerie man taketh his rest, and thinketh to be in safetie, it is their office, that the gates be not at commandement, of such as by whom their restes, and sleepes be disturbed, nor vnquieted, by receiuing any person or persons into the gates, nor in dooing of anie act, which may be hurtfull to the citie, or inhabitants of the same.
               
                  FIrst therefore, they must euerie night, shut and make fast the cities gates, at the times and hours appointed, and accustomed, that is, at ten of the clocke at night, in the summer, and at nine of the clocke in the winter, and likewise must open the said gates, at the times accustomed, that is, at foure of the clocke in the morning in the summer, and at fiue of the clocke in the winter.
                  Also in the times of warres, commotions, and rebellions, they are to deliuer vp the keies, into the custodie of the Maior.
                  Also at no time in the night, after the gates be shut, they shall suffer anie person, or persons, to come or go in and out, but such as they doo knowe to be honest, and of good credit, and conuersation.
                  Also at all time and times, if anie post happen to come, they shall open the gates to receiue him, and to bring him to the Maior, and to his lodging.
                  Also if ante hew and crie shall happen to be, they shall open the gates, to receiue and followe the same.
                  Also if anie tumults, vprores, escapes of prisoners, fiering of houses, or anie such like things shall happen, they shall foorthwith, close and make fast the gates, and so kèepe the same shut vntill all be appeased, and order giuen for the opening of them.
                  Also they shall attend the Maior, vpon euerie sundaie, and festiuall daies, to and from S. Peters church, and vpon euerie mondaie, to the guildhall court, as other officers doo, and are bound to doo; and shall at the said court, present all bloudsheds, fraies, and breaches of the peace, and whatsoeuer else by them is and ought to be presented.
               
            
            
               
               The office of the Bull ring keeper, named commonlie the Maior of the Bull ring.
               THe Maior of the Bull ring, is an office of countenance, and appointed for the keeping of a good order in such things as be committed to his trust and office.
               
                  FIrst when anie bull or beare baiting be appointed, he is first to make the Maior priuie thereof, and no baiting to be vsed within the citie, but that the said Maior be present or giue leaue therevnto.
                  Also he shall sée all things to be well and orderlie vsed at such pastimes.
                  Also he shall not sée or suffer anie pigges, poulterie, or duckes, to rainge abroad the stréetes.
                  Also vpon euerie market daie he shall not suffer anie horse to stand in the stréetes in the market place, but shall cause them to be carried out of the market.
                  Also if anie straiers come, he shall cause them to be brought to the place of the high conduct vpon the market daies, and there to be tied to the ring, and to be proclaimed in the market, and from market daie to market daie, during thrée markets, to kéepe them in pound, or in some place safelie.
                  Also if the said beasts be chained and challenged, he shall vpon proofe made before the Maior and bailiffes, redeliuer to the owners, taking his fées, and for the reasonable kéeping of such beasts in the meane time.
                  Also if the said beasts, at or within thrée courts, be not challenged, then he shall bring them at the Guildhall, the next mondaie then following, and there to be praised.
                  Also he shall attend the Maior vpon sundaies to the church, and vpon mondaies to the court, as other officers doo, and ought to doo.
               
            
            
               
               The office of the VVatchemen and VVardens.
               THe Watchmen are officers of trust, for the safe custodie and preseruation of the citie, as well in times of troubles and warres, as in the daies of peace, when ordinarie night watches by the lawes of the realme are kept.
               
                  FIrst the watchmen, are housholders, who by course are to watch themselues in person, or to appoint some méet and conuenient persons in their place, and which are to be well and sufficienrlie armed with harnesse and weapon.
                  Also they are to repaire in the summer in the euening, immediatlie vpon the sunne set, vnto the Guildhall, and there to take their oth, to heare their charge, and to receiue their watchword.
                  Also they are then to depart hence in good order, and to go to euerie of the gates, and to sée them to be shut and made fast, and then to come all to Corfoixe or the great conduit: and there to diuide themselues into their seuerall quarters, by order of such as be appointed captaines ouer them, and the same seuerall quarters they shall gard and kéepe.
                  Also they shall all night be watchfull and walking abroad in their diuisions, leauing alwaies some one at the least at the gate.
                  Also they shall view and looke whether all things be quiet and in good order, and if they find anie candle light in anie house late and out of season, they shall cause the same to be put out, vnlesse some cause be to the contrarie, and if they find anie fiers perillous, or houses aduentured, they shall rowse and call vp the scauengers and constables, and other the officers for quenching thereof.
                  Also if they find anie night watchers, plaiers, quarellers, dronkeards, suspect persons, whatsoeuer, they shall apprehend them, and bring them, either to the ward or to some conuenient place, as where the parties may be foorth comming before the magistrate the next morning.
                  Also if anie poste or stranger come, they shall receiue him, if his arrant and comming be honest, and shall bring him to his lodging, or present him to the magistrate, according as his cause shall require.
                  
                     Also they shall attend the Maior vpon euerie mondaie at the Guildhall court, and then and there to present what faults haue béen doone and committed in the nights of their watches.
                  Also that in their watches they doo ball and kill all such dogges as they shall find balling or ranging in the stréets, or lieng out of anie mans house.
                  There be other officers which are sworne also: as the iustices of the peace, the shiriffes, the clarke of the peace, the vndershiriffes, &c. But for so much as their offices are limited by statutes, and at large therein expressed, I will referre them to the same.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   