
      
         
            
            
            ¶A true and iust Recorde, of the Information, Examination and Confession of all the Witches, taken at S. Oses in the countie of Essex: whereof some were executed, and other some entreated according to the determination of lawe. Wherein all men may see what a pestilent people Witches are, and how vnworthy to lyue in a Christian Commonwealth.
            Written orderly, as the cases were tryed by euidence, By W. W.
            ¶Imprinted in London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Dawson 1582.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right honourable and his singular good Lorde, 
                  •
               he Lord Darcey, W. W. wisheth a prosperous continuaunce in this lyfe to the glory of God, and a dayly preseruation in Gods feare to his endlesse ioye.
            
               IF THERE HATH BIN at any time (Right Honorable) any meanes vsed, to appea
                  •
               e the wrath of God, to ob
                  •
               aine his blessing, to 
                  •
               errif
                  •
               e secreete offenders by open transgressors punishments, to withdraw honest natures from the corruption of euil company, to diminish the great multitude of wicked people, to increase the small number of virtuous persons, and to reforme all the detestable abuses, which the peruerse witte and will of man doth dayly deuise, this doubtlesse is no lesse necessarye then the best, that Sorcerers, Wizzardes, or rather Dizzardes, Witches, Wisewomen (for so they will be named) are rygorously punished. Rygorously sayd I? Why it is too milde and gentle a tearme for such a mercilesse generation: I should rather haue sayd most cruelly executed: for that no punishment can bee thought vpō, be it in neuer so high a degree of tormēt, which may be deemed sufficient for such a diuelish

& dānable practise. And why? Because al the imaginatiōs, al the cōsultatiōs, al the conferences, al the experimentes, finally all the attemptes, proceedinges and conclusions of Sorcerers, Witches, and the rest of that hellishe liuerie, are meere blasphemers against the person of the most high God; and draw so neere to the nature of idolatrie (for they worshippe Sathan, vnto whome they haue sworne allegiaunce) that they are by no meanes to be exempted from the suspition of that most accursed defection, nay rather they are guiltie of apparaunte apostasie, which is more heynous (considering the circumstances of their ordinarie actions, then any trespasse against the seconde table, which ouglye sinnes of blasphemie, and grosse, or rather diuelish idolatrie cōcurring in no malefactor so roūdly, as in sorcerers, witches, Inchaūters &. in whō the meete with a millian of enormities more, as it were in a centre; the magistrates of forren landes, noted so precisely, that weighing the qualitie of the cryme, they kept a due analogie and proportion of punishment, burning them with fire, whome the common lawe of Englande (with more measure of mercie then is to be wished) strangleth with a rope. An ordinary fellon, and a murtherer offending against the morrall lawe of iustice,
                  Bodinus in confutatione futilis opinionis Wier
                        •
                     ; Lamias, lamiarum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Veneficia astruentis.
                is throtled: a Sorcerer, a Witch, (whome a learned Phisitian is not ashamed to auoche innocent, and the Iudges that

denounce sentence of death against them no better than hangmen) defying the Lorde God to his face, and trampling the pretious blood of that immaculate lambe Iesus Christ most despitfully vnder feete, is stiffled: the one dyeth on the gallowes, and so doth the other: wherein doubtlesse there is a great inequalitie of iustice, considering the inequalitie of the trespasse, which deserueth a death so much the more horrible, by how much the honour of God is eclipsed, and the glorye due to his inuiolable name most abhominably defaced, euen to the vttermost villanie that they can put in practise.
            This I speake (Right Honorable) vpon a late viewe of tryall, taken against certaine Witches in the countie of Essex; the orderly processe in whos
                  •
                examinations, together with other accidents, I dilygently obseruing and considering their trecheries to be notable: vndertooke briefly to kni
                  •
                vp in a fewe leaues of paper, their manifolde abuses: and obtaining the meanes to haue them published in print, for that a number of memorable matters are here touched, to present the same vnto your Lordship, of whose gentle acceptation though I dooe not doubt, yet will I not be ouer bolde thereupon to presume: but rather refer the same to your honours iudgement and patronage, by way of humilyation, that going abrode vnder couerte of your honourable name, the discourse maye seeme the

more credible, your lordship knowing the grounds of this whole booke to be true and iustifiable, and therefore the further off from feare of impugning. But supposing I haue beene too tedious, and sparing to trouble your Lordship with multitude of words, I buyld vpō hope, & so put forth my booke, praying the Lord here to blesse your Honour, and all about you with the increase of his grace in this life, and with the presence of his diuinitie in the lyfe to come. Amen.
            
               Your Honours to commaund W. W.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The xix. day of February the xxiiii. yeere of the raigne of our Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth.
            The information of Grace Thurlowe, the wife of Iohn Thurlowe, taken before mee Brian Darcey
                  •
                the day and yeere aboue saide, against Vrsley Kempe alias Grey, as followeth.
            
               THE saide grace sayeth, that about xii. monethes past, or neere there abouts, her sonne Dauye Thurlowe, beeing strangely taken and greatly tormented, Ursley Kempe alias Gery came vnto the sai
                  •
                Grace to see how the childe did: At which time the childe lying vpon a bed in the chimney c
                  ••
               
               ner, shee the said Ursley tooke it by the hande, saying, A good childe howe art thou loden▪ and so went thrise out of the doores, and euery time when shee came in shee tooke the childe by the hands, and saide▪ A good childe howe art thou loden: And so at her departure, the saide Grace prayed the saide Ursley to come againe vnto

her at night to helpe her. And thereupon she the saide Ursley replied, and saide, I warrant thee▪ I, thy Childe shall doe well enough: and y• night it fell to rest, the which it did not of a long time before. And the next day the said Grace going to mille warde meeting the said Ursley, shee asked her howe her childe did, and shee said it tooke good rest this night God be thanked, I I saide the said Ursley, I warrant thee it shall doe well. Note, that the palme
                  •
                of the childes handes were turned where the backes shoulde bee, and the backe in the place of the palmes.
            The said Grace saith also, that about three quarters of a yeere agoe she was deliuered of a woman childe, and 
                  •
               aith, that shortly after the birth thereof▪ the said Ursley fell out with her, for that shee woulde not suffer her to haue the nu
                  •
               sing of that childe, at suche times as she the said Grace continued in woorke at the Lorde D
                  ••
               c
                  •
               es place: And saith, that shee the saide Grace nurs
                  •
               ng the said childe, within som short time after that falling out, the childe lying in the Cradle, and not aboue a quarter olde, fell out of the saide Cradle, and brake her necke, and dyed. The which the saide Ursley hearing to haue happened▪ made answere it maketh no matter. For shee might haue suffered

mee to haue the keeping and nursing of it.
            And the saide Grace saith, that when shee lay in, the saide Ursley came vnto her, and seemed to bee very angrie for that shee had not the keeping in of the saide Grace, & for that she answered vnto her that shee was prouided: And thereupon they entred further into talke, the saide Grace 
                  •
               aying, that if shee should continue lame as shee had doone before, shee woulde finde the meanes to knowe howe it came, and yt shee woulde creepe vpon her knees to complaine of them to haue iustice done vpon them. And to that shee the saide Ursley saide, it were a good turne. Take heed (said Grace) Ursley, thou hast a naughtie name. And to that Ursley made answere, though shee coulde vnwitche shee coulde not witche, and so promised the saide Grace, that if shee did sende for her priuily, and send her keeper away, that then shee woulde shew the said Grace, how shee shoulde vnwitch herselfe or any other at any time.
            And the said Grace further saith, that about halfe a yeere past she began to haue a lamenesse in her bones, & specially in her legges, at which time ye said Ursley came vnto her v
                  •
               sent for and wtout request: And said, she would helpe her of her lamenes, if she the said Grace woulde giue

her xii. pence, y• which the said Grace speaking her fayre, promised her so to doe, and thereupon for the space of v. weekes after, she was wel & in good case as shee was before. And then the said Ursley came vnto the saide Grace, and asked her ye money she promised to her. Wherupon the saide Grace made answere, that shee was a poore and a needie woman, and had no money: & then the said Ursley requested of her cheese for it: but she said she had none. And shee the said Ursley, seeing nothing to be had of the saide Grace, fell out with her, and saide, that she woulde bee euen with her: and thereupon shee was taken lame, and from that day to this day hath so continued.
            And she saith, that when she is any thing well or beginneth to amend, then her childe is tormented, and so continueth for a time in a very strange case, and when he beginneth to amend: Then shee the saide Grace becommeth so lame, as without helpe shee is not able to arise, or to turne her in her bed.
         
         
            The information of Annis Letherdall, wife of Richard Letherdall, taken by mee Brian Darcey Esquire, against Vrsley Kempe, alias Grey the xix. day of February.
            
               THe said Annis saith, that before Michaelmas last, she the said Ursley sent her sonne to the said Letherdals house, to haue scouring sand, and sent word by the said boy, yt his mother would giue her the dying of a payre of womens hose for the sand: But the said Annis knowing her to be a naughtie beast sent her none. And after she the said Ursley, seeing her gyrle to carry some to one of her neighbours houses, murmured as the said childe said, & presently after her childe was taken as it lay very bigge, with a great swelling in the bottome of the belly, and other priuie partes. And the saide Annis saith, yt about the tenth day of Februarie last shee went vnto the said Ursley, and tolde her that shee had been foorth with a cunning body, which saide, yt she the said Ursley had bewitched her childe: To yt the said Ursley answered, that shee knewe shee had not so been, and so talking further she said, that she would lay her life that she the said Annis had not been with any: whereupon shee requested a woman being in the house a spinning with the said Ursley, to beare witnesse what shee had said. And the next day the childe was in most piteous case to beholde, whereby shee thought it good to Carry the same vnto mother Ratcliffe, for that shee had some experience of her skill, The which when the said mother

Ratcliffe did see, shee saide to the saide Annis that shee doubted shee shoulde doe it any good, yet shee ministred vnto it, &c.
         
         
            The enformation of Thomas Rabbet, of the age of viii. yeres or there abouts, base sonne to the said Vrsley Kempe alias Grey, taken before me Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices, the xxv. day of February, against his said mother.
            THe saide Thomas Rabbbet saith, that his said mother Ursley kempe alias Grey hath foure seuerall spirites, the one called Tyffin, the other T
                     •
                  ttey, the third Pigine, & the fourth Iacke
               ▪ & being asked of what colours they were, saith, that Tyttey is like a little grey Cat, Tyffin is like a white lambe, Pygine is blacklike a Toad, and Iacke is black like a Cat. And hee saith, hee hath seen his mother at times to giue thē beere to drinke, and of a white Lofe or Cake to eate, and saith that in the night time the said spiri
                  •
               es will come to his mother, and sucke blood of her vpon her armes and other places of her body.
            This Examinat being asked, whether hee had seene Newmans wife to come vnto his mother, saith, that one morning he being in ye chamber

with his mother, his Godmother Newman came vnto her, and saith, that then hee heard her and his mother to chide, and to fall out: But saith before they parted they were friends: and that then his mother deliuered an earthen pot vnto her, in the which he thinketh her spirites were, the which she carried away with her vnder her aperne.
            And this examinat saith, that within a fewe daies after the said Newmans wife came vnto his mother, and yt he heard her to tel his mother that she had sent a spirit to plague Iohnson to ye death, and an other to plague his wife.
         
         
            The enformation of Ales Hunt, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, the xxiiii. day of February, against Ioan Pechey widdow.
            THis examinat Ales Hunt saith, that shee dwelleth in ye next house vnto ye saide Ioan Pechey, & yt she the said Ioan two or three daies before Christmas last, went to ye house of Iohnson ye Collector appointed for ye poore, whereas she ye said Ioan receiued beefe & bread, the which this Examinat saith, shee hearde to bee of the gift of ye said Briā Darcey). And this examinat saith that ye said Ioan going homewardes, murmured & found great fault at Iohnson, saying, he might haue giuen that to a gyrle or another,

and not to her, saying, the bread was to hard baked for her, and that shee then seemed to bee in a great anger therewithall. This examinat saith, shee was at that present in the house of the wydow Hunt, and that there was but a wall betweene them, The saide Ioan comming to her house did vnlocke her dore, the which this examinat did see her doe: And after shee was entred into her house, this examinat saith, she hard the said Ioan to say, yea are you so sawsie? are yee so bolde? you were not best to bee so bolde with mee: For if you will not bee ruled, you shall haue Symonds sause, yea saide the saide Ioan, I perceiue if I doe giue you an inch, you you will take an ell: and saith she is assured that there was no christian creature with her at that time, but that she vsed those speeches vnto her Imps.
            And this examinat saith, that she hath heard her mother say, that she the said Ioan was skilfull and cunning in witcherie, and could do as much as the said mother Barnes, this examinats mother, or any other in this towne of S. Osees. And further saith, she hath hard her mother to say, yt the said Ioan did know what was saide or done in any mans house in this towne.
         
         
            
            The information of Margerie Sammon, sister to the saide Ales Hunt, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, the xxv. day of Februarie against the said Ioan Pechey as foloweth.
            THe said Margerie sayth, that she hath hard the widowe Hunt to say, that the sayde Ioan Pechey shoulde say that shee coulde tell what any man saide or did at any time in their houses, when & as often as shee listed: and sayth, that the saide widowe Hunt did tell her that shee hath harde the saide Ioan Pechey, being in her house, verie often to chide and vehemently speaking as though there had been some bodye present with her: And sayth, that shee went in to see to whome the saide Ioan should speake, but shee founde no bodie but her selfe all alone: And sayeth, that shee the sayd Ioan Pechey was with this examinates mother, mother Barnes, the day before shee departed, where this examinate left them together while shee went home to her mistris house to doe her businesse and worke.
         
         
            The enformation of Iohn Tendering of Saint Osees, takē before me Brian Darcey esquire, the xxvi. of Februarie 1
                  •
               82.
            
               THe said Iohn sayth, that William Byette hauing occasion to come to this examinate, sayeth, that after they had conferred and talked, hee the saide William Byet did declare to this examinate, That, that morning he did tell him that he had a Cow wt had lien two dayes or longer in a strange case, and had eaten nothing, and was not likly to liue, & that he and his seruants seuerall times had lifted at the said 
                  •
               owe to raise her vpon her feet, but they could not make her to arise or stand: wherevpon he told this examinat, that he had caused his said seruāts to fetch straw, and to lay the same round about her: And that he himselfe tooke an Axe, minding to knocke her vpon the head, and so to burne her: And said that the fire being kindled, the said Cowe of her selfe start vp, and rā her way vntil it came to a wood stack▪ and there stood still, and fell a byting of stickes, bigger then any mans finger, and after li
                  •
               ed and did well.
         
         
            The enformation of Febey Hunt, daughter in lawe to Ales Hunt, of the age viii. yeeres or there abouts, taken before mee Brian Darcey esquire, the xxv. day of Frbuarie agaynst Ales Hunt her mother.
            THe sayd Febey hunt sayth, yt shee hath seen her mother to haue two litle thinges like

horses, the one white, the other blacke, the which shee kept in a litle lowe earthen pot with woll, colour white and blacke: and that they stoode in her chamber by her bed side, and saith, that shee hath seene her mother to feede them with milke out of a blacke trening dishe, and this examinat being caried after this confessiō by the Counstables to her fathers house, shee shewed them the place were they stood and the borde that couered them: And this examinate chose out the dishe, out of which they were fedde, from amongst many other dishes. She this examinat did also confesse that her mother had charged her not to tell any thing, what shee had seene: And if shee did those thinges woulde take her, and this examinate saith, that her mother did send them to Hayward of Frowicke, but to what end shee can not tell, & shee being asked howe she knew the same, saieth, that shee hard her mother bid them to go.
         
         
            The enformation of William Hooke Painter, taken before me Brian Darcey esquire, the xxiii of Februarie, against Ales Newman.
            THis examinate William Hooke sayth, yt he dwelleth in the next house vnto Ales Newmā, & saith, that he hath hard William Newemā her husbād to say vnto ye said Ales his wife, yt she

was the cause of her husbands great miserie and wretcher state, and sayeth, that when the saide Ales doeth giue her husbande any meate to eate, then presently he the saide William saith to his wife, doest thou not see? doest thou see? wherevnto this examinate sayth, that he hath hearde the saide Ales to say, if thou seest any thing, giue it some of thy meat. And saith further, that he hath hearde the saide William Newman bid the said Ales his wife to beate it away.
         
         
            The enformation of Elizabeth Bennet, taken by me Brian Darsey esquire, the xxiiii. day of Februarie 1582▪ against Ales Newman.
            THe sayde Elizabeth saith, that shee neuer sent any spirite to plague Iohnson or his wife, neither knew sheemother Newmā to haue sent any of her spirits to plague him or his wife, shee this examinate for her part sayth, shee was greatly beholding to the sayde Iohnson and his wife. But denieth that euer shee sent any spirit to hurt him and his wife: or that shee knewe mother Newman to haue hurt them. But this examinat saith, that shee being at Iohnsons to haue wool to spinne, he being a clothmaker, of whom shee had many times worke, At that present mother Newman being come thither, shee this examinate

faith she hard the sayd mother Newman to desire Iohnson to giue her xii.d. saying: her husbande lay sicke, wherevnto shee heard him answere that hee woulde gladly helpe her husbande: but that hee had laide out a greate deale more then he had receiued, saying, he was a pore man, and hee, his wife and familie, might not want for the helping of her husband, saying that hee coulde not helpe her with any, vntill he had collected more money, whervpon shee departed, and vsed some harde speeches vnto him, and seemed to be much angrie.
         
         
            The examination & confessiō of Vrsley Kemp alias Gray, taken at S. Osees, and brought before me Brian Darsey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of the peace, the xx. day of Februarie 1582.
            Condemned.
            THe saide Ursley Kempe sayeth, that about tenne or eleuen yeeres pas
                  •
               e, shee this examinate was troubled with a lamenes in her bones, and for ease thereof, went to one Cockes wife of Weley, nowe deceased, who telled this examinate that shee was bewitched, and at her entretie 
                  •
               aught her to vnwitche her selfe▪ And 
                  •
               ad her take hogges dunge and charuell,

and put them together and holde them in her left hand, and to take in the other hande a knife, and to pricke the medicine three times, & then to cast the same into the fire, and to take the said knife & to make three pricks vnder a table, and to let the knife sticke there: & after that to take three leues of sage, and as much of herbe Iohn (alias herbe grace) and put them into ale, and drinke itlast at night and first in the morning, & that shee taking the same, had ease of her lamnesse.
            The sayde examinate sayth, that one Pages wife, and one Grayes wife, beeing eyther of them 
                  •
               ame and bewitched: shee beeing requested and sent for to come vnto them, went vnto them: And saieth, that shee knewe them to bee bewitched, and at their desires did minister vnto them the foresaid medicine, wherevpon they had speedie amendement.
         
         
            The saide Brian Darcey then promising to the saide Vrsley, that if shee would deale plainely and confesse the trueth, that shee should haue fauour: & so by giuing her faire speeches shee confessed as follloweth.
            THe saide Ursley bursting out with weeping, fel vpon her knees, and confessed that

shee had foure spirits, wherof two of them were hees, and the other two were shees: the two hee spirites were to punishe and kill vnto death, and the other two shees were to punishe with lamenes, and other diseases of bodyly harme, and also to destroy cattell.
            And she this examinate, being asked by what name or names shee called the sayde spirits, and what maner of thinges, or colour they were of: confesseth and saith, that the one is called Ti
                     ••
                  ey, being a hee, and is like a gray Cat, the seconde called Iacke, also a hee, and is like a blacke Cat, the thirde is called Pigin, being a she, and is like a blacke Toad, the fourth is called Tyffin, being a shee, and is like a white lambe.
            This examinate being further asked, wh
                  •
               che of the saide spirites shee sent to punishe Thorlowes wife▪ and Letherdalls childe, confessed and sayed, that shee sent Tyttey to punishe Thorlows wife, and Pigen Letherdalls Childe.
            And this examinate, without any asking of her owne free will at that present, confessed and saide, yt shee was the death of her brother Kemps wife, and that she sent the spirite Iacke to plague her, for that her sister had called her whore and witche.
            And this examinate further confessed,

that vpon the falling out betweene Thorlowes wife and her, shee sent Tyffin, the spirite vnto her childe, which lay in the Cradle, and willed the same to
                  •••
                
               
                  •
               e the Cradle ouer, so as the childe might fall out thereof, and breake the necke of it.
            These foresaide 5. last recited matters, being confessed by the saide Ursley priuately to me the sayde Brian Darcey, were afterwardes (supper being ended, and shee called agayne before mee, the saide Brian) recited and particularlie named vnto her all which shee confessed, as before in the presence of vs, whose names bee herevnder subscribed.
            Also after this examinates aforesaide confession, the saide Thorlows wife, and Letherdalles wife being then in my house, and shee the saide Letherdalls wife hauing her chylde there also, were brought in my presence before this examinate: who, immediatly after some speeches had past betweene them, shee this examinate burst out in teares and fell vpon her knees, and asked forgiuenesse of the sayde Letherdalls wife, and l
                  ••
               ewise of Thorlows wife, and confessed that shee caused Newmans wife to sende a spirite to plague the childe, asking the saide Letherdalls wife, if shee were not afraide that night that the spirite came vnto the childe, and telled her about

the same houre, and said that shee her selfe by reason thereof was in a great swett. And this examinate confesseth, that shee caused the saide Newmans wife, to send a spirite to Thorlowes wife, to plague her where that thought good, &c.
            The said Letherdals childe (being a woman childe)) at the time of this examination, appeared to bee in most pitious sort consumed, and the priuie and hinder partes thereof, to be in a most strange and wonderfull case, as it seemed to verye honest women of good iudgement, and not likely to liue and continue any long time.
            Note also that it is specially to be considered, that the saide childe beeing an infante and not a yeere olde, the mother thereof carrying it in her armes, to one mother Ratcliffes a neighbour of hers, to haue her to minister vnto it, was to passe by Ursley this examinates house, and passing bye the wyndowe, the Infante cryed to the mother, wo, wo, and poynted with the finger to the wyndowe wardes: And likewise the chyld vsed the like as shee passed homewards by the said window, at which she confessed her conscience moued her, so as shee went shortly after and talked with the said Ursley, wherevpon

               
                  •
               hee vsed suche speeches as mooued her to complaine.
         
         
            The seconde confession and examination of Vrsley Kemp, takē the xxi. day of Februarie.
            The said Vrsley, being committed to the ward & keeping of the Constable that night, vpon some speeches that shee had passed, said, that shee had forgotten to tell M. Darcey one thing, wherevpon the next day she was brought before Brian Darcey, & the second time examined, who confessed and said.
            THat about a quarter of a yeere last past, one Ales Neweman, her nere neighbour came vnto this examinates house and fel out with her, and said shee was a witche, and that shee woulde take away her witcherie, and carrie the same vnto M. Darcey: But this examinate saieth, shee thought shee did not meane it, but after they had chidden they became friendes, and so shee departed carying away with her, her spirites in a pot, as this examinate sayth.
            And shee further sayth, that about Christmas last, shee went to the said Ales Newman, and declared to her that Thorlows wife and shee were fallen out, and prayed the saide Newmans wife,

to sende the spirite called Tittey, vnto her to plague the sayde Thorlowes wife, where that thought good: The which this examinate saith, shee did, and at the returne of the saide spirite it 
                  •
               olde this examinate, that it had punished Throlowes wife vpon her knee, And then it had a reward by sucking blood of this examinate, and so returned as shee saith to the said Ales Neweman.
            This examinate saith, that about three monethes past, shee and one Iohn Stratton fel out, and the saide Iohn called her whore & gaue her other euill speeches, wherevpon this examinate sayth, that shortly after shee sent her Boy for spices vnto the wife of the said Iohn: But shee sayeth, shee sent her none, whervpon this examinate sayeth, shee went vnto the said Newmans wife, and tolde her of the falling out between Stratton and her, and requested the saide Newmans wife, to sende Iacke the spirite vnto Strattons wife to plague her, y• which the said Ales Newman promised this examinate to doe the nexte night, as this examinate saith shee did: And the spirite tolde this examinate when it returned, that it had plagued her in the backe euen vnto death: and the spirite did sucke of this examinate vpon the left thigh, the which when she rubbeth (shee saith) it will at all times bleede.
            
               And shee sayeth that then the spirite did returne to the sayde Newemans wife agayne, and had the like rewarde of her as shee thynketh.
            This examinate sayeth, that about Friday was seuennight beeing about the nienth of Februarie, shee went vnto the said Ales Newman, and did shewe her that one Letherdalls wife and shee were fallen out, and sayth, that shee prayed her to sende one of the spirites vnto her younge chylde: wherevnto shee the sayd Ales answered well, she would: and this examinate saith, that at that time shee coulde haue no longer talke with her, for that her husband was then present in the house: and this examinat saith, that the said Ales sent the spirit Pigin, to plague ye said child where that thought good, and after that it had sucked of this examinate, shee saith it returned to the saide Newmans wife, and more at that time the saide examinate confessed not.
         
         
            The third examination & con
                  •
               ession of Vrsley Kempe alias Gray, taken before me Brian Darsey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of the peace, the xxiiii. day of Februarie.
            THis examinate, being asked how she knew the said Elizabeth Bennet to haue two spirits,

saith, that about a quarter of a yere past, she went vnto mother Bennets house for a messe of milke, the which shee had promised her: But at her comming this examinate saith shee knocked at her dore, and no bodie made her any answere, wherevpon shee went to her chamber windowe and looked in therat, saying, ho, ho, mother Bennet are you at home? And casting her eyes aside, shee saw a spirit lift vp a clothe lying ouer a pot, looking much lik a Ferret. And it beeing asked of this examinate why the spirite did looke vpon her, shee said it was hungrie.
            This examinate, beeing asked howe shee knewe the names of mother Bennets spirites, sayth, that Tyffin her spirite did tell this examinate that shee had two spirites, the one of them like a blacke Dogge, and the other redde like a Lyon, and that their names were Suckin and Lyerd, and sayeth that Suckin did plague Byettes wife vnto death, and the other plagued three of his Beastes whereof two of them dyed, and the third leyer fire or drooping, & not likly to liue: Byette caused his folkes to make a fire about her: The Cowe feeling the heate of the fire, starte vp and ranne her way, and by that occasion was saued.
            
               This examinate saieth, that about the foureteene or fifteene day of Ianuarie last, shee went to the house of William Hunt to see howe his wife did, and shee beeing from home, shee called at her chamber window and looked in, and then espied a spirite to looke out of a potcharde from vnder a clothe, the nose thereof beeing browne like vnto a Ferret. And sayeth, that the same night shee asked Tyffin her white spirite, what Hunts wiues spririte had done: And then it told this examinate, that it had killed Heywarde of Frowicke sixe beastes which were lately dressed of the gargette. And sayeth, that her sayde spirite tolde her, that Huntes wiues spirite had a droppe of her blood for a rewarde: but shee sayeth, that shee asked not her spirite vpon what place of her body it was.
            This examinate sayeth, that one Michell a shoomaker of Saint Osees did tell her, that he thought that Glascockes wife had bewitched his Chylde, whereof it dyed: Wherevpon shee this examinate sayeth, that shee went home, and asked Tyffin her white spirite, whether the 
                  •
               a
                  •
               e were so: whiche tolde this examinate, 
                  •••
               t shee had bewitched the sayde chylde, and sent one of her spirites to plague it to the death.
            
               And sayeth also, that the sayde Glascockes wife did bewitche the Base childe that Page and his wife haue in keeping, and that her sayde spirite telled her so. And being demaunded, howe many spirits Glascockes wife had, and by what names shee called them, this examinate sayeth, that shee asked not her spirite Tyffin any such questions.
            This examinat sayeth, that the sayde Elizabeth Bennette did sende her spirite Suckin to plague one Willingall, whereof hee languished and died: beeyng sicke of an impostume.
            This examinate sayeth also, that the sayde Elizabeth sente the sayde spirite to William Willes his wife to plague her, whereof shee languished many yeeres and dyed.
            This examinate sayeth, that the sayde Elizabeth (not aboue three weekes sithence) sent her spirite Lyerd to plague Fortunes wife and his chylde.
            This examinate sayeth, that the sayde Elizabeth did sende her spirite Lyerd to Bonners wife to plague her, the whiche her sayde spirite, tolde this examinate to bee done vpon the knee.
            This examinate saith further, that Ales Newman went vnto Iohnson beeing Collectour

               
                  •
               or the poore, and did require him to giue her xi
                  •
               . d. for her husbande whiche was sicke. But hee aunswering her that he had disbursed more money then hee had collected, saying, therefore hee coulde not then helpe her with any: The sayde Newemans wife fell out with him very angerly, and the next day after sent one of the spirites that shee had from this examinate to plague the saide Iohnson and his wife vnto the death: And that her spirite called Tyffin did tell the same vnto her, and shee beeing asked what woordes the sayde Newemans wife vsed to Iohnson vpon the falling out, sayth, that shee asked not her said spirite.
            This examinate sayeth, that Newmans wife beeing at Butlers, and asking a peece of meate, was denyed thereof: whereat shee went a way mourmuring, And then shortely after sent one of her spirites to punishe him vpon the backe: The whiche Tyffin her sayde spirite telleth this examinate was done, whereof hee languisheth and is greatly payned.
            This examinate being asked, whether her white spirit called Tyffin did euer at any time 
                  •
               el her any vntruths, or whether she had foūd it at any

time to tell any thing contrary to truth, saith, that the saide spirite did euer tell her true in any matter shee required of it, and saith, that shee neuer knewe it to tell her otherwise then truth.
            This Exam. being asked, whether she sent any of her spirits to plague or punishe Iohn Strattons childe, confesseth and saith, that the spirite which plagued Strattons wife to the death, did also punishe the saide Strattons childe, saying, that the saide childe shoulde not complaine thereof vntill the mother were departed.
            Note, it is to bee considered, that the saide Ursley Kempe in this her confession hath vttered many thinges well approued and confessed to bee most true: And that shee was brought thereunto by hope of fauour.
         
         
            The Examination and confession of Ales Newman, taken before mee Brian Darcie Esquire, the xxi. of February.
            Condemned.
            THis examinat saith, that shee went vnto the house where the saide Ursley Kempe alias Grey dwelt, and entred into communication with her, and that they fell out greatly: and confesseth that shee saide vnto the saide Ursley

that she knew her to be a witche, but denieth the residue of ye speeches alleadged by the said Urley against this Examinat.
            The said Brian Darcey finding this examinat to bee obstinate, and that shee coulde bee brought to confesse nothing, said to this Examinat, that hee woulde seuer and part her and her spirites a sunder, nay sayth shee this examinat, that shal ye not, for I wil carry thē with me, and hold being taken of her wordes, after some distance she added (if she haue any.)
         
         
            The enformation of William Bonner, taken before me Brian Darcey Esquire, the xxiiii. day of February.
            THe said William Bonner saith, that ye said Elizabeth Bennet and his wife were lovers and familiar friendes, and did accompanie much together: and saith that since Candlemas last his wife hath complained of a lamenesse in her knee, and that sithence also shee hath been much troubled. And saith also that not ten daies past the saide Elizabeth Bennet being with his wife, shee beeing sickely and sore troubled, the saide Elizabeth vsed speeches vnto her, saying, a good woman how thou art loden, & then clasped her in her armes, and kissed her: Wherupon

presently after her vpper Lippe swelled & was very bigge, and her eyes much sunked into her head, and shee hath lien sithence in a very strange case.
         
         
            Vpon the saide enformation made by Vrsley Kempe alias Grey, against Elizabeth Bennet, I Brian Dercey directed my warrāt for her apprehēsiō, wherupō she was brought before me the said Brian, whose confession being taken the 22. day of February.
            Condemned.
            THe said Elizabeth Bennet being charged with the foresaid information, denieth the same in generall, & after many and sundrie demāds being asked, whether she had not a pot or pitcher of earth stāding vnder a paire of staires in her house & wool in the same, in the which vsually the said two spirits did lie, denied ye same with many othes, saying, yt she was wel assured yt she had none such, wherupō it was said to her, if it be proued to your face, what will you say to al the other matters you haue bin charged with, are they true? To that she made answere & said yea: Then was the pot brought before her, the which she then confessed to be her pot, but denied yt the wool therin was any of hers, thē I calling her vnto mee, saide, Elizabeth as thou

wilt haue fauour confesse the truth. For so it is, there is a man of great cunning and knoweledge come ouer lately vnto our Queenes Maiestie, which hath aduertised her what a companie and number of Witches be within Englande: whereupon I and other of her Iustices haue receiued Commission for the apprehēding of as many as are within these limites, and they which doe confesse the truth of their doeings, they shall haue much fauour: but the other they shall bee burnt and hanged. At which speeches shee the saide Elizabeth falling vpon her knees distilling teares confessed as heereafter followeth.
            Saying, that one William Byet dwelt in the next house vnto her three yeres, saying, yt the first yeere they did agree reasonably well, but ere the seconde yeere passed they fell out sundry and oftentimes, both with this examinat & her husbande▪ Byet calling her oftentimes olde trot and olde witche, and did banne and curse this examinat and her Cattell, to the which this examinat saith, that shee called him knaue saying, winde it vp Byet, for it wil light vpon your selfe: and after this falling out this examinat saith, that Byet had three beastes dyed, whereof hee seeing one of them somewhat to droupe, hee did beat the saide Cowe in such sorte, (as this

Examinat saith, that shee thought the said Cow did die thereof.
            This examinat saith further, that Byets wife did beate her swine seuerall times with greate Gybets, and did at an other time thrust a pitchforke through the side of one of this examinats swine, the which Durrant a Butcher did buie, and for that when hee had dressed it, it prooued A messell, this Examinat saith, shee had nothing for it but receiued it againe, &c.
            This examinat saith also, that aboue two yeeres past there came vnto her two spirits, one called Suckin, being blacke like a Dogge, the other called Lierd, beeing red like a Lion, Suckin this examinat saith is a hee, and the other a shee. And saith, on a time as this examinat was comming from mill, the spirite called Suckin came vnto her and did take her by the coate, and helde her that shee coulde not goe forwarde nor remooue by the space of two houres, at the which (this examinat saith) she was much amased, and shee saith, that the spirite did aske her if she this examinat woulde goe with it: Whereat shee this examinat saide, In the name of God, what art thou? Thou wilt not hurt mee, at the which speeche it said no, & this Examinat sai
                  •
               h, that shee then prayed deuoutly to Almightie God to deliuer her from it: at which time the spirite

did depart from her vntill shee had gone a good way, and being come within xxx. or xl. rodes of her house, this examinat saith, that the said spirite came againe vnto her and tooke her by the coates behind, & held her fast, whereat this examinat saith, that she desired God to deliuer her frō that euill spirite, and then that did depart to the Wel. And this examinat saith, yt within one houre after, the same same spirite came againe vnto her she being a sifting of her meale, & saith, the same remained with her vntill she had laied her leauen, and then departed.
            The saide examinat saith, that the next day shee being a kneading of her bread, the said spirite came againe vnto her, and brought the other spirite with it called Lierd, and that one of them did aske her why she was so snappish yesterday, to that this examinat saith, that shee made answere, I trust I am in the faith of God, and you shall haue no power ouer mee, at which wordes this Examinat saith, the saide spirites departed.
            Then shee this examinat saith, that shee beeing a making of a fire in her Quen, the said spirits came againe vnto her, and tooke her by the legge, this examinat feeling it to take her by the leg saith she said, God and the holy Ghost deliuer me from the euill spirites, at which words

this examinat saith, that the said spirites did depart to her thinking.
            But this examinat saith, that within halfe an houre after she hauing a fier fork in her hād, and beeing a stirring of the fire in the Quen, the spirit (called Suckin) came vnto her & tooke this examinat by the hippes, and saide, seeing thou wilt not be ruled, thou shalt haue a cause, & would haue thrust this examinat into ye burning Ouen, & so had (as this examinat saith) but for the foresaide forke, but this examinat striuing and dooing what shee coulde to her vttermost, the saide spirite burnt her arme, the which burning is apparaunt and euidently too bee seene, and when it had thus doone it did depart.
            And this Examinat saith, that about a moneth after or more, shee beeing a walking in a croft neere vnto a Barne called Heywoods Barne, the spirite called Suckin came and followed this examinat, she spying the same as she looked backe, at the sight thereof this examinat saith, yt her eies wer like to start out of her head: then she saith yt she did beseech God to gouerne and guide her from the euill spirites, whereupon shee saith they did depart,
            But the same euening she this examinat being set a milking of a red Cowe with a white face,

saith that Suckin and Lired came againe vnto her, and saith that Suckin appeared at that time in the likenesse of a blacke dogge, and Lired in the likenesse of a Hare, the one sitting on the one side of her, the other on the other side of her within lesse then two yardes: And saith, that the Cowe shee was then a milking of, snorted and ranne away, and brake her paile and spilt al her milke, neither coulde she get the said Cow any more that night to stand still, and saith, that for the losse thereof her husband did much chide her, but shee woulde not tell him what was the cause: and she praying to the father, the sonne, & the holy ghoste, saith that they did depart, and that shee sawe them not a quarter of a yeere after, nor aboue three times since Midsommer last.
            The said exam. saith, that about that time they appeared againe vnto her, and saith that a little before there was a falling out betweene her and the saide Byet, whereupon and for that Bye
                  •
                had oftentimes misused her this examinat and her Cattell, shee saith, that shee caused Lyard in ye likenes of a Lion to goe & to plague the saide Byets beastes vnto death, and the spirite returning tolde this examinat that it had plagued two of his beastes, the one a red Cow, the other a blacke. And saith that the spirite

tolde her, that hee plagued the blacke Cowe in the backe, and the read Cowe in the head.
            This Examinate saieth further, that aboute Whitsontyde last past, the spirit called, Suckin, did come againe at that tyme vnto her, sayeing to this Examinate, that hee had mette Byettes wife two seuerall tymes, tellyng this Examynate, that it mette her once in this Examinates yarde, and the next day after it sayde, that it met her at the style, going into her grounde: And saieth it tolde this Examinate, it had plagued y• said Byets wife to the death. She this Examinate saying it was done by the spirite, but not by the sending of this Examinate. The sayde spirite sayeing▪ I knowe that Byet and his wife haue wronged thee greatly, and doone thee seuerall hurtes, and beaten thy swyne, and thrust a pytchforke in one of them, the which the spirite sayde to haue doone, to winne credit with this Examinate.
            And this Examinate saieth further, that aboute Lammas last past: For that the sayde William Byet had abused her, in calling her olde trot, old whore, and other lewde speaches, shee this Examinate, caused the spirite, called Suckin, to goe and plague the sayde Willyam Byette where that woulde: The which the sayd spyrite did, and at the retourne of it, it

tolde this Examinate, that it met Byet in the barne yarde, and that it had plagued him in the hippes, euen vnto death: And saith she gaue it a rewarde of mylke: and saith, that many tymes they drinke of her milke bowle. And being asked how shee came by the sayde spirites, she confessed and sayde, that one Mother Turner did sende them vnto her to her house (as shee thinketh) for that she had denyed the sayde Mother Turner of mylke: And when, and as often as they did drinke of the mylke: This Examynate saith they went into the sayd earthen pot, and lay in the wooll.
         
         
            The Examynation and Confession of Annis Glascocke, wife of Iohn Glascocke, sawyer, taken before me Bryan Darcey Esquyre, the xxiiii. of February.
            TThis Examinate beeing charged by Mychel the shoomaker, that a womā, sōtimes fellowe with her in the house, shoulde reporte her to bee a naughtie woman, and a dealer in witchcrafte, denyeth that she knewe anye such woman, or that any such speaches were vsed vnto her.
            This Examinat being charged that one sparrowe being lodged in her house, shoulde heare a straunge noise or rumbling since Christmas

last, saith, that she made a noyse by remouing of boards one night for that she woulde haue him to lye in an other chamber.
            This Examinate saith also, that long sithence she dwelt by the space of one quarter or more with her brother Edward Wood, and that at seueral tymes in that time certain leddē weights and great stones were cast into the house, and diuers straunge noyses of rumblinges hearde: the which weights & stones came alwayes neerest one Arnoldes head, being then a boorder in that house, and saith that Arnoldes wife was accompted a witch: And was suspected to cause the same stones to be cast, to the intent to dryue her husband from boording there being in Ielosie of this Examinate: She being at that tyme not aboue the age of xx. yeares.
            This Examinate saith, that by many yeares past she was much troubled with straung aches in her bones, and otherwise: wherof she consumed by the space of two or three yeares: And saith, yt she was told, that about Sudbery there dwelt one Herring (named to bee a Cawker) to whome she went, who declared to this Examinate, yt she was haūted with a witch (naming Arnolds wife) And that she should not escape death wtout she had some remedy, wherupon this examinat saith, yt she praied ye said Herring to helpe her.

And that hee then deliuered vnto her a little lynnen bagge of the breadth of a groate, full of small thinges like seedes, and willed her to put the same where her payne was most, the which shee proued by sewing it vppon her garmente, neare the place where her greefe was: And after a while this Examinate saieth, she recouered, and was well.
            This Examinate denyeth that euer she hurt the base Childe, which Pages his wife kept, or that there was anye falling out betweene this Examinate and her: And sayeth, that shee knoweth not, whether the sayde Childe bee a base Childe or not.
            This Examinate beeing charged, that shee sent a spirite to plague Michell, the shoomakers Childe, or that shee had bewitched the said Childe, denyed that shee had doone eyther of both. And she being asked, whether she euer fell out with one Fortune or his wife, or whether shee hurt any of their children, saieth, that there was no falling out betweene them, or that shee hurt any of his Children.
            Annys Letherdall and Margaret Sympson women appoynted, to see and view the body of this Examinate: sayde, and affyrme vppon their credites, that vpon the left side of the thighe of this Examinate, there be some spots,

and vpon the left shoulder likewise one or two▪ Which spottes bee like the sucked spots, that Ursley Kempe hath vppon her bodie.
            This Examinate and the sayde Ursley Kempe alias Greye, being brought before mee face to face, the sayde Ursley then charged this Examinate to haue plagued and punyshed Mychelles Childe, whereof it dyed: And also Fortunes wiues Childe, whereof it languyshed. At which speaches this Examinate vsed outragious wordes, calling the sayde Ursley whore, saying, shee would scratch her: for shee was a Witch, and that shee was sure shee had bewitched her: For that shee coulde not nowe weepe.
         
         
            The Confession and Examynation of Ales Hunt, the Wife of Willyam Hunt, taken before me Bryan Darcey Esquyre, the xxiiii. of February.
            THe sayd Ales Hunt beeing asked, whether there was anye falling out beetwene this Examinate, and Haywarde of Frowycke, or his Wyfe: saieth, there was none: But rather shee had cause to be beeholding vnto them: saying, that Haywardes wife did christen her a Childe. And she being charged to haue a spi
                  •
               it

in a potsharde, which Ursleye Kempe had seene, denyed that shee had anye such, or that shee had plagued Haywardes Cattell with that or with any other spirite.
            This Examinate being asked, if she neuer did feede her spirits with mylke out of a lyttle trenyng dishe, sayde no: the which dyshe was brought by the Constable from her house, and then shewed to this Examynate, the which shee denyed to bee her dyshe, or that she had any such in her house.
            This Examinates warrant beeing made, and to her read, and shee committed to the Counstable to be carryed to the Gaile, desired to speake alone with mee the saide Bryan Dar
               
                  •••
               : wherevpon I wente into my Garden, and this Examinate followed mee, shee then falling vppon her knees with weeping teares, confessed and sayde, that shee had within vi. dayes before this examination, two spirits, like vnto little Coltes, the one blacke, and the other white: And saith she called them by the names of Iacke and Robbin: And that they tolde her, that the sayde Ursleye Kempe woulde bewray her this Examinate, and willed her therefore to shift for her selfe. And so they went from her, and sithence this Examinate saith shee sawe them not.
            
               This Examinate saith, that her sister (named Margerie Sammon) hath also two spirites like Toades, the one called Tom, and the other Robbyn: And saith further, her sayde Syster and shee had the sayd spyrites of their Mother, Mother Barnes: who departed out of this world within xii. dayes before the taking of this examination.
         
         
            The Examination and confession of Margery Sammon, taken before mee Brian Darcie Esquire, the xxv. of February.
            THe sayde Margerie Sammon, sister to the sayde Ales Hunt, daughter to one mother Barnes lately deceased, (which mother Barns was accompted to bee a notorious Witche) saith, that shee remayned at home with her mother by the space of halfe a yeare, and saith shee was with her mother seueral times, when shee laye sicke, and also at the houre of her death: But denyeth the hauing of any spirites of her sayd Mother, or that her mother had any to her knowledge.
            The said Margery yt night being cōmitted to ye ward & keeping of ye counstable, and the nexte daye brought before mee the saide Bryan in the presence of her sister Ales Hunte, And beeing charged by her sayde Syster to haue

two spirites like toades, giuen her by her mother at her death, vtterlye denyed the same saying, I defie thee, though thou art my sister, saying she neuer sawe anye such: At which speaches her sister taking her aside by the arme, whyspred her in the eare: And then presentlye after this Examinate with great submission and many teares, confessed that she had two spirites delyuered her by her mother, the same day shee departed. And that shee this Examinate caryed them awaye with her in the euening, they beeing in a wicker basket, more then half full of white and blacke wooll: And that she asking her mother what shee should doe with them, she bad her keepe them and feede them: This Examinate asking wherewithall: her mother answered, if thou doest not giue them mylke, they will sucke of thy blood: And sayeth, she called them by the names of Tom and Robbin. And this Examinate beeing asked how often she had giuen them meate sithence shee had them, saieth and confesseth, that she fed them twise out of a dyshe with mylke: And beeing asked when shee fed them last, this Examinate sayde, vppon Twesday last past before this examination, and that with mylke.
            This Examinate sayeth also, that when shee tooke them of her mother, shee sayde vnto her,

if thou wil
                  •
               e not keepe the said spirits, then send them to mother Pechey, for I know she is a Witch, and will bee glad of them. And saith further, that shee hearing, that Ursleye Kempe was apprehended, and fearing that shee shoulde bee called in question, saieth thereupon shee tooke the saide spirites beeing in a basket, and in the euening wente into the grounde of her Master, and so into Reads grounde, and bad them goe to the sayde mother Pechey: At which wordes they skypped out of the said basket, and wente before this Examinate, shee this Examinate sayeing, all euill goe with you, and the Lorde in heauen blesse mee from yee: And sayeth, shee myghte see the sayde spyrites goeing towarde a barred style, goeing ouer into Howe lane: And when they came at the style, shee saieth, they skypped ouer the same style and wente the readye waye to mother Pecheyes house: And saieth shee verilye thinketh the sayde mother Pechey hath them.
         
         
            The Examination and confession of Ioane Pechey widdowe, taken before mee Brian Darcie Esquire, the xxv. of February.
            
               This Examinate Ioan Pechey beeing asked how olde shee was, saith, shee is threescore yeares and vpwardes: And saith that shee hath dwelt in the Towne of S. Oseys aboue xl. yeares: And saith she knew Mother Barnes, and she knewe her to bee no witch, or that she euer heard her to bee accompted, or to haue skill in any witchery. And she being asked whether shee was with her when she lay vpon her death bed, saith that she was not.
            This Examinate also denyeth, that she hath or euer had any Puppettes, Spyrites or Maumettes: Or that shee had any Spirites, which she bought, or were conueyed vnto her by Margerie Barnes, or sent by any other sithence the death of Mother Barnes.
            This Examinate also denyeth, that euer shee sayde to any of her neighbours, or to any other person in secrete sorte or meerely, that she knew or could tell what any man in the Towne at aany time dyd or sayed, when she her selfe listed, or would know.
            This Examinate saith, that she neuer vsed any of those speaches, which Ales Hunte hath enformed against her, As yea art thou so sawsie? art thou so boulde? thou were not best to bee so bould, for if thou beist, thou shalt haue Simonds sauce.
            
               This examinate being asked, what she thought of the sodaine death of Iohnson the Collector, saith, he was a very honest man, and dyed very sodainly: And saith she heard, that one Lurkin shoulde saye, that hee heard Iohnson to saye, that Mother Newman had beewitched him. And beeing asked of whome shee heard it, shee aunswered shee coulde not tell: And sayth that shee her selfe neuer vsed anye harde speaches against the sayde Iohnson.
            This Examinate beeing charged to haue willed her Sonne Phillip Barrenger, beeing of the age of xxiii. yeares to lye in hedde with her, denyeth that shee had so doone, other then shee had willed him at some tymes to lye vppon the bedde at her backe.
            But the saide Phyllyppe beeing examined, confesseth and saith, that manye times and of late hee hath layne in naked bed with his owne mother, being willed and commaunded so to doe of her.
            This Examinate beeing asked, whether she had any Cat in her house, sayth that shee hath a Kyttyn, and a little Dogge. And beeing asked, what coulour the Kyttyn was of, shee this Examinate sayed she could not tell, saying yee maye goe and see.
         
         
            
            The Information of Iohn Sayer one of the Constables of Thorpe, taken before mee Bryan Darcey Esquyre, one of her maiesties Iustices against Als Manfielde, the xiii. daye of March.
            THe saide Iohn saieth, that aboue one yeare sithence hee had a Thetcher, which was a thetching of a barne of his, neere Mother Manfieldes house, and that then shee the sayde Ales came vnto the Thetcher, and would haue had him to
                  •
               hetche ouer an ouen of hers, wherunto this Thetcher made aunswer and sayde, hee woulde doe it, if his mayster woulde let him, but els hee woulde not doe it, whereunto shee sayde, hee had beene as good as to haue willed you to doe it. For I will bee euen with him. And hee saieth, that within a while after, hee had occasion to come by the house of the sayde Ales Manfielde with his carte, well neere three quarters loaden, and beeing before her doore vppon the harde grounde: saieth, his carte stoode, that hee coulde not make it goe forwarde nor backwarde, by the space of one howre and more: The which he saieth, hee thought to bee doone by some wit
               
                  •
               herie, which the sayde Ales Manfielde then 
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            
            The Information of Robert Sanneuet, taken before me Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her M. Iustices the xiiii. of March.
            THe sayde Robert saieth, that aboute xv. yeeres past, ther dwelt with him the daughter of Elizabeth Ewstace, and that for some lewde dealynges, and behauiour by her doone, hee saieth, hee vsed some threatning speeches vnto her, beeing his seruaunt: And that shortlye after shee wente home to her sayde mother, and telled her of her maysters vsing of her: And the nexte daye hee saieth, as hee was a sitting by his fire side, his mouth was drawne awrye, well neere vppe to the vpper parte of his cheeke: whereuppon hee sayeth, hee sent presentlye to one of skill to come vnto him, who came vnto him, And that hee seeing him in that case, tooke a lynnen cloath, and couered his eyes, and stroake him on the same side with a stronge blowe, and then his mouth came into the right course: and hee sayeth that hee willed this Examinate to put awaye his seruaunt, and that out of hand: the which he saieth he did.
            This Examinat saith, that iii. yeres sithence his brother Crosse was taken verye sickly, and at tymes was without any remembrance, & that he sent for this Examinat, & when he came vnto

him, hee tolde him that Margaret Ewstace had bewitched him, and brought him into that weak state hee then was at: Wherto this Examinate saith, that if that bee so, hee then wished a spyt red hotte and in her buttocks, which speaches of his, hee sayth was carryed by one then in the house vnto the saide Mother Ewstace, and this Examinate saith, that shee seeing a neighbour of his going towardes this Examinates house, asked her whether shee was going, and she answered vnto this Examinates house: Wherevnto she the sayd Mother Ewstace should say, naye goe not thyther, for he saith I am a witch: And sayed, his wife is with Childe and lustie, but it will bee otherwise with her then hee looketh for: Whereuppon this Examinate saith, that his wife had a most straunge sicknes, and was deliuered of childe, which within short time after dyed.
            This Examinate saith, that the Sommer after he milked vii. mi
                  •
               che beasts, and that al that sommer many and very often tymes, his sayde beasts did giue downe blood in steede of milke and that hee had little, or no profit by them: And hee saith that about iiii. monethes after many of his hogges did skippe and leape aboute the parde in a straunge sorte: And some of them dyed.
         
         
            
            The Information of Vrsley Kemp Alias Grey, taken at Colchester by Thomas Tey and Brian Darcey Esquires, two of her M. Iustices the ix. of March.
            THis Examinate beeing charged that shee shoulde reporte to seuerall persons that haue comen vnto her, sithence her imprysonment, that Ales Newman shoulde send a spirit to plague the late Lorde Darcey, whereof hee dyed: And shee being asked, whether shee saied so, saith shee sayed, that Tyffyn her white spirit tolde her that Ales Newman had sent a spyrite to plague a noble man, of whome we (meaning the poore) had all rEliefe: The which she sAith she tooke to be the said Lord Darcey, And other wise she sayed not.
         
         
            The Information of Rychard Rosse of little Clapton, taken before mee Bryan Darcey Esquyre, agaynst Henry Cilles and Cysley his wife, the i. day of March.
            THe sayd Richard saith, that about vi. years past, the sayd Henry Cilles wrought with this Examinate in husbandry many and seueral times, & saith yt at one time he the said Henry being at plough in ye said Richardes ground with his plowgh of horses, they being as well and as likely to any mans iudgement, as any mens

horse myght be when they beganne to worke: yet before they had gone twise or thrise aboute the lande, two of his lykest horses fell downe in moste straunge wise, and dyed.
            This Examinate sayeth, that a little before he had denyed the sayde Cillys of two bushels of maulte, which she would haue had for three shillings, but he helde it at tenne groates. And sayeth further, that within a whyle after the sayde Cysleye Cyllis did come vnto this examinates wife, brynging with her a poke, and desired to buye a bushell, or a bushell and a halfe of maulte of her, or as much as her bag would hould: But for that shee the sayd Cysley would not giue her her price, shee departed without hauing anye, vsing many harde speaches at that time: whereupon they fell out.
            This Examinate saieth also, that his wife finding Cylles his cattell in his grounde, did hunt thē out therof, which Cylles his wife seeing, was thereat in a great anger, and gaue her lewd speeches, & saith that presently after, many of his beaste were in a most straung taking: the which he doth say, to be wrought by some witchcraft, or sorcery by ye said Hēry or Cisly his wife.
            This Examinate saieth, that about xii. months & more past, a barn of his stāding in his groūd, a good way of frō his dwelling house wt
               
much corne therein, was in a most sodeine sorte fired and burnt: But (hee saieth) hee cannot charge the said Henry or Cysley his wife, to bee the doers thereof, other then the youngest sonne of the saide Henrie and Cisley, should say heere is a goodly deale of corne, and a man vnknowen shoulde answere there was the diuel
                  •
                store.
         
         
            The enformation of Henrie Sellys, sonne of the saide Henrie, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, the saide day and yeere.
            THe saide Henrie saith, that hee is of the age of ix. yeeres, and that sithence Candlemas last, one night about midnight, there came to his brother Iohn a spirite, and tooke him by the left legge, and also by the litle Toe, which was like his sister, but that it was al blacke: at which time his brother cryed out and said, Father, Father, come helpe mee, there is a blacke thing yt hath me by ye legge, as big as my sister: whereat his father said to his mother, why thou whore cannot you keepe your impes from my childrē
               
                  •
                whereat shee presently called it away frō her sonne, saying, come away, come away, At which speech it did depart.
            This examinat saith, that the next day hee

tolde his mother hee was so afraid of the thing that had his brother by the legge that he swett for feare, and that he coulde scarse get his shirt from his backe: his mother answering thou lyest, thou lyest whoresonne. This Examinat being asked, wherewith hee had seene his mother to feede her Imps and wherein, hee saith, yt she fed them out of a blacke dish, ech other day with milke: and saith, that he hath seene her to carry it vnto a heape of wood and brome standing vnder a crab tree by the house, and being asked what their names were, he saith, that one of them is called by two names which is Herculus, sothe hons, or Iacke, & that is a blacke one, & is a hee, and the other is called Mercurie, and is white, and is a shee: and that their eyes bee like vnto goose eyes, and saith, that he hath seen his mother to remooue foure Brome fagots, and so to creepe into the crabtree roote, whereas they stand and lye vpō a sleese of wooll. And this Examinat saith further, yt the same night Rosse his maide was taken: when his father came home, his mother told him her husbande, that she had sent Herculus to Rosse his maide: and he answered, yee are a trim foole. This examinat saith, that as hee and his mother were comming (they being in Rosse his Bromefield) she said vnto him, take heed ye say nothing.
         
         
            
            The information of Iohn Selles the youngest sonne of Henry and Cysley, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, the third day of March.
            THe said Iohn Selles saith, that he is abou
                  •
                the age of vi. yeeres iii. quarters, & saith▪ ye one night there was a blacke thing like his sister, that tooke him by the legge and that hee cried out, saying, father, father, come helpe me and defende mee, for there is a blacke thing that hath me by the legge: at which he saith, his father said to his mother, ye stinking whore what meane yee? can yee not keepe your imps from my children? & beeing asked what colour they were of, & what they were called, he saith, that one is black, & another is white, & yt he hath hard his mother to call them Imps, & that they haue eyes as big as himselfe: and he saith, yt his father bad his mother put them away or els kill them. And saith, yt a while sithence his mother deliuered thē to one of Colchester (he thinketh his name is Wedon or Glascocke) and saith yt Wedōs wife had a cap to dresse of his mothers, and saith, that they were carried away in a basket at that time. And beeing asked, whether his father or mother bade him that hee shoulde saye nothinge, hee saieth, that h
                  •
               s

mother said vnto him that hee should goe before: a gentleman, and willed him to take heed he telled no tales nor lyes.
            He saith, that his father called one of them, which is the blacke one, Iohn, which he said his father mocked him because his name was so: And his mother called ye white one an Impe. He saith he hath seene his father to feede them out of a blacke dish with a woodden spone, and yt he knoweth the same dishe, & the last time he fed them it was behinde the Bromestacke at ye crabtree. And hee saith, that the man which carried them away gaue his mother a pennie, and that when she should goe to him she should haue another pennie, hee saith at that time his brother was from home at one Gardeners house.
            And being asked, whether euer hee sawe his mother to feede them, he saith, that he hath seene his mother to feed them twise, and that out of a dish with a spone with thinne milke.
            Note also, it is to be considered, that there is a scarre to bee seene of this examinats legge where it was taken, and also the naile of his little Toe is yet vnperfect.
         
         
            The information of Ioan Smith wife of Robert Smith, takē before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, the said day and yeere.
            
               THe said Ioan saith, that one holy day in the after noone sithence Michaelmas last, shee had made her selfe readie to goe to Church, and tooke in her armes her young childe & opening her dore, her mother (grandmother to the child) one redworths wife, and Selles his wife were at the said dore readie to draw the latch, shee this examinat telling her mother she was comming out of dores to Churchward: whereat the grand mother to the child, tooke it by the hand & shoke it, saying, a mother pugs art thou comming to Church? And Redworthes wife loking on it, said, here is a iolie & likely childe God blesse it? after which speeches, Selles his wife saide, shee hath neuer the more children for that, but a little babe to play wtall for a time. And she saith within short time after her said childe sickned and died: But she saith yt her cōscience wil not serue her, to charge the said Cysley or her husband to be the causers of any suche matter, but prayeth God to forgiue them if they haue dealt in any such sort. &c.
         
         
            The examination and confession of Henrie Selles and Cysley his wife, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, the first day of Marche.
            THe said Henry saith, that he hath wrought in husbandry by some long time past with

Richard Rosse of litle Clapton, and yt one time he being at plough, two of his horses vpon a sodaine fell downe and were in most strange taking, but what the occasion should be thereof (he saith) he knew not. And saith, yt he doth not remē
               ber yt he would haue had any mault of the saide Rosse at his price, or yt there was any falling out betweene thē: and denieth yt his childe cried out vnto him, saying, father come helpe me, or that he called his wife stinking whore: and denieth all the residue of the matters in general enformed against him, &c.
            Condemned.
            The said Cysley his wife saith, that she doth not remēber yt Rosse his wife did at any tyme hunt her catell being in her ground, or yt shee vsed any hard speeches to his wife therevpon, or yt shee fel out for yt she could not haue any mault at her price: but she saith at one time she met Rosse his wife, & that there was some talke betweene them, the which shee doeth not remember more then that the saide Rosses wife saide, I shall see at your ende what you are. And being asked if shee knewe not mother Tredsall, shee saith shee knew her, but she denieth, yt she saide if she were a witche, she learned the same of the saide mother Tredsall: and denieth that her childe cryed

out in the night to his father, and all the residue of ye matters ingeneral enformed against her.
            Ales Gilney, Ioan Smith, and Margaret Simson women of credite, appointed by mee Brian Darcey, to view and see the body of the saide Cysley, say, that shee hath vpon her body many spots very suspitious, and the said Margaret saith, that they bee much like the sucked spots, that shee hath seene vpon the body of Ursley Kempe and seuerall other.
         
         
            The enformation of Ales Baxster seruāt with Richarde Rosse, taken by mee Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of the peace, the xix. day of Marche.
            THE saide Ales saith, that about Hallamas last past about foure of the clocke in the after noone, shee went a milking into her masters grounde two closes of from the house, and that she had eight or niene beastes to milke, and saith yt after she had milked all but one, and as shee was a milking of that one, before shee had halfe done, the Cow start and stroke downe her paile, and that shee saw all the rest to make a staring and a looking about: And shee

saith as shee was a making an ende of milking of that Cowe, shee felt a thing to pricke her vnder the right side, as if she had been striken with ones hande, and she saith that after, as shee was going homewardes with her milke neere the style in the same closse, there came a thinge all white like a Cat, and stroke her at the hart, in such sort as shee could not stand, goe, nor speake, and so she remained vntill her said master & two of his workmen did carry her home in a chaire: she saith, she saw the said thing to go into a bush by the style, & that she knew not her master when he came vnto her.
            Robert Smith saith, that about Hallamas last past he wrought wt Richard Rosse, and that about v. a clocke was called by the said Rosse to helpe him to fetch home his maid, & going then with him they found the said Ales his maide sitting leaning against the stile, & in yt case as she could not stand, go, nor speake, and yt he and one other with their masters helpe tooke her vp and brought her home in a chaire.
         
         
            The information of Henrie Durrant, taken by me
                  •
                Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of peace, the 26. day of March, against Ales Hunt.
            THe said Hēry Durrāt saith, yt about the second day of this present month, he went to Colchester

to appeare before the Iustices there to bee bounde from killing of fleshe, and after that hee had so done he saith, that he went with seueral of his neighbours vnto the Castle, to see the witches that were committed thyther, at which time he saith, he talked with Ursley Kemp alias Gray, who then tolde him after some demaunds which hee vsed vnto her, that Ales Hunt and her mother (the widow Barnes) had bewitched his daughter, whereof she dyed, saying, that because they were denied of a peece of Porke at suche time as they came for it, therefore they were offended with you: and saieth further, that hee doth remember that they came vnto him and woulde haue had a peece of Porke, the which for that it was newly dressed, and somewhat whot, he made them answere that he woulde not cut it out.
         
         
            The enformatiō of Richard Rosse and others together, with the confession of Henrie Selles and Cisley his wife.
            The examination and confession of Ales Manfield, taken at Thorpe, and brought before me Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices, the xiii. day of Marche.
            
               Condemned.
            THe saide Ales Manfielde saieth, that shee is of the age of three score and three yeeres or there aboutes, and that about xii. yeeres sithence one margaret Greuell came vnto this examinat and saide, that shee shoulde goe out of her house yt shee dwelt in vnto another house in the towne: And then telled her that she had foure Impes or spirites the whiche shee woulde not carrie with her to that house, for feare they shoulde be espied or seene, and prayed her this examinate that shee woulde keepe them, and also telled her what they woulde doe for her (saying shee should haue them vpon condition that shee the sayde Margaret might haue them at her pleasure, otherwise shee should not haue them) and with what, and howe shee shoulde feede them, and at her desire and request shee sayth that shee was contented to keepe them: And therevpon shee sayeth it was concluded and agreed betweene her and this examinate, that shee the sayde Margaret shoulde haue them as often and as many times as shee would at her pleasure, and that then shee receiued them.
            This examinate being asked, what names they were called by, and of what likenes, saieth that one of thē was called Robin, an other Iack, the thirde William, the fourth Puppet alias Mamet,
               
& that two of them were hees and the other two were shees, & were like vnto blacke Cats, and sayth that she kept them in a boxe with woll therein: And yt they did stand vpō a shelfe by her bed where she lay. This examinate saith also, yt ye said Margaret Grauel hath commen vnto her many & oftē times sithence ye saide agreemēt betweene thē made, & according to ye said condition hath receiued of this examinat ye said imps or spirits: shee this examinat being telled of her some times wherfore she would haue thē, & that some times she knew by asking ye said imps or spirits where they had bin, & what they had done when they returned againe vnto her. And being asked how oftē & whē to her remēbrāce, she this examinat saith, about 7. yeres since ye said mother Grauel came vnto this examinate & told her y• Chestons wife & she were fallē out, & had chiddē very much: & that she gaue her euill speeches, wherevpon shee requested to haue ye spirit Robin to go to plague his beasts: & thē sēt it, which said when it returned, yt Cheston being at plow & leauing worke, yt it had plagued a bullocke of his yt was well liking & lustie, wherof it should pine & die.
            This examinate saith, that the saide Margaret Greuell, well neere two yeres after, sent her spirite Iacke to goe to plague Cheston, vpon the great Toe vnto the death.
            
               This Examinate saieth, that when it returned it tolde her that it had plagued the saide Cheston vpon the Toe euen vnto death, and that it had sucked blood of the saide Margrettes bodie, and that besides it had of her Beere and Breade for the labour: and saith, that shee this examinate gaue it Beare and Breed then also for telling of her.
            This examinate saith also, that fiue yeeres past or there aboutes, her spirit Robin tolde her that Margarette Greuell had sent the saide spirite vnto her husband to plague him, where of he pined aboue halfe a yeere and more, hauing by that meanes many and seuerall straunge sores, and thereof died. And this Examinate saith that, that hee woulde eate as much or more then two men woulde doe, and that it sucked blood vpon the bodye of the saide Margaret for the labour: she this examinate being asked vpō what place, saith the saide spirite did not tell her.
            This examinat saith, that on a time she went vnto the house of Ioan Cheston widow, and desired of her to giue her some Curdes: but shee sayeth shee gaue her none, wherevpon she saith, that shee sent her Impe Puppet alias Mamet to plague her Beastes, where that woulde, and so it did: And that when the saide Impe returned, it tolde this examinate that it had plagued

foure of her Beastes with lamenesse, and that it did sucke blood vpon this Examinates body for a rewarde.
            This examinate sayth, that about two yeres past, one Iohn Sayer did fetch doung out of an Orchard, from a pittes banke, neere this examinates house, and did by reason thereof, gulle a greene place before her doore, wherevpon shee saieth, shee sent her Impe called Puppet alias Mamet to stay the Carte being before the dore, the which it dyd, and shee saieth that shee sawe him and others to lift at the wheeles, and to set his hauser rope, the which did litle good, and that the same hauser rope and other of his horse harnesse burst a sunder, and shee saieth, shee gaue her said Impe Beere for the labour.
            This examinate saieth, that litle before Michaelmas last, her saide foure Impes saide vnto her, saying, I pray you Dame giue vs leaue to goe vnto little Clapton to Celles, saying, they woulde burne Barnes, and also kill Cattell, and shee saith, that after their returne they tolde her that they had burnt a barne of Rosses with corne, and also tolde her that Celles his wife knewe of it, and that all they foure were fedde at Cels house by her al ye time they were away frō this examinate, wc shee sayeth was about a seuennight: An
                  •
                that Puppet sucked vpon this examiaminates

left shoulder at their returne vnto her: And the rest had beere.
            This examinate saith, that William, one of her Impes not aboue a seuēnight before her apprehension, tolde her that shee shoulde be called in question, and bad her shift for her self: saying, they woulde nowe depart from her and goe vnto saint Osees vnto mother Gray, mother Torner, or mother Barnes two daughters, but to which of them it was that they would goe shee doth not nowe remēber: but they told her yt they to whō they wēt had hurt mē & womē to death, & seueral mēs cattel and other thinges.
            This examinat saith, yt about a quarter of a yere since, she wēt vnto ye house of mother Ewstace to speake wt her, at wc time she saith, shee saw three imps wc she had stāding in a yearthē pot in ye one side of her house next ye heath, & saith that one of thē was white, ye other gray, & the third blacke, & saith they were like cats. This examinat saith also, that her white spirit told her, yt mother Ewstace their dame, sent her impes to hurt a childe, whereof it shoulde pine and become lame, but whose childe shee remembreth not.
            Also this examinate saith, yt vpon some conference between mother Ewstace & her, shee this examinate told mother Ewstace, yt mother Greuel did plague her husbād, wherof he died, which

was done by her spirit Robin: & she saith that she also told mother Ewstace, yt mother Greuel sēt her spirite Iacke to plague Chestō to the death: but what answere she the said mother Ewstace then made, shee nowe remembreth not.
            This examinate saith, that about a yere since the said mother Grauel told her, that she had caused her impes to destroy seuerall brewinges of beere, & batches of bread, being asked where, she saith a brewē at Reades, a brewē at Carters, and a brewē of three or foure bushelles of malte at Brewses.
            The said confession being made by the saide Ales in maner and forme aforesaid, I the saide Brian in the presence of they cunstables & other the Townesmen of Thorpe, sayde as I had seuerall tymes before vnto the sayde Ales, what a danger it was, and howe highly shee should offende God if shee shoulde charge any person with any thing vntrue, and also telled her that her saide confession should bee read agayne vnto her, willing her that if shee hearde any thinge read that she knew was not true, that she should speake, and it shoulde be amended, the which being done, shee sayde her confession was true, and the sayde Margaret and Elizabeth beeing then also called before mee, shee affirmed her confession to their fa
                  •
               es.
         
         
            
            The enformation of Thomas Death & Marie his daughter, taken by me Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices, the xv. day of March.
            THe sayde Thomas Death saith, that about two yeeres sithence, there was a great falling out betweene this examinates wife and the sayde Cisly Celles, for that one George Battell hauing put a child of his to the nursing and keeping of the saide Cisley, and after he taking the saide childe away from her, and put the same to this examinates wife to be nursed & kept, wherevpon at the next meeting of the sayde wiues, the saide Celles his wife chid and rayled at her, and saide, thou shalt loose more by the hauing of it, then thou shalt haue for the keeping of it, & within one moneth after (as he now remembreth) he saith that a child of his, of the age of foure yeres, being in good liking and well, went but out of the doores into the yarde, who presently fell downe dead, and after by helpe being brought to life, the saide childe was in a pitious case, and so died presently.
            This examinate saith, that hee had presently after seuerall Swine the which did skippe and leape about the yarde, in a most straunge sorte, and then died. And he saith that ouer night he had

a Calfe which was very fatt, and the next morning he found the same dead.
            This examinate saith, that hee hauing bin at sea and newely arriued at Ipeswitch, a messenger which was newely come from his wife, by chaunce mette him, who told this examinate that his daughter Marie was taken very strangly, and lay in a most pitious case, saying he had brough
                  •
                her water to carry vnto a Phisition to haue his opinion thereof: Wherevpon this examinate saieth, that hee and the messenger went therewith vnto one Berte dwelling in that Towne, and shewed him the same, hee sayeth, he asked him if that his daughter were not bewitched: But hee saide that hee woulde not deale so farre to tell him, wherevpon hee not satisfied to his minde, met after with an acquaintaunce of his, and asked him where hee might goe to a cunning man, telling him in what case his daughter lay in: who then sent him to a man whome he knewe not, nor his name hee nowe remembreth not, with whome after hee had conferred and shewed his daughters saide water: This examinate sayeth, hee tolde hym if hee had not commen with some great haste to seeke helpe▪ hee had come too late: And this examinate

sayeth, that hee toulde him that within two nyghtes after the parties that had hurte his daughter shoulde appeare vnto her, and remedie her: And hee sayeth, that hee him selfe did not then come home, but went to sea: But hee sayeth hee sent his messenger home with thinges that were to bee ministred vnto his said daughter.
            This examinate sayeth, that when he came home, his wife tolde him that the next nyght after his daughter had receyued the thinges ministred vnto her, that shee heard a noyse like a groning, and that shee did arise and went vnto her daughter, and asked her howe shee did: wherevnto her daughter made answere and sayed, ah mother that you had commen a little sooner, you shoulde haue seene Celles wife and Barkers wife here standing before mee.
            Marie Death, daughter of the sayd Thomas Death, sayeth, that about two yeeres sithence vpon a Sunday, shee was taken with an ache or numnes from her necke down her backe all ouer: And shee sayeth, that after her mother had ministred thinges vnto her sente from a Phisition: The nexte nyght after shee sayeth

shee hearde a voyce, saying vnto her, looke vp, at which shee saieth shee lifted vp her eyes, and then did see Celles wife and Barkers wife standing before her in the same apparell that they did vsually weare. And shee this examinat sayeth, shee thought they saide vnto her bee not afraide, and that they vanished away, as shee thinketh it was about midnight, And the nexte day after, this examinate saieth, shee amended, and was in case to arise without help, where afore two or three coulde scarce turne her in her bed as shee lay.
         
         
            The enformation of Ioan Cheston widowe, Iohn Carter and other the inhabitantes of the Towne of Thorpe, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of the peace, the xiii. day of March▪ against Ales Manfielde.
            THe sayde Ioan saieth, that in sommer last▪ mother Manfielde came vnto her house and requested her to giue her Curdes, shee saith that answere was made that there was none, and so shee departed. And within a while after some of her cattell were taken lame & could not trauell to gather their meat, so that her seruants were cōstrained to mow down grasse for thē by

the space of eyght dayes, shee sayeth, that afterwardes the saide mother Manfielde came agayne vnto her, and demaunded Curdes, and shee sayeth, that shee then 
                  •
               elled the 
                  •
               aide mother Man
                  •••
               lde, that shee had bewitched her Cattell, and that shee then sayde vnto her, that if her cattell did no
                  •
                amend and become well, shee would burne her: wherevpon shee sayeth, that her cattell did amende, and within a very shorte while after were as well as before.
            Lyndes wife sayeth, that the sayde Mother Manfielde came vnto her, and asked her a mease of Mylke, who answered that shee had but a little, not so muche as woulde suckle her calfe, whereat shee departed: and shee sayeth, that that nyght her Calfe dyed, being verye lustie, and xx. dayes olde.
         
         
            The enformation of Iohn Carter & others of Thorpe, taken by mee Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices, the xx. day of March, agaynst Margarette Greuell.
            
               Continued in prison.
            
            THe saide Iohn sayeth, that on a tyme Margaret Greuell came vnto this examinates

house, desiring her to haue Godesgood, whiche was denied her, and sayeth that within a fewe dayes after his folkes went in hande with brewing: But of two brewinges after they coulde make no beere, but was fayne to put the same to the swill Tobbe, whiche was halfe a Seame at a brewing, & sayth, yt the third tyme they went to Brewing with the like quantitie, and that his sonne beeing a tall and lustie man, of the age of xxxvi. yeeres, was wished to take his Bowe and an arrowe, and to shoote to make his shaft or arrowe to sticke in the Brewing Fatte, and that he shotte twise and coulde not make the same to sticke, but at the thirde time that hee shotte, hee made the same to sticke in the brewinge Fatte, and after hee sayth they coulde brewe as well as before.
            Nicholas Stricklande Butcher, sayeth, that Margaret Greuell sent her sonne vnto him for a Racke of Mutton, hee hauing newely killed a Mutton, saying, the same was whot and that he coulde not cutte it out, and sayeth, that hee 
                  •
               a
                  •
                him come agayne in the after noone, and the Munday after his wife seething Mylke for the breakefaste of his woorkfolkes, the same stancke and was bytter: And sayeth within fewe dayes

after his wife went to chearne her Creame that shee had gathered, and that shee was from the morning vntill tenne of the clocke in the night 
                  •
                Chearning, and coulde haue no butter: the whiche this examinate seeing, hee sayeth hee caused his wife to powre the saide Creame into a Kettle, and to set it vpon the fire, the whiche was done: And making a great fire vnder it, this examinate sayeth, they coulde not make it to seeth ouer: Then this Examinate sayeth, that hee seeeing it woulde not doe, hee sayeth hee tooke the kettell off the fire, and powred the one halfe thereof into the fire, and the other halfe hee let stande in the Kettle, the whiche hee sayeth stancke in suche exceeding sorte, as they coulde not abyde in the house. And this examinate sayeth, that the seconde time that his wife went to to chearne her Creame, shee continued a chearning and coulde haue no butter, but that it was as the other, the which hee sayeth, his wife was constrayned to put it into ye 
               
                  •
               wil Tub. And after yt this Examinate saith, that the head and master Cowe of fiue beastes did also cast her Calfe, and presentlye after fell a hauleynge, the whiche hee fearyng that it woulde haue dyed, saying, that he fed it and killed it.
         
         
            
            The enformation of Felice Okey widowe, taken by mee Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of the peace, the xx. day of March▪ against Elizabeth Ewstace.
            THe saide Felice sayeth, that shee was the late wife of Thomas Crosse, and that shee on a time finding the geese of Elizabeth Ewstace in her grounde, did driue them out, and that by mischaunce one of her geese was hurt: whereat the sayde Elizabeth 
                  •
               ell out exceeding lye with this Examinate, and gaue her harde speeches, saying, that thy husbande shall not haue his health, nor that whiche hee hath shall not prosper so well as it hath done, and that shee also sayde, thou haste not had so good lucke with thy gooslings, but thou shalt haue as badde: And shee sayeth, that neuer after that shee coulde haue any of them geese whiche shee her selfe kept: and also the same night shee sayeth, that one of her Kine gaue downe 
                  •
               lood in steede of mylke, and after for the space of viii. dayes.
            THis examinate saith, that her late husbande T. Crosse, was takē in a strāge sort, & therof

pyned, and sayeth, that on a time as her said husbande was a walking in his grounde, hee was ca
                  ••
                amongest B
                  ••
               hes, and was in that case that hee coulde neyther see, heare, nor speake, and his face all to bee scratched: and shee sayeth, that hee beeing in that strange case, when hee came to his memorie, hee woulde alwayes crye out vpon the sayde Elizabeth euen vnto his dying day, and woulde say that sithence shee the sayd Elizabeth had threatned him he was consumed, and that shee had bewitched him.
         
         
            The examination of Lawrance kempe taken before me Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices, the xx. day of Marche, against Vrsley kempe.
            THe sayde Lawrence sayeth, that his late wife was taken in her backe, and in the priuie partes of her bodye, in a very extreame and most straunge sorte, and so continued about three quarters of a yeere, and then died▪ and hee sayeth, that his saide wife did tell him seuerall times that Ursley kempe his sister, had forspoke her, and that shee was the onely cause of that her sicknesse.
            
               This examinat saith, that his saide wife did tell him that two yeeres before shee mette the said Ursley his sister vpon Eliots heath, & that she fell vppon her, & then tooke vp her clothes and did heat her vpon the hippes, and otherwise in wordes did misuse her greatly.
            This examinat saith, that when his wife lay a drawing home, and continued so a day and a night, all the partes of her body were colde like a dead creatures, and yet at her mouth did appeare her breath to goe and come: and that she so cōtinued in that case, vntil the said Ursley came vnto her without sending for, and then lifted vp the clothes and tooke her by the arme, the which shee had not so soone doone, but presently after she gasped, and neuer after drew her breath and so dyed.
         
         
            The examination and confession of Margaret Greuell, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her Maiesties iustices of the peace, the 24, day of March.
            
               Continued in prison.
            
            THis examinat saith, that she is of the age of lv. yeeres or there abouts, & being charged with the foresaide enformation and confession

made by the said Ales Manfield against her, 
                  •
               e
                  •
               teth the same in generall, and saith, that shee her selfe hath lost seuerall bruings, and bakings of bread, and also swine, but shee neuer did complame thereof: saying, that shee wished her gere were at a stay, and then shee cared not whether shee were ha
                  •
               ged or burnt, or what did become of her.
            This examinat beeing asked, what falling out was or hath beene between Cheston & her, saith, on a time shee went to the saide Ioan Ceston to bu
                  •
               e a penniworth of Rie meale, but shee woulde let her haue none, and faith, she said that it was pitie to doe her any good, saying, that she this examinat had told master Barnish yt shrifes dogge did kil a Doe of his by the parke pale, and saith, that there was none other falling out as shee remembreth.
            This examinat beeing viewed and seene by women, say, that they cannot iudge her to haue any sucked spots vpon her body.
            This examinat and the saide Ales Manfield beeing brought before Brian Darcey, the saide Ales did affirme her confession made by her to her face to be true.
         
         
            
            The Examination and cōfession of Elizabeth Eustace, taken before mee Brian Darcey Esquire, the xiiii. day of marche.
            
               Continued in prison.
            
            THe said Elizabeth Eu
                  •
               tace saith, shee is of the age of liii. yeeres or thereabouts, and denyeth the enformation and confession made by the sayd Ales Manfield ingenerall: Or that euer shee had any Impes or Mamettes saying, out vpon her hath shee tolde anye thing of mee? and shee beeing asked, what conference had been betweene her the & sayd Ales Manfielde saith, that there was none to her remembrance, other then once she went vnto her, and carried her ointment to annoynt her lamenesse that shee was troubled with, and that then there was no conference which she remē
               breth.
            The saide Ales Manfielde in my presence did affirme her confession made against the said Elizabeth to and before her face to face.
         
         
            The enformation of Iohn Wadde, Thomas Cartwrite, Richard Harrison with seueral others the parishioners of little Okeley, taken by mee Brian Darcey Esquire one of her Maiesties Iustices the 16. day of march.
            
               IOhn Wade saith, that about two moneth s
                  •
               
               thence Annis Heard saide vnto him, that shee was presented into the spirituall Courte for a witch, and prayed him to be a meanes to helpe her, that she might answere the same when the dayes were longer: whereunto he said, that hee told her that the Regester dwelt at Colchester, saying, it must be hee that therein may pleasure thee: whereto she saide, that shee woulde goe to Iohn Aldust of Ramsey to speake vnto him, for that he goeth to Colchester that he might speak to the officers for her, and so she departed: this examinat saith, that since that time hee droue fortie sheepe and thirtie lambes to a pasture yt he had at Tendring, beeing thereof well neere fourescore Acres, the which hee had spared by some long time, and knew the same to be a good sheepes pasture, and saith, that after they had bin there viii. or ix. dayes, hee went to see them (hauing neuerthelesse appointed one to looke to them): And at his comming, he found one to bee dead, another to bee 
                  •
               ame, another to sit drowping, and a lambe in the same case by it, whiche all died, and he founde one other with the necke awry, which is in that case to this day, and one other whiche was so weake that it coulde not arise, & this examinat saith, that sithence he with others that presented her, and sithence shee the

saide Annis talked with him, he hath had not so fewe as twentie sheepe and lambes that haue died, and 
                  •
               e lame and like to die: & hee saith, that hee hath lost of his beasts & other cattell, which haue dyed in a strange sort.
            Thomas Cartwrite saith, that after a great winde & snowe wel neere three yeeres sithence, there was an arme or houghe of a tree of his that was blowen downe, whereof Annis Herd had remoued a peece and laid the same ouer a wet or durtie place to goe ouer, which being to this examinat vnknowen, hee tooke the same & the rest and carried it home: the which the saide Annis knowing, that hee had carried the same away, she said, that the churle (meaning this examinat) to a neighbour of hers had carried away the peece of the bough that she had laied to go ouer, saying, that shee woulde bee euen with him for it. After which this Examinat saith, within three nights after, there then beeing a snowe two of his beasts went from all the rest, where as they lay as he might well perceiue by the snowe, and the head Cowe fell ouer a great bancke into a ditch on the other side, and there lay with the necke double vnder her, and the head vnder the shoulder, but a liue, and he saith, he gate it home by good helpe and laied it in his harne, and faith, that it lay fourteene dayes in a

growing and piteous sort, but of all that time woulde eate nothing: whereupon hee saith hee tooke an are & knocked it on the head. And also the other Cowe that was with the said Cow being a caluing in a most strange sorte died, the which this examinat faith, yt hee verily thinketh to be done by some witchery by the saide Annis Herd.
            Bennet Lane wife of William Lane, saith, yt when she was a widdow, Annis Herd beeing at her house she gaue her a pint of milke & also lent her a pish to beare it home, the which dishe she 
                  •
               ep
                  •
                a fortnight or 3. weekes, & then y• girle of the said Annis Herds came to her house on a message
                  •
                & she asked the girle for the dish, & said though I gaue thy mother milk to make her a posse
                  •
                I gaue her not my dish, she this examinat being then a spinning: & so yt girle went home, & as it seemed told her mother, who by her sent her dish home to her yt which girle hauing done her arrand, & being but a while gone: shee this examinat saith, she could no lōger spin nor make a thread to hold, whereat she was so greeued yt she could not spin, she saith, she tooke her spindle and went to the grindstone therewith once or twise, & grownd it as smoth as she coulde, thinking it might be by some ruggednesse of ye spindle that did cause her thread to breake, and so

when she had grownd it as wel as she could, she went againe to worke therewith, thinking that then it would haue done, but it would not do no better then it did before: then she saith, yt shee remembred her 
                  •
               elf and tooke her spindle and put it into ye fire, & made it red hot, & then cooled it gaine and went to worke, and then it wrought as well as euer it did at any time before.
            This examinat saith, that 
                  •
               n other time the saide Annis Herd owed her two pence, and the time came that shee shoulde pay the Lordes rent, and she beeing a poore wom
                  •
               n was constrained to aske her the two pence, and to borow besides (as shee said): whereto she the saide Annis answered, that shee had paied eight or nine shillings that we
                  •
               ke, and shee had it not nowe: saying she should haue it the next weeke, whereto shee this Examinat saide, you must needes helpe me with it now, for this day I must paye the Lordes rent, then shee saide shee must goe borrowe it, and so went and fetched it, saying, there is your money, whereunto shee this examinat answered, and said, now I owe you a pint of milke, come for it when you will & you shall haue it: the which she came for ye next day, & had it with ye better, this examinat saith, yt ye next day she would haue fleet hir milk bowle, but it wold not abide ye fleeting▪ but would rop & role as it were

the white of an egge, also the milk being on the her it did not so soone seath but it would quaile, burne by and stincke, the which shee saide shee thought might be lōg of y• feeding of her beasts, or els that her vessels were not sweete, wherevpon she saith, she s
                  •
               alded her vessels, and scoured them with salt, thinking that might helpe, but it was neuer the better but as before: then she saith, shee was full of care, that shee shoulde loose both milke and creame, then shee saith it came into her minde to approoue another way, which was, shee tooke a horse shue and made it redde hote, and put it into the milke in the vessals, and so into her creame: and then she saith, shee coulde seath her milke, fleete her creame, and make her bu
                  •
               ter in good sort as she had before.
            Andrewe West and Anne saith, that on a time the said Annis Herd came vnto his house, saying, she had been at mill, and that she coulde get neither meale nor bread, at which her speeches hee knowing her neede, saith, hee caused his wife to giue her a peece of a lofe: and that thē he said vnto her▪ Annis, thou art ill thought of for witchcraft, the which she then vtterly denyed yt she coulde or did any such thing: whereunto he saith, his wife saide wee haue a sort of pigges I wo
                  •
               e not what we shall doe with the,

saying, I woulde some body had one or two of them, to that the said Annis said, that if a poore body should haue of them and bestow cost, & that then if they should die it would halfe vndoe thē, and said if her Landlord would giue her leaue to keepe one, she thē wished that she would giue her one of them, whereunto this examinat said, shee should haue one: But for that she came not for it, this examinat saith, that he did thinke that she cared not for it, and after a while one of her neighbours bought two of them, and within ii. or iii. dayes after the said Annis came for one: to whom this examint said, for yt they had not hard no more of her, that he thought she would haue none, and told her that he had sold two of them, and so the said Annis departed and went home.
            This examinat saith, yt his wife the next day sent vnto the said Annis a pound of wooll to be spun: and that she said to the boy that brought it, saying, can she not haue her weeders to spin the same? and that she then said to ye boy, your Aunt might as well giue me one of he
                  •
                pigges, as to Penly. and this examinat saith, that within two houres after, one of the best pigs that he had fel vpon a crying as they stood all together before the dore in the yard, and the rest of the pigs wēt away from yt: at the length the pig that cried folowed stackering as though it were lame in the hinder partes, and yt then he called his weeders

to see in what strange case the pig was in, and asked them what was best to doe therewith, to which some of them said, burne it, other said, cut of the eares & burn them, and so they did, & then the pig amended by & by. and within two daies after this examinats wife met with the said Annis Herd, and shee then burdened her with that she had said to her boy: To the which y• said Annis made answere, yt she did say so: and then this examinats wife told the said Annis in what case her pig was, saying, thou saidest the other day thou hadst no skill in witcherie, his saide wife then said, I will say thou hast an vnhappie tongue. After which, this examinats wife could not brewe to haue any drinke yt was good, so as she was full of care, saying, yt somtimes she put one thing into her brewing fat, sometimes an other thing to see if it could doe it any good, but shee saith, it did none: then she saith one gaue her counsell to put a hot yron into her mesh fat, the which she did, and then shee could brewe as well as she did before.
            Edmond Osborne and Godlife his wife, said that a litle before Christmas last past, he bought at Manitree mault, and brought it home, and said to his wife, good wife, let vs haue good drinke made of it. And the next day shee went in hand to brew the same, and when she had meshed her first worte and did let it goe, that did verye

well: Then his said wife hauing occasion to send her lad to their ground, she bade the lad call at Annis Herds for iii. d. the which shee owed her for a pecke of Aples, and that the lad so did: And she answered him very short, and saide, shee had it not now, saying, she shold haue it as soone as y• Wooll mā came: and the lad came home, & tolde his dame what she had said. And at yt time, she this examinat was readie to meshe ye seconde time, & whē she had done, her mesh 
                  •
               at wrought vp as the fat doth when it was set a worke with good beere, and bare vp a hand breadth aboue y• fat, and as they thrust in a sticke or any other thing, it would blow vp and then sinked againe, then she saith, yt she did heat an yron redde hot, and put ye same into it, & it rose vp no more. And then she let goe, and then shee did seath the wort, and when it was sodden it stancke in suche sorte, as that they were compelled to put ye same in the swill tubbe.
            Richard Harrison Clerk, person of Beamōd saith, that he and his late wife did dwell at little Okely, in a house of his said wife, & that hee the said Richard Harrison had also the personage of Okeley in farme, and about Sommer was tweluemonth, he being at London his wife had a Ducke sitting on certaine egges vnder a Cherrie tree in a hedge, and when the saide

Duck had hatched, his said wife did suspect one Annis Herd a light womā, and a common harlot to haue stolen her duckelins, & that his said wife went vnto the said Annis Herd & rated her and all too chid her, but she could get no knowledge of her ducklins, and so came home & was very angry against the said Annis. & within a short time after, the said Richard Harrison went into a chamber, and there did reade on his bookes for the space of 2. or 3. houres bidding his said wife to goe to bed wt the children, and yt he would come to her, and she so did: and being awhile laid downe in her bed, his wife did crie out: Oh Lord Lorde, helpe me & keepe me, and he running to her, asked her what she ailed? and she said, Oh Lord I am sore afraid, and haue bin diuers times, but that I would not tell you, and said, I am in doubt husband, that yonder wicked harlot Annis Herd doth bewitch me, and ye said Richard, said to his wife, I pray you be content and thinke not so, but trust in God and put your trust in him onely, and he will defend you from her, and from the Diuell himselfe also: and said moreouer, what will the people say, that I beeing a Preacher shoulde haue my wife so weake in faith.
            This examinat saith, yt within two moneths after his said wife said vnto him, I pray you as euer there was loue betweene vs, (as I hope

there hath been for I haue v. pretie children by you I thanke God) seeke som remedie for me against yonder wicked beast (meaning the saide Annis Herd). And if you will not I will complaine to my father, and I thinke he wil see som remedie for me, for (said she) if I haue no remedie, she will vtterly consume me, whereupō this examinat did exhort his said wife as hee had before, & desired her to pray to God, and y• he wold hang her the said Annis Herd if he could proue any such matter. and after he went to the personage, and there he saith he gathered plummes: and the said Annis Herd then came to the hedge side and Anwicks wife with her, and said vnto him, I pray you giue me som plummes sir: and this examinat said vnto her, I am glad you are here you vield strumpet, saying, I do think you haue bewitched my wife, and as truly as God doth liue, if I can perceiue y• she be troubled any more as she hath been, I will not leaue a whole bone about thee, & besides I will seeke to haue thee hanged: and saith, he saide vnto her that his wife would make her father priuie vnto it, and that then I warrant thee he will haue you hanged, for he will make good friends, & is a stout man of himselfe. and sai
                  •
               h, yt then he did rehearse diuers things to her yt were thought she had bewitched, as Geese & Hogges, & as he was comming downe out of the tree, shee the said Annis

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
drinke, she saith, sometimes water & sometimes beere, such drinke as they drunke.
            She this examinat saith, yt her brother somtimes seeing them the Auices and black birdes, to come about him, saith, that he saith they keepe a tuitling and tetling, and that then hee taketh them and put them into the boxes.
            She being asked if she saw them sucke vpon her mother, saith, that the Auices & blackbirdes haue sucked vpon her hands, and vpon her brothers legges: being willed to shew the place, she said, here sucked Aues, & here sucked Aues, and heere sucked Blackbird. And being asked how one spot upon the backe of her hande came so somewhat like the other, she saith the same was burnt.
         
         
            The examination and confession of Annis Herd of little Okeley, taken by me Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of the peace, the xvii. day of March.
            
               Continued in prison.
            
            THe said Annis Herd saith, that she told one of her neighbors that the churle (meaning Cartwrite) had carried away a bough which she had laid ouer a slowe in the high way, and saide that she was faine to goe vp to the anckle euery steppe, and that shee said hee had beene as good hee had not caried it away, for she would fetch as much wood out of his fieldes as that doeth

come vnto. And she saith also that she remēbreth she came vnto goodman Wad, & telled him that she was presented into the spirituall court for a witch, & that thē she desired yt she might answere the same when the dayes were longer.
            Also she confesseth yt Lannes wife gaue her a pinte of milk & lēt her a dish to carie it home in, & that she kept the dishe a fortnight or longer, & thē sent it home by her girle, & also that Lannes wife came to her for ii. d. which shee ought her.
            Also she confesseth that she came to the house of her neighbour West, & telled him that she had bin at mille, but she could get no meale, nor yet no bread, & that he gaue her a piece of a loafe: and she confesseth the speeches that then were of the pigs: And that shee saide to ye b
                  •
               y that brought woll, yt his Aunt might aswell haue let her haue one as Penley. She saith also, yt shee remēbreth yt she came to goodwife Osborne, & bought of her 3. peckes of aples, & confesseth yt shee ought vnto her iii.d. but denieth that the boye or ladde came to her for any money.
            Also she remēbreth that mistres Harisō charged her to haue stollen her ducklings, & that she called her harlot & witch, & confesseth yt she came vnto M. Harison, he being at ye parsonage a gathering of plūms, & that shee prayed him to giue her some plūms: But denieth that she hath any imps Aueses or blacke birds, or any kine called

               Crowe or Donne: And all & euery other thing in generall, or that shee is a witch or haue any skill therein.
         
         
            The enformation of Edward Vpcher, Thomas Rice, and seueral others of the inhabitants of Walton, taken by me Brian Darcey esquire, the xxv. day of Marche.
            THe said Edward saith, yt he & wife being at Colchester, this last weeke, they wēt together vnto the Gaile, to speake wt Ursley Kemp, & then entring into talke wt her, saieth, he asked her if she could tell what sicknes or diseases his wife had, whervnto ye said Ursley thē told him, yt his wife was forspokē or bewitched, he thē asked her by whom, she told him it was by a woman yt dwelt in their town, saying, that ye party hath one of her eares lesse thē ye other, & hath also a moole vnder one of her armes, and hath also in her yard a great woodstacke.
            Ales Miles saith, that shee went to the house of Ioan Robinson for a pound of 
                  •
               ope, at which time shee the saide Ioan was gone from home, And saith that her maide Ioan Hewet told her, that her Dame made her nose bleed, and thē called her Catte to eate ye same, saying she did maruell why her dame shoulde call the Catte to eate her blood.
            Thomas Rice saith, that about xiiii. dayes past,

Ioan Robinson came vnto the house of this examinate, and desired to borrowe a Hayer, the which his wife denyed her, saying, that she was to vse it her selfe, whereat shee departed, and presently after there arose a great winde, whiche was like to haue blowen downe their house. And the next day after one of his Kine could not calue without helpe, it being drawen from her, died, and the Cowe was in danger and did hardly escape.
            And sayeth also, that his wife hath a broode Goose a sitting, that hath been as good for the bringing foorth of her broode as any goose in Walton, and sayeth, that sithence the said Ioan was denied of the hayer, the goose in the night will goefrom her neste, and will not suffer his wife nor none of his folk
                  •
                
               
                  •
               o come neare her, but shee will flie away, so as shee hath lost two of her egges.
            And sayeth also, that he thinketh the same to be done by the said Ioan by some witchcraft.
            Margery Carter saith that about ten yeeres past, the husbande of the sayde Ioan came vnto this Examinates house, and requested this Examinates husbande to hyre a pasture for a Cowe, the whiche shee sayeth was denied him, with aunswere that hee coulde not forbeare it for feare hee might want for his owne beastes.

and that presently after two of his best & likliest beasts in a strāge sort brake their neckes. & saith also yt presēntly after this mischance Ioans husband came vnto this examinats husbād W. Carter, & said, God restore you your losse, nowe you may pastor me a cowe, the which then he did, and then his beasts left breaking of their necks. And saith also, yt about 2. yeeres since, the said Ioans husband would haue bought a house and an acre of ground of W. Carter her husband, the wt hee would not sell vnto him, for yt he would not haue him his neighbour. And ye next day he had a faire ambling mare, for ye which he might haue had 5. li. often times: The wt mare of her selfe came in to ye stable, & presētly was in a great sweat, & did hold her tongue out of her head, & shooke & quaked in a strāge sort, & presētly died, the wt whē it was fleed, a neighbors dog came & fed of it, and thereof presently died.
            Also she saith, not aboue 14. daies past, the said Ioan Robinson came vnto this examinate, & requested to borrow a Heyer, to whō she made answere yt she had vowed not to lend the same: And saith, that wtin 3. daies after, shee had one of her best beasts drowned in a ditche where there was but a litle water.
            Ales Walter saith, yt well nere 4 yeeres past, the said Ioan came vnto her, & requested to bie a pig of her: wherto she saith she woulde lende her

one, but sell her any she would not: whereto the said Ioan said yt she would haue none except she did bye it, & so they parted. And presētly after ye sowe would not let her pigs sucke, but did bite & flye at them, as though shee had bin madde, when they had sucked aboue 7. dayes very well: & shee saith yt she sold of the pigs, the which Ioan Robinson hearing, came vnto her, and requested to bie one of them, which she had for 3. d. and telled her that her sowe did the like, & bad her giue thē milke as it came frō the Cowe and they woulde drinke, which shee approued, and they dranke.
            This examinate saith, that two yeeres since, she going to the house of Ioan Robinson, found her and her husband sitting by the fire, with whō after she had talked, Ioan Robinson required to bye two pigs of her sowe that then was to pige: whereto shee said shee woulde see first what shee should haue her self, and would not then promise her any. And the same night her Some piged two piges in the cote where shee lay, and for the more safetie of them, she tooke a broome faggot and laid it close ouerwharte the dore, because the pigs should not come out, & saith the same night all the farey of pigs being ten, came out ouer the broome sheafe, and stoode one before an other in a tract place lieke horses in a teem, beinge al dead to the number of nine, & the tenth was drowned by the pond side being about a rod frō ye cote.
            
               Allen Ducke saith, that about fiue or sixe yeeres past the saide Ioan came vnto this examinate, and requested to bye a Cheese of his wife, but shee made her answere, that shee coulde sell none, yet neuerthelesse shee was very desirous to haue one, the whiche shee sayeth, shee denyed her, and that shee went away in a great anger. And this examinate sayeth, that the next day he went with his Cart & foure horses therein to fetch a lode of corne, & that his wife & two of her children rid in the Cart. And saith, that as he went towardes the fielde he watered his horses at a ware called the Uicarage ware, whiche horses when they had drunke, he could not gette them out of the water, but was faine to wade to the forhorse head, it beeing about a yarde deepe, and to take him by the head and to lead him out. This examinate saith, that the said Ioan came vnto this examinates wife at two seuerall times to bie two pigges, whereof hee saith she was denied, & presently after he had two pigs that died. And saith, that he assuredly thinketh yt the saide pigs died of some witchcraft which she the saide Ioan vsed, and the like for the staying of his horses being in the water.
            Iohn Brasyer saith, yt about two yeres since the said Ioan Robinson came vnto this examinates house, and requested to bie a sowpigge to weane, the which was a moneth old, wherevnto he told

her he ment to weane it him selfe, and that hee woulde not let her haue it, the which being a fat and a well liking pigge aboue all the rest, the next day died.
            Also this examinate saith, yt sithence Christmas last past, this examinates wife went vnto the sayde Ioan Robinson, to pay her money shee ought vnto her for wares which shee had beeing due vpon scores: And for that she his wife would not pay her her owne reckoning, shee fell out with his wife: And presenely after he had a cow that was drowned in a ditche not a foote deepe with water: Al which he supposeth was done by some witchcraft by the said Ioan.
         
         
            The enformation and confession of Ioan Robinson, taken by me Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Maiesties Iustices of peace, the xxv. day of March.
            THe saide Ioan saith, shee went to the house of T. Rice to borrowe a Heyer two dayes before a flawe of winde which was denied her: but denieth that she hath any impes or caused his calfe to die, or that she hurt her brood goose. Also shee reēmbreth that her husbād wēt to W. carter to bie a house & an acre of groūd, & to hire a cow pastor, & to borrow a Hayer of goodwife Carter. But denieth yt she sēt any impes to hurt any of his beasts, or his ambling mare, or caused any cow of his to be drowned.
            
               Also this examinate saith, that shee went to bye a pigge of Ales Walter, but denieth that she required to bye any that was not pigged of her or of any other at any time, & denieth that shee sent any Impes or spirites to kill any of her pigges, and all the other matters against her enformed shee denieth in generall.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted in London at the tree Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson. 1582.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            The names of xiii. Witches, and those that haue beene bewitched by them.
            ¶ The Names of those persons that haue beene bewitched and thereof haue dyed, and by whome, and of them that haue receyued bodyly harme &c. As appeareth vpon sundrye Enformations, Examinacions and Confessions, taken by the worshipfull Bryan Darcey Esquire: And by him certified at large vnto the Queenes Maiesties Iustices, of Assise of the Countie of Essex, the xxix. of Marche. 1582.
            
               
                  
                     S. Osythes.
                     1
                     The Witches. Ursley Kempe alias Grey
                     bewitched to death
                     Kempes Wife. Thorlowes Childe. Strattons wife.
                      
                  
                  
                      
                     2
                     Ales Newman and Ursley Kempe
                     bewitched to death
                     Leth
                           ••
                        dalles Childe and Strattons wife.
                      
                  
                  
                     Confessed by Ursley and Elizabeth.
                      
                     The sayde Ales and Ursley Kempe
                     bewitched
                     Strattons Childe, Grace Thorlowe,
                     whereof they did languish
                  
                  
                      
                     3
                     Elizabeth Bennet
                     bewitched to death
                     William Byet and Ioan his wife, and iii. of his beasts. The Wife of William Willes and William Willinga
                           ••
                        e.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Elizabeth Bennet
                     bewitched
                     William Bo
                           •
                        ners Wife, Iohn Butler, Fortunes Childe, whereof they did lang
                           ••••
                        .
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Ales Newman
                     bewitched to death
                     Iohn Iohnso
                           •
                         and his Wife, and he
                           •
                         owne husband, as it is thought.
                  
                  
                     Confessed the Cattell.
                     4
                     Ales Hunt
                     bewitched to death
                     Rebecca Dur
                           •
                        ant, and vi be
                           •
                        sts of one Haywa
                           •
                        des.
                  
                  
                      
                     5
                     Cyssey Celles
                     bewitched to death
                     Thomas Deathes Childe.
                  
                  
                     Little Clapton.
                      
                     Cyssey Celles
                     bewitched
                     Rosses mayde, Mary Death Wherof they did languish
                  
                  
                     Thorpe.
                     6
                     Cysley C
                           •
                        lles and Ales Manfielde
                     bewitched Richard Rosses horse and beasts, and caused their Impes to burne a barne with much corne.
                  
                  
                     Confessed by Ales Manfield
                     7
                     Ales Manfielde and Margaret Greuell.
                     bewitched to death
                     Robert Cheston and Greuell husband to Margaret.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Ales Manfield and Margaret Greuell
                     bewitched the widdow Cheston and her husband v. beasts, and one bullocke, and seuerall brewinges of beere, and batches of bread.
                  
                  
                     Thorpe.
                     8
                     Elizabeth 
                           •••
                        sta
                           •
                        e
                     bewitched to death
                     Robert Stann
                           •
                        uettes Childe and Thomas Grosse.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Elizabeth Ewstace
                     bewitched Robert Sanneuet vii. milth bea
                           ••
                        s, which gaue blood in steede of milke, and seuerall of his Swin
                           •
                         dyes.
                  
                  
                     Little Okley.
                     9
                     Annys Herd
                     bewitched to death
                     Richard Harrisons wife, and two wiues of William D
                           •
                        wsinge, as it is supposed.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Annys Herde
                     bewitched Cartwright two beasts, w
                           •
                        de, she
                           •
                        pe and lambs x
                           •
                        . West, swine and pig
                           •
                        , Othorne a brewing of beere, and seuerall other losses of milke and cr
                           ••
                        me.
                  
                  
                     Walton.
                     10
                     Ioan Robynson
                     bewitched beasts, horses, swi
                           •
                        e and pigs of seuerall mens.
                  
               
            
            The sayd Ursley Kemp had foure s
                  •
               yrites viz. their names Tettey a hee like a gray Cat, Iack a hee like a black Cat: Py
                  ••
                a 
                  •
               he, li
                  •
               e a 
                  •
               ack 
                  •
               oad, & Tyffyn a she, like a white Lambe. The hees were to plague to death, & the shees to punish with bodily harme, & to destroy 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Tyffyn U
                  •
               sleys white spirit did tell her alwayes (when she asked) what the other witches had done: And by her the most part were appelled, which spirit telled her alwayes true. As is well approued by the other Witches confession.
            The sayd Ales Newman had to 
                  •
               aid Ursley Ke
                  •
               p
                  •
                spiri
                  •
               s to vse at her pleasure.
            Elyzabeth Bennet had two spirits, viz. their names Suckyn, a hee like a blacke Dog
                  •
                And Lya
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
               .
            Ales Hunt had two spirits lyke Coltes, the one blacke, the other white.
            11▪ Margery Sammo
                  •
                had two spirits like Toads, their names Tom and Robyn.
            Cy
                  ••
               y Celles had two spirits by seuerall names viz. Sothea
                  •
               s Herculus, Iack of Mercury.
            Ales Manfield and Margaret Greuell had in common by agreement iiii spirits, viz. their names 
                  〈…〉
               , wherof two were hees, and two shees, lyke vnto black Cats.
            Elizabeth Ewstace had iii. Impes or spirits, of coulour white, grey and black.
            Annis Herd had vi. Impes or spirites like a
                  •
               ises and black byrdes, And vi. other
                  •
               ike 
                  •
               ine, 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               nises shee fed with wheat, barly, Otes and bread, the 
                  •
               i
                  •
               e with strew and hey.
            
               
                  Amys Glascocke 
                  12 Ioan Pechey
                  13 Ioan Robinson
               These haue not confessed any thing touch
                  •••
                
               
                  〈…〉
               .
            Ana
                  •
               s Glascoke bewitched to death 
                  Mychell S
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     ens Childe.
                  The 
                        〈◊〉
                      Childe at Pages.
                  William Pa
                        •
                     es Childe.
               
            
         
      
   