
      
         
            
            
            THE
COPIES OF
CERTAINE LETTERS
WHICH HAVE
passed betweene SPAINE and
ENGLAND in matter of
RELIGION.
            Concerning the generall Motiues to the
Romane obedience.
            Betweene Master IAMES WADESWORTH,
a late Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in
Siuill, and W. BEDELL a Minister of
the Gospell of Iesus Christ in
SVFFOLKE.
            LONDON
Printed by William Stansby for William Barret and
Robert Milbourne. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE MOST
HIGH AND EXCELLENT
PRINCE,
PRINCE
CHARLES.
            
               I Should labour much in my
excuse, euen to mine owne
iudgement, of the highest
boldnesse, in daring to present
these Papers to your Highnes,
if there were not some releeuing circumstances,
that giue mee hope, it shall not
be disagreeable to your higher goodnesse.
There is nothing can see the light, which
hath the name of Spaine in it, which seemes

not now properly yours, euer since it pleased
you to honor that Countrie with your
presence. And those very Motiues to the
Romane obedience, which had beene represented
vnto you there, in case you had
giuen way to the propounding them, are
in these Letters charitably and calmly examined.
Betweene a couple of friends, bred
in the same Colledge (that of the foundation
of Sir WALTER MILDMAY of
blessed memorie, whom with honor and
thankfulnesse I name) chosen his Schollers
at the same election, lodged in the same
Chamber, after Ministers in the same Diocesse.
And that they might bee matchable
abroad as well as at home, attendants in the
same ranke as Chaplaines, on two Honorable
Ambassadors of the Majestie of the
King your Father in forraine parts; the one
in Italie, the other in Spaine. Where, one
of them hauing changed his profession,
and receiued a pension out of the holy Inquisition
house, and drawne his wife and
children thither, was lately often in the
eyes of your Highnesse: very ioyfull I suppose
to see you there, not more I am sure,

then the other was solicitous to misse you
here. These passages betweene vs I haue
hitherto forborn to divulge, out of the hope
of further answer from Master Wadesworth
according to his promise; though since
the receipt of my last (being silent to my
selfe) he excused him in sundrie his Letters
to others by his lack of health. Nor should
I haue changed my resolution, but that I
vnderstand that presently after your Highnesse
departure from Spaine, hee departed
this life. Which newes though it grieue
me as it ought in respect of the losse of my
friend, yet it somewhat contenteth me, not
to haue beene lacking in my endeauour, to
the vndeceiuing a well-meaning man touching
the state of our differences in Religion;
nor as I hope to haue scandalized him
in the manner of handling them. And conceiuing
these Copies may be of some publike
vse, the more being li
                  •
               ted vp aboue their
owne meannesse by so high patronage, I
haue aduentured to prefixe your Highnesse
name before them. Humbly beseeching
the same, that if these reasons be too weake
to beare vp the presumption of this Dedication,

it may bee charged vpon the strong
desire some way to expresse the vnspeakeable
joy for your Highnesse happy
returne into England, of one
amongst many thousands,
            
               Of your Highnesse
most humble
and deuoted
seruants
W. BEDELL.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE CONTENTS.
            
               1. A Letter of Master Wadesworth, contayning
his Motiues to the Romane obedience. Dated
at Seuill in Spaine, April 1. 1615. printed as all the
rest out of his owne hand-writing. pag. 1.
               2. Another Letter from him requiring answere
to the former, from Madrid in Spaine, April 14.
1619. pag. 16.
               3. The answere to the last Letter, Dated Aug. 5.
1619. pag. 17.
               4. A Letter from Master Wadesworth vpon
the receipt of the former. From Madrid. Dated Oct.
28. 1619. receiued May 23. 1620. pag. 23.
               5. The answere to the last Letter. Iune 15.
1620. pag. 25.
               6. A Letter from Master Wadesworth, from
Madrid, Iune 8. 1620. pag. 29.
               7. A Letter of Master Doctor Halls sent to Master
Wadesworth, and returned into England with
his marginall notes. pag. 30.
               8. A Letter returning it inclosed to Master Doctor
Hall. pag. 36.
               9. A Letter sent to Master Wadesworth, together
with the Examination of his Motiues. Octob. 22.
1620. pag. 36.
               
                  
10. The Examination of the Motiues in the first
Letter. pag. 39.
            
         
         
            The heads of the Motiues reduced vnto
twelue Chapters, answering vnto the like
figures in the Margint of the first of
Master WADESWORTHS
Letters.
            
               Chap. I.
               OF the Preamble. The Titles Catholike, Papist,
Traytor, Idolater. The vniformitie of Faith in
Protestant Religion. pag. 39.
            
            
               Chap. II.
               Of the contrarietie of Sects pretended to be amongst
Reformers. Their differences, how matters 
                     •
                  f
Faith. Of each pretending Scripture, and the holy
Ghost. pag. 44.
            
            
               Chap. III.
               Of the want of a humane externall infallible Iudge
and Interpreter. The obiections answered. First, that
Scriptures are oft matter of controuersie. Secondly, that
they are the Law and Rule. Thirdly, that Princes are
no Iudges. Fourthly, nor a whole Councell of Reformers.
The Popes being the Iudge and Interpreter ouerthrown
by reasons; And by his palpable misse-interpreting
the Scriptures in his Decretals. The style of his
Court. His Breues about the Oath of allegeance. p. 50.
            
            
               Chap. IIII.
               Of the state of the Church of England, and whether
it may be reconciled with Rome. Whether the Pope be
Antichrist, PAVLO V. VICE-DEO, OVR LORD
GOD THE POPE: the Relation de moderandis titulis,
with the issue of it. pag. 72.
            
            
               Chap. V.
               Of the safenesse to ioyne to the Romane being confessed

a true Church by her Opposites. Master P. Wottons
peruersion printed at Venice. The badge of
Christs sheepe. pag. 82.
            
            
               Chap. VI.
               Of fraud and corruption in alledging Councels, Fathers,
and Doctors. The falsifications imputed to
Morney, Bishop Iewell, Master Fox, Tyndals Testament:
Parsons foure falshoods in seuen lines. A taste
of the for
                     •
                  eries of the Papacy. In the ancient Popes
Epistles, Constantines Donation, Gratian; The
Schoolemen and Breuiaries by the complaint of the
Venettan Diuines. The Fathers not vntoucht. Nor
the Hebrew Text. pag. 91.
            
            
               Chap. VII.
               Of the Armies of euident witnesses for the Romanists.
Whence it seemes so to the vnexpert Souldier.
The censure of the Centurists touching the Doctrine of
the Ancients. Danaeus of Saint Augustines opinion
touching Purgatorie. An instance or two of Imposture
in wresting Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine. p. 108.
            
            
               Chap. VIII.
               Of the inuisibilitie of the Church said to bee an e
                     •
                  asion
of Protestants. The promises made to the Church,
and her glorious Titles, how they are verified out of
Saint Augustine; falsly applied to the whole visible
Church, or representatiue, or the Pope. pag. 118.
            
            
               Chap. IX.
               Of lack of vniformitie in matters of Faith in all
ages and places. What matters of Faith the Church
holds vniformely; and so the 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Of Wicliffe
and Hus, &c. whether they were martyrs. p. 12
                     •
                  .
            
            
               Chap. X.
               Of the originall of Reformation in Luther, C
                        •
                     luin,
Scotland, England Whether King Henrie the eight
were a good head of the Church. Of the Reformers in
France and Holland. The originall growth and supporting
of the Popes Monarchie considered. pag. 122.
            
            
               
               Chap. XI.
               Of lacke of Succession, Bishops, true Ordinations,
Orders, Priesthood. The fabulous Ordination at the
Nags-head examined. The Statute 8. Elizabeth. Boners
sleighting the first Parliament, and Doctor Bancrofts
answere to Master Alablaster. The forme of
Priesthood inquired of. pag. 139.
            
            
               Chap. XII.
               Of the Conclusion. Master Wadesworths agonies
and protestation. The protestation and resolution
of the Author, and conceipt of Master Wadesworth,
and his accompt. pag. 158.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Copies of certaine Letters,
which haue passed betweene Spaine
and England in matter of
RELIGION.
            
               Salutem in Crucifi
                     •
                  o▪
To the Worshipfull my good friend
Mr. WILLIAM BEDE
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ &c.
               
                  Master Bedell,
               
               
                  MY very louing friend After the
old plaine fashion, I salute you
heartily, without any new fine
complements or affected phrases.
And by my inquirie, vnderstanding
of this Bearer that
after your being at 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ you
had passed to Con
                        •
                     tantinop
                        •
                     e.
and were returned to Saint 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and with health, I was exceeding glad thereof▪ for
I wish you well as to my selfe: and hee telling mee
further that to morrow, God willing▪ he was to depart
from hence to imbarke for England, and offering

me to deliuer my Letters if I would write vnto
you, I could not omit by these hastie scribled lines
to signifie vnto you the continuance of my sincere
loue, neuer to be blotted out of my brest (if you kill
it not with vnkindnesse like Master Ioseph Hall) neither
by distance of place, nor successe of time, nor
difference of Religion. For (contrarie to the slanders
raysed against all, because of the offences committed
by some) wee are not taught by our Catholike
Religion, either to diminish our naturall obligation
to our natiue Countrie, or to alter our morall
affection to our former friends.
               And although for my change becomming Catholique,
I did expect of some Reuilers to be termed rather
then prooued an Apostata, yet I neuer looked
for such termes from Master Hall, whom I esteemed
either my friend, or a modester man; whose flanting
Epistle I haue not answered, because I would not
foile my hands with a Poeticall Rayler, more full
with froth of Wordes then substance of Matter, and
of whom according to his beginning, I could not
expect any sound Arguments but vaine Flourishes,
and so much, I pray, let him know from me if you
please.
               Vnto your selfe, my good friend, who doe vnderstand
better then Master Hall, what the Doctors in
Schooles doe account Apostasie, and how it is more
and worse then Heresie, I doe referre both him and
my selfe, whether I might not more probably call
him Heretike, then he terme me at the first dash Apostata:
but I would abstaine from such biting Satyres.
And if he, or any other, will needes fasten vpon

me such bitter termes, let them first prooue that
in all points of faith I haue fallen totally from Christian
Religion, as did Iulian the Apostata: For so is Apostasie
described and differenced from Heresie.
Apostasia est error, h
                        •
                     minis baptizati, contrarius fidei
Catholicae ex toto: and, Haeresis est error pertinax,
hominis baptizati, contrarius 
                        •
                     idei Catholicae ex parte.
So that hee should haue shewed, first, my errors in
matters of Faith; not any error in other Questions,
but in decreed matters of Faith (as Protestants vse
to say) necessarie vnto saluation. Secondly, that such
errors were maintayned with obstinate pertin
                        •
                     cy,
and pertinacy is, where such errors are defended against
the consent and determination of the Catholik▪
Church; and also knowing that the whole Church
teacheth the contrarie to such opinions, yet will
persist in them: and yet further, if there bee any
doubt, he must manifest vnto me which is the Catholique
Church. Thirdly, to make it full Apostasie, he
should haue conuinced mee to haue swarued and
back-slidden (as you know the Greeke word signifies)
like Iulian renouncing his baptisme, and forsaken
totally all Christian Religion▪
                   a horrible imputation,
though false, nor so easily prooued as declaymed:
But I thanke God daily that I am become Catholique,
as all our Ancestors were till of late yeeres,
and as the most of Christendome still be at this present
day, with whom I had rather bee mis-called
a Papist, a Traytor, an Apostata, or Idolater, or what
he will, then to remayne a Protestant with them still
For in Protestant Religion I could neuer finde vniformitie
of a settled faith, and 
                     •
                  o no quietnesse of

conscience, especially for three or foure yeeres before
my comming away, although by reading, studying,
praying, and confe
                     •
                  ring, I did most carefully
and diligently labour to finde it among them.
               But your contrarietie of Sects and opinions of

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , Zwinglians, Caluinists, Protestants, 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
Cartwrightists, and Brownists, some of them
damning each other; many of them auouching their
Positions to be matters of Faith (for if they made
them but Schoole questions of opinion onely, they
should not so much haue disquieted mee) and all
these being so contrarie, yet euery one pretending
Scriptures, and arrogating the Holy Ghost in his
fauor. And aboue all (which did most of all trouble
me) about the deciding of these and all other Controuersies
which might arise, I could not finde among
all these Sects any certaine humane externall
Iudge, so infallibly to interpret Scriptures, and by
them and by the assistance of the Holy Ghost so vndoubtedly
to define questions of Faith, that I could
assure my selfe and my soule, This Iudge is infallible;
and to him thou oughtest in conscience to obey and
yeeld thy vnderstanding in all his determinations of
Faith, for he cannot erre in those points. And note
that I speake now of an externall, humane, infallible
Iudge. For I know the Holy Ghost is the Diuine
internall and principall Iudge; and the Scriptures be
the Law or Rule by which that humane externall
Iudge must proceede. But the Holy Scriptures being
often the Matter of Controuersie and somtime
questioned which be Scriptures, and which bee not,
they alone of themselues cannot be Iudges: and for

the Holy Ghost likewise euery one pretending him
to bee his Patron, how should 
                     •
                   certainly know by
whom he speaketh, or not? For to Men we must goe
to learne, and not to Angels, nor to God himselfe
immediately. The Head of your Church was the
Queene (an excellent notable Prince) but 
                     •
                   
                  Woman,
not to speake, much lesse to be Iudge in the Church;
and since a learned King, like King Henrie the eight,
who was the first temporall Prince that euer made
himselfe Ex Regio jure, Head of the Church in spir
                        •
                     
                     tuall
matters, a new strange Doctrine, and therefore
iustly condemned by Caluin for monstrous. But
suppose hee were such a Head, yet you all confesse
that hee may erre in matters of Faith. And so you
acknowledge may your Archbishops and Bishops,
and your whole Clergie in their Conuocation-house
euen making Articles and Decrees: yea, though a
Councell of all your Lutherans, Cal
                        •••
                     nists, Protestants,
&c. of Germanie, France, Engiana, &c. were
all ioyned together, and should agree all (which
they neuer will doe) to compound and determine
the differences among themselues, yet by your ordinarie
Doctrine of most Protestants they mig
                     •
                  t in
such a Councell erre, and it were possible in their
Decrees to be deceiued. But if they may erre, how
should I know and be sure when and wherein they
did or did not erre? for though on the one side 
                     •
                  
                  posse ad esse non valet semper consequentia. yet 
                        〈◊〉
                     
valet, and on the other side 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
potentia, quae nunquam ducitur in actu
                        •
                     . So that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
neither in generall nor in particular, in puo
                     ••
                  que 
                     〈◊〉
                  
priuate, in head nor members, ioynely nor 
                     •
                  euerally

you haue no visible, externall, humane, infallible
Iudge, who cannot erre, and to whom I might haue
recourse for decision of doubts in matters of faith.

                     •
                   pray let Master Hall tell me, where should I haue
fixed my foot? for God is my witnesse, my soule was
like Noah Dou
                        •
                     , a long time houering & desirous to
discouer land, but seeing nothing but moueable and
troublesome deceiueable water, I could find no quiet
center for my conscience, nor any firme foundation
for your faith in Protestant Religion. Wherfore hearing
a sound of harmon
                        •
                     e and consent, that the Catholique
Church could not erre, and that onely in
the Catholique Church, as in Noahs Arke was infallabilitte
and possibilitie of saluation; I was so
occasioned, and I thinke had important reason, like
Noahs Doue, to seeke out, and to enter into this
Arke of Noah. Hereupon I was occasioned to doubt,
whether the Church of England were the true Church,
or not▪
                   For by consent of all, the true Church cannot
erre; but the Church of England, head and
members, King, Clergie, and People, as before is
said, yea a whole Councell of Protestants by their
owne grant may erre, ergo, no true Church. If no
true Church, no saluation in it; therefore come out
of it: but that I was loath to doe. Rather I laboured
mightily to defend it, both against the Puritanes,
and against the Catholiques: But the best arguments
I could vse against t
                     •
                  e Puritanes from the
Authoritie of the Church, and of the ancient Doctors
interpreting Scriptures against them, when
they could not answere them, they would reiect
them for Popish, and f
                     •
                  ye to their owne arrogant

spirit, by which forsooth they must controll others
This I found on the one side most abs
                     •
                  rd, and 
                     •
                  o
b
                     •
                  eede an Anarchy of confusion: and yet when I
come to answere the Catholique Arguments on 
                     •
                  he
other side against Protestants, 
                  
                     •
                  rging the like Authority
and vniformity of the Church, I perceiued the
most Protestants did frame euasions, in effect like
those of the Puritanes inclining to 
                     •
                  heir priuate spirit,
and other vncertainties.
               Next therefore I applied my selfe to follow
their opinion, who would make the Church of England
and the Church of Rome still to be all one 
                        •
                     n essentiall
points, and the diff
                        •
                     rences to be accidentall. confessing
the Church of Rome to be a true Church
though sicke, or corrupted, and the Protestants to
be deriued from it and reformed: and to this end I
laboured much to reconcile most of our particular
controuersies: But in truth I found such contrar
                     •
                  eties,
not onely betweene Catholiques and Protestants,
but euen among Protestants themselues that
I could neuer settle my selfe fully in this opinion of
some reconciliation, which I know many great
Schollers in England did fauour. For considering
so many opposite great points, for which they did
excommunicate and put to death each other, and
making the Pope to be Antichrist, proper or improper,
it could neuer sinke into my braine how these
two could be descendent, or members 
                     •
                  ound nor
vnfound participant each of other Rather I concluded,
that 
                     •
                  eeing many of the best learned Protestants
did grant the Church or Rome 
                        〈…〉
                      true
Church, though 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  
And contrarily, not onely the Catholiques, but also
the Puritanes, Anabaptists, Brownists, &c. did all denie
the Church of England to be a true Church: therefore
it would be more safe and secure to become a
Romane Catholique, who haue a true Church by
consent of both parties, then to remaine a Protestant,
who doe alone plead their owne cause, hauing
all the other against them: For the testimony
of our selues, and our contraries also, is much more
sufficient, and more certaine then to iustifie our
 selues alone. Yet I resisted and stood out still: and
betooke my selfe againe to reade ouer and examine
the chiefest controuersies, especially those about the
Church, which is, cardo negotij (and herein because
the Bearer 
                     •
                  taies now a day or two longer, I will inlarge
my selfe more then I purposed) and so I would
needes peruse the Originall quotations and Texts of
the Councels, Fathers, and Doctors, in the Authors,
themselues which were alleadged on both parts, to
see if they were truely cited, and according to the
meaning of the Authors: a labour of much labor,
and of trauell sometime to finde the Books, wherein
 I found much fraud committed by the Protestants;
and that the Catholiques had farre greater
and better armies of euident witnesses on their sides,
much more then the Protestants; in so much,
that the Centurists are faine often to censure and reiect
the plaine testimonies of those Ancients, as if
their new censure were sufficient to disaucthorize
the others auncient sentences. And so I remember
Danaeus in Commentarijs super D. Augustin Enchirid▪
ad Laurentium. Where Saint Augustin plainely

                  auoucheth Purgatory: he reiects Saints Augustines opinion,
saying, hic est naeuus Augustini: but I had
rather follow Saint Augustins opinion, then his ce
                     •
                  
                  sure;
for who are they to controll the Fathers?
               There are indeede some few places in Authors,
which prima facie seeme to fauour Protestants, as
many Heretiques alleadge some texts of Scriptures,
whose sound of words seeme to make for their opinions:
but being well examined and interpreted,
according to the analogie of faith, and according to
many other places of the same Authours where
they doe more fully explaine their opinions; so
they appeare to be wrested, and from the purpose.
               In fine, I found my selfe euidently conuinced, both
by many Authorities, and by many Arguments,
which now I doe not remember all, nor can here repeate
those which I doe remember: but onely some
few arguments I will relate vnto you which preuailed
most with me, besides those afore mentioned.
               First, therefore I could neuer approue the Protestants 
euasion by Inuisibility of their Church: For
though sometime it may be diminished and obscured,
yet the Catholique Church must euer be visible,
set on a hill, and not as light hid vnder a Bushell; for
how should it enlighte
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  nd teach her children, if
inuisible, or how should Strangers, and Pagans, and
others, be conuerted vnto her? or where should any
finde the Sacraments, if inuisible?
               Also the true Church in all places and all ages, euer 
holds one vniformitie and concord in all matters
of Faith, though not in all matters of ceremony
or gouernment: But the Protestants Church hath

not in all ages, nor in all places such vniforme concord,
no not in one age, as is manifest to all the world,
and as Father Parsons proued against Foxes martirs,
Wickliffe, Husse, and the res
                     •
                  : ergo the Protestants
Church, not the true Church.
               
                   Againe, by that saying, Haereses ad originem reuocasse
est refutasse; and so considering Luthers first
rancour against the Dominicans, his disobedience
and contempt of his former Superiours, his vowe
breaking, and violent courses, euen causing rebellion
against the Emperour, whom he reuiles, and other
Princes most shamefully, surely such arrogant
disobedience, scisme, and rebellions, had no warrant
nor vocation of God to plant his Church, but
of the Deuill to begin a scisme and a sect. So likewise
for Caluin, to say nothing of all that D. Bolsecus
brings against him. I doe vrge onely what Master
Hooker, Doctor Bancroft, and Sarauia doe proue
against him, for his vnquietnesse and ambition, reuoluing
the Common-wealth, and so vniu
                     •
                  tly expelling
and depriuing the Bishop of Geneua, and other
temporall Lords of their due obedience, and
ancient inheritance. Moreouer, I referre you to
the stirres, broiles, sedition, and murders which
Knoxe and the Geneua Gospellers caused in Scotland
against their lawfull Gouernours, against their
Queene, and against our King, euen in his Mothers
belly. Nor will I insist vpon the passions which first
moued King Henrie violently to diuorce himselfe
from his lawfull wife, to fall out with the Pope his
friend, to marrie the Lady Anne Bullen, and soone
after to behead her; to disinherite Queene Mary, and

enable Queene Elizabeth; and presently to di
                     •
                  inherit
Queene Elizabeth, and to restore Queene Mary;
to hang Catholiques for traitors, and to burne Protestants
for heretiques, to destroy Monasteries, and to
pill Churches: were these fit beginnings for the Gospell
of Christ? I pray was this man a good head of
Gods Church? for my part, I beseech our Lord blesse
me from being a member of such a head, or such a
Church. I come to France and Holland, where you
know by the Hugenots and Geuses all Caluinistes,
what ciuill wars they haue raised, how much bloud
they haue shed, what rebellion, rapine, and desolations
they haue occasioned principally for their new
Religion, founded in bloud like Draecos lawes: But I
would gladly know whether you can approue such
bloudy broiles for Religion, or no? I know Protestants
de facto, doe iustifie the ciuill warres of France
and Holland for good against their Kings, but I could
neuer vnderstand of them quo lure: if the Hollanders
be Rebels (as they are) why did we support them
                     •
                  
if they be no rebels, because they fight for the pretended
liberty of their ancient priuiledges, and for
their new Religion; we see it is an easie matter to
pretend liberties, and also why may not others as
as well reuolt for their old Religion: Or I beseech
you, why is that accounted treason against the State
in Catholiques, which is called reason of State in Protestants?
I reduce this argument to few words,
That Church which is founded and begun in ma
                        •
                     ice
disobedience, passion, bloud, and rebellion, cannot be
the true Church: but it is euident to the world that
the Protestant Churches in Germanie, Franc
                        •
                     , Holland,

Geneua, &c. were so founded, and in Geneua and
Holland are still continued in rebellion: ergo, they
are not true Churches.
               
               
                   Furthermore, where is not Succession both of
true Pastors and of true Doctrine, there is no true
Church: But among Protestants is no succession of
true Pastors, (for I omit here to treate of Doctrine)
ergo, no true Church. I prooue the minor: where
is no consecration nor ordination of Bishops and Priests,
according to the due forme and right intention required
necessarily by the Church and ancient Councels,
there is no succession of true Pastors▪ but among
Protestants the said due forme and right intention
are not obserued, ergo, no succession of true
Pastors. The said due forme and right intention are
not obserued among Protestants in France, Holland,
nor Germanie, where they haue no Bishops, and
where Lay men doe intermeddle in the making of
their Ministers. And for England, whereas the
Councels require the ordines minores of Subdeacon
and the rest, to goe before Priesthood; your Ministers
are made per saltum without euer being Subdeacons.
And whereas the Councels require three
Bishops to assist at the consecration of a Bishop, it is
certaine that at the Nags-head in Cheap-side where
consecration of your first Bishops was attempted
but not effected (whereabout I remember the controuersie
you had with one) there was but one Bishop,
and I am sure there was such a matter: and
although I know and haue seene the Records themselues,
that afterward there was a consecration of
Doctor Parker at Lambeth, and three Bishops named,

                  viz. Miles Couerdall of Exceter, one Hodgeskin
Suffragan of Bedford, and another whose name
I haue forgotten, yet it is very doubtfull that Couerdall
being made Bishop of Exceter in King Edwards
time (when all Councels and Church Canons
were little obserued) he was neuer himselfe Canonically
consecrated; and so if he were no Canonicall
Bishop, he could not make another Canonicall: and
the third vnnamed, as I remember (but am not sure)
was onely a Bishop Elect, and not consecrated, and
so was not sufficient. But hereof I am sure, that they
did consecrate Parker by vertue of a Breue from the
Queene as Head of the Church, who indeed being no
true Head and a Woman, I cannot see how they
could make a true consecration grounded on her authoritie.
Furthermore, making your Ministers you
keepe not the right intention; for neither doe the
Orderer nor the Ordered giue nor receiue the Orders
as a Sacrament; nor with any intention of Sacrificing.
Also they want the matter and forme with
which according to the Councels and Canons of
the Church holy Orders should be giuen; namely
for the matter, Priesthood is giuen by the deliuerie of
the Patena with bread, and of the Chalice with wine:
Deaconship by the deliuerie of the booke of the Gospels;
and Subdeaconship by the deliuerie of the
Patena alone, and of the Chali
                        •
                     e emptie. And in the
substantiall forme of Priesthood you doe faile most
of all, which forme consists in these wordes, Accipe
potestatem offerendi sacrificium in Ecclesia pro viuis
& mortuis, which are neither said no
                     •
                   done by you,
and therefore well may you bee called Ministers, as

also Lay men are, but you are no Priests. Wherefore
I conclude, wanting Subdeaconship, wanting
vndoubted Canonicall Bishops, wanting right intention,
wanting matter and due forme, and deriuing euen
that you seeme to haue from a Woman the Head
of your Church, therefore you haue no true Pastors,
                   and consequently no true Church. And so to conclude,
and not to wearie my selfe and you too much,
being resolued in my vnderstanding, by these and
many other Arguments, that the Church of England
was not the true Church, but that the Church of Rome
was and is the onely true Church, because it alone is
Ancient, Catholique, and Apostolique, hauing Succession,
Vnitie, and Visibilitie, in all ages and places;
yet what agonies I passed with my will, here I will
ouer-passe. Onely I cannot pretermit to tell you,
that at last hauing also mastered and subdued my
will to relent vnto my vnderstanding, by meanes of
prayer, and by God Almighties grace principally,
I came to breake through many tentations and impediments,
and from a troubled vnquiet heart to a
fixed and peaceable tranquilitie of minde, for which
I doe most humbly thanke our sweet Lord and Sauiour
Iesus, before whom with all reuerence I doe
auouch and sweare vnto you, as I shall answere it in
the dreadfull day of iudgement when all hearts shal
be discouered, that I forsooke Protestant Religion for
very feare of damnation; and became a Catholique
with good hope of saluation; and that in this hope
I doe continue and increase daily: and that I would
not for all the world become a Protestant againe.
And for this which here I haue written vnto you in

great haste, I know there bee many Replyes and Reioynders
wherewith I could neuer be satisfied; nor
doe I desire any further Disputation about them,
but rather to spend the rest of my life in deuotion;
yet in part to giue you, my deare good friend, some
account of my selfe, hauing now so good an occasion
and fit a messenger, and by you if you please to render
a reason of my Faith to Master Hall, who in his
said printed Epistle in one place desires to know the
motiues thereof, I haue thus plainly made relation
of some points among many. Whereunto if Master
Hall will make any Reply, I doe desire it may bee
directly & fully to the points and in friendly termes,
vpon which condition I doe pardon what is past:
and of you I know I neede not require any such circumstances.
And so most seriously intreating and
praying to our gracious Lord to direct and keepe vs
all and euer in his holy Truth, I commend you vnto
his heauenly grace, and my selfe vnto your friendly
loue. Seuill in Spaine, this first day of Aprill.
1615.
               
                  Your very affectionate and true
louing friend,
IAMES WADDESWORTH.
               
            
            
               
               To the Worshipfull his respected friend
Master WILLIAM BEDELL, at his
house in Saint Edmundsbury, or at Horinger,
be there deliuered in
Suffolke.
               
                  Kinde Master BEDELL,
                  
               
               MIne old acquaintance and friend hauing heard
of your health and worldly well-fare, by this
Bearer Master Austen your neighbour, and by
him hauing opportunitie to salute you with these
few Lines, I could not omit; though some fewe
yeeres since I wrote you by one who since told mee
certainly hee deliuered my Letters, and that you
promised answere, and so you are in my debt,
which I doe not claime not vrge so much, as I doe
that in truth and before our Lord I speake it, you
doe owe me loue in all mutuall amitie, for the heartie
affectionate loue which I haue and euer did beare
vnto you with all sinceritie. For though I loue not
your Religion (wherein I could neuer finde solide
Truth, nor firme hope of saluation, as now I doe
being a Catholique, and our Lord is my witnesse
who shall be my iudge) yet indeed I doe loue your
person, and your ingenuous, honest, good, morall
condition, which euer I obserued in you: nor doe I
desire to haue altercations with Master Ioseph Hall
(especially if he should proceede as Satyrically as he
hath begun with me) nor with any other man, and

much lesse would I haue any debate with your selfe,
whom I doe esteeme and affect as before I haue
written: nor would I spend the rest of my life (which
I take to be short, for my lungs are decaying) in any
Questions, but rather in deuotion, wherein I doe
much more desire to bee hot and feruorous, then in
Disputations, beseeching our Lord to forgiue my
coldnesse, yea my neglect therein, and to pardon
and free me from all sinne, and to guide and keepe
you in all happinesse euen as I wish for mine owne
soule, through the Redemption of our sweet Sauiour,
and by the inter
                        •
                     ession of his holy Mother, and all
Saints, Amen. Written in haste from Madrid,
14. Aprill. 1619.
               
                  
                     Your assured true friend,
IAMES WADDESWORTH.
               
               
                  
                     Receiued 
                     I
                           •
                        ne 4. 1619.
                  
               
            
            
               To the Worshipfull my very good friend Master
IAMES WADDESWORTH
at Madrid, deliuer this.
               Salutem in Christo Iesu.
               THe late receipt of your Letters (good Master
Waddesworth) did diuersly affect me with ioy
and shame; and I know not with whether most. I was
glad to heare of you, and your prosperous state, much
more to receiue a kinde Letter from you. Ashamed,

therein to be called vpon for debt; who haue euer endeuoured
to liue by that rule of the Apostle; Owe nothing
to any man. Yet not so much for that which you
must vrge the debt of loue, sith by that Text it appears,
that it can neuer be so discharged, as there should not be
more behinde to pay. And your selfe who challenge this
of me, doe owe me as much or well more. For let me tell
you, I haue the aduantage of you herein by my profession,
for where your loue is to me as to a man, or to an honest
man, nor can by your present perswasion goe any
further, I can and doe loue you as my deare brother,
and fellow member in the mysticall body of our Lord
Iesus Christ. And from this ground (to his knowledge
I doe appeale) I doe heartily pray for you, and beare
with you, and as the Apostle enioynes, Rom. 15. 7. Receiue
you with a true brotherly affection. I am not
therefore ashamed of this debt, but doe reioyce as much
in the owing of it, as in the payment. But my shame
growes from the being behinde with you in the office
of writing. Wherein yet heare my honest and true excuse.
Neither will I goe about to set off one debt with
another. For you may remember how at our parting
you promised to write to me touching the state of Religion
there, which if wee shall make out a perfect
reckoning, I account to be a good debt still. But this I
say, when your Letters of the first of April, 1615▪ came
to my hands, I purposed to returne answere by the same
B
                     •
                  arer, who as hee told mee, was to returne about the
Midsommer following. But I had a sodaine and extraordinarie
iourny which came betweene, and kept me
from home till after the Commencement, so as that opportunitie
was lost. Besides, vpon the reading of your

Letters, I perceiued your intention was to haue them
imparted to Doctor Hall, expecting in a sort some reply
from him. To him threfore did I send them.
After some moneths I receiued this answere, which
though I had once purposed to conceale, as not willing
to be the meane of any exasperation betweene you, yet
now hoping of your wisedome and patience I send you
inclosed, that it may be some euidence of my true excuse.
Vpon the receipt of it, I began to frame an answere to
the points of your Letter, according to your desire,
full, and in friendly termes. I had well-nigh finished
it, when I was presented to this Benefice, and thereby
entered into a world of distractions. These, together
with the labour of writing it ouer, and vncertaintie of
safe conueighing my Letters to you, did make mee procrastinate
my payment, till now to my shame you should
neede to demand it. And that I may by the more shaming
my selfe obtaine a more easie penance from you;
I confesse to you, I was sometime halfe in the minde
(hauing especially differred it so long) to suppresse it
altogether. First, out of mine owne naturall disposition,
who haue euer abhorred contention: and whereas in
matters of Religion there ought to be the fairest wars,
I could neuer yet meete with any of that side of so patient
a minde, but by opposition he would be vnsetled.
For your selfe, though I knew your former moderate
temper, and (as I remember I wrote to Doctor Hall)
beleeued you in that which you protest, that out of conscience
you were such as you professe; yet me thought I
perceiued by your quick manner to him, and some passages
in the conclusion of your Letter, you were rather
desirous to enioy the quiet possession of your owne opinion,

then come to any fur
                     •
                  her disputation whose is
the right. And in truth the time of that triall had
beene proper, before your departure: nor you had to
                     •
                  
farre engaged your selfe; and were to iustifie by your
constancie, the wisedome of your change. Besides, since
the sum of the errour of that side, as I haue euer conceiued
it, is beleeuing rather too much, then failing in
any point necessary to saluation, that notable place of
the Apostle, Rom. 14. 1. came to my minde, especially
after that I had once occasion to preach of it, where
he forbids controuersies of disputations with those
that are infirme in faith. Who art thou (saith he)
that iudgest another mans seruant? he standeth or
falleth to his owne Master. Why should I grieue you,
and perhaps make my friend mine enemy (as Saint
Paul the Galathians) by saying the truth. The world
is full enough of contentious writings, which as by
your letter appeares you had seen ere ye resolued. If those
had not satisfied you, what could I hope to adde to them?
These things moued me; but as you say, they did not yet
satisfie me. For all men are interessed in the defence of
truth, how much more he that is called to be a Preacher
of it? All Christians are admonished by Saint Iude, to
fight for the faith once giuen to the Saints; how
much more those that are leaders in this warfare: How
could I say I loued our Lord Iesus Christ, if his honour
being questioned I should be silent? How could I
approue to mine owne soule that I loued you, if I sufered
you to enioy your owne error, suppose not damnable.
Besides that, you and perhaps others also might be
confirmed in it, perhaps interpreting my silence for a
confession that your Motiues were vnanswerable. But

therein I was not onely resolued selfe to the contrary,
but thought it so easie to resolue any indifferent minde,
as me thought it was more shame not to haue done it at
the first, then praise to doe it at the last. As for the successe
of my endeauour, I was to leaue it to God. Many
and secret are the wayes of his Prouidence, which serueth
it selfe sometimes euen of our errours, to the safer
conduct of vs to our finall happinesse. Some I had known,
and heard of more, who being at first carried away with
the shewes of Vnity, Order, Succession, Infallability;
when they found them emptie of Truth, and the
cloakes of Pride, ambition, coue
                        •
                     ousnesse, ioyned
with an obstinacie to defend all corruptions how palpable
so euer, by finding the difference of these Hulles
from their Fathers Table, had with the prodigall Son
returned home againe. To conclude, I accounted my
selfe still in debt, and was I confesse to you unwilling to
die in it; and somtimes vowed to God, in the middest of
my troubles, if I might once see an end of them, to endeuour
to discharge it. And now hauing by his mercy
not onely attained that, but a new occasion presented
me presently thereupon, by your calling for satisfaction
to pay it, and meanes offered me to send it safely: I take
this motion to proceede from God, and doe humbly desire
his Maiesty to turne it to good. It remaines therefore,
good Master Wadesworth, that I doe intreat your
pardo
                     •
                   of that slacknesse that is past, and gentlenesse to
take it as I shall be able to pay it. My employments both
ordinary and extraordinary are many: the bulke of it
is to great to conuey in one Letter, consisting of sundry
sheetes of paper; and at this present there lies an extraordinary
taske vpon me, so as I cannot presently writ

it out. I doe therefore no more now but acknowledge
the debt, and promise speedy paiment. Vnlesse I shall
adde this also, that I doe vndertake to pay interest for
the forbearance; and according as I shall vnderstand
by Master Austen shall be fittest, and safest, to send it in
parts, or all at once. To the conclusion of your last Letter,
wherein you professe your desire to spend the rest
of your life rather in the heate of deuotion, then
of disputation, desiring pardon of coldenesse that
way, and of all other your sinnes, and that it would
please God to guide and keepe me in all happinesse
as your selfe, through the redemption of our sweete
Sauiour, and by the intercession of his holy mother
and all Saints. I doe most thankefully and willingly subscribe
Amen: returning vnto you from my heart your
owne best wishes. Neither is it my purpose to call into
question the soliditie of truth, or firmenesse of the hope
of saluation, which you finde in your present way. This
onely I say.Euen for vs also hath Christ died, and for our redemption hath hee shed his bloud. Sinners indeed we are, but of his flocke, and among his poore sheepe are we numbred. Et pro nobis Christus mortuus est, &
pro nostra Redemptione sanguinem suum fudit.
Peccatores quidem, sed de ipsius grege sumus, &
inter eius ouiculas numeramur: This is my tenet.
And if the doctrine of the holy Bible doe containe solid
truth, and beleeuing in the name of the Son of God
doe giue firme hope of saluation, according to Gods own
record, 1 Iohn 5. 10. 11. 12. we are perswaded we haue
both. I will adde this more; We know that wee are
translated from death to life, because wee loue our
brethren. With this Oyle in our Lampes, which we
desire may be alwayes in store in our Vessels also our
hearts, we attend the comming of the Bridegroome;
and say cheerefully,
                  Euen so come Lord Iesus. Etiam veni Domine Iesu. To

whose gracious protection I doe most hartily commit
you, and doe rest,
               
               
                  Your assured friend and louing
Brother, W. BEDELL.
                  Horningesherth 
                        this fifth of August 1619.
                  
               
            
            
               To the Worshipfull Master WILLIAM
BEDELL at Horningesherth neere Saint
Edmundsbury in Suffolke, these.
               Salutem in Crucifix
                     •
                  .
               
                  WORTHY SIR,
               
               I Was exceeding glad to perceiue by your kinde,
modest, and discreete Letters of 5. of August
last, that you are still permanent in your own good
nature, and constant in your loue to me: not like
Master Ioseph Hall, neither bitterly reuiling nor flourishing
impertinently. Vnto whom I pray you returne▪
his scoffing railing Letter, with these few
marginall noates. I pray God forgiue him, and
make him a more humbler and meeker man. And
I for my part doe freely pardon all his foule tearmes
against me. And though in gratitude and iustice I
am bound and so doe loue and respect you more
then him, for your greater curtesie to me, and for

your better value in your selfe; yet euen him I can
and doe and am bound to loue not onely as an enemy,
or a creature of God, or as I doe you for
an honest, morall, good, discreete man, but euen
further and beyond that which you seeme to vnderstand
that we cannot by our doctrine proceede
in loue: viz. as men hauing soules for whom our
Sauiour hath died; and so as possible members
though indeede not actuall branches of his misticall
body: yea for such as may come to be ingrafted
and beare fruite in him, when we may be withered,
cut off, or fallen away. As for your serious
Apologie and excuse for not answering my first Letters
all this while, I doe easily admit it, and assure
my selfe that all the circumstances, impediments,
and occasions were such, as you affirme: nor did I
expect, nor vrge, in my first nor second Letters any
answere about Controuersies in Religion (for I euer
said we could say nothing of substance which before
had not beene said) but onely gaue you by Masters
Hals occasion some few reasons of my faith,
wherein still I protest I had rather be deuout then be
troubled to dispute, not for feare or doubt, but because
I am so fully resolued in my selfe, and do think
it a very superfluous labour toties & melius ab alijs
actum agere. So that I desired rather answere of
curtesie then of controuersie, which now by Master
Astons meanes I receiued, and doe much esteeme
it, and hartily thanke you for it. Neuerthelesse, when
your Replie vnto my plaine and few reasons come,
I will for your sake both read them ouer, and according
to my little health, lesse leisure, and my poore

abilitie (which is least of all) returne you some such
short reioynder as it shall please almighty God to
enable me, being glad to perceiue by your last that
you doe subscribe to our Intercession by our blessed
Lady, and other holy Saints; which also I hope
and wish you would fully extend to our Inuocation
of Saints as Intercessors, not as Redeemers, for
that were Blaspemie indeede and Idolatrie; from
which our sweete Sauiour deliuer vs, and euer
keepe you my good deere friend, as I desire.
               
                  
                     Madrid, in haste, 26.
Octob. 1619.
                  
                  IAMES WADDESWORTH.
               
            
            
               To the worshipfull my very good
friend M. IAMES WADDESWORTH,
at Madrid, deliuer this.
               Salutem in Christo Iesu.
               YOur Letters of the 26. of October (beloued Master
Waddesworth) were long vpon the way and
came not to my hands till the 23. of May. In them I
receiued your curteous acceptation of my excuse for
my former silence, & censure of Doctor Hall Letter
with the profession of your loue to me and him, further
then I accounted you could by your Doctrine proceede,

                  viz. as redeemed by Christ, and possible
members of his mysticall body. Truely Sir, I will
not change words with you here abouts, but I account
still to be an honest man, restraineth from that, to
be redeemed by our Sauiour, since that is as large as
humane nature, this is giuen to fewer, of whom a
man may say as our Lord doth of one in the Gospell,
that they are not far from the Kingdome of God.
Howsoeuer, I haue still my intention that wee out of
our profession may loue you better then you can
vs: since it is more to be an actuall, then a possible
member of Christ; and the Communion of Saints
is a staighter bond, then Redemption by Christ, and
possibilitie of being ingrafted and bearing fruite in
his mysticall body. And I would to Christ that of
all other Controuersies this were the vehementest betweene
vs, which should loue each other most.
Wherein although I would striue and doe my best to
haue the better, yet see how equally I would contend.
For both I would acknowledge freely, my selfe farre
short of that which I may by my profession doe in this
kinde, and perswade my selfe better of your secret affection
to vs, then you may by your pofession expresse.
I will not easily beleeue that you can finde in your heart
to count that man a Dogge, and out of the Church,
and in state of damnation, that stedfastly beleeueth
in our Lord Iesus Christ, and by him in the B.
Trinitie; that confesseth all the Doctrine of holy
Scriptures, the summe whereof is in the Creede;
that lastly, with a charitable affection embraceth all
that hold this faith, throughout the world, yea euen

those that hate and persecute him to the death.
Wherein I forbeare for the present to enlarge, because
I speake more of it in my answere to your first Letters;
which Master Aston giues me hope that himselfe
ere long will consigne into your hands. Now by his
direction, I send you onely aduice of the receipt of
your last, with heartie thankes for them, desirous
not to runne further in arrerages with you in this
office of writing. This one thing I adde, that where
you write you are glad I doe subscribe to your intercession
by the Saints, wishing me fully to extend
it to inuocation of Saints as Intercessors, though
not as Redeemers; I should be very glad if I could
as well content you in all other points, as that one:
comming thus prepared in all controuersies with you,
and all men, to yeelde whatsoeuer I may, sauing
the truth. But as I conceiue it, there is great oddes
betweene these two. To desire God to grant vs this
or that good thing by the intercession of the
Saints; and, To vse inuocation of themselues.
The one supposeth onely that the Saints in glory generally
knowing the warfare of those on earth, are
carefull for them, and omit not this act of neuer failing
charitie to pray for them. These praiers it
hopes, and desires of God may be helpefull to vs, by
the onely merit of our Lord Iesus Christ; in the same
sort as those of the Saints wheresoeuer on earth; as
2 Cor. 1. 10. 11. Ephes. 6. 1. Philem. ver. 22. The other,
that the Saints departed know our wants, and
states in particular, and heare our prayers, and by
consequent know our hearts: which is flatly contrarie

to the Scriptures 2 Chron. 6. 30. Esay 63. 16. To
omit now that you doe not onely desire them to pray
for you, but aske at their hands grace and glory,
trust in them, vow to them, sweare by them, offer
and receiue the sacrifice of the New Testament to
their honour and glory, and desire it may be accepted
by their patronage. Wherefore as I am glad
to perceiue that you doe reuerse those blasphemies indeede,
Salua me Saluatrix; Redime me Redemptrix;
and will not subscribe to those words of Bellarmine,
non erit absurdum si sancti viri redemptores
nostri aliquo modo, id est secundum aliquid, non
simpliciter; & largo modo; non in rigore verborum
esse dicantur: and againe, cur inepte dicantur
Sancti viri aliquo modo passionibus suis delicta
nostra posse redimere? so I hope and wish you would
doe the like for calling vpon them, and presenting
their merits vnto God; and as yee may more safely
and sweetely speake vnto our Iesus, who is our Aduocate
with the Father, entered into the Holy
of Holies to appeare before God for vs. To his
gracious protection I commit you, and doe rest
               
                  
                     Horningshearth 
                     this 15. of
Iune, 1620.
                  
                  Your assured friend
and louing Brother
W. BEDELL.
               
            
            
               
               To the worshipfull his much respected
friend Master WILLIAM
BEDELL at Horningshearth
by Saint Edmundsbury in
Suffolke, these.
               
                  My very good Friend
               
               MAster BEDELL, my last vnto you was by
a Gentleman who went from hence about
sixe moneths since; but I haue vnderstood hee
fell sicke at Paris, by the way, and so was first
hindered there in his iourney, and afterward againe
at Brussels fell to a relapse, which detained
him so long, that although now very lately I
heare he is recouered and gone forward into England,
yet in so long delayes & so often sickenesses,
I know not whether hee haue lost or forgotten my
former Letters: wherefore out of this consideration,
and by the opportunitie of this Bringer,
and by the true harty affection which I beare you,
being desirous to signifie vnto you the continuance
of my sincere loue, I could not pretermit
this so good an occasion, though hereby I haue
nothing else to say, nor intreate, but if wee haue

                        •
                     arres, yet our dissention may be rather in the
matter and cases, then betwixt our persons, as discreete
Lawyers vse to pleade vehemently each for

his Clyents iustice, and yet remaine betwixt themselues
without breach of amitie, and abstaining
from opprobrious iniurie; wherein I haue great
confidence that you will proceede both more
moderately in all the circumstance, and to better
purpose in the substance then Master Ioseph
Hall, vnto whose Letter directed to you, and
by you sent vnto me, I wrote certaine Marginall
Notes onely, and so returned the same by the aboue
named Gentleman, whereof also (if it returne
to your hands) I would intreate you to send
me a Copie both of his Text and my Glosse, for
then being in haste I remained with neither. Our
Lord keepe you, and guide vs all to his truth, and
to heauen.
               
                  Madrid, 8. Iune,
1620.
                  
                  IAMES WADDESWORTH.
               
            
            
               The Letter of Master D. HALL, mentioned
in the formerwith Master WADDESWORTHS
marginall notes.
               GOod Master Bedell, what a sorry crabbe hath
Master Waddesworth at last sent vs from Siuill?
I pittie theI pray see within how short a compasse he proues himself a Poeticall rai
                     
                        •
                     er by his Epithets, not onely against me, but 
                        •
                     euiling a whole Nation, and the Religion of the best part of all Christendome. 
                  impotent malice of the man;
sure that hot Region, andI pray see within how short a compasse he proues himself a Poeticall rai
                     
                        •
                     er by his Epithets, not onely against me, but 
                        •
                     euiling a whole Nation, and the Religion of the best part of all Christendome. 
                  sulphurous Religion are
guiltie of this his choler. For ought I see hee is

not onely turned Papist but Spaniard too. Ibi vi
                     
                        •
                     itur
ambitiosa paupertate: The great man would
not foyle his fingers (for that is his word) with
such an aduersarie as my selfe; hee should haue
found this conflict his foyling indeede; but hee
scornes the match; and what wonder if he that
hath all this whileThis m
                        •
                     cke if it were true yet would I reioyce in 
                        •
                     t, not onely to 
                        •
                     it on his staires, but to m
                        •
                     ke cleane his shoe
                        •
                     s. 
                  sat on Father Creswels staires,
scorne the vnworthinesse of him whom an English
Vniuersitie scorned not to set in the chaire of
Diuinitie? But whence is this my contempt? I
see but two vices to cleare my selfe of; Poetry and
I tearmed him a Poeticall Ra
                        •
                     
                     ler, not accusing nor 
                        〈◊〉
                      him for a Poet 
                        〈◊〉
                      taxing him for raising poe
                        ••
                     cally vsing the word as sometimes it is in the worst sense when it is abused: neither condemning Poetrie nor 
                        •
                     o
                     
                        •
                     rouing him for a Poet▪ out a po
                     
                        •
                     ticall Ra
                        ••
                     er: as he doth 
                        •••
                     
                     selfe by that Epistle 
                        〈…〉
                      better Letter. 
                  Railing; of the latter you shall acquit mee if
you will but reade that my poore Epistle which
he sleights thus: Let your eyes iudge whether
euer any thing could be written more mildely,
more modestly, more louingly. Of the former I
must acquit my selfe; Cuius vnum est sed magnum
vitium Poesis: what were I the worse if I were still
a louer of those studies? If he could haue had leisure
to tend vpon any thing besides that Fathers Packets,
he might haue seene most of the renowned and
holy Fathers of the Church eminent in that profession
for which I am scornd; amongst many
others Tertullian, Lactantius, Nazianzen, Prudentius,
Fulgentius, Apollinarius, Nonnus, Hilarius,
Prosper, and now in the vpshotI willingly pardon 
                        〈◊〉
                      is pe
                        ••
                     icall railing and false 
                        •
                     pithites, for that one true word 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     Bernard to be deuout. deuout Bernard,
and why should their honour be my disgrace?
But the truth is, these were the recreations
of my minoritie; nun
                        •
                      oblita mihi. And if Poetrie

were of the deadly sinnes of their Casuists, I
could smart for it in my 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : Is this a fit scandall
to 
                     •
                  ake vp from so farre? What my proficiencie
hath beene in serious studies, if the Vniuersitie and
Church hath pleased to testifie: what neede I stand
at the mercie ofPardon for S. Bernards sake. 
                  a fugitiue. But if any of
                  A braue man a
                        •
                      armes, &c. 
                  his Masters
should vndertake me in the cause of God, he
should finde I had studied prose. As for these vaine
flourishes of mine, if he had not taken a veny in
them, and found it smart, he had not strooke again
soPardon for S. Bernards sake. 
                  churlishly? Was it my Letter that is accused of
Poetry? there is neither number, nor ryme,I would there were not. 
                  nor
fiction in it: Would the great Schoole man haue
had me to haue packt vp a Letter of syllogismes?
which of the Fathers (whose high steppes I haue
desired to tread in) haue giuen that example? what
were to be expected of a Monitorie Epistle which
intended onely the occasion if he had pleased of a
future discourse? Wee I slandersSatis pro imperio. 
                  list not learne to
write Letters from beyond the Pyrenees. Howsoeuer,
I am not sorry that his scorne hath cast
him vpon an aduersarie more able to conuince
him; I am allowed onely a looker on; therefore
I will neither ward nor strike; his hands are too full
of you: my onely wish is, that you could beare
him sound againe; whereof I feare there it little
hope. There was neuer aduersarie that gaue more
aduantage: hee might haue serued in th
                     •
                  se Coleworts
neerer home. I professe I doe hartilyThis ap
                        •
                     eares by your railing on him, as hee that iustified himselfe from swearing, by 
                        ••
                     wd swearing By God hee did not 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  pittie

him; and so if it please you let him know from me.
What Apostacie (which is the onely hard word I
can be charged with)This were in pro
                        •
                     e one a
                        •
                     surdi
                        •
                     y by a greater & to vndert
                        •
                      be that some one Text of Scripture is false or f
                        •
                     ged because all the whole Bible is 
                        〈◊〉
                      Or hauing called one a Iew or Bas
                        •
                     ard &c. to make him amends by 
                        •
                     elling him all his kinred were such. But that Book
                        •
                      and Chapter is indeede 
                        •
                     ittifully professed: And by it and 
                        〈◊〉
                      nuating here 
                        〈◊〉
                      offence of 
                        •
                     oo much chari
                        •
                     e may be easily 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        ••
                     
                     stance of your proficiencie on 
                        〈◊〉
                     . impute to the Roman
Church I haue professed to the world in the first
Chapter of my Roma Irreconciliabilis: if I offend
not in too much charitie, there is no feare: say what
you will for me, I haue done, and will onely pray
for him that answers me with contempt: farewell,
and commend mee to Master Sotheby, and your
other louing and reuerend Societie; and know
mee euer,
               
                  Your truely louing friend
and fellow labourer, IOS. HALL.
                  
                  Waltam. Ian,
10. 1615.
                  
               
               
                  Good Master Bedell, this Letter hath lien thus long by
me for want of carriage. I now heare you are setled at
Horningsherth. whereby I wish you much ioy. I am appointed
to attend the Ambassador into France, whither
I pray you follow me with your praiers.
                  
                     
                        May 15.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               To my Reuerend and worthy
friend Master Doctor HALL,
at Waltham deliuer this.
               
                  SAlutem in Christo. Good Master Doctor, this
Letter of yours since my receipt of it, hath beene a
traueller, further then you or I; which being some
moneths since returned into England, I returne to
you that it may relate what entertainment it hath
found in forraine parts. It is now a yeare and more
that I receiued a Letter from Master Waddesworth,
challenging an old debt of me, an answere
to his Letters which occasioned this of yours. I wrote
backe, and among other things enclosed this your
Letter, which he hath censured as you see. His answere
by reason of the sicknesse of the Gentleman that
brought it, first at Paris, and after at Bruxels came
not to me till the latter end of May, and now lately
another I receiued from him, wherein he desires a
Copie both of your Text and his Glosse, as he cals
it, as hauing reserued none for haste. I haue not yet
sent him my answere to his Motiues which hath long
layen by me for lacke of leisure to copie it out, and
meanes safely to conuey it, being well towards a
quire of Paper. My auncient fault, tediousnesse. But
the Gentleman that brought me his former Letter,
hath vndertaken ere long to consigne it into his
hands. Therein I endeauour to vse him with the
best respect I can deuise, onely oppugning the Papacy

and Court of Rome. Now Sir, that which I would
entreate of you, is this: You know the Precept of the
Apostle touching them that are fallen, lend me your
hand to set him in ioynt againe. And be pleased not
onely not to reflect vpon the weakenesse of his Glosse,
but not so much as vpon the strength of his stomacke 
                     •
                  
though that bee also weakenesse, as Saint Augustine
well cals it,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  infirmitas animositatis Writ a letter
to him in the Character 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
Which shall either goe with mine, or be sent shortly
after. Who can tell what God may worke? Surely, at
least we shall heape coales of fire vpon his head. Although
if all be true that I heare, it is not to be despaired
but he may be deliuered out of the snare of error,
the rather because he hath not that reward or
contentment which he expected. He liues now at Madrid
with the Persian Ambassador Sir Robert Sherly,
and hath good maintenance from him, being as
his Steward, or Agent. The kinde vsage of his ancient
friends, may perhaps bring him in loue with his
countrie againe, &c. This for that businesse. Now.
&c.
               
                  
                     October 2▪ 1620.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To the worshipfull my very good
friend Master IAMES WADDESWORTH
at Madrid
deliuer this.
               Salutem in Christo Iesu.
               SIr, I receiued by Master Fiston your letters of the
eight of Iune, and as I hope ere this time you vnderstand,
the former which I mention in them: to
which I wrote in answere, and deliuered the same to
Master Aston the 15. of the same Moneth. Doctor
Hals letter with your marginall Notes which in
your last you require, I send you herein enclosed.
Though if I may perswade or intreate you both, neither
should the Text nor Glosse make you multiply
any more words thereabout. Vpon the receipt of your
Letter I spake with Master Aston, who told me that
he held his resolution for Spaine, whereupon I resolued
also to send by him mine answer to your first:
as thinking it better to doe it more safely, though a
a little later, then sooner, with lesse safetie. And here
Sir at length you haue it. Wherein as to my moderation
for the manner, I hope you shall perceiue that
setting aside our difference in opinion, I am the same
to you that I was when we were either Schollers together
in Emmanuell Colledge, or Ministers in
Suffolke. For the substance, I doe endeauour still
to write to the purpose, omitting nothing materiall

in your Letters. If sometimes I seeme ouerlong, and
perhaps to digresse somewhat from the principall
point more then was necessary, I hope you will pardon
it, sith you required a full answere, and the delay it
selfe had neede to bring you some interest for the forbearance.
And because you mention the vehemencie
of discreete Lawyers (although me thinkes we are
rather the Clients themselues, that contend, since our
faith is our owne and our best freehold) let me entreate
of you this ingenuitie) which I protest in the
sight of God I bring my selfe.) Let vs not make head
against euident reason, for our owne credit, or fashion,
and factions sake, as Lawyers sometimes are wont.
Neither let vs thinke we loose the victory, when
truth ouercomes. We shall haue part of it rather,
and the better part, since errour the common enemy
to vs both, is to vs more dangerous. For truth is secure
and impregnable; we, if our Errour be not conquered,
must remaine seruants to corruption. It is
the first praise, saith Saint Augustine, to hold the
true opinion, the next to forsake the false. And
surely that is no hard masterie to doe, when both are
set before vs, if we will not be either retchlesse, or obstinate.
From both which our Lord of his mercy euermore
helpe vs, and bring vs to his euer lasting
Kingdome. Amen.
               
               
                  Horningshearth, Octo.
22. 1620.
                  
                  
                     Your very louing Brother
W. BEDELL.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE COPIES
OF CERTAINE
LETTERS, &c.
            Salutem in Christo Iesu.
            
               CHAP. I.
               Of the Preamble. The titles Catholique, Papist,
Traytor, Idolater.
               
                  SIr, I doe first returne you heartie thankes,
for the truth and constancie of your loue,
and those best effects of it, your wishing mee
as well as to your selfe, and reioycing in my safe
returne out of Italy. For indeede further I
was not: though reported to haue beene
both at Constantinople and Ierusalem, by reason of the
neerness
                     •
                   of my name to one Master William Bidulph, the
Minister of our Merchants at Aleppo, who visited both
those places.
               I thanke you also, that your ancient loue towards mee,
hath (to vse that word of the Apostle) now flourished againe,
in that after so many yeeres, you haue found opportunitie
to accomplish your promise of writing to mee:
though not as ye vndertooke of the state of Religion there,

yet which I confesse I no lesse desired, the Motiues of the
forsaking that you had professed here. Whereof since it
hath pleased you, as yee write, now to giue mee an account,
and by me to Master Doctor Hall, with some expectation
also as it appeares of reply from one of vs, I will vse the
libertie which you giue me, and as directly as I can for the
matter, and in Christian termes for the manner, shew you
mine opinion of them, wherein I shall endeauour to obserue
that Precept of the Apostle; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whether
it be to be interpreted, louing sincerely, or seeking truth
louingly. Neither soothing vntruth for the dearnesse of
your person, nor breaking charitie for diuersitie of opinion.
With this entrance, my louing friend, and if you refuse not
that old Catholike name, my deare brother, I come to your
Letter. Wherein though I might well let passe that part
which concernes your quarrell with Master Doctor Hall,
with aetatem habet; yet thus much out of the common presumption
of charitie, which thinkes not euill, giue mee
leaue to say for him, I am verily perswaded he neuer meant
to charge you with Apostasie in so horrible a sense as you
count, viz. a totall falling from Christian Religion, like that
of Iulian, an obstinate pertinacy 
                        •
                     n denying the principles of the
Faith necessarie to saluation, or a renouncing your Baptismee
The terme Apostasie, as you know, doth not alwaies sound
so hainously. A Monke forsaking his Order, or a Clerke
his habit, is in the Decretals stiled an Apostata. Granatensis
saith not vntruly, that euery deadly sinne is a kinde
of Apostasie. The Apostle Saint Paul speaking of Antichrists
times, saith, there must come an Apostasie before
Christs second comming: and how this shall be he shewes
elsewhere. Men shall giue heede to spirits of error, and doctrines
of Deuils, and such as speake falsehood in hypocrisie
                        •
                     
                  
Whereby it seemes that Antichrist himselfe shall not professedly
renounce Christ and his Baptisme. His Kingdome
is a mysterie of iniquitie; a reuolt therefore, not from the
outward profession, but inward sinceritie and power of the

Gospel. This kinde of Apostasie might bee that which
Master Hall was sory to finde in you, whom hee thought
fallen from the truth, though not in the principles of
Christian doctrine, yet in sundry conclusions which the
reformed Churches truely out of them maintaine. He remembred
our common education in the same Colledge,
our common oath against Popery, our common calling
to the same sacred function of the Ministery, he could not
imagine vpon what reasons you should reuerse these beginnings.
And certainly, how weightie and sufficient soeuer
they be, wee are not taught by our Catholicke religion
to reuenge our selues, and render reproch for reproch
with personall termes; much lesse to debase and auile the
excellent gifts of God, as is Po
                     •
                  sie, the honour of Dauid
and Salom
                        •
                     n, by the testimony of the holy Ghost himselfe.
These courses are forbidden vs when wee are reiled vpon,
and calumniated; how much more when as Saint Peter
speakes, wee are beaten for our faults; as it falls out in your
case, if these motiues of yours be weake and insufficient;
which we shall anon consider.
               You say, you are become Catholicke. Were you not then
so before? The Creed whereinto you were baptized, is it
not the Catholicke faith? The conclusion 
                     •
                  ertes of Athanasius
Creed, which is but a declaration thereof, saith,
Haec est fides Catholica.
                  This is the Ca
                     
                        •
                     holike 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Or is not he a Catholick that holds
the Catholicke faith? That which was once answered,
touching the present Church of England, to one in a Stationers
shop in Venice, that would needs know what was
the difference betwixt vs and the Catholickes. It was told
him none: for we accounted our selues good Catholicks.
When he vnwilling to bee put of in his answer, for lacke
of due forme in his question, pressed to know what was
the difference betwixt vs and them there. He was a swered,
This; that wee beleeued the Catholicke faith conta
                     •
                  
                  ned
in the Creed, but did not beleeue the thirteenth Ar
                     ••
                  
                  cle
which the Pope had put to it. When he knew not of

any such Article; the Extrauagant of Pope Boniface was
brought, where hee defines
                        ••
                      to bee altogether of necessitie to
saluation, to euery humane creature to bee vnder the Bishop of
Rome. This thirteenth Article, of the thirteenth Apostle,
good Master Wadesworth, it seemes you haue learned, and
to are become, as some now speake and write Catholike
Romane. That is in true interpretation Vniuersall-particular
                        •
                     
                  
which because they cannot bee equalled, the one 
                     •
                  estraining
and cutting off from the other, take heed that by
streightning your faith to Rome, you haue not altered
it, and by becomming Romane, left off to bee Catholike.
               
               
                  Thus, if you say, our ancestors were all till of late yeeres.
Excuse mee Sir, whether you call our ancestors the first
Christian Inhabitants of this Ile, or the ancient Christians
of the Primitiue Church; neither those, nor these were
Roman-Catholikes; Namely, the Fathers of the African
Councell, and amongst these Saint Augustine: and therefore
by Pope Boniface his sentence bee vndoubtedly damned
for taking vpon them, by the Deuils instinct (if wee
beleeue another
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  Pope Boniface) to waxe proud against
the Church of Rome. Such Catholikes, if yee meane the
most of Christendome be at this day. Beware of putting your
selfe vpon that issue. Beleeue mee, either yee must frame a
new Cosmography, yes, a new world, or else yee are
gone if it come to most voyces in Christendome. Touching
the names of Papist, Traytor, Idolater. The first is no
mis-calling you, as comprizing the very character that
difference
                     •
                  h you from all other Catholikes. Neither by
our Rhemists aduice should you be ashamed of it, sith to
be a Papist,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   by their interpretation is nothing else, but to bee
a Christian man, a childe of the Church, and subiect to Christs
V
                        •
                     car. The wise State of Venice haue a little different notion
of their Papaelines, excluding from sundry their consultations
vnder that name, such of the Nobilitie as are
obliged to the Pope by Ecclesiasticall promotions. True

it is that they apply it also to Papalines in faction, such as
are superstitiously deuoted to the maintaining of all the
Popes vsurped authoritie; in which sense shope you are
no Papist.
               A Traytor I am assured M
                     •
                  ster Doctor Hall will neuer
call you, vnlesse hee know that you haue drunke so deepe
of the Cup of error, as to beleeue the Pope 
                     •
                  y depose
your Prince; that you are not bound to obey him being
so deposed; that in that case, it is lawfull, yea meritorious
to kill him; that they are Mar
                     •
                  yrs that are executed 
                     〈◊〉
                  
plotting to blow him vp with Gun-powder, though vndeposed;
hoping it would bee no lesse agreeable to hi
                     •
                  
Holinesse, then (that which hee desired) to haue kep
                     •
                   him
from comming to the Crowne at first. If you be thus perfectly
a Papist, not onely wee here in England, but I beleeue
his Catholicke Maiestie, vnder whose obedience
now ye liue, whensoeuer he should be that Prince, would
account you a Traytor, and punish you accordingly. I
hope you are farre from these furies.
               For Idolatry, if to giue diuine honour to creatures, deserue
that name, consider how you can defend or excuse
those prayers to the Blessed Virgin, Tu no
                        •
                      ab 
                        •
                     oste protege.
& 
                        •
                     or â mortis suscipe. And to the Crosse, Augepus 
                        ••
                     stitiam
re
                        •
                     sque dona veniam: I omit to speake of the Popes
Omnipotencie. I hope also you keepe your selfe from this
Idolatry.
               
                  In Protestant religion, you say, you coui
                        •
                      neuer 
                        ••
                     nae V
                        ••
                     
                     formitie
of a settled Faith. How so? when you had that
same
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  one onely immoueable and vnreforma
                        •
                     ie 
                        •
                     nie of 
                        •
                     aith
as Tertullian calls it, euery Lords day recited 
                     •
                  n your 
                     •
                  earing,
if not by your mouth. I meane the Creea, of which
Irenaeus
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . saith, that hee which is able to say much of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
exceeds it not, nor hee that lesse 
                        〈◊〉
                     . which Saint Augustine
cals the rule common to great and 
                        〈◊〉
                     ; which mig
                     ••
                  
well enough haue settled and quieted 
                        〈◊〉
                      conscience. wh
                     •
                  
                  lest
you laboured to finde the truth in all doubtfull questions.

Whereto how carefully and diligently you vsed the
meanes of reading, studying, and praying for three or foure
yeeres, God and your conscience best know. For conferring,
I cannot yeeld you any testimonie, notwithstanding
our familiaritie, and that we were not many miles asunder,
and you were also priuie, that I had to doe in these
controuersies with some of that side, and saw some sample
of the worke. I come now to your motiues.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of the Contrarietie of Sects pretanded to bee
amongst Reformers.
               IN the front whereof is the comm
                     •
                  on exception, to our
contrar
                        •
                     etie of sects and opinions, &c. First, what are all
these to the Church of England, which followeth none
but Christ? Then, if it be a fault of the reformed Churches,
that there is strife and diuision amongst them, as
who will iustifie it; yet let it finde pardon, if not for
Corinths sake,1. Cor. 3. 3. Socrat. 1. 4. c. 2
                        •
                     . and the Prim
                     •
                  tiue Churches what time Themistius
was faine to excuse it with an Oration to Valens
the Emperour, yet euen for Romes: where also you cannot
but know, that in very many and most important points,
Diuines hold one thing and Canonists another; The French,
and lately also the Venetian Diuines, resist to his face, him,
that others say no man may bee so hardie as to aske, Domine
cur ita facus? though he should draw with him innumerable
soules to hell. Your Spanish Prelates and Diuines, would
neuer acknowledge in the Councell of Trent (the mysteries
whereof are come out at last) that Episcopall authoritie
was deriued from him, nor consent to that circum
                  
                     •
                  enting
clause Proponentibus Legatis, &c. and were strong
that residence is, de iure diuino; howsoeuer they were ouerruled
by the Italian faction: whether they haue yet changed
their mindes, you can better tell then I. The old faction

of the Thomists and Scotists is yet a foot, as I perceiue
by Rada his Controuersies. In the beginning whereof the
Censor of the Booke hath this sentence. Qua prop
                        •
                     er audiendi
nullatonus sunt, qui has Theologicas contentiones è medio
omnino expl
                        •
                     dendas arbitrantur. There is another lately risen
betweene the Dominicans and the Iesuites; both in as
great matters, and pursued with as great vehemencie, as
those of the reformed Churches, excepting onely a few
fierie spirits of Saxony. But in the Church of England, as
reformation was not brought in by any one man, but by
the ioynt consent of the whole, so it is yet continued. Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Caluinists, are not knowne among vs,
saue by hearesay. Whereof it is some signe, that your selfe
doe not know them well, as it seemes, when you distinguish
them from Protestants. A name first giuen to the
Princes and free Cities of Germany, that sought reformation
in the Diet at Spire, Anno 1529. and from them passed
to vs and other Countries where it was effected. Who
are then Protestants, if the Lutherans and Zuinglians bee
not? For of both these there were in that Diet; the Heluetians
and parts adioyning of Germany, hauing beene reformed
at home, first by the preaching of Zuinglius; the
Saxons, and the remnant of Luther. Who much about one
time and without any correspondence, began to oppose
the Popes Indulgences, and differed not for ought that
euer I could yet vnderstand, saue in the manner of Christs
presence in the Eucharist. Yea, in that also taught vniformely,
that the bodie and bloud of our Sauiour are present;
not to the Elements, but to the receiuer, in the vse,
and without Transubstantiation. As for those whom you
call Caluinists; and the rest Puritanes, Cartwrightists, and
Brownists, tell mee in good sooth, Master Wadesworth, how
doe they differ from the reformed Churches in Helueti
                        •
                     ,
or the Church of England, saue in the matter of gouernment
onely? See th
                     •
                  n all this contrarietie of Sects meetly
well reconclled. For Puritanes, Cartwrightists, and Brownists,
                  
are in substance of Doctrine all one with Caluinists,
and these with Zwinglians, who were of the first Protestants,
and differ litle or nothing from those whom yee call
Lutherans. Whereof this may bee a sensible proofe, that
commonly their Aduersaries and your selfe after call them
by the same name, the Protestant Churches in Germanie,
France, Holland, and Geneua. And Pope Leo the tenth in
his condemnatorie Bull; and likewise Charles the fifth in
his Imperiall Edict, doe reflect wholly vpon Luther and
his followers, without any mention of the other at all. To
conclude this matter; as it is vndoubtedly a signe of a
good minde to dislike contention, and diuersities of opinions,
and it may haue pardon to apprehend sometimes
more then there is indeed; like to the melancholike old
man in the Comedie, whose suspition makes him to multiply
on this manner.Plaut. Aulular. 
                  Qui mihi intromisisti in aedes quingentos
coquos, so to muster vp emptie names, without any
reall difference, as Pur
                        •
                     tans, Cartwrightists, Brownists; to
make differences in a few opinions about Gouernment or
Sacraments, Sects and contrarieties, hath not the character
of ingenuous and sincere dealing, which from you Master
Waddesworth, I did and doe expect.
               But some of these damne each other, auouching their Positions
to be matters of Faith, not Schoole questions of opinion only.
Here indeed there is fault on all sides in this Age, that
we cannot be content with the bounds which the ancient
Church hath set, but euery priuate opinion must be straight-wayes
an Article of Faith. Euery decision of a Pope, euery
Decree of a Councell. And then as men are easily enamored
of their owne conceits, and as Gerson wisely applies
that of the Poet, Qui amant sibi somnia fingunt; as
if the very marrow of Religion consisted in those points,
those that thinke otherwise are Heretikes, and in state of
damnation. The Roman faction goes further, to Fire and
Faggot, and all exquisite torments, as if those things that
make against the Papacie, were more seuerely to bee punished

then the blasphemies of the Iewes, or Mahumetisme
it selfe. I doe not excuse the reformers of this bitternesse,
wherein after your departure out of England, my
namelesse Aduersarie that vnder-tooke Master Alablasters
quarrell, giuing me ouer in three of his demands, ran riot
in the first, about this point of opposition among our selues,
and raked together all the vehement speeches of Luther,
and some of his followers, against those whom they call
the Sacramentaries. Why, who will vndertake to defend
Lutbers speeches, or all that falls from contentious pens?
But euen out of those testimonies, which himselfe brings
for the worst that hee could on the contrarie part; it appeares,
this eagrenesse is not mutuall. And in truth, both
we in England, and the Helue
                        •
                     ians, and French, doe maintaine
a brotherly affection towards them of Saxonie, how
spitefully soeuer some of them write of vs. And euen of
those whom he calls Lutherans, as I perceiued while I was
at Norimberg, the moderater sort are alike affected towards
vs. But as touching the auouching our opinions to be matters
of Faith (which exception is common to you with
him) that which I should haue answered him, if I had
found in him any thing but spite and scorne, I will say
now to you. Verily in some sort euen the least conclusions
in Diuinitie are matters of Faith. For both Faith hath to
doe with them, and they are fetched by discourse, from the
first Principles holden by Faith, whence our whole Religion
is called by Saint Iude, the Faith once deliuered to the
Saints. And the least error in them, by consequence ouerthrowes
the same principles whence they are deduced.
That makes some, to mooue attention in their Readers to
say, The questions are not about small matters, but of the principall
Articles of Religion, euen about the foundation. As Cu
                     
                        •
                     aeus
whom he cites, saith, the question is of two Articles
of Faith. First, of that which teacheth that in Christ two natures
are vnited. Secondly, of the Article, He ascended into
Heauen. Why? doe not both sides agree to these? Yes.

But one side fetches arguments against vbiquitie from these
places, and thereupon saith, the question is about these
Articles; perhaps also chargeth the other to denie them.
Hee cites Pappus writing thus, Agitur inter nos de Omnipotentia
Dei, &c. The controuersie betwixt vs, is about the
Omnipotencie of God. The personall vnion of the two natures in
Christ. The communication of properties. The glorious body
of our Sauiour, &c. Loe againe, euery place of argument or
defence is made the matter of Controuersie. Out of these
and such like confessions on either side, my namelesse Aduersarie
will needes enforce, with great pompe and triumph;
what thinke yee? That such sanctified men (this is
his scoffing language) goe not together by the eares for Moonshine
in the water. Againe, That all those Myrmidonian fights
and bloudie encounters bee not de lanâ Caprinâ aut de vmbrâ
asini—Why, who said they were? I will set downe here
my wordes, that you may iudge of the conscience of this
man, and haue with all the substance of my answere to
this obiection. And what if some outragious spirits on each
side, trans
                        •
                     ported with passion in their oppositions, haue vsed most
bitter and vnbeseeming speeches to their Aduersaries, and
sometimes haue shewed each other small humanitie; are you
so simple as not to discerne betweene the choller of some few opinionate
men, and the consequence of their opinions? Haue you
forgotten Saint Hierome and Ruffinus deadly foe-hood, which
was rung ouer the world? or Epiphanius and Chrysostomes,
or Victors and the Greeke Bishops? which proceeded so farre
about a trifle, that hee excommunicated them; which is little
lesse I thinke then to condemne to the pit of Hell. And yet if I
should put it to your iudgement, I am perswaded you would
grant they held all truth necessarie to saluation. For you must
remember Pope Boniface had not yet coyned the new Article of
the Faith, that I mentioned before. What shall I speake of Saint
Paul and Barnabas, which grew to such bitternesse, and that
about a very little question of conueniency, that though they were
sent out together by the Holy Ghost, they brake off companie.

These be humane passions, which wisedome would we should pittie,
when they grow to such extremities, vpon so small cause;
rather then from their outrage to gather there is iust cause to
encrease. Doe we not see that euen naturall brethren doe sometimes
defie one another, and vse each other with lesse respect
then strangers? Now from hence would you conclude they bee
not brethren; and hearten them on, and say to the one, that
sith his halfe brother is not so neere to him, as he with whom he
is thus at oddes, hee must fall out worse with him. You should
well so deserue the hate of God, for a make-hate betweene brethren.
These were all my wordes set downe in answere to
his obiecting our owne contentions and condemning each other,
to proue that therefore we could not hold continuitie with
the ancient Church of England, from which we dissented
much more. I held as you may perceiue, that neither amongst
our selues, nor from our predecessors wee disagree
in any truth necessarie to saluation. Hee makes me to say,
our dissentions are about Moone shine, and de vmbrâ asini, &
de la
                     •
                  â caprinâ, and tr
                        •
                     fles, and matters of no consequence. To
returne to you, good Master Waddesworth, let men auouch
as confidently as they will touching their owne positions,
Est de Fide. N
                        •
                     hil certius apud Catholicos, and of their contraries
crie out. They are Heretikes, renew ancient heresies,
race the foundation, denie the Articles of the Creede, Gods 
                        ••
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     ipoteney,
&c. all because themselues by discourse, can (as
they thinke) fasten such things vpon them: A sober Christian
must not giue heede to all that is said in this kinde.
These things must be examined with right iudgement, and
euer with much charitie, and patience, remembring that
our selues know in part, and prophesie in part. In a word
                     •
                  
this should not haue so much disquieted you.
               Nor yet that which you adde, That euery one pretends
Scripture. Best of all,
                  Hom. 33. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Act. saith Saint Chrysostome, For if wee
should say we beleeue humane reasons, thou mightest with good
reason 
                     〈◊〉
                   troubled, but when as we receiue the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and
they bee simple and true, it will 
                     〈…〉
                   thing for 
                     〈◊〉
                   to

i
                     •
                  dge, &c. And to what purpose indeed serues the facultie
of 
                     •••
                  son perfected and polished with learning? wherefore
the supernaturall light of Faith? wherefore the gift
of God in vs Ministers con
                     •
                  erred by the imposition of
hands? but 
                     〈◊〉
                   which side handles the Word of God
deceitfully, which sincerely. But here againe, Each side
arrogates the Holy Ghost in his fauour. What then? If wee
our selues haue the anointing,
                  1. Ioh. 2. 20. 27 & 4. 1. we shall be able as we are bidden
to trie the spirits, whether they bee of God or no? For wee
will not b
                     •
                  leeue them, because they say they haue the Spirit,
or cannot bee deceiued, but because their Doctrine is
consonant to the principles of heauenly Truth, which by
the writings inspired by himselfe, the Holy Ghost hath
grauen in our hearts. Which writings are well acknowledged
by you, to be the Law and Rule, according whereunto,
in iudgement of Religion we must proceede.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Of the want of a humane externall infallible Iudge
and Interpreter.
               AS to that you say, did about all trouble you, the want of
a certaine humane externall infallible Iudge to interpret
Scripture, and define Questions of Faith without error. What
if you found not an externall humane Iudge, if you had an
internall diuine one? And hauing an infallible Rule by
which your humane Iudge should proceede, why should
you trust another mans applying it, rather then your own,
in a matter concerning your owne saluation? But i
                     •
                   God
haue left vs no such externall Iudge, if Antiquitie knew

                     〈◊〉
                  , if Religion neede none, it was no iust motiue to
leaue vs, that you could finde none, amongst all those Sects
which 
                     〈…〉
                  . And how much lesse if you haue 
                     〈…〉
                  
amended your selfe where you are; which we shall
consider by and by?
               
                  
I say then first, that to make this your motiue of any
moment, it must be shewed, that God hath appointed such
a Iudge in his Church. Let that appeare out of some passage
of holy Scripture. For your conceit or desire that such
a Iudge there should be, to whom you might in conscience
obey, and yeeld your selfe, because he could not err
                     •
                  , doth
not proue it. You would know the Truth, onely by the
authoritie, and sole pronouncing of the Iudges mouth. A
short and easie way, which to most men is plausible, because
it spares the paines of studie and discourse. To such
especially, as either out of weaknesse dare not trust their
owne iudgement, or account it shall haue the merit of humilitie,
to bee led by their Teachers. But what now if
God will haue you call no man your Father vpon earth? If he
will send you to his Word? and after you haue receiued the
Faith by the Churches testimonie out of the easie and
plaine places thereof, bid you search the Scriptures, to finde
the Truth in the remnant, and pick it out by your owne
industrie.Luke 16. The rich man being in hell torments (in whose
wordes I doubt not but our Sauiour doth impersonate and
represent the conceits of many men liuing in this world)
presumes that if one were sent from the dead his Kinsmen
would hearken to him, but he is remitted to Moses and the
Prophets. The Iewes as I perceiued by speech with some of
them at Venice, make it one of their motiues, that our
Lord Iesus is not the Christ. He should not, say they, haue
come in such a fashion, to leaue his owne Nation in doubt and
suspence; and scandalize so many thousands; but so as all
men might know him to be what he was. Miserable men! that
will giue lawes to God. Of which fault be you a ware also
(good Master Waddesworth) and be content to take, not
to prescribe the meanes by which you will be brought vnto
the knowledge of the Truth▪ to vse what hee hath giuen,
not to coniecture and diuine what he must giue.
               But God failes not his Church in such meanes as be necessarie.

Let vs therefore consider the necessitie of this
Iudge. Where I beseech you consider (for I am sure you
cannot but know it) that all things necessary to saluation are
euidently set downe in holy Scripture? This both the Sciptures
themselues doe teach, and the Fathers auouch, namely
Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostome, and others. I forbeare
to set downe their words, or further to confirme this
Lemma, which I proued at large against another aduersarie,
and shall at all times make good if it be questioned. Besides
these points, there are a great manie other though not of
such necessitie, yet euidently laid downe also in the same
Scriptures, by occasion of them. Manie by iust discourse
may be cleared from these, and the former. If any thing
yet remaine in suspence, and vnknowne, yea or if you will
erred in, so it be not wilfully and obstinately, yet shall it
be euer without perill of damnation to him that▪ receiueth
what the holy Ghost hath plainely deliuered. What necessitie
then of your imaginarie Iudge? Yes▪ for Vnitie is
a goodly thing, not onely in matters necessarie, but vniuersally
in all. Controuersies must not bee endlesse. But
how comes it to passe then that your Iudge, whosoeuer hee
be, doth not all this while decide the question touching the
Conception of the Blessed Virgin, that is betweene the
Dominicans, and Franciscans, nor that betweene the Dominicans
and Iesuites touching Grace and Free-will; and all other
the points that are controuerted in the Schooles; to
spare contention and time (a precious commoditie among
wise men) and giue this honour to Diuinitie alone, that in

                     •
                  t all doubts should be reduced to certainties? Or if it seeme
no wisedome to bee hastie in deciding such questions;
wherein wittie and learned men are engaged, least in stead
of changing their opinions, they should fall to challenge
not onely the infallibilitie, but which were more dangerous
the authoritie of their Iudge: If it be thought better to leaue
scope to opinions, opposition it selfe profitably seruing to

the boulting out of the truth. If vnitie in all things bee as
it seemes despaired of, by this your Gellius himselfe;Cic. 
                        •
                     . de Legibus. why
are wee not content with vnitie in things necessary to saluation,
expresly set downe in holy Scripture: and anciently
thought to suffice, reseruing infallibilitie as an honour proper
to God speaking there? Why should it not be thought
to suffice, that euery man hauing imbraced that necessarie
truth, which is the rule of our faith, thereby trie the spirits
whether they be of God or no. If hee meete with any that
hath not that doctrine, receiue him not to house, nor salute
him. If consenting to that, but otherwise infirme or
erring, yet charitably beare with him. This for euery priuate
man. As for the publike order & peace of the Church,
God hath giuen Pastors and Teachers, that we should not
bee carried about with euery winde of doctrine, and amongst
them appointed Bishops,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   to command that men
teach no other or forraine doctrine, which was the end of
Timothy his leauing at Ephesus, 1. Tim. 1. 3. Then, the Apostles
themselues by their example, haue commended to
the Church the wholsome vse of Synodes,Act. 15. 6. to determine of
such controuersies as cannot by the former meanes be composed;
but still by the holy Scriptures, the Law or Rule, as
you say well, by which all these Iudges must proceede. Which
if they doe not, then may they be deceiued themselues, and
deceiue others as experience hath shewed, yet neuer bee
able to extinguish the truth.
               To come to Antiquitie. There is not any one thing belonging
to Christian Religion, if wee consider well, of
more importance, then how the puritie of the whole may
bee maintayned. The Ancients that write of the rest of
Christian Doctrine, is it not a miracle, had they knowne
any such infall
                     •
                  ble Iudge, in whose Oracle the securitie of
all, with the perpetuall tranquillitie of the Church is contayned,
they should say nothing of him? There was neuer
any Age wherein there haue not beene heresies, and sects▪
                  
to which of them was it euer obiected that they had no
infallible Iudge? How soone would they haue fought to amend
that defect, if it had beene a currant doctrine in
those times, that the true Church cannot bee without
such an Officer? The Fathers that dealt with them, why
did they not lay aside all disputing, and appeale them only
to this Barre? Vnlesse perhaps that were the let which
Cardinall Bellarmine tells the Venetians,
                  Rispos
                        •
                     a ad vn
                        •
                      lettera, &c. hindered Saint
Paul from appealing to Saint Peter, l
                        •
                     st they should haue
made their Aduersaries to laugh at them for their labour.
Well: howsoeuer the Cardinall hath found out a merrie
reason for Saint Paules appealing to Caesars iudgement,
not Peters, lest hee should expose himselfe to the laughter
of Pagans: what shall wee say when the Fathers write
professedly to instruct Catholike men,Tertull. de Praescript. &c. of the forepleadings
and aduantages to bee vsed against Heretikes, euen without
descending to triall by Scriptures? or of some certaine generall
and ordinarie way to discerne the Truth of the Catholike
Faith from the prophane nouelties of heresies?
                  Vincent. Lyrine
                        •
                     s. Had they
knowne of this infallible Iudge, should wee not haue
heard of him in this so proper a place, and as it were in a
cause belonging to his owne Court. Nay, doth not the
writing it selfe of such bookes shew, that this mattter
was wholly vnknowne to Antiquitie? For had the
Church beene in possession of so easie and sure a Court to
discouer and discard heresies, they should not haue needed
to taske themselues to finde out any other. But the
truth is, infallibilitie is, and euer hath beene accounted
proper to Christs iudgement. And as hath beene
said, all necessarie Truth to saluation hee hath deliuered
vs in his Word. That Word, himselfe tells vs, shall
iudge at the last day. Yea, in all true decisions of Faith,
that Word euen now iudgeth, Christ iudgeth, the Apostle
sits Iudge▪ Christ speakes in the Apostle. Thus Antiquitie.
               
                  
Neither are they moued a whit with that obiection:
That the Scriptures are often the matter of Controuersies. For
in that case the remedie was easie which Saint Augustine
shewes to haue recourse to the plaine
                  Lib. de Vaitate. 
                  places, and manifest
such
                  Eccles. c. 5. &. 19. 
                  as should need no interpreter: for such there bee, by
which the other may bee cleered. The same may be said,
if sometimes it be questioned, which bee Scriptures, which
not. I thinke it was neuer heard of, in the Church, that
there was an externall infallible Iudge, who could determine
that question. Arguments may be brought from the
consent or dissent with other Scriptures, from the attestation
of Antiquitie, and inherent signes of diuine authoritie,
or humane infirmitie: but if the Auditor or Aduersarie
yeeld not to these, such parts of necessitie must needes be
laid aside. If all Scripture be denied (which is as it were
exceptio in iudicem ante litis contestationem) Faith hath no
place, onely Reason remaines. To which I thinke it will
scarce seeme reasonable, if you should say, though all men
are liers, yet this Iudge is infallible; and to him thou oughtest
in conscience to obey and yeeld thy vnderstanding in all his det
                        •
                     rminations,
for hee cannot erre. No not if all men in the
world should say it. Vnlesse you first set downe there is
a God, and stablish the authoritie of the bookes of holy
Scripture, as his voyce, and thence shew if you can, the
warrant of this priuiledge.
               Where you offi
                     •
                  me, the Scriptures to be the law and the
rule, but alone of themselues cannot bee Iudges; if you meane,
without being produced, applied, and heard; yee say truth.
Yet Nicodemus spake not a
                     •
                  isse,Ioh. 1. 51. when hee demanded,
Doth our law iudge any man, vnlesse it heare him first? hee
meant the same which Saint Paul, when hee said of the
high Priest, thou sittest to iudge me according to the law: and
so doe we when wee say the same. Neither doe wee send
you to Angels, or God himselfe immediately, but speaking
by his spirit in the Scriptures, and (as I haue right now
said) alledged, and by discourse applied to the matters in

question. As for Princes, since it pleased you to make an
excursion to them, if wee should make them infallible
Iudge, or giue them authoritie to decree in religion as
they list, as Gardiner did to King Henry the eight, it might
well bee condemned for monstrous, as it was by Caluin,
As for the purpose, Licere Regi interdicere populo vsum calicis
in Coena, Quarè? Potestas. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . summa est penes Regem,
quoth Gardiner. This was to make the King as absolute
a Tyrant in the Church, as the Pope claimed to bee. But,
that Princes which obey the truth, haue commandement from
God, to command good things, and forbid euill, not onely in
matters pertaining to humane societie, but also the religion of
God, this is no new strange doctrine, but Calums,
                  Institut. l. 4. c. 20. August. contr. Crescō. l. 3. c. 51. and ours,
and S. Augustines, is so many words. And this is all the
Head-ship of the Church wee giue to Kings. Whereof a
Queene is as well capable as a King, since it is an Act of
authoritie, not Ecclesiasticall Ministery; proceeding from
eminencie of power, not of knowledge, or holinesse.
Wherein not onely a learned King, as ours is; but a good
old woman (as Queene Elizabeth, besides her Princely
dignitie was) may excell as your selues confesse, your infallible
Iudge himselfe. But in power hee saith, hee is aboue
all: which not to examine for the present, in this power
Princes are aboue all their subiects I trow; and Saint Augustine
saith plainly, to command and forbid, euen in the religion
of God, still according to Gods Word, which is the
touchstone of good and euill. Neither was King Henry the
eight, the first Prince that exercised this power, witnesse
Dauid, and Salomon, and the rest of the Kings of Iudah
before Christ, And since that Kings were Christians▪ 
                  the
affaires of the Church haue depended vpon them, and the greatest
Synodes haue beene by their Decree,
                  Proëmiol. 5. 
                  as Socrates, expresly
saith. Nor did King Henry claime any new thing in this
Land, but restored to the Crowne the ancient right
thereof, which sundry his predecessors had exercised as
our Historians and Lawyers with one consent affirme.
               
                  
The rest of your induction of Archbishops, Bishops, and
whole Clergie in their Conuocation house, and a Councell of all
Lutherans, Caluinists, Protestants, &c. is but a needlesse
pompe of words, striuing to win by a forme of discourse,
that which gladly shall bee yeelded at the first demand.
They might all erre, if they were as many as the sand on
the sea shoare, if they did not rightly apply the rule of
holy Scriptures, by which, as you acknowledge the externall
Iudge, which you seeke, must proceed. As to your
demand therefore, how you should be sure when, and wherein
they did, and did not erre; where you should haue fixed your
foot? to forbeare to skirmish with your confirmation
(That though, à posse ad esse non valet semper consequentia,
yet, aliquando valet: &, frustra dicitur potentia quae nunquam
dueitur in actum.) To the former whereof I might
tell you, that without question, nunquam valet: and to the
second, that I can verie well allow, that errandi potentia,
among Protestants be euer frustra. This I say freely, that
if you come with this resolution to learne nothing by
discourse, or euidence of Scripture, but only by the meere
pronouncing of a humane externall Iudges mouth, to
whom you would yeeld your vnderstanding in all his determinations:
if, as the Iesuites teach their Schollers,Regula 1. & 1
                        •
                     . you
will wholly deny your owne iudgement, and resolue, that if this
Iudge shall say, that is blacke, which appeares to your eyes
white, you will say it is blacke too; you haue posed all the
Protestants; they cannot tell how to teach you infallibly.
Withall I must tell you thus much, that this preparation
of minde in a Scholler, as you are, in a Minister, yea in a
Christian, that had but learned his Creed, much more
that had from a childe knowne the holy Scriptures, that
are able to make vs wise to saluation,
                  1. Tim. 3. 15. 
                  through the faith that is
in Christ Iesus, were too great weakenesse, and to vse the
Apostles phrase childishnesse of vnderstanding.1. Cor. 14. 20.
               
               But at length you heard a sound of harmony and consent,
that in the Catholike Church, as in Noahs Arke was infallibilitie,

and possibilitie of saluation; which occasioned you to seeke
out, and to enter into this Arke of Noah. The sound of consent
and infallibilitie is most pleasing and harmonious,
and vndoubtedly euer and onely to bee found in the Catholike
Church, to wit, in the rule of Faith, and in the holy
Scriptures, and such necessarie doctrine as perfectly
concordeth with the same. But as in song many discords
doe passe in smaller notes, without offence of the eares, so
should they in smaller matters of opinion in the Church,
without the offence of iudicious and charitable mindes.
Which yet I speake not to iustifie them; nay, I am verily
of the minde, that this is the thing that hath marred the
Church musicke in both kindes, that too much libertie is
taken in descant to depart from the gound, and as one
saith, notae nimium denigrantur. The fault of the Italians:
though they thinke themselues the onely songsters in the
world. But to returne to you, tell me, I beseech you (good
Master Wadesworth) was this the harmonie that transported
you. The Pope himselfe saith, I cannot erre, and to mee
thou oughtest to haue recourse for decision of doubts in matters
of faith. And whereas this is not onely denied by Protestants,
but hath beene euer by the French, and anciently I
am sure by the Spanish, lately by some Italian Diuines
also, vnlesse hee vse due meanes to finde the truth; yea,
whereas it is the issue of all the Controuersies of this age;
in this snare you fastned your foot, this was the Center
that settled your conscience, this the solid and firme foundation
of your faith. What? and did it not moue you, that
some limit this infallibilitie of the Pope thus, if hee enter
Canonically, if hee proceed aduisedly, and maturely, vsing that
diligence that is fit to finde out the truth; that is (as you said
before) proceeding by the rule, the Scriptures? Albeit
to the Fathers of the African Councell it seemed incredible
(as they write in their Synodall Epistle to P. Coelestine
standing for appeales to himselfe) that God can inspire
the right i
                     •
                   t
                     •
                  iall to one, denying it to many Bishops in a

Councell. Tell vs then, who made you secure of these
things? or did you in truth, neuer so much as make question
of them, but hearing this harmonious sound; The
Pope is the infallible Iudge, you trusted the new Masters of
that side, Gregory de Valentia, and Bellarmine, that whether
the Pope in defining doe vse diligence or no, if hee doe define,
                  Analyst Fidei Cathol. pa 8. 
                  hee
shall define infallibly. Alas Sir! if this were the rest you found
for the soale of your foot, instead of moueable water, you fell
vpon mire and puddle; Or rather like to another Doue
mentioned in Scripture, columba seducta non habens cor,
                  Oseae, 2. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   by
the most chaffie shrap that euer was set before the eyes of
winged Fowle, were brought to the doorefall. Excuse
my griefe, mixed I confesse with some indignation, but
more loue to you, though I thus write. Many things there
be in Poperie inconuenient, and to my conceit weakely
and vngroundedly affirmed, to say no more; but this is
so absurd and palpably a flatterie, as to omit to speake of
you, for my part I cannot bee perswaded that Paulus the
fifth beleeues it himselfe. For consider I pray, what needed
anciently the Christian Emperours, and sometimes at the
request of the Bishops of Rome themselues, to haue gathered
together so many Bishops from so diuers parts of
the world to celebrate Councells, if it had beene knowne
and beleeued then, that one mans sentence might haue
cleered all controuersies, and put all heresies to silence?
How durst sundrie holy, and learned men haue reiected
his decisions, whether right or wrong is not now the question,
vnchristianly out of doubt on their parts, if hee had
beene then holden the infallible Oracle of our religion?
As when Polycrates, with the Bishops of Asia, and Irenaeus
also yeelded not to Victor, excommunicating the
Easterne Churches about the celebration of Easter, when
Saint Cyprian, with the first Councell of Carthage of eightie
sixe Bishops had decreed, that such as were baptized
by heretickes, should bee rebaptized, and certified Stephanus
of this Decree, and he opposed it, and would haue

nothing innouated, would Cyprian after that haue resisted
and confuted Stephanus his letter, had he knowne him for
infallible? And how doth hee confute him? as erring, writing
impertinently,
                  Epistol
                        •
                      ad Pompe
                        •
                     um. 
                  contrarie to himselfe. Yea, let it bee obserued,
that hee doth not onely not account Stephanus infallible,
but not so much as a Iudge ouer any Bishop. See
the Vote of Cyprian, and note those wordes. Neque enim
quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit,
ant tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos
adigit, quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentia libertatis &
potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicari ab alio non
possit cum nec ipse possit alterum i
                        •
                     dicare. Sed exspectemus vniuersi
iudiciū Domini nostri Iesu Christi, qui vnus & solus habet
potestatē & praeponendi in Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, & de actis
nostro iudicandi. A passage worthy to bee noted also, for
the cleering of the independence of Episcopall authoritie
from the Pope, which I now let passe. Neither was Saint
Cyprian herein alone: Firmilianus, and the Easterne Bishops,
resisted Stephanus no lesse, as appeares by his Epistle,
which in the Romane edition of Manutiu
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   set forth
by the command of Pius the fourth, with the suruey of
foure Cardinalls, whereof one is now a Saint, with exquisite
diligence; is wholly left out. And Pamelius saith hee
thinkes purposely, for himselfe is of the minde that it had
beene better it had neuer come forth. But to returne to
our purpose. The Fathers of the Councell of Africke, and
Saint Augustine amongst them, resist three Popes succeeding
each other, Zosimus, Boniface, and Coelestinus, about
appeales to Rome; shall we thinke they would euer haue
done it, if they had knowne or imagined them to be the
supreme and infallible Iudges in the Church? I let passe
the Schisme betweene the Greeke and the Latin Church,
which had not happened, if this doctrine had beene anciently
receiued. Nay, it is verie plaine in storie, that the
Bishop of Romes lifting vp himselfe to bee Vniuersall Bishop
chiefly caused it. To conclude, neither Liberius, nor

                  Honorius, to omit many other Bishops of Rome, had euer
beene taxed of heresie, if this had anciently beene currant,
that the Pope is infallible. I will not stand now to examine
the shamefull defence that Bella
                        •
                     mine makes for the
latter of these, bearing downe Fathers, Councells, Stories,
Popes themselues, as all falsified or deoeiued herein. Wherein
because hee is learnedly refuted by Doctor Raynolds, I
insist not vpon it. This I presse, that all those Writers and
Councels, and amongst them Pope Leo the second accursing
Honorius, did not then hold, that which by Pighius and
the Iesuites is vndertaken, that the Pope is infallible. Euen
the Councell of Basil, deposing Eugenius (for obstinately
resisting this truth of the Catholike faith, That the Councell
is aboue the Pope) as an Heretike, doth shew the sense of
Christendome euen in these latter times how corrupt soeuer,
both in rule, and practice.
               And because you make this infallible Iudge to be also an
infallible Interpreter of holy Scripture, how happens it that
Damasu
                        •
                     
                   Bishop of Rome consults with Hierome about
the meaning of sundrie Texts of Scripture, when it seems
himselfe might haue taken his pen, and set him downe
quickly, that which should haue taught both him and the
whole Church, not onely without danger but euen possibilitie
of error? Sure wee are little beholding to the diligence
of our Ancestors, that haue not more carefully registred
the Commentaries (or because they haue had for sundrie
Ages small time to write iust Commentaries) the expositions
which in their Sermons, or otherwise the Bishops
of Rome haue made of holy Scripture. A worke which if
this Doctrine were true, were more worth then all the
Fathers; and would iustifie that blasphemie of the Canon
Law, where by a shamefull corruption of Saint Augustine,
the Decretals of Popes are inrolled amongst the Canonicall
Scriptures.
                  
                     
                        •
                     . in 
                        〈◊〉
                      Dist. 19. I am alreadie too long in so plaine a matter:
yet one proofe more which is of all most sensible. Being
admonished by this your conceit of an infallible Interpreter,

I chanced to turne ouer the Popes Decretals, and obserued
the interpretation of Scriptures. What shall I say?
I finde them so leud, and cleane beside the purpose, yea oftentimes
so childish & ridiculous, both in giuing the sense,
and in the application, that I protest to you in the presence
of God, nothing doth more lothe me of Poperie, then the
handling of holy Scripture by your infallible Interpreter
alone. Consider a few of the particulars, and especially
such as concerne the Popes owne authoritie.Significasti de electione. Ioh. 21. 15. To iustifie his
exacting an oath of fealtie of an Archbishop, to whom he
grant
                     •
                   the Pall, is brought our Lord Iesus Christ who committing
the 
                        •
                     are of his Sheepe to Peter, did put too a condition,
saying, Sid diligis me pasce oues meas. Christ said, if thou
louest me feede my sheepe; Why may not the Pope say,
If you will sweare me fealtie, you shall haue the Pall. But
first hee corrupts the Text: Christ said not, If thou louest
mee: Then, Christ puts not Peters loue as a condition of
feeding, but feeding as a proofe and effect of his loue. And
if the feeding of Christs sheepe were sought, loue to him
and them might suffice to be professed, or if he would needs
haue more then Christ required, to be sworne. What is this
to the oath of fealtie? Straight after to the obiection, that
all oathes are prohibited by Christ, nor any such thing can bee
found appointed by the Apostles after the Lord, or in the Councels,
he vrges the wordes following in the Text,Matth. 5. 34. 
                  Sweare not
at all; quod ampli
                        •
                     s est à malo est, that is saith hee, Euill
compels vs by Christs permission to exact more. It is not euill
to goe from the Popes obedience? to condemne Bishops without
his priuitie? to translate Bishops by the Kings commandement?
See the place, and tell me of your Interpreters infallibilitie.
Treating of the translation of Bishops, or such as are
elected vnto other Sees, hee saith:Inter corpor. De translatione Episcopi. 
                  That since the spirituall
Bands is stronger then the carnall, it cannot be doubted but Almightie
God hath reserued the dissolution of the spirituall marriage
that is betwixt a Bishop and his Church, to his owne iudgement
alone;
                  Matth. 19. 26. 
                  charging that whom God hath 
                        •
                     oyned man seuer

not. For it is not by humane but rather diuine power that spirituall
marriage is dissolued, when as by translation or cession by
the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome (whom it is plaine to bee
the Vicar of Iesus Christ) a Bishop is remoued from his Church.
An admirable interpretation of the Text, Quos Deus coni
                        •
                     nxit!
by which the Pope not onely challengeth that
which is proper to Gods iudgement onely, as hee saith,
viz. to dissolue the bond of spirituall wedlock; but because
that is the stronger, of 
                     •
                  arnall it seemes also; when
it shall please him.
               The anointing of a Prince since Christs comming is translated
from the head to the shoulder,
                  De sacra Vnctione. Esay 9. 6. 1. Sam. 9. 24. 
                  by which Principalitie is
fitly designed, according to that which is read, Factus est principatus
super humorum eius; for signifying also whereof, Samuel
caused the shoulder to be set before Saul. Who should euer
haue vnderstood these Texts, if your infallible Interpreter
had not declared them? But this is nothing yet to
the exposition of those Texts which the Pope interprets
in his answere to the Emperor of Constantinople,Solicite. De maioritate. 1. Pet, 2. 13. as Subditi
estote omni humanae oreaturae propter Deum, &c. He tells
him that Saint Peter wrote that to his owne Subiects, to prouoke
them to the merit of humilitie. For if he had meant thereby
to lay the yoke of subiection vpon Priests, it would follow
that euery seruant were to rule ouer them, since it is said, omni
humanae creaturae. After, Iris not barely set downe, Regi
praecellenti, but there is put betweene, perhaps not without
cause; tanquam; And that which followes, ad vindictam malefactorum,
laudem vero bonorum,Vers. 14. 
                  is not to bee vnderstood
that the King or Emperor hath receiued the power of the sword
vpon good and euill men; saue onely those who vsing the sword
are committed to his iurisdiction according to that which the
Truth saith, They which take the sword shall perish with
the sword. For no man ought or can iudge anothers seruant,
                  Matth. 
                        •
                     6. 5
                        •
                     .
                  since the seruant according to the Apostle standeth or falleth to
his owne Lord. For the loue of God consider this interpretation,
and compare it with Saint Chrysto
                        •
                     e vpon Rom.
                  
13. Nay doe but reade the Text attentiuely, and iudge of
the infallibilitie of your Interpreter. Straight after hee
tells the Emperor, that hee might haue vnderstood the prerogatiue
of Priesthood out of that which was said, not of euery man
but of God, not to the King but to the Priest, not to one descending
of the Royall stocke but of the Priestly linage of the Priests,
to wit,
                  Ierem. 
                        •
                     . 10. 
                  which were in Anathot. Behold, I haue set you ouer nations
and kingdomes, to pull vp, and destroy, to build and to
plant. See the prerogatiue of the Priesthood out of Ieremies
calling to bee a Prophet. O if hee had beene high Priest!
This had beene a Text for the nonce. But hee goes on. It
is said in Gods Law also,Exod. 22. 
                        •
                     8.
                  Thou shalt not raile on the Gods, nor curse the Prince of 
                        •
                      thy people. Gen. 1. 16. 
                  Dijs non detrabes, & Principem populi
tui non maledices. Which setting Priests before Kings cals
them Gods, and the other Princes. Compare this exposition
with Dauids and Paules, Psal. 82. and Act. 23. 5. and yee
shall see how the Interpreter hath hit the marke. Againe,
yee ought to haue knowne, quod fecit Deus duo magna luminaria,
&c. See the exposition, and the difference betweene
the Pope and Kings both in the Text and Glosse.
Now although the Glosse writer were no excellent Calculator,
yet out of Clauius the account may bee cleared:
who tells vs the Sunne exceedes the Moone 6539. times
and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Io
                        •
                     . 21. 16. I let passe the collection out of Pasce oues meas, that

                     
                        •
                     e belongs not to Christs fold that doth not acknowledge Peter
and his Successors his Masters and Pastors:
                  Matth. 16. 19. out of Quodcuin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ligaueris, that nothing is excepted. Indeed the Pope
excepts nothing, but looseth Vowes, Contracts, Oathes,
the bond of Allegeance and Fealtie betweene Subiects and
their Princes: The Commandement of Christ, Drinke yee
all of this, &c. But our Lord expounds himselfe, Iohn 20.
Whose sinnes yee remit, they are remitted, &c.
               
               Ex ore sedentis in throno procedebat gladius his acutus.3 Ex ore. De his quae fiunt, Tit. 11.
This is, saith the Pope, the sword of Salomon, which cuts on
both sides giuing euery man his owne. Wee then who albeit vnworthy
bold the place of the true Salomon, by the fauour of God,
doe wisely exercise this Sword, when such causes as in our audience

are lawfully canuassed, wee doe with iustice determine.
This interpretation first corrupts the Text, for it hath not,
out of the mouth of him that sate on the Throne, but that
sate on the Horse; next, it peruerts it, for it is not the
sword of Iustice but of Christs Word, which is more piercing
then any two-edged sword that issueth out of his mouth.Heb. 4. 12▪
                   
                  As
for that of Iustice, he neuer assumed it, but renounced it rather,
                  4 Per venerabil
                        •
                     m. Qu
                        •
                      filij sint legitim
                        •
                     . Deu
                        •
                     . 17. 8.
                  when hee said. Man who made mee a diuider to you?
Luk. 12. 14. To proue that in other Regions besides the patrimonie
of the Church, the Pope doth casually exercise temporall
iurisdiction, it is said in Deuteronomie, Si difficile sit &
ambiguum, &c. And because Deuteronomie is by interpretation

                        •
                     he second Law, Surely by the force of the Word it is
proued, that what is there decreed should bee obserued in the
New Testament. For the place which the Lord did choose is
knowne to bee the Apostolike See. For when as Peter fleeing
went out of the Citie, the Lord minding to call him backe to the
place hee had chosen, being asked of him, Lord whither goest
thou? answered, I goe to Rome to bee crucified agai
                     •
                  e. The
Priests of the Tribe of Leus are the Popes coadiutors. The high
Priest or Iudge, he to whom the Lord said in Peter Quodcunque
ligaueris, &c. His Vicar who is a Priest for euer after the
order of Melchisedeck, appointed by God the Iudge of quicke
and dead. He that contemnes the Popes sentence is to bee excommunicated,
for that is the meaning of being commanded to
be put to death. Doth not this well 
                        •
                     ollow out of the word
Deuteronomie? And Rome is the place that Christ did choose,
because he went, he said, to bee crucified there. Onely there
is a scruple of the high Priest, for as much as he that is high
Priest after Melchisedecks order 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
hath a Priesthood that passes not into another,
Heb. 7. He addes there, that Paul that hee might declare
the fulnesse of power, writing to the Corinthians saith:
Know yee not that yee shall iudge the Angels?1. C
                        •
                     r. 6. 
                        •
                     . 
                  how much
more the things of the world? Is this then the Popes plenitude
of Power, to iudge secular things? or was Corinth

                  the Apostolike See, and so many Popes there euen of the
meanest of the Church? What shall we say to that exposition
of the famous Text. T
                     ••
                   es Petrus & super ha
                     ••
                   petram a
edificabo Ecclesiam mea
                     •
                  :Matth. 16. 18. Cap. Fundament
                        •
                      de Elect. in 6. The Lord (he saith) taking peter
i
                     •
                  to the fellowship of the vndiuided Vnitie, would haue him to
bee called that, which hee was himselfe, that the building of the
eternall Temple might by the maru
                     •
                  llous gift of God consist in
Peters firmenesse. What is this vndiuided Vnitie? Not of the
Trinitie, I trow, or Natures in Christ. What then? his
office? of which hee said a little before out of the Apostle,
that no man can lay any other foundation but Iesus Christ. Yes:
that from Peter as a certaine head hee should as it were
powre abroad his gifts into his whole body. That the Church
might stand vpon Peters firmenesse. This foundation Saint
Paul knew not, when hee blamed I am of Ceph
                     •
                  s. Peters
infirmitie cannot beare vp the weight of such a building,
much lesse (which we must remember the Romanists vnderstand
by this Iargon) the Papes his Successors.
               Such another interpretation is that of Pope Boniface,
                  Ioh. 10. 16. Extra Vnum Testam.
that makes Vnum Ouile & vnus Pastor, the Church and the
Pope. But it is plaine our Sauiour alludes to the prophesies,
Ezek. 34. 23. & 37. 24. where the Lord cals that one
Pastor his seruant Dauid. What blasphemie is this, thus to
vsurpe Christs Royalties? What Father, what Councell,
what Catholike man euer interpreted this Text on this
manner? By which the Pope while hee seekes the name
of the Sheepherd, shuts himselfe out of Christs fold?
               Yea the same Pope cals the Church his Spouse also,Cant. 4. 9. c. quoniam. De Immunitate. and
so other Popes since. Saint Iohn the Baptist tels them, that
he that hath the Bride is the Bridegroome. Saint Paul prepared
her to one husband Christ, If shee bee the Popes Spouse
with her will, shee is a Harlot: if against her will, hee is a
Rauisher, and our Lord Iesus Christ will deliuer her out of
his leud embracements, crying out of the violence which
shee suffers, as it is to be hoped shortly.
               
                  That in the Churches power are two swords, the spirituall

and temporall, we are taught by the wordes of the Gospell, saith
the same Boniface. For when the Apostles said, Behold,
there be two swords here (to wit, in the Church) when the
Apostles spake thus,
                  Luk. 22. 38. 
                  the Lord answered not that is was too
much, but enough. Certainly, hee that denies the temporall
sword to be in Peters power, doth ill obserue the speech which our
Lord vtters, Put vp thy sword into the sheath. No doubt an
infallible interpretation; by which it should appeare that
both the swords that were in our Sauiours companie, hung
by Saint Peters side, or else that some other had the spirituall,
leauing none to Saint Peter, but that which he might
not vse. The exposition is Saint Berenards, you will day,
But in an Epistle paraeneticall to the Pope himselfe; Saint
Bernard might haue leaue to vse allusions, and after his
manner to bee liberall of all that the See of Rome challenged,
that he might haue the more authoritie to reforme the
abuses of it. As to grant Peter the temporall sword, but
so, as hee must not vse it. Quid tu gladium denno vsurpare
tentes, quem semel iussus es ponere in vaginam? and he shews
how these two swords bee the Churches. The one to bee
drawne out for the Church, the other also by the Church. This
by the Priests, that by the Souldiers hand, but at the beck of the
Priest, and bidding of the Emperor. But the Pope in a Decretall
Epistle, pretending to teach the world, in a point
as he pronounces necessarie to saluation, with such an interpretation
as this; argues little reuerence to the Word of
God, and a very meane opinion of the iudgements and
consciences of christen men, if they could not discerne this
to be a strangers voice, not Christs. Besides that, he changes
Saint Bernards wordes, and cleane peruerts his meaning.
For, exerendus, he puts in exercendus. For, ille Sacerdotis,
is militis manu, sed sanè ad nutum Sacerdotis & iussum
Imperatoris. Pope Boniface thinking iussum to absolute in
the Emperor, makes him to bee the executioner and
ioynes him with the Souldier, on this manner. Ille Sacerdotum,
is manu Regum & Militum sed ad nutum & patientiam

Sacerdotis. Saint Bernard makes the executiue power
to be in the Souldier, the directiue in the Priest, the commanding
in the Emperor. Pope Boniface makes the Kings
and Souldiers to haue only the executiue, the directiue &
permissiue to be in the Priest. Yea sword, he saith, must be
vnder sword.Rom. 13. 1. For where the Apostle saith, There is no
power but of God, que autem sunt, à Deo ordinata sunt; more
fully in the originall text, the powers that are, are ordained,
that is, appointed of God: the Interpreter here dreames
of order and subordination, and cities a saying of Dionysius,
that the lowest things are reduced to the highest by the middlemost;
a conceit that makes nothing to the purpose of
the Apostle in that place.
               Hee proceeds and tells vs, that of the Church and power
Ecclesiasticall,
                  Ierem. 1. 10. 
                  is verified the prophecie of Ieremy. Behold I
haue set thee this day ouer Kings and Kingdomes, &c. Tell
me, good Master Wadesworth, what is to peruer
                     •
                   the Scriptures,
if this bee not, to apply to the power Ecclesiasticall,
that which is spoken of the word and calling Propheticall?
Yet more, The earthly power, if it swerue out of the
way shall bee iudged of the power spirituall, but if the spirituall,
that is lesser; of that which is superiour to it. But if the
highest, it may bee iudged of God onely, not of man, the
Apostle witnessing the spirituall man iudgeth all things,
                  1. Cor. 2. 15. 
                  but
himselfe is iudged of none. Wee are come at length, as it
were to the fountaines of Nilus to the originall of the infallibilitie
of your Iudge; and if hee haue here rightly interpreted
Saint Paul, we learne that no earthly power, no
Magistrate is a spirituall man, vnlesse hee bee one of the
Popes spiritualtie. For these be Saint Pauls spirituall men,
that iudge all things. Yet this must receiue limitation. For
no man may iudge the Pope, the supreme Spirituall man, for
of him it seemes Saint Paul meant it, his authoritie hee
saith is not humane, but diuine, by the diuine mouth giuen
to Peter, and his successors, when the Lord said to him,
Quodcunque ligaueris.
               
               
                  
For conclusion,Rom. 12. 2. 
                  whosoeuer resists this power thus ordered of
God, resists the ordinance of God, vnlesse as Manichaeus he faine
two beginnings: which (saith hee) wee iudge to bee false and
hereticall, sith by Moses record, not in the beginnings,
                  Gen. 1. 1. 
                  but in the
beginning God created Heauen and Earth. Who would not
acknowledge the diuine authoritie and infallibilitie of
your Interpreter, both in confirming his purpose, and conuincing
heresies from so high a beginning, as this first
sentence of holy Writ? What rests now, but after so many
testimonies he inferre▪ 
                  Furthermore, to be vnder the Bishop of
Rome we declare, say, define, and pronounce that to euery humane
creature it is altogether of necessitie of saluation. Thus
saith your infallible Iudge and Interpreter of Scripture,
the center of your conscience, and foundation of your
Faith, not as a priuate Doctor, but as Pope, in his owne
Law, intending to informe and bind the Church, and
that in matters with him of the greatest importance that
may bee, touching his owne authoritie, and as hee pretends
absolutely necessarie to saluation, to all the sonnes of
Adam.
               
               I might heape vp many more, but these may suffice for
a sample. You may (and so doe by your selfe I beseech
you) obserue these kind of interpretations in other points
also, and in other the Decretals & Breues of Popes; which
as I heare, are lately come forth in great volumes. You
shall finde many mysteries in your faith, that perhaps you
know not of, as,Rom. 8. 8. Syricius Epist. 4▪ & Innocent. Ep. 2. 
                  That you cannot please God because you
are married: for so is that place of the Apostle interpreted,
qui in carne viuunt Deo placere non possunt. That not
onely the wine in the Chalice, but the water also is transubstaniated
first into wine, then into Christs bloud. That it
wasIoh. 19. 34. c. Inter cunctas. 
                  not watry moisture, but the true element of water which
issued out of Christs side. You shall findeRom. 10. 10. 
                  confession of sins
to the Priest, proued by the text, Corde creditur a'd iustitiam,
ore autem fit confessio ad salutem.
                  Matth. 13▪ 8. That the good ground,
that receiued the seed in the Gospel, is the religion of the

                  Friers Mi
                        ••
                     rs.
                  Iam. 1. 27. That this is that pure and immaculate religion
with God and the Father, which descending from the Father
of lights, deliuered, exemplariter & verbaliter, by the
Sonne, to his Apostles, and then inspired by the holy Ghost, into
Saint Francis aud his followers, containes in it selfe the testimony
of the Trinitie. This is that, which as Saint Paul witnesseth,
no man must be troublesome vnto, which Christ hath
confirmed with the prints of his Passion. The text is,Gal. 6. 17. 
                  decaetero
nemo mihi molestus sit, ego. n. stigmata Domini Iesu
in corpore nemo porto. It is maruell, if Saint Paul were not
of the order of Saint Frances. That when Christ said,Matth. 28. 20. Loe I am with you, &c. Clem. 3. de Reliq. Tract. in Iob 50. 
                  Ecce
ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus, hee meant it of remaining
and being with them euen by his bodily presence. Saint Augustine
vpon the same text denies this, and saith, that according
to the presence of his body hee is ascended into heauen, and
is not here. ThatC. Ma
                        ••
                     nus De cognat. spirit. 4. Mat. 19. 5. the Father of the childe christened, and his
Godfathers wife may not marry, because, according to the
Lords word, the husband▪ and the wife are made one flesh
by marriage.
                  C. non debet De consang. 1. Cor. 7. 4. That the number of Foure, doth well agree to
the degrees prohibited in corporall marriage, of which the Apostle
saith, The man hath not the power of his owne body,
but the woman, nor the woman power of her body, but the
man, because there are foure humours in the body, which
consist of the foure Elements. For conclusion, you shall
finde it by a commodious interpretation concluded, contrarie
to many texts of Scripture, out of Scripture it selfe,
thatCum ex. De. 
                        •
                     aeretici
                        •
                      5. no simple and vnlearned man presume to reach to the
subtility of the Scripture, because, well it was enacted in the
law of God,Heb. 12. 20. that the beast which should touch the mountaine
should be stoned.
                  Exod. 19. 13. For it is written,Ecclu. 3. 22. 
                  Seeke not things higher then
thy selfe.
                  Rom. 12. 3. For which cause the Apostle saith, Be not more
wise then it behooueth, but be wise to sobrietie.
               
               One thing more also you shall finde, that now adayes
this spirituall man and sole infallible interpreter of Scripture,
seldome interprets Scripture, or vses it in his Decretalls
and Br
                        ••
                     es, Nay the stile of his Court hath no manner of

smack or sauour of it. A long compasse of a sentence, intricate
to vnderstand, yea, euen to remember to the end,
full of swelling words of vanitie, with I know not how
many ampliations and alternatiues; after the fashion of
Lawyers in Ciuill Courts, not of sober Diuines, much
lesse of the Spirit of God in his Word. Some man would
perhaps thinke this proceeds from an affectation of
greatnesse, and the desire of retaining authoritie, which
seemes to bee embased by alledging reason, or Scripture,
and interpreting texts. For my part, I account it comes
as much from necessitie. For it is notorious, that neither
the Popes themselues, nor those of the Court the Secretaries
and Dataries, which pen their Bull and Breues, haue
any vse or exercise in holy Scripture, or soundnesse in the
knowledge of Diuinitie, or skill in the originall tongues,
wherein Gods Word is written; all which are necessarie
to an able Interpreter. And therefore it is a wise reseruednesse
in them, not to intermedle with that wherein they
might easily fault; especially in a learned age, and wherein
so many watchfull eyes ate continually vpon them.
And to this very pouertie and cautelousnesse I do imp
                     •
                  te
it, that the present Pope in his Breues about the Oath of
Alleageance, vseth not aword of Scripture: But tells his
faction, that they cannot without most euident and grieu
                        •
                     us
iniury of Gods honour take the Oath, the tenor whereof hee
sets downe word for word; and that done, addes. Quae
cum ita sint, &c. Which things (saith hee) since they bee so, it
must needs be cleere vnto you out of the wordes themselues, that
such an oath cannot bee taken, with the safetie of the Catholike
faith, and of your soules, sith it containeth many things which
are apparantly contrary to faith and saluation. Hee instances
in no one thing, brings neither Scripture nor reason, but a
Quae cum ita sint, without any premisses. Which loose and
vngrounded proceeding, when as it is occasioned the
Arch-Priest here, and many other of that side, to thinke
those letters forged, or gotten by surreption; hee sends

another of the same tenor, with this further reason. Haec
aut
                        ••
                      est mera pura, integraque volunt as nostra. This is now
to be more then an Interpreter, euen to be a Lord ouer the
faith of his followers, to make his will a reason. What would
ye haue him doe? to alleadge a better he could not, a weake
and vnsufficient one he was ashamed, hee thought it best
to resolue the matter into his sole authoritie. Whereby he
hath proued himselfe a fallible both Iudge and Interpreter,
yea a false witnesse against God and the truth; commanding
by the Apostle Christian men to be subiect, and to giue euery
man their dues, feare to whom feare, honour to whom honour;
and much more (if there be any difference) allegiance to
whom allegiance.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Of the state of the Church of England, and whether it
may be reconciled with Rome.
               BVt of your interpreters infallibilitie enough. Your next
doubt, whether the Church of England were of the true
Church or no, was resolued with a Paralogisme, partly by
reason of equi
                     •
                  ocation, and diuers acception of the tearmes
the Church, and to erre, partly by composition and diuision in
the connexion of these by those Verbes [can, or may.] Let
vs examine the seuerall parts of your Syllogisme.
               
               The Proposition. The true Church cannot erre, is confirmed
by the consent of all. Excuse me Sir, if I withhold my
consent, without some declaration and limitation. I say first
it must bee declared whether you meane the Catholike
Church, or a atrue part of the Catholike Church. For there is
not the like reason of these to error. Against the Catholike
Church,Math. 16. 
                  hell gates shall not preuaile; against particular, when
Christ doth remoue the Candlesticke out of his place,
                  Reuel. 2. 5. they doe.
Witnesse the Churches of Africke, sometimes most Catholike.

And thus it seemes you must take this tearme, since
your doubt was whether the Church of England be of the true
Church or no, Besides, I must desire to know, what manner of
errours you meane; whether euen the least, or onely deadly,
and such as barre from saluation, which the Apostle cals

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , heresies of perdition, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Take now
your owne choise; for if you speake of euery errour, the proposition
is false, euen of the Catholike Church, much more
of any particular Church. Yea, I adde further, not onely of
the Catholike Church by denomination from the greatest
part, or by representation, as the Pastors or Prelates thereof
met in a Councill, which is still the mixt Church, but euen
that which is Christs true body, whereof he is the Sauiour, and
which shall be with him for euer. As for deadly and damnable
errors, this true and properly called Church, both in the
whole and euerie part of the mixt Church, is yet priuiledged
from them finally:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   for it is kept by the power of God
to saluation, it is not possible the Elect should thus be seduced.
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
Truth it is, that by such errors particular visible assemblies,
vniuersally and obstinately defending them, become falsely
called Churches, from which wee are to seperate our
selues. Example in the Synagogue, and in Churches of
the Arians.
               Now let vs see your Assumption. But the Church of England,
head, and members, King, Clergie, and people, yea awhole
Councell of Protestants may erre by your owne grant. I answer,
the Church of England that is the Elect in the Church of
England, which onely are truely called the Church, can neuer
deadly erre. This no Protestant will grant yee. The
mixt Church of England, head, members, King, Clergie, and
the residue of the people, and a whole Councell of Protestants,
may erre damnably, and therefore much more 
                     •
                  all
into lesser errors. This they grant. And if they shall so erre
obstinately, they shall deseruedly loose the name of a true
Church. But they denie they doe thus err; yea they denie
that they erre de facto, at all.
               
                  
What followes in conclusion? Ergo, No true Church.
This shortnesse in suppressing the verbe, would make a
man thinke you ment to couer the fault of your discourse.
And indeede you might by that meanes easily beguile another,
but I cannot be perswaded you would willingly beguile
your selfe. Sure you were beguiled, if you ment it
thus. Ergo, it is no true Church. See your Argument in the
like: A faithfull witnesse cannot lye. But Socrates or Aristides
may lye by his owne grant. Ergo, no faithfull witnesse.
He that stands vpright cannot fall: but you Master
Waddesworth by your owne grant may fall, Ergo, stand not
vpright. Perhaps your meaning was, Ergo, it may become no
true Church, to wit, when it shall so erre damnably. But
then it followes not, There is now no saluation in it, and
therefore come out of it now. When you shew that, I shall account
you haue done wisely to goe out of it. Shew that in
anie one point, and take me with you. In the meane while,
for my part, I shall sooner trust that chapman that shall say
to me, Loe here is a perfect yard, I will measure as truely
as I can, and when I haue done take the yard and measure
it your selfe; then him that shall say here is thus much, yee
shall not neede to measure it, but take it on my word: yea
though one of his Apprentices should stand by and say, he
could not deceiue mee though hee would; as Benedictus a
Benedictus, tels the present Pope, Volens nolens errare
non potes.
               
               Where you relate, your endeauour to defend the Church of
England, and tell of the Puritanes reiecting those Arguments
you could vse from the authoritie of the Church, and of the ancient
Doctors interpreting Scriptures against them, flying to their
owne arrogant spirit: I cannot excuse them for the former,
nor subscribe to your accusation in the latter. Perhaps you
haue met with some more fanaticall Brownists or Anadaptists,
whom here you call Puritans. But these that are commonly
so called, which differ from the Church of England
about Church gouernment and ceremonies onely, giue indeede

to little to the authoritie of men, how holy, learned,
or ancient soeuer. Which is their fault, and their great fault,
especially in matters of this nature; yet they flye not to
their owne spirit as you charge them.
               That which you adde that you perceiued the most Protestants
did frame the like euasions when you came to answere the
Arguments against them on the other side; when you shall
shew this in particulars, I shall beleeue it. In the meane
while I beleeue you thought so; for commonly mediocrities
are aggrauated with the hatred, & slandered with the
names of both extreames. But in the question betweene
the Popish faction and vs, you might easily haue discerned
why the argument from bare authoritie, is not of such validitie.
For ceremonies and matters of order may be ordered
by wise men, & are not the worse, but the better if they be
ancient, yea if they be common to vs with Rome, which
Puritans will by no meanes allow. In doctrin, if holy men,
yea if an Angell from heauen shall innouate any thing, wee
are not to admit it. Now the controuersies betweene the
Romanists and vs, are most about doctrine, and they exceede
as much in extolling the authoritie of the ancients in
their priuate opinions and incommodious and strained
speeches, as the Puritans in depressing them. We hold the
meane, and giue as much to the authoritie and testimonies
of the Fathers, as may stand with the truth of holy Scriptures,
and as themselues deferre to the writing of others, or
require to be giuen to their owne.
               Next you tell, of your following their opinion who would
make the Church of England and the Church of Rome still to
be all one in Essentiall points, and the differences to be accidentall.
Confessing the Church of Rome to be a true Church, though
sicke, or corrupted, and the Protestants to be derined from it, and
reformed. This opinion is not onely as you write fauoured
of many great Schollers in England, but is the common opinion
of all the best Diuines of the reformed Churches that
are or haue beene in the world, as I shewed in part of another

worke, which as I remember you had a sight of. Wherein
yet I feare you mistake the tearme, accidentall, which
doth no
                     •
                   import that our differences are but sleight and of
small confideration, but that all those opinions and abuses
which we reforme and cut off, are not of the Faith, but superfluous
and 
                     •
                  oraine, yea hurtfull and noisome to it, as the
weedes are to the corne, which ouer-grow and choake it.
And to follow this similitude, the state of the Church vnder
the Romane obedience, and that part which is reformed,
is like a field ouergrowne all with weedes, thistles,
tares, cockle: some part whereof is weeded and clensed,
some part remaines as it was before; which makes such a
difference to the view, as if it were not the same corne. But
being better considered, it will be found all the difference
is, from the weedes, which remaine there, and here are taken
away. Yet neither here perfectly, nor all where a like,
but ac
                     •
                  ording to the industrie of our weeders, or conueniencie
of the worke, with care of the safetie of the good corne.
By this Parable, you may see what is to be hoped of your
labour to reconcile most of our particular controuersies. For although
I doubt not but in some it may be performed,
where the difference is rather verball then reall; and in the
manner of teaching, rather then in the substance of doctrine.
And if moderate men had the matter in handling
the flame of contention in a great many more might be
troden downe and slaked, suppose the sparkes not all extinct;
yet in some other, it is as possible to make the weede
and corne-friends, as your and our opinions; where there is
none other remedy but that of our Sauiour, Euery plant that
my heauenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted out. Neither
doth this impossibilitie arise more out of the nature of the
things, then the affection of the persons. For the Pope and
the Court of Rome, which are those that domineere on
that side, doe no lesse out of the feare of their owne ruine
deadly detest all reformation, then the reformed out of
their present view and former feeling, the tyrannie of the

Papacie, which they see doth excommunicate, and put to
cruell death all that are of this way. And which is a prodigious
thing, where they tolerate the blasphemous and
professed enemies of Christ, euen with allowance of the
publike exercise of their Religion, there doe they burne
men professing Christs religion, according to the ancient
and common rule thereof, with that vprightnesse of conscience,
that if they had as many liues as there be Articles
thereof, they would giue them all rather then renounce any
of them.
               As for the Protestants making the Pope Antichrist, I know
it is a point that inrageth much at Rome. But if the Apostle
Saint Paul, if Saint Iohn in the Reuelation, describe Antichrist
so, as they that doe but looke vpon the Pope well,
must be forced to say as the people did of the blinde man
in the Gospell, some, this is 
                        •
                     e; others, he is very like him; if
himselfe and his flatterers doe, and speake such things, as if
all others should hold their peace, doe in a sort proclaime, I
am he; what can the Protestants doe with the matter? I
will take the liberty here to relate to you, what I saw
while I was in Venice, the rather because it is not impertinent
to our present purpose. And though perhaps you
may haue heard somewhat of it, yet the particulars are I
suppose vnknowne in those parts. And yet it doth more
import they were knowne there then otherwhere, being
occasioned by a subiect of the Crowne, though of a name
and family whereto it is not much beholding.
               In the yeare 1608. F. Thomas Maria Carafa, of the order
of the Friers Preachers, Reader of Philosophy in Naples,
printed a thousand Theses to be disputed thrice; once
at Rome in the Church of Saint Marie super Mineruam, twice
in Saint Dominickes at Naples. Of these fiue hundred were
in Logicke, Naturall Philosophy, Metaphysicke, and Mathematickes;
fiue hundred more in Diuinitie, amongst
which that was one. Solus Petrus & success
                        •
                     res in totam
Ecclesiam illimitatam iurisdictionem habent. These were all

included in the forme of a Tower, and dedicated with an
Epistle to the present Pope Paulus the fift, to whose armes
alluding he saith, idem Draco biceps qui vtrumque polum amplexus
imperio ad Ecclesiae pomoerium tanquam ad amaenissimos
Hesperidum hortos peruigil excubat, nullius Herculis vim metuens,
turris etiam mea sit custos. On the top of his Tower,
was this representation curiously and largely cut. An
Altar, with two Columnes, and their ornaments, according
to the rules of Architecture. In the middest for the Altar
peece was the Popes picture, very liuely portraied to the
breast. Ouer his head was the word, Vultu portendebat imperium.
Aboue on the toppe of the front, in three compartiments
his armes thus. On the one side the spread
Eagle alone, the word Ipse mihi fert tela pater. On the other
a Dragon, and by it Meliora seruo. In the middest both
together in one scutchion with the crosse Keyes and triple
crown in the crest. On either side of these colums were depending
Crownes and Scepters, whereof sixe were on the
right hand after the Christian fashion. The Imperial aboue,
other vnderneath, and lowest the Corno of the Duke of Venice,
so they call a certaine Cap the Prince vseth to weare
being of Gold Embroderie, and somewhat resembling a
horne. There were also Turkish Turbanes, and Diadems
of diuers fashions, as many on the left side. By
these on either side of the columnes, were two of the foure
parts of the world. Europe and Afrike on the one, Asia
and America on the other, in the habite of Ladies sitting
vpon their proper beasts couchant, each offering vnto him
that was aboue the Altar of their commodities, Corne,
Fruits, Incense, &c. On the base of the columne on the
Christian and Europaean side, was the word, Et erunt Reges
nutritij tui. On the other, Vultu in terram demisso puluerem
pedum tuorum lingent, Esai. 49. Agreeable whereto
there was made flying ouer their heads two Angels, on
each side, one with these sentences in their hands. That ouer
Europe and Africk; Gens & regnum quod non seruierit

illi, in gladio & in fame, & in peste visitabo super gentem illam
ait Dominus, Hier. 27. That ouer Asia and America: Et
dedit ei Dominus potestatem & regnum, & omnes populi ipsi
seruient: potestas eius potestas aeterna quae non auferetur &
regnum eius quod non corrumpetur, Dan. 7. Now iust vnderneath
the picture of the Pope, on the foreside of the Altar,
was this inscription, PAVLO V. VICE DEO CHRISTIANAE
REIP. MONARCHAE INVICTISSIMO
ET PONTIFICIAE OMNIPOTENTIAE
CONSERVATORI ACERRIMO. The Copies of
these Theses were sent as Nouelles from Rome, and did the
more amuse men at Venice, because of the controuersie that
State had with the Pope a little before, and the seeing their
Dukes Corno hanged vp among his Trophees, vnder all other
Princes Crownes. But most of all the new title Vice-Deo,
and the addition of Omnipotencie gaue matter of wonder.
The next day it was noised about the Citie, that this
was the picture of Antichrist; for that the inscription
P A V5 L50 O V.5 V5 I1 C100 E-D500 E O, contayned exactly in the
numerall Letters the number of the beast in the Reuelation
666. What anger and shame this was to the Popish
faction, I leaue it to you to esteeme. But whom could
they blame, but themselues, who had suffered so presumptuous
and shamelesse a flatterie to come forth, with publike
approbation, annexing also so blasphemous an inscription,
as vnawares to them by the prouidence of God, should so
plainly characterize Antichrist? But to heale vp this matter
againe, not long after we had fresh newes went about,
that Antichrist was borne in Babylon, had done many miracles,
was comming toward Christendome with an Armie. Wee
had an Epistle stampt at Venice, pretended to bee written at
Rome, An. 1592. by the Reuer. D. Valentinus Granarensis
touching the birth of Antichrist his stocke, progenie, countrie
habitation, power, maruels, life, and death, out of the holy Scriptures,
and Fathers, printed Cum priuilegio. And as for the
Title Vice-Deus, as if they would haue it in despite of all

men: one Benedictus à Benedictis a subiect of the Venetian
State, setting out a Booke against Doctor Whitakers position,
De Antichrist
                        •
                     , at Bologn
                        •
                     
                   (for at Venice it was not
suffered to bee printed) reuiues it with aduantage. Hee dedicates
it thus, Paulo Quinto Pontifici Vniuersalis Ecclesiae
Oecumenico, summo totius Orbis Episcopo at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Monarchae &
supremo Vice-Deo. These Titles he heapes vpon the Pope
againe, and againe, and that yee may iudge of his wit by
one place, in the conclusion, exhorting Doctor Whitakers
to repentance; hee tels him, that by his example his King,
and with the same King Iames the first, many Englishmen,
conuertentur ad Dominum Deum, & ipsius loco ad Vice-Deum
confugient. And pag. 135. hee saith of Gregorie the Great.
Totum mundum quasi Monarcha ac Vice-Deus optimè & irreprehensibiliter
rexit, &c. Hee might haue learned of him,
that his other Title Oecumenicus Pontifex, is the very name
of Antichrist, the name of blaspheme, by which hee doubts
not to presage, that Antichrist was neere, and an Armie of
Priests readie to attend vpon him. In this if euer in any thing,
it seemes your Iudge was infallible.
               It will bee said here, it is not in the Popes power what
his followers will say of him, he stiles himselfe the Seruant
of Gods Seruants. If the Canonists will call him, Our Lord
God the Pope,Apologia pro Garneto, c. 5. 
                  first, it may be denyed. Secondly, it may be laid
to the ouer-sight of the Writers or Printers. Thirdly, if it bee
shewed to bee left standing still in the Glosse of the Canon Law,
by them that were appointed to ouer-see and correct it, what
maruell if one word escaped them, through negligence, or wearinesse,
or much businesse? And yet if they thought the sense of
the word not so vsuall indeed in the ordinarie talke of Christians,
but not differing from the custome of Scripture was to bee
allowed to an ancient Writer, the matter deserues not such outcryes.
But the Pope, such is his modestie, neuer vsurped this
Title full of arrogancy, neuer heard it with patient eares. To
this, let it first bee considered, that the Censors of such
things as come to the Presse, are not to bee imagined such

Babes, as not to know what will please or displease his
Holinesse. Especially in writings dedicated to himselfe, a
man may be sure they will allow nothing the second time,
and after some exception and scandal taken at it, but what
shall bee iustified. How much more in the Popes owne
Towne of Bologna, and when his Chaplaine could not bee
allowed to print it at home. But to let all these goe; wee
may haue a more sensible proofe how the Pope tastes these
Titles. That which hee rewards hee approues: Benedictus
was shortly after made for his paines Bishop of Caorli. How
worthily hee deserued it you shall iudge by his booke;
which at my request vouchsafe to reade ouer, and if there
be any merit, you shall sure get great meede of patience in
so doing. That you may not doubt of the Popes iudgement
concerning these Titl
                     •
                  s, you shall further know, that
the matter being come to the knowledge of the Protestants
in France, and England, made them talke and write
of it broadly, namely the Lord of Plessis, in his Mysterium
iniquitatis, and the Bishop of Chichester in his Tortura Torti.
This gaue occasion to the Cardinall Gieurè, to relate in the
Officio Santo at Rome of the scandall taken hereat, and to
make a motion, De moderandis titulis. It was on foot sundrie
moneths. At last the Pope reuoking it to himselfe,
blamed those that had spoken against these Titles, and
said, they were no whit greater then the authoritie of S. Peters
Successor did beare. To returne thither whence I haue a litle
digress
                     •
                  d. In the question whether the Pope bee the Antichrist
or no, for my part I despaire of all reconciliation. For neither
doth there appeare any inclination at all in the Pope
to reforme any thing in Doctrine or Gouernment, nay he
encroacheth daily more and more vpon all degrees euen among
his owne subiects, and resolues to carry all before
him at the brest, with his Monarchy and infallibilitie. On
the other side, the Reformers partly emboldned with successe,
partly enforced by necessitie, chiefly tyed with band
of conscience, and perswasion of truth, are not like to retract

what they haue affirmed in this behalfe, and whatsoeuer
their differences be in other things, in this point they haue
a maruellous vn
                     •
                  tie amongst them. These in France hauing
beene molested for calling the Pope Antichrist haue beene
occasioned (as I haue heard) some few yeares since to take
it into their Confession, thereby to iustifie themselues accor
                     •
                  ing
to th' Edicts of Pacification giuing them libertie to
pro
                        •
                     esse their Religion. In England as you know it is no part
of the doctrine of our Church, yet a commonly receiued
opinion. Howbeit this is so farre from hindering, that the
reformed Chu
                     •
                  ches and those which heretofore were, or
at this present are vnder the Popes obedience be one
Church, that is, all members of the Catholike; that the
Protestants without this cannot make good the other. For
Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God, and that is in the
Church, as Chrysostome and Theophylact interpret it, and
Gods people could not be commanded to goe out of Babell,
if he had none there.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Of the safenesse to ioyne to the Roman being confessed a
true Church by her opposites.
               BVt you concluded hence, that seeing many of the best
learned Protestants did grant the Church of Rome to be a
true Church, though faultie in some things; and contrarily not
onely the Romanists, but Puritanes, Anabaptists, and Brownist
denie the Church of England to be so, therefore it would be
more safe and secure to become a Roman Catholike, &c. This
discourse hath a pret
                     •
                  e shew at the first blush, and perhaps
was vsed to you since your comming to Spaine, as
it was to some there before. At my comming to Venice I
fell vpon certaine letters and reports, set forth as it was
told me by F. Posseuine, and not vnlike by his mindefulnesse

to all occasions to aduance the credit of his societie.
Amongst them there is one said to be a true Relation of the
manner how M. Pickering Wotton was conuerted to the Catholike
Roman faith, indited as it is said and subscribed by himselfe
before his death. In which by a certaine Father of the
companie of Iesus an Englishman by nation, the like discourse
was vsed, as it is said, to him. That hee should consider
well, that he and other Protestants did not denie that the Catholikes
might be saued in their faith, whereas all the Catholikes
that either liued at the present, or euer were, hold it as a
most certaine Article of Faith, that the Protestants and other
heretickes cannot be saued out of the Catholicke Church; therefore
if he should become a Catholike, he should enter into that way
which was safe, by the consent of both parts. This consideration
be saith moued him not much then. But after praying to God, as
he was also aduised by that Father, to direct him into the right
way, if hee were out of it, suddenly hee saw a certaine light very
clearely before his eyes in forme of a crosse. Whereupon incontinently
there was offered vnto him such a heape of reasons and arguments
by which was shewed that the Catholike faith is the onely
way of saluation, and that of the Protestants on the contrarie
most absurd and abominable, that most euidently he was conuinced,
without any the least doubt. And these reasons which then
offered themselues to him, were for the most part such as hee did
not remember that he had euer heard them in all his life. Thereupon
with vnspeakeable ioy he called backe the Father, told him
what had hapned, praied him to heare his confession, and he examining
him vpon all the heads of the Catholike religion, which
he most firmely and entirely beleeued, heard his confession, &c.
But this narration deserues little credit. First creating
Master W
                        •
                     tton for the greater glorie of their triumph a
Baron▪
                   vnlesse the Fathers in Spaine, or Posseuine in Italie
haue a 
                     •
                  acultie to create Barons. Next it is a very improbable
thing that Master Wotton dying of a Calenture
should haue so good a memorie, as to indite so exact and
artificiall a Narration, with such formalitie, and enforcements

in fit places, as any Reader of vnderstanding must
needes perceiue, came out of a diligent forge, and needed
more hammering and fyling then so. But that of all other
is most Legendlike, that howsoeuer this motiue of yours
is vsed, yet it is not made the effectuall inducement, but
a heape of reasons in the twinkling of an eye, and causing him
not onely to beleeue in the grosse, but to be able to giue
ac
                     •
                  ount of all the heads of the Catholike religion (that is
all the points of controuersie at this day, betweene the
Romists and the reformed Churches) in a fit of an Ag
                        •
                     e, in
the twinkling of an eye? Excuse mee: this is beyond the
blinde begger that recouered his sight at Saint Albans that
could tell the names of all colours as soone as hee saw
them. What then? Was not Master Wotton reconciled?
and saw he not a light in forme of a crosse? Yes: and this
your motiue was vsed to him also, and perhaps moued
him more then all the heape of reasons besides. But shall
I tell you here what I haue heard from the mouth of one
that was himselfe then in Spaine, that both could know
the truth of this matter, and had no reason to tell me a lye,
sith what hee said came freely from himselfe, without
feare, or hope, or almost enquirie? The Gentleman being
sicke, and weake in his braine, the Father that Posseuine tels
of, brought vnder his gowne a picture, and vpon a sudden
presented it before him: this might be the light in forme
of a crosse (perhaps a very image of Christ crucified)
which together with the lightnesse of his fancie, occasioned
that your motiue though it selfe also very light, might
carrie him: as a little weight is able to sway much, where
the beame it selfe is false. If this be true (as I take the liuing
God to record I faine no thing, but doe relate what
hath beene told me) as on the one side I doubt not, but
God in his mercie did interpret of the Gentlemans religion,
according to his right iudgement and perswasion in
his health, and not according to the erronious apprehension
of his fancie in his sicknesse (which euen in his best

health was euer very strong in his sleep) as some that haue
conuersed with him haue tolde mee: So on the other
side, they shall bea
                     •
                  e their iudgement whosoeuer
they were, that would with so cru
                     •
                  ll a craftinesse take
aduantage of his infirmitie, and make his storie after a
stale to draw on others. As for the heape of Arguments
to conuince the Protestants faith to bee absurd (that must
bee by the way the Articles of the Creed) Posseuines
Catholike Hyperboles are well enough knowne in Venice,
and hee hath beene there told to his head,A
                        •
                     uertiment
                        •
                     al P Ant Posseuino. p. 7. & 14. 
                  That
if in things past, whereof hee might haue beene informed,
hee proues a most lying Historian, it might more easily fall
out, that hee should proue a most false and ridiculous prophet
in things to come.
               
               And in truth he hath proued so hitherto. Wherefore, I
reckon these garnishments of Master Wottons peruersion,
to bee like the rest of his newes, touching the Conquest of
Moscouia by Demetrius that Impostor, whom he boasteth in
a manner to haue been the Scholler of his Societie. W
                     •
                  ere
hee tells the world that the army cried out often. God
and the prayers of our Fathers (the Iesuites) haue subdued
the hearts of our enemies, and inclined them vnder our Noble
Prince Demetrius. That Demetrius turning to the Priests of
the company of Iesus, was heard to say [Loe that which you
foretold mee, O Fathers, in the time of that sorrowfull flight of
ours, is now come to passe, to wit, that as the Lord God had afflicted
mee much, so on the contrary hee would much comfort
mee, and that therefore I should not doubt of a full victory.]
These wordes Posseuine stamps in his former Relation in
Capitall letters. But when this bold enterprise was ouerthrowne,
and this suborned fugitiue slaine and shamefully
dragged vp and downe the streets of Mosco, then loe
the repors were, That a light was seene ouer his body in the
night time, &c. Let them that walke in darknesse follow
such lights as these be. Wee are no children of the night,
nor of darkenesse. Leauing therefore those vnheard of

Arguments, which Posseuine hath not onely cunningly
drawne a veyle ouer, that wee may not see them, but exempted
by priuiledge of a miracle that wee may not try
them, this which he hath shewed vs, let vs bring it a little
to the cleere day-light.
               And euen at the first view it is apparent that this Argument
is meerely forraine; not drawne from any thing, à

par
                        •
                     e rei, as what the true Church is, what it teacheth, or
such like, but from opinion and testimony. What men say
of that of Rome, and of the Reformed Churches, &c. Now opinions
are no certaine grounds of truth, no not in naturall
and ciuill matters, much lesse in religion. So this Argument
at the most is but Topicall and probable. Let vs
see the parts of it. And first that ground. The testimony of
our selues, and of our contraries is much more sufficient and
certaine then to iustifie our selues alone. Surely neither the
one nor the other is sufficient, or certaine. It is true, that
if other proofe faile, and we will follow coniectures. hee is in
probabilitie an honester man, that others beside himselfe
say well of, then hee that alone testifieth of himselfe. And
yet according to truth, this latter may bee a right honest
man, and dwel, as we say, by ill neighbours, or where he is
not knowne, or requires not the testimony of other men:
Whereas the other being indeed a knaue, is either cunning
to conceale it, or hath suborned other like himselfe
to say for him, or dwells b
                     •
                   honest men that iudge and
say the best. And in this very kind, our Sauiour attributes
so little to testimony,
                  Luk
                        •
                     . 6. 26. as he pronounces a woe to them that
all men speake well of. So in our case it is more probable I
grant, if there were no other Argument to cleere it, but
opinion, and most voyces, that you haue the true Church,
and are in the way of saluation then wee because we giue
you a better testimony then you doe vs. But it is possible
we are both deceiued in our opinions, each of other; wee
through too much charitie, and you and others through ignorance
or malice. Herein vndoubtedly we haue the aduantage

of you and the rest, and doe take that course which
is more safe and sure to auoid sinne, that if we doe faile of
the truth, yet we be deceiued with the error of loue, which
as the Apostle saith, hopeth all things, and is not puffed vp.
Wee auoid at the least that gulfe of rash iudgement,
which, mee thinkes, if the case bee not too to cleere wee
should all feare, With what iudgement yee iudge,
                  Matth. 7. 6. 
                  yee shall bee
iudged. Thou that iudgest another condemnest thy selfe.
                  Rom. 2. 1.
               
               But that you may a little be ter consider the weaknesse
of this discourse, if the testimony of our selues and our
contraries were sufficient and certaine to make tru
                     •
                  h, and
euer more safe and secure to follow that side which hath
that testimony, it had beene better to haue become a
Iewish Proselyte, in the Apostles times then a Christian 
                     •
                  
For the Christ
                     •
                  ans acknowledged the Iewes to be the people
of God, heires of the promises, and of Christ, and stiled
them Brethren, notwithstanding their zeale to the ceremonies,
and tradi
                     •
                  ions of their Fathers, excused their ignorance,
bare with them, laboured to giue them content
in all things. Whereas they to the contrarie called those
that professed Christ, Heretickes and Sectaries, accursed
them, drew them out of 
                     •
                  heir Synagogues, scourged them,
cast them in prison, compelled them to blaspheme: as
you doe now Protestants to adiu
                     •
                  e, though in other cruelties
I confesse you goe farre beyond them. By like reason
a Pagan in Saint Augustines time, should rather haue
made himselfe a Christian among the Donatists, then with
the Catholikes. For the Catholikes granted the Donatists
Baptisme to bee true, accoun
                     •
                  ed them Brethren. The
Donatists to the contrary renounced their Brother-hood
and Baptisme both, rebaptized such as fell to their side,
vsed these formes to their friends, Saue thy Soule, become
a Christian: like to those vsed by your Reconcilers at
this 
                     •
                  ay.Aug. Epist. 4
                        •
                     . & 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                        •
                     9. De 
                        〈◊〉
                      l. 
                        •
                     . c. 7.
               
               Lastly consider, if this ground of the testimony of our
contraries for our part, and their lack of ours, for theirs be

sure; you haue iustified the cause of the Protestants in
the maine question, which is the better religion. For
whatsoeuer a Protestant holds, as of Faith, you cannot
deny to bee good and Catholike, nor any Christian man
else. For hee binds him to his Creed, to the holy Scriptures,
and goes no further: and in these he hath your testimony
for him. But hee denies many things which you
beleeue, and accounts them forreine, yea repugnant to
Faith, as the Popes infallibilitie, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
worshipping of Images, inuocation of Saints. In all these
you speake onely for your selues, in some of these you
haue not vs onely, but all other Christians your opposites,
to say nothing of the Iewes and Turkes, whom I
might as well chocke you withall, as you doe the Protestants
with Anabaptists. So by this reason our profession
is more safe and secure, and questionlesse is more Catholike
then yours. Neither haue wee in this discourse the
Argument onely as you see very appliable and fauourable
to vs, but (which I would entreate you by the way to obserue)
the conclusion it selfe often gran
                     •
                  ed by moderate
and sober men of your owne side, viz. that our course
is in sundry things more safe then yours. As in making
no Image of God.Abulensis. In trusting onely in the merits of
Christ.Bellarmine.
                  Faber. In worshipping none but the Trinitie. In directing
our prayers to our Lord Iesus Christ alone.Erasmus. In allowing
Ministers to marry.Cassander. In di
                     •
                  ers other points also many of
your side say the same with the Protestants,Hofmeister.
                  Aeneas Syluius. and defend
vs from the imputations which others of you lay vpon
vs, as is shewed in the Catholike Apologie, by the Reuerend
Bishop of Chester.
               
               This to the proposition. Let vs come to the Assumption,
where you mince too much the Protestants opinion
touching the Church of Rome, when you make them say,
It is peraduenture faultie in some things: Nay without peraduenture,
they say, It is corrupt in doctrine, superstitious
and Idolatrous in religion, tyrannicall in gouernment,

defiled in manners, from the crowne of the head to
the soale of the foot no soundnes in it, as the Prophet saith
of another like it;Isai 1. 6. yet the vitall parts not perished, readie
to die,Doctor Raynolds. Thes. 5. yet not dead. A true Church though neither the Catholike
Church, nor yet a sound member of the same. That also
is false in the assumption, that the Puritans denie the Church
of England to bee a true Church. Vnlesse the Puritans and
Brownists bee with you all one, which you haue made diuers
Sects aboue, and then are you to blame as to multiply
names (whereof I haue told you) before, so now againe to
confound them.
               What is now the Conclusion? It would be more safe and
secure to become a Roman Catholike. But the Proposition wil
not inferre thus much simply, but onely in this respect.
For Topicall arguments (as you know) hold onely, caeteris
paribus. We must then inquire if there be no other intrinsecall
arguments by which it may bee discerned, whether
cause bee the better, whether pretence to the Church and
Truth, more iust, more euident. Whether it may bee warranted
to returne to Babell, because God hath some people
there; when as he commands those that are there to come
out of it. How safe it may bee willingly to ioyne with
that part of the Church, which is more corrupt in Doctrine
and Manners, when wee may continue with that
which is reformed. These points were to haue been scanned,
ere you concluded and executed as you did.
               And such Arguments there want not. Christ our
Lord hath giuen vs amongst others, two infallible
Notes to know his Church. My Sheepe, saith hee,Iob 10. 27.
                  heare my voice:
                  Chap. 13. 35. and againe, By this shall all men knowe
that yee are my Disciples if yee loue one another. What
shall wee stand vpon coniecturall Arguments from that
which men say? We are partiall to our selues, malignant
to our opposites. Let Christ bee heard who bee his, who
not. And for the hearing of his voice, O that it might be the
issue! But I see you decline it, Therefore I leaue it also for

the present. That other is that which now I stand vpon:
the badge of Christs sheepe. Not a likelihood, but a certaine
token, whereby euery man may know them. By this, saith
he, shall all men know that yee are my Disciples, if yee haue
charitie one towards another. Thanks be to God: This marke
of our Sauiour is in vs, which you with our Schismatikes,
and other enemies want. As Salomon found the true Mother
by her naturall affection, that chose rather to yeeld to
her Aduersaries plea clayming her childe, then endure it
should bee cut in peeces, so may it soone bee found at this
day, whether is the right Mother. Ours, that saith, giue
her the liuing child, and kill him not; or yours, that if shee
may not haue it, is content it bee killed, rather then want
of her will. Alas, saith ours, euen of those that leaue her,
these be my children, I haue borne them to Christ in Baptisme, I
haue nourished them as I could with mine owne breasts his Testaments.
I would haue brought them vp to mans estate, as
their free birth and parentage deserues. Whether it bee their
lightnesse or discontent, or her enticing wordes and gay shewes,
they leaue me, they haue found a better Mother. Let them liue
yet, though in bondage. I shall haue patience; I permit the
care of them to their Father; I beseech him to keepe them that
they doe none euill; if they make their peace with him, I am satisfied,
they haue not hurt me at all. Nay but, saith yours, I sit
alone as Queene and Mistris of Christs family;
                  Reuel. 18. 7. 
                  hee that hath
not me for his Mother, cannot haue God for his Father. Mine
therefore are these, either borne or adopted: and if they will not
bee mine they shall bee none. So without expecting Christs
sentence, shee cuts in peeces with the temporall sword,
hangs, burnes, drawes those that shee perceiues inclined
to leaue her, or haue left her alreadie. So shee kils with the
spirituall sword, those that subiect not to her, yea thousands
of soules that not onely haue no meanes so to doe,
but many which neuer so much as haue heard whether
there be a Pope of Rome or no. Let our Salomon be Iudge
between them: yea iudge you (Master Waddesworth) more

seriously and maturely, not by ghesses, but by the very
marke of Christ, which wanting your selues, you haue vnawares
discouered in vs, iudge I say without passion, and
partialitie, according to Christs Word; which is his Flock,
which is his Church.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               Of fraud and corruption in alleaging Councels,
Fathers, and Doctors.
               YOur next Motiue was, That in examining the questions
especially about the Church, where you laboured to peruse
the originall Quotations and Texts of the Councels, Fathers,
and Doctors, you found, as you say, much fraud committed by
the Protestants. This imputation of fraud is very vsuall
and common to both sides; and verily I beleeue some on
both sides are faultie. For whether out of humane infirmitie,
mistaking the meaning of Authors, or slips of memorie,
trust of other mens Q
                     •
                  otations, who tie not themselues
to the wordes, but giue the sense they conceiue;
how easily may testimonies bee alleaged cleane besides the
Authors mindes? Hee that hath strongly conceited any
thing, findeth it in all that euer he readeth, or falleth vpon.
Too much heat in contention, and desire of victorie, blindeth
the iudgement, and maketh a man heedlesly lay hold
vpon any thing, that hee thinkes may serue his turne. As
wee see sometimes in the writings of the Fathers, which
had to deale with ancient Heretikes, alleaging the Scriptures
themselues besides the purpose. Sometimes haste and
desire of contracting makes one cut off some wordes, and
explaine and presse those that make for him; and perhaps
leaue out something materiall▪ presently the other side
cries out clipping, forgerie, falsification, and what not? But
although all this may bee called fraud in respect of the

Reader, who is by this meanes deceiued in his euidence, and
therefore if he be not aware may pronounce amisse, yet is
it nothing to that kinde, when with an euill conscience and
of set purpose falshood is set forth, and Truth out-faced.
Wherein I cannot tell what you haue found. I could haue
desired, and doe yet if your leisure may serue, you would
shew the particulars. I doe professe here to you, that I
haue seene and euen felt with my fingers such dealing in
the Romish faction, as I cannot resolue whether I should
account them more shamefull slanderers, and false accusers
of others, of fraudulent handling; or bold and shamelesse,
in the practizing of it themselues. When the Lord of Plessis
his booke of the Sacrament came out, how was it calumniated
in this kind, with falsification? Du Puy in a publike
Chartell offered, that of 306. passages in the Preface,
he would shew as cleere as the Sunne at noone day, 283.
were falsified, corrupted, and mangled, and the rest of no
importance. The Bishop of Eureux after Cardinall, vndertooke
to shew in the booke it selfe 500. enormous falsities by

                        •
                     ale, and without hyperbole. The matter was brought to a
triall before the King of France, and nine places examined
of this number. And as was before-hand promised the
Popes Nuncio, the businesse should be so carried that the aduantage
should remaine on the part of the Church of Rome, and the
Pope receiue contentment, & in these very words the lie should
rest with the Heretikes. Morney was borne downe. The
Kings letters to the Duke of Espernon of this victorie, were
blowne ouer France, sent to Rome, printed with a discourse
thereabout, set forth at Antwerp, and translated into English,
with some alteration and Turksing by F. Parsons▪
                  
Wherein hee saith a French Iesuit Fronto Duc
                        •
                     us discouered
in it at least a thousand falshoods for his part. Hee accuseth
Bishop Iewell, and Master Fox of the like crime; hee
saith that in two onely leaues of his booke, a certaine learned
Scholler did discouer thirtie wilfull and voluntarie corruptions
and falsifications that cannot be excused, and himselfe

besides these thirtie, noted so many other plaine falsehoods
and manifest wilfull lies, as might well double the
former number. And by Arithmetick hee multiplies this
number with the number of the leaues, the number hee
saith will rise to 30000. by which Iohn Fox his booke will
as much exceede Iohn Sleidans storie in number of lies (in
which were found onely 11000) as it doth in bulke and
bignesse. This manner of writing of these men, brings to
my minde that which Sir Thomas More writes of Tyndals
New Testament,
                  Dialog. l. 3. c. 8. wherein hee saith, were founden and noted
wrong and falsely translated aboue a thousand Texts by tale.
The language is like, and the cause is the same. Men were
loath these bookes should be read. The substance of them
was such as could not be controlled; the next remedie was
to forestall the Readers mindes with a prejudice of falsification,
that so they might not regard them, but cast them
out of their hands of their owne accord. The Vulgar sort
would be brought out of conceit at the first hearing, with
vehement accusation. Euen wise men would suppose
though there should not bee any thing neere so many wilfull
faults, yet surely there must needes bee a very great
number, and that could not happen but with a very bad
meaning; this admitted, who would vouchsafe them the
reading? And in truth among those that fauour the reformed
part, I haue me
                     •
                   with some that out of this buzze of
falsification in the Lord of Plessis booke, cared not for reading
it; whereby may bee thought in what account it
should bee with all those who esteeme all F. Parsons Libels
to bee Oracles. But shortly: Sith neither the Cardinall
Perone, nor F. Parsons haue had the meanes, or will, to
decypher those hundreds and thousands of falsifications in
Sleidan, Bishop Iewell, Master Fox, or Plessis, in these so
many yeeres, as haue run since they wrote; and as for the
last, he hath set forth the booke againe, with all the authorities
at large in the margent, in the Authors owne words,
and hath answered all those that bayed at it, till they are

silent, what remaines but that we count this multiplying of
F. Parso
                        •
                     s, may be ioyned with Aequi
                        •
                     ocation, to make vp
the arte of falsehood; wherein he and his faction may iustly
claime to be the worthiest Professors in the world. But
without any multiplication or other Arithmeticke, in the fift
page of that Relation of his, in the seuen first lines are foure
notorious, I will not say lies or falsifications, but falshoods
by tale. The first: That the triall being begun vpon the first
place, that was found false. The French discourse printed at
Antwerp cum priuilegio, and approbation of the Visitor of
bookes, saith: And as to the said first Article, nothing was
iudged thereabout by the said Commissioners, nor pronounced by
my said Lord the Chancellor, and the King said that it should be
remitted to another time to deliberate thereabout. The second:
Hee (that is, Plessis) would haue passed to the second, but the
Bishop refused so to doe, except the Ministers and Protestants
there present would first subscribe and testifie that this first
place was falsified. Hee said in the page before, that Plessis
appeared at last with some foure or fiue Ministers on his side.
There were no Ministers appeared with him on his side.
No Protestants, no creature did subscribe, or was required
so to doe. The third: Which at length they did, viz. subscribe,
this place was falsified. A vtter vntruth. Whereof
there is not a word in the said printed Narration. The
fourth: as well in this as in all the rest. There was no subscription,
as I said, at all. The Commissioners were all of
the Roman profession, sauing Causabon; and he no Minister.
They neuer pronounced, much lesse subscribed that
any of those places examined were falsified. Of the first
place of Scotus they pronounced nothing. Of the second,
of Durand, That the opposition of Durand was alleaged for
the resolution. And this they would haue remitted also as
the former to another time, saue that the Bishop insisted,
saying, it was in vaine to dispute if they would not iudge, addressing
his speech diuers times to the King, to the intent
hee should signifie his pleasure to the Commissioners; and

then his Maiestie drawing neere to them, they gaue their
opinions vpon that Article as before. This was that which
F. Parsons stumbled at when hee wrote, The Ministers and
Protestants there present subscribed and testified, that it was falsified,
and so all the rest. For being ouerioyed with this
newes which hee did not well vnderstand (to thinke the
charitablest of him) hee thought the Commissioners had
beene part at least Protestants, and Ministers: and had
subscribed, whereas they pronounced their sentence viua
voce, by the mouth of the Chancellour, neuer vsing the
tearme falsification; yea in some of the rest they acquited
the L. of Plessis, as in the passage of P. Crinitus though they
said Crinitus was deceiued. In that of Bernard, that it had
beene good to distinguish the two passages of Saint Bernard out
of the same booke with an et caetera. Not to stand now vpon
that, that in the rest of the places he hath a reasonable and
iust defence with indifferent men, for the omissions he was
charged with in Chrysostome, Hierome, Bernard, and Theodorit:
and in that of Cyril, the King himselfe said aloud,
that both sides had reason▪
                   but F. Parsons not hauing as it
appeares receiued perfect information of the particularities
of this affaire, was so hastie to write according to the
partiall intelligen
                     •
                  e he receiued at Rome, that hee faults
himselfe in the same kinde, that hee imputes to another.
And if he should meete with some seuere aduersarie, that
would multiplie his falsehoods by his leaues and lines, as
he dealeth with Master Fox, and then extend by proportion
his pamphlet to the bignesse of Master Fox his Booke of
Martyrs, he would finde, that he prouides very ill for himselfe
that is to rigorous and censorious to other men.
               But I leaue him, and come to the fidelitie of the Popish
faction, whereof I shall desire you to take a taste in one of
the questions which you name about the Church, euen
that which is indeede cardo negotij, as you say, the controuersie
of the Popes authoritie. For the establishing whereof:
First, the Epistles of the ancient Bishops of Rome for the space of

about 300. yeares after Christ are counterfeited. The Barbarous
not Latine but lead of the stile, and the likenesse of
them all one to another, the deepe silence of antiquitie
concerning them; the Scriptures alleadged after Hieromes
translation, doe conuince them of falshood. And by whose
practice and procurement we cannot doubt, if wee aske
but as Cassius was wont Cui bono? For at euery bout the
authoritie of the Pope, and priuiledges of the Roman See
are extolled and magnified.
               Next, the Donation of Constantine is a sencelesse forgerie;
Dist. 96. c. Constantinus. and so blazed by some of the learnedest of the Roman
Church. Reade it aduisedly, either in Gratian, or in
the Decrees of Syluester, with the Confession, and Legend
of Constantines baptisme, and say out of your owne iudgement
if euer any thing can be more fraudulent, more sottish?
And because I haue mentioned Gratian, his whole
compilation is f
                     •
                  ll of falsification, and corruption of Antiquitie:
take an example or two in the matter wee haue
in hand.Concil. Mile
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . 72. The Mileuitene and after the Africane Councils
vnderpaine of Excommunication prohibit appeales beyond
the Seas.
                  Concil. A
                        •
                     ric. c. 12. Which Canons were made purposely to meet with
the vsurpations of the Bishops of Rome, of which I haue
spoken some what before. Now in the citing this Canon,
Gratian addes this goodly explication;c. placuit. qu. 9. 6 
                  nisi forte Romanam
sedem appellauerint; thus excepting that abuse which these
Councels directly sought to prohibit.De doctrina. Christt. l. 2. Againe, Saint Augustine
to informe a Christian man what Scriptures hee
should hold for Canonicall, bids him follow the authoritie
of the greater part of the Catholike Church, amongst which are
those, quae Apostolicas sedes habere, & Epistolas acc
                        •
                     pere meruerunt,
which had the honour to haue the Apostles sit in them and to
receiue Epistles from them. Gratian 
                  
                     •
                  its it thus, inter qu
                        ••
                     
                  
(Scripturas) sane illae sunt quas Apostolica sedes habere & ab
ea alij meru
                        •
                     runt accipere Epistolas: and accordingly, the

                     〈◊〉
                   of that Canon is; Inter Canonicas, The Decretall Epistles
are numbred amongst the Canonicall Scriptures. True it

i
                     •
                  , that in the end of the next Canon, Gratian addes a good
limitation, and worth the remembering, that this must be
vnderstood of such Decrees, in which there is nothing found
contrary to the Decrees of the Fathers foregoing, nor the precepts
of the Gospell. Belike euen in Gratians time it was not
holden impossible, that in the Sanctions and Decretals of
Popes, something might be decreed contrary to the Gospel,
which may be added to your Iudges infallibility, which
hath beene touched before.
               
                  But these be old trickes of the Champions of the Papacie.
At this day perhaps it is better: yes, and that shall ye
vnderstand by the words of the children of the Church
of Rome themselues the Venetians. But first ye are to know,
that among certaine Propositions set forth in defence of
the state, there was one, the fourth in number of eight,
That the authoritie promised by our Sauiour Christ to Saint
Peter vnder the metaphor of the Keyes is meerely spirituall. For
confirmation whereof after other proofe was said, that
the authoritie of the highest Bishop is ouer sinne and ouer soules
onely; according to the words of that prayer of the Church about
Saint Peter—qui B. Petro animas ligandi atque soluendi
Pontificium tradidisti. Cardinall Bellermine vndertooke
to answere these Propositions, and comming to this place,
he saith; that peraduenture Gods prouidence to take away such
deceipts, whereby the author of these Propositions would deceiue
the simple, with the words of the holy Church misunderstood, inspired
into the reformers of the Breuiarie that they should take
out of that Prayer the word (animas) as anciently it was not
there, nor ought to be; because that prayer was formed out of
the words of the Gospell. Quodcunque ligaueris, & quodcunque
solueris. Now marke the reioinder that is made to
him by Iohannes Marsilius, who numbering vp his errors
in the defence of euery proposition, roundly tels him?
Erra XIIII. perche dice, &c. He erres in the XIV. place
for that he saith, that those which haue taken out of the Breuiarie
the word (animas) were inspired by the holy Ghost. I

                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Quodcunque 
                        〈◊〉
                     , with the word (
                     〈◊〉
                  ) by that text
which explaineth them, 
                     〈…〉
                  ; sinnes
being in the soule and not in the body, least any should beleeue
that the Pope were, Domi
                        ••
                     s in 
                        〈◊〉
                      & spiritualibus,
of goods, of bodies, and of soules, and that he might loose
and binde euery thing, as it seemes the L. Cardi
                     •
                  all beleeueth.
And they explained them with the word 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , by which
explication a remedy is put vnto all those discords which
may arise betweene the Pope and Princes 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   & tuo,
Whereas those which haue lat
                     •
                  ly taken it away out of the Breuiarie,

                     〈◊〉
                   a new stirred vp occasion of discords and cont
                     ••
                  tions.
Besides that, it is a thing knowne of all men, that in the Bookes
of the Councels, of the Canons, of other Doctors, in a word, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
in the very Br
                     •
                  maries and Missals there haue beene and
are taken away those things which are in fauour of Princes of
the Laitie, to see if at length there might be established the opinion
de illimita
                        •
                     a Potestate Pontificis in t
                        •
                     mporalibus. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   he
as 
                     •
                  e that compar
                     •
                  s together the Bookes printed in the year
                     •
                   30.
in 50. and those at this day, as well of the Councels as others,

                     •
                  uidently 
                     〈◊〉
                   the vintage, that 
                     〈◊〉
                   it is, that we post
vindemia
                        •
                     , haue found some few clusters for the defence of our
gracious Prince. This is a meanes if it goe on further, to make
all writings to loose their credit, and to ruine the Church of God.
Be it spoken by the occasion that the Lord Cardinall hath giuen

                     •
                  e thereof▪ and for charities 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and for the desire that these
writings be no more touched; which be also said with all humilitie
and reuerence.
               He erres in the XV. place, for that he saith 
                     •
                  hat in the ancient
Breuiaries there was not the word animas. And I haue
seene Breuiaries written with 
                     〈◊〉
                   abou
                     •
                   200. yeares agoe, and
printed aboue an hundred; in them is the word animas; and if it
were not▪ yet ought it to be put in, to take away the occasions of
discord
                     •
                  .
               
                  
Thus he there; As for the Prayer corrected, or corrupted
rather; if you looke the old Breuiaries, yea euen that
set forth by Pi
                        •
                     s the Fifth, printed by Plantine, with the
Priuiledge of the Pope,Ex Decreto 5▪. Conc
                        •
                     l. T
                        •
                     d. and his Catholike Maiest
                     •
                  e, Anno
77. vpon the nine & twentieth of Iune, yee shall find it
to runne thus. Deus qui B. Petro Apostolo 
                        •
                     uo collatis clauibus
r
                        •
                     gui coelestis animas ligandi atque solu
                        •
                     ndi Ponti
                        •
                     icium
tradid
                        •
                     st
                        •
                     , concede vt intercessionis eius auxilio peccator 
                        •
                     m nostrorum
nexibus liberemur. Per Dominum▪
                   Now in the late
correction animas, is left out, and wee vnderstand the
reason.
               
                  In the end of the same booke there is 
                        •
                     n aduertisement
to the Reader, the beginning whereof I will not sticke to
set downe verbatim; it is this. Because in this Defence I
haue often said, that Authors are made to recant, and that
out of their bookes many things are taken away sincerely said,
in fauour of the power of Temporall Princes, to stablish by these
meanes the opinion, De supremâ authoritate Papae in temporalibus;
I haue thought good to aduise the R
                     •
                  ader, that the
quotations by mee brought, are taken, ad verbum, out of those
bookes which are incorrupt, and containe the opinion of the
Authors sincerely. And that the more ancient the Copies
bee, and further from these our times, so much 
                     •
                  he better
they bee. And in particular I desire that hee bee aduertised,
that the Cap. Nouit de iudicijs, printed in Rome the
yeere 1575. by Ioseph de Angelis, with licence of Superiours,
it the text which was followed by the Author of the
eight Positions, and by mee; which containes sincerely the
opinion of Na
                     •
                  arrus, and of the Parisians. Which in the bookes
printed since, is changed in such manner as it is no more
the same, but is become the contrary, to wit, that of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
&c.
               Tell mee, good Master Wad
                        •
                     sworth, in the 
                     •
                  ight of God,
what is fraud, if this be not. And thus not onely the Authors
of this age any way inclining to reformation, as
Erasmus, Rhe
                        •
                     anus, Cassander, F
                        •
                     rus; but, Vines, Faber,

Caietane, Pol. Virgil, Guicciardine, Petrarch, Dante, yea Authors
of six or seuen hundred yeeres old, are set to Schoole
to learne the Romane language, and agree with the Trent
                  
                     •
                  aith. For it is not the authoritie and Monarchy of the
Pope alone that is sought, though that bee Summa summarum,
whereunto all comes at last, but no voyce must be
heard discenting from that which he teaches. Therefore it
is, that Bertramus Presbyter is appointed by your Spanish
Index printed at Madrid, to bee wholly abolished. The
former had catechized him to say in stead of visibiliter, inuisibiliter,
with many other pretie explications, as where
he saith, the Elements in the Lords Supper, Secundum creaturarum
substantiam, quod prius fuerant ante consecrationem,
hoc & post consistunt, the explication is, secundum externas
species Sacramenti. But the surest way was to take him
cleane away: and so indeed in the Bibliotheca Patrum hee
is, and that purp
                        •
                     sely, as Marguerinus de la Bigne confesseth
in his Preface.
               
                  The Ancient Fathers are perhaps free. For the Councell
of Trent appointed, that in the writings of the ancient Catholikes
nothing should bee changed, sa
                     •
                  e where by the fraud of
heretikes a manifest error is crept in. But who shall bee the
Iudge of that? The Inquisitors and Censors themselues.
For my part, I cannot say that I haue spent many houres
in the triall of this point, nor haue I had ancient Copies
thereto requisite. But I will intreat you to consider with
mee one example, or rather two or three in one Father,
and in the matter that I named, whereby you may ghesse
at the rest. In Saint Cyprians Workes imprinted at Rome,
by P. Manutius, sent for to Venice by Pius the Fourth, to set
forth the Fathers, as himselfe saith, most perfectly clensed from
all spots, the Epistle of Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea, beginning,
Accepimus per Rogatianum, is wholly left out;
and Pamelius thinkes purposely, and addes, perhaps it had
beene more wisdome it had beene neuer set out at all. Saint Cyprian
was not of that minde, who translated it into Latin,

as the stile it selfe witnesses, and Pamelius also is enforced
to confesse. The matter is, it is to quicke and vehement
against Stephanus Bishop of Rome. Hee saith hee is moued
with iust indignation, at the manifest folly of Stephanus, that
boasting so much of the place of his Bishopricke, and that hee
hath the succession of Peter, vpon whom the foundations of the
Church were set, brings in many other Rockes, &c. Hee saith
hee hath stirred vp contentions and discords throughout the
Churches of the whole world. Bids him not deceiue himselfe, he
hath made himselfe a Schismaticke, by separating himselfe from
the Communion of the Ecclesiastical vnity, for while he thinks he
can separate all from his communion, he hath separated himselfe
onely from all. He taxes him for calling Saint Cyprian a false
Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceitfull workeman, which being
priuy to himselfe that these were his owne due, preuentingly
hee obiected to another! No maruell if this geare could not
passe the Presse at Rome.
               
               In S. Cyprians Epistle, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, these words,
& Primatus Petro datur, &c. & after, Vnam Cathedram constituit:
and againe, Et Cathedra vna, are foisted into the
text in that Romane edition. In that of Pamelius also besides
these, another clause is added, forsooth, out of Gratian,
and a Copie of the Cambron Abby [Qui Cathedram
Petri super quam fundata est Ecclesia deserit.] These patches
being all left out, the sense is neuerthelesse complete and
perfect: and for the last, which speaks most for the Popes
Chaire, the Superuisors themselues of the Canon Law, by
the commandement of Gregory the thirteenth, acknowledge,
that in eight Copies of Cyprian entire, in the Vaticane
Librarie this sentence is not found: but besides these
there is one wherein his opuscula alone are contained, and
another at Saint Sauiours in Bologna, in which it is found.
But what account they make of it appeares by this, that
supplying the whole sentence in another place of Gratian,
they leaue it out. Wherein as their conscience is to bee
commended, and Manuti
                        ••
                     
                   his modestie, or theirs who

surueied that edition, that would not follow one Copie against
eight; so is Pamelius boldnesse to be corrected, that
out of one, and that not fully agreeing with Gratian, neither
shames not (as himselfe sayes, veriti non sumus) to
force in this reading into the text, against all the rest printed
and manuscript, which he vsed aboue twentie in number,
as he sets them downe in a Catalogue in the beginning
of his edition. It is now little more then two hundred
yeeres agoe, that Frier Thomas of Walden wrote against
Witcleff. He in the second Booke of his first Tome,
the first Article, and second Chapter, cites this verie place
of Cyprian, and cites it to fort
                     •
                  fie Witclefs assertion of his
owne minde. For hauing recited Witclefs words, he concludes
them thus; Haec ibi, and then proceeds. Addam
                        •
                     t
& nos quod Cyprianus dicit omnes Apostolos pares fuisse &
pote
                        •
                     tate & ho
                        ••
                     re. Addamus quod Hieronymus dicit, super
omnes Apostolos ex aequo fortitudo solidatur Ecclesiae, &c. Yet,
neither in that Chapter, nor in that whole discourse doth
he once mention these words, now conueied into Cyprian,
nor any where else that I can find in all his Work, though
hee cite this Tractate often vnder the name of Liber contra
haereticos & schismaticos. How fit had it beene to answere
the obiection out of Cyprian by Cyprian, if hee had not
found that Gratian after his manner had been too bold or
negligent in this passage. The same Author in his third
Tome De Sacramentalibus, Doct. 10. cites a long place
out of this same Treatise beginning at those words. An
esse sibi cum Christo videtur qui aduersum Sace
                        •
                     dotem Christi
facit, &c. Againe, Cap. 81. two places; one immediately
before the sentences charged with those former wordes,
another after. The one beginning, Loquitur Dominus ad
Petrum▪ Ego tibi dico quia tu es Petrus, &c. the other Vnitatem
tenere 
                        •
                     irmiter & vendi
                        •
                     are debemus, &c. Certainely
vnlesse Waldens
                        •
                     s meant by fai
                     •
                  t-pleading to betray the
cause hee vndertooke, hee would neuer haue omitted so
pregnant pass
                     •
                  ges as these be, for Peters Primacie, and the

Popes Chaire, had they beene extant in Cyprians worke
when hee wrote, But wee cannot doubt of his good affection
to the See of Rome, either for his orders sake, o
                     •
                  
his dedicating that worke to Pope Marti
                        •
                     e the Fi
                     •
                  th, or
his approbation of the two first Tomes, which hee saith,
hee caused to bee seene and examined, per sollennes viros, and
testifies of to bee commended of all, encouraging him to
write the third. It remaines therefore that Cyprian hath receiued
this garnishment since Waldens time. And here
with this occasion of his silence about those things which
are thrust into Cyprian, I will, though besides my purpose▪
vse his testimony about a certaine sentence of the Author
of the imperfect worke vpon Matthew, ascribed to Saint
Chrysostome, which the Romish faction will needs race
out. It is in the eleuenth Homily, about the middle. The
words are these: Si enim vasa sanctificata ad priuat
                        •
                     s vsus
transferre peccatum est & periculum, sicut docet Balthasar qui
bibens in calicibus sacris de regn
                        •
                      depositus est & de vita. Si
ergo haec vasa ad priuatos vsus transferre sic 
                        〈◊〉
                      est [in
quibus non est verum corpus Christi 
                        〈◊〉
                      mysterium 
                        •
                     orporis
eius continetur] quanto magis vasa corporis nostri quae sibi
Deus ad habitaculum praeparan
                        ••
                      non debemus locum dare
Diabolo agend
                        •
                      in ijs quae vult. In this sentence the wordes
that I haue e
                     •
                  closed from the rest are inserted saith Bellarm
                        •
                     e
by some Schol
                     •
                  er of Berengarius,
                  De Sacram. for they are not
in all Copies.Euch. l. 2. c. 32. No maruell. That is more maruell that they
are in any, since the Canonizing of Trans
                        •
                     bstantiation. But
in Walde
                        •
                     s time, and before, the words were th
                     •
                  s read, for
in his third Tome, Cap. 30. they are thus cited, saue tha
                     •
                  
by the error of the print ministerium, is put for mysterium,
and hee addes there. 
                     〈…〉
                   But, saith Bellarmine, These words 
                        〈◊〉
                      not to
the matter in hand, for the Author of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      spake of
the holy vessels of Salomons Temple, which 
                        〈…〉
                     ;

and in those vessels, neither was the Lords true body, nor
yet the mystery thereof. Well, if they be not to the purpose,
if they speake of the vessells of Salomons Temple, let them
stand in the Text still. What need yee purge them out of
the newer editions at Antwerpe, and Paris. Belike Father
Iohn Matthews saw further into this matter then Bellarmine,
for hee casts out this sentence with the dregs of the
Arians, although there bee no Arianisme in it that I can
perceiue. The truth is, the Author speakes of the Vessels
vsed in the Lords Supper in his owne time. For those
wordes, sicut docet Balthasar, &c. are brought in by the
way, for a confirmation from a like example, the sense
hanging in the meane while, which is resumed againe
when hee goes on, Si ergo haec vasa, as any indifferent
Reader may perceiue. Yea, take away these words, & the
sinewes of the sentence are cut, for the force of the argument
lies in the comparison of the prophaning of the holy
vessels, and of our bodies; That is a sin, yet Christs body
is not contained in them, but the mystery therof: but God
himselfe dwels in these.
               These examples, to omit some other, doe make mee
thinke, that howsoeuer the corrupting of the texts of the
Fathers, is not perhaps so vsuall, as of other Writers,
and good reason why, they know that many looke narrowly
to their 
                     •
                  ingers, neither is there any place almost,
that is of speciall pith, that hath not beene obserued and
vrged in the handling of the controuersies of this age, by
some one or other; yet where there is any colour of differing
Copies, or any aduantage to bee taken that way, it is
not slipped. And who knowes not, that sometimes the
change of a Letter, yea, of a Point or Accent; makes the
whole sentence of another meaning?De Verbis Domini, Serm. 15. c. 11. As for example
                     •
                  
that of Saint Augustine, Qui fecit te sine te, non iustificat te
sine te. Read it interrogatiuely, and it is as strong for 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as if it be read assertiuely, for Cathar
                        •••
                     
                  
and the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
And in very deede when I consider the eagernesse of
these men, to win their purposes, and their fearfull boldnesse
with the holy Word of God, I know not how a man
should looke for conscience or respect at their hands in the
writings of men. For to omit that the Trent-Fathers
haue canonized the Vulgar Latin Edition, which so many
times departeth from the originall inspired by the holy
Ghost, adding, detracting, changing, often to a diuerse,
sometimes to a contrarie sense. To let passe also how Sixtus
V. and Clemens VIII. doe tyrannize oue
                     •
                   and delude
the Faith of their followers, about that Edition, binding
them vnto two diuerse Copies, and sometimes flat
contradictorie; and so, as the forme of each must bee inuiolably
obserued, without the least particle of the Text added,
changed, or detracted. The former, derogating all Faith and
authoritie from whatsoeuer Bibles hand
                        •
                     written, or printed, of
the Vulgar edition, which did not agree with that which hee set
forth ad verbum & ad literam. The latter, telling, that
when the same Pope endeuoured to set it out, hee perceiued not a
few things to haue crept into the holy Bible, through the fault of
the Presse, and that it needed a second care, whereupon he decreed
to bring the whole worke againe to the Anuile, had he not
beene preuented by death; so derogating all Faith from the

                     •
                  ormer. Whereas the truth is Sixt
                        ••
                     
                   did not onely endeuour
to set out his Bible, but prefixed his Bull before it ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, and sent one of the Copies to the
State of Venice (as I heard at my being there) howsoeuer
since it was cunningly recouered againe, set it to sale publikely,
and saith in his Bull, that he corrected the faults of
the Presse with his owne hand, and (which most of all conuinceth
Pope Clements Preface of falshood) the difference
of these Editions is not in fault of the prints, but in that
the one followes the old erroneous reading, the latter the
reading of other Manuscripts ac
                     •
                  ording with the Hebrew,
Chaldee, Greeke, or the Latin edition of the Catholike Kings
Bible, obserued by the industrie of the Diuines of Lo
                        •
                     aine.
                  
But to forbeare to vrge this contradiction in the very foundation
of beliefe, which some man peraduenture would
presse so farre, as to inferre, that the Romanists haue no
faith (for hee that beleeues contradictories beleeues nothing.)
What shall we say of that impietie, to corrupt the
originall Text according to the vulgar Latin? See an example
hereof in the first promise of the Gospell, Gen. 3.
where the Serpent is threatned, that the seede of the
Woman shall crush his head. The vulgar Edition leauing
here the Hebrew, the Seuentie, and Saint Hierome himselfe,
as appeares by his questions vpon Genesis, tran
                  
                     ••
                  ates
Ipsa. Shee shall bruise thy head. So it stands now
in the authenticall Scripture of the Church of Rome,
and herein Sixtus and Clemens are of accord. The Diuines
of Louaine obserue, that two Manuscript Copies
haue Ipse. That the Hebr
                        •
                     w, Chaldie, and Greeke, haue
it so likewise. Why then did not either Sixtus or Clemens,
or they themselues hauing Copies for it, correct it,
and make it so in the authenticall Text? I will tell you.
By colour of this corruption, the Deuill enuying Christs
glorie, like an obstinate enemie rather yeelding himselfe
to any then his true Conqueror, hath giuen this honour to
the Virgin Mary. To her it is attributed in that worke
which I thinke to bee the most vngodly and blasphemous
that euer saw the Sunne: The Ladies Psalter, wherein that
which is spoken of God by the Spirit of God is writhed to
her. In the 51. Psalme, Quid gloriaris in malitia, ô maligne
Serpens, &c. Why boastest thou in malice, ô thou malignant
Serpent and infernall Dragon, Submit thy head to the Woman,
by whose valour thou shalt be drowned in the deepe. Crush
him, ô Lady, with the foot of thy valour, arise and scatter his
malice, &c. And in the 52. speaking to the same Serpent.
Noli extolli, &c. Bee not lifted vp for the fall of the Woman,
for a Woman shall crush thy head, &c. So in that Anthem:
Haec est mulier virtutis quae contri
                        •
                     it caput Serpentis. Yea
which I write with griefe and shame, to her doth good

                  Bernard apply it, Hom. 2. super Missus est, and which is
more strange, expounds it, not of her bearing our Sauiour,
but, Ipsa proculdubio, &c. Shee doubtlesse crushed that poisonfull
head, which brought to nought all manner of suggestion of
that wicked one, both of temptation of the flesh and of pride of
minde. To her doth the learned and deuout Chancelor of
Paris apply it.Serm. de Natiui
                     
                        •
                     ate Mar. Virginis. 
                  Has pestes vniuersas dicimus membra Serpentis
antiqui, cuiu
                        •
                      caput ipsa virgo contriuit. And what
maruell in those times, when the plaine Text of the Scripture
ran so in the foeminine gender, of a woman, and few or
none had any skill of the Greeke or Hebrew? Who should
that SHEE be, but shee that is blessed among women? Now
although that thankes be to God, it is knowne that this is
a corrupt place, out of the Fountains, yea out of the Riuers
also the testimonies of the Fathers, referring this to Christ,
as Irenaaus, Iustine, Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Hierome,
yea Pope Leo himselfe, yet because no error of the Church
of Rome may bee acknowledged, how palpable soeuer;
they haue cast how to shadow this corruption, and set
some colour vpon it, that howsoeuer this reading cannot
bee true, yet it may bee made like to truth. Loe in the Interlinear
Bible set forth by the authoritie of King Philip
the father of his Majestie that now reignes with you, the
Hebrew Text is reformed according to the Latine,See D. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Conf. with Hart. c. 6. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   IPSA.
There was some opportunitie hereunto, by reason that the
Letters of the Text without pricks would beare both readings.
For 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   may be read 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   hu, or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   hiu. And
this selfe-same word for the Letters the base of reading, is
so pointed in this Chapter verse 19. and applied to Eue
Shee is the mother of all liuing. And so elsewhere, as Gen. 28.
1. and 21. Hereunto perhaps was added, that the pricks
are a late inuention of the Rabbines, as many thinke, and
no part of the Hebrew Text. And that not onely Leo Castro,
and such as accuse the present Hebrew Copies as fal
                     •
                  ified,
but those that defend them also, doe many of them
confesse. Hereupon it was resolued, as it seemes, to point

this place 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For that it was not by mistaking but purposely
done▪ 
                  Franciscu
                        •
                      Lucas in his Annotations vpon the
place doth assure vs; and saith it was Guido Fabricius his
deede. And indeede other things there bee in that worke,
which sauour not of the learning and integritie of Arias
Montanus, as for example, the Etymologie of Missa from
the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . But as Boldnesse is not alwayes as prouident,
as Ignorance or Malice is bold, these Correctors
marked not, that the gender of the Verbe, and the affixe of
the Noune following, are both Masculine. So although the
Orthographie would bee framed to consent, yet the Syntaxe
doth crie out against this Sacriledge. And yet our
Rhemists, as I am informed, in their lately set forth Bible,
with a long note vpon this place, defend the applying of
this Text to the blessed Virgin, and the old reading Ipsa.
What should a man say? Necessitie makes men desperate,
and as the Apostle saith,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. 13. 
                  Euill men and deceiuers shall waxe
worse and worse, deceiuing and being deceiued.
               
               These be fraudes indeed, in the strictest sense, wilfully
corrupting the Texts of good Authors, wilfully maintayning
them so corrupted; not abstayning from the holy
Scriptures themselues. For as to that other kinde, deprauing
the sense, retayning the wordes; it were endlesse to
cite examples. Bellarmine alone, as I beleeue, passeth any
two Protestants that euer set pen to paper, perhaps all of
them put together.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               Of the Armies of euident witnesses for the Romanists.
               WHere you adde that you found the Catholikes had
farre greater and better Armies of euident witnesses
then the Protestants, it might perhaps seeme so to
you, as your minde was prepared, when you had met with

such cunning muster-Masters as the Romanists are. Who
sometimes bring into the fi
                     •
                  ld to make their number seeme
more, after the old stratagem of warre, a sort of Pages and
Lackeis, vnworthy to hold any ranke in the host of God,
vnder the names of the Fathers. Sometimes to confirme
their part, giue out a voice confidently, that all the 
                     •
                  orces
which they see aloofe in the field are on their side, whereas
when it comes to the battell they shall finde that they
wil turne their armes against them. Somtimes they change
the quarrell it selfe; in which case how easie is it to bring
Armies, as you say, into the field, to fight against No-bodie
and euident witnesses, to proue that which no man denies?
For the purpose, that the Bishops of Rome hath had
a primacie of honour, and authoritie; when as the question
is about a Monarchie, and infallible Iudgement, an vncontrolable
Iurisdiction. Herein if you please, see how
Bellarmine alleages the Fathers, Greeke and Latine, in the
15. and 16. Chapters of his first Booke, de Summo Pontifice.
So for proofe of the veritie of Christs Bodie and Bloud in
the Lords Supper, hee spends a whole Booke onely in citing
the testimonies of the Fathers. To what purpose?
When the question is not of the truth of the Presence, bu
                     •
                  
of the manner; whether it be to the Teeth and Belly, or
Soule and Faith of the Receiuer. Sometimes they will
beare downe the vnexpert Souldier their Reader, that hee
sees the Fathers fight for them; as Pighius and Bellarmine
come in often with their Vides in the end and application
of a testimonie. Whereby it comes to passe that the Scholler
if he be of a plyable disposition, or loath to bee counted
dimme-sighted, yeelds himselfe to his Teacher, and sees in
the Fathers that which they neuer dreamed of. But surely,
Sir, had you giuen that honour to the holy Scriptures,
which of the Iewes was giuen to them, and our Lord Iesus
Christ allowes it in them; and then employed as much
trauell in the searching and looking into them, as you professe
to haue done in the perusing the Councels and Fathers,
                  
perhaps God had opened your eyes, as those of El
                        •
                     sha his
seruant, to haue seene, that there are more on our side then against
vs, horses indeede and charets of fire, able to put to
flight and scatter neuer so great armies of humane authorities
and opinions. But this place of the Scriptures hath no
place amongst all your motiues.
               As touching that which you say of the Centurists often
consuring and reiecting the plaine testimonies of the Ancients. It
is true, that in the title De Doctrina, they note a part, the
singular and incommodious opinions the stubble and errors of the
Doctors. Wherein to tell you my fancie, if they commit
any fault, it is, that they are to rigid and strict, referring
into this Catalogue, euery improper and excessiue speech,
which being seuered from the rest of the discourse, may
often seeme absurd: as it may also seeme strange that our
Sauiour should teach a man to hate his Father and Mother,
or pull out his eyes, or giue him his cloake that hath bereaued
him of his coate. Whereas these and the like haue in the
place where they stand, admirable force and grace, being
taken with an equall and commodious interpretation. But
it is are cleare as the noone day, that sundry such errors
and singular opinions there be in the Fathers, as cannot
be iustified. They speake not alwaies to your own mindes,
not onely prima facie, and in sound of words, but being neuer
so well examined and salued. Witnesse Sixtus Senensis in
the fift and sixt Bookes of his Bibliotheca. Witnesse Pamelius,
Medina (though blamed for confessing so much by Bellarmine)
yea witnesse Bellarmine himselfe. Wherefore if the
bare authoritie of the Fathers must binde vs, vndergoe
the same law yee giue, if as your Belgick Index confesseth,
you beare in them with many errors, extenuate them, excuse
them, by deuising some shift, often denie them, and giue them a
c
                        •
                     modious sense, when they are opposed in disputations, giue the
libertie ye take. Or if (as we thinke) these be base courses
and vnbeseeming the ingenuitie of true Christian
mindes, acknowledge this honour as proper to the Scriptures,

to be without controuersie receiued, examine by the
true touchstone of diuine authoritie all humaine writings,
how holy soeuer their Authors haue beene. Try all
things, as the Apostle commands, hold fast that which
is good.
               
                  Your instance in Danaeus his Commentaries, super D.
Aug. Euchiridion ad Laurentium, was not all the best chosen.
For neither doth Saint Augustine in that booke treating
professedly of Purgatory, auouch it plainely, or yet
obscurely. Nor doth Danaeus reiect his opinion with those
words, Hic est nae
                     •
                  us Augustini, or the like. The heads of
Saint Augustines discourse are these. I. That whereas some
thought that such as are baptized and holde the Faith of Christ,
though they liue and die neuer so wickedly, shall be saued, and
punished with a long but not eternall fire, he thinkes them to be
deceiued, out of a certaine humane pit
                     •
                  ; for this opinion is flatly
contrarie to other Sc
                     •
                  rptures. II. He interprets the place of
Saint Paul, touching the trying of euery mans worke by fire, of
the fire of tribulation, through which as well he that builds gold
and siluer, that is, mindes the things of God, as he that builds
hay and stubble, that is, too much mindes the things of this life
must passe. III. He saith that it is not incredible, that some
such thing is done after this life also; and whether it be so or not,
may be enquired of. IIII. But whether it be found or no, that
some faithfull people, according as they haue more or lesse, loued
these perishing things, are later or sooner saued: yet not such as
of whom it is said, that they shall not possesse the Kingdome of
God, vnlesse repenting as they ought, they obtaine forgiuenesse;
as for the purpose, be fruitfull in almes; which yet will not serue
to purchase a licence to commit sinne. V. That the daily and
lighter sinnes, without which we are neuer in this life, are blotted
out by the Lords Prayer. And so the greater also, if a man
leaue them, and forgiue others his enemies; which is a worthy
kinde of almes: but the best of all is a sinners amending of his life.
Loe how plainly Saint Augustine auo
                        •
                     cheth Purgatorie,
Of which he doubts whether any such thing can be found

or no. Expounds that Scripture that seemes most strong
for it, all otherwise, and so as it cannot agree thereunto. If
it be found, is sure it will not serue for greater sinnes. And
for lesser defects, yea the greatest shewes, another a surer
remedy, which intruth makes Purgatory superfluous. In
this doctrine, Danaeus is so farre from controuling Saint
Augustine, that he applauds him; and saith, that declaring
his owne opinion of Purgatorie, he pronounceth plainely, that the
whole defining of this matter is vncertaine, doubtfull, and rash;
which since that Augustine wrote being now an old man, certainely
it cannot be doubted but that hee did altogether reiect
Purgatorie: yea and he shewes this fire it selfe to be vnprofitable.
Thus Danaeus there. But the censure that was in your
minde, I beleeue is that vpon another passage of Saint Augustine
in the same Booke, where hee treates, whether the
soules of the dead are eased by the pietie of their friends that are
liuing. And thus he determines it. That when the Sacrifices
either of the Altar, or of whatsoeuer almes are offered for all
such as are deceased after Baptisme, for such as are very good
folke, they are thankesgiuings; for such as are not very euill, they
are propitiations: for those that are very euill, though they be
no helpes to the dead, yet they are consolations, such as they be to
the liuing. And to such as they are profitable vnto, it is either
that they may haue full remission, or that their very damnation
may be more tollerable. Vpon this Chapter thus saith Dan
                     •
                  us.
Hoc totum caput continet 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Augustini, and after
hee addes, Itaque hic foenum & stipulam aedificat vir pius
& magnus. But you, yee say, had rather follow Saint Augustines
opinion then his censure. Perhaps as one saith, rather erre
with Plato, then hold the truth with others. If that be your
resolution, what should we vse any more words? Beleeue
then if you please, that the commemoration of Christs sacrifice
in the Lords Supper, or the oblations of the faithfull,
are to be made for all that decease after Baptisme, in the
attempting of whatsoeuer sinne they die, yea suppose in
finall impenitence of any deadly crime. That such as be

damned may thereby haue their damnation made more tollerable.
Beleeue that without any improprietie of speech, the
same forme of words may be a thanksgiuing for one, and
an appeasing of Gods wrath for another. Beleeue also (if
you can beleeue what you will) that Saint Tecla deliuered
the soule of Falconilla out of hell, and Saint Gregorie the
soule of Traian, and that as may seeme saying Masse for
him, sith he was forbidden thence forth to offer any hoste
for any wicked man. Bele
                        ••
                     e that Macarius continually
praying for the dead, and very desirous to know whether
his prayers did them any good, had answere by miracle
from the scull of a dead man an Idolater, that by chance
was tumbled in the way. O Macarius when tho
                     •
                   offerest
prayer's for the dead, we feele some ease for the time. Beleeue
that on Easter euen all the damned spirits in hell keep holy day,
and are free from their torments. Saint Augustine, such is his
modestie, will giue you leaue to beleeue 
                        〈◊〉
                     , as well as
Purgatorie, if you please, as hee is not vnwilling to giue,
as large scope to other mens opinions as may be, so they
reuerse not the plaine and certaine grounds of holy Scripture.
In all these you may if you please follow authors
also; as Saint Damasce
                     ••
                  , Paladius, Prudentius, Sigebert,
and others. But giue the same libertie to others that yee
take. Compell no man to follow your opinion, if he had
rather follow Danaeus reasons. For my selfe, I would sooner
with Saint Augustine himselfe, whose words touching
Saint Cyprian, Danaeus here borrowed, confesse this to be,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   coopertum 
                     〈…〉
                  , then
be bound to iustif
                        •
                     e his conceit touching the commemoration
of the dead in the Lords Supper. And as hee saith
of Saint Cyprian, so would I adde, Ego h
                     •
                  ius libri authoritate
non teneor, 
                     〈…〉
                   Augustini non vt Canonicas habeo,
sed eas ex Canonic
                     •
                  s considero; & quod in ijs 
                     〈◊〉
                   scriptur

                     〈…〉
                   cum 
                     〈…〉
                   quod non
congruit cum pace eius resp
                     ••
                  . Which words I doe the rather
set downe, that they may be Luthers iustification also

against F. Parsons,Relation 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  who thinkes he hath laid sore to his
charge when hee cites very solemnely his Epistle ad Equitem
Germ. Anno Domini 1521. where he saith, he was tyed
by the authority of no Father, though neuer so holy, if hee were
not approued by the iudgement of holy Scripture. Surely this
is not to denie and contemne, as he cals it, or as you to controll
the Fathers, to account them subiect to humane infirmities,
which themselues acknowledge. But the contrary is
to boast against the truth, to seeke to fore iudge it with their
mistakings, which needes not so much as require their testimonies.
               
               I will forbeare to multiply words about that, whether
the testimonies of Antiquitie which fauour the Protestants be
many or few: whether they doe indeede so, or onely seeme, prima
facie; whether they be wrested or to the purpose; whether
all this may not by iust or reason be affirmed of the passages
cited by 
                     〈◊〉
                   Romanists out of Antiquitie, setting aside
matters of ceremony, and gouernment (which your selfe confesse
by and by may be diuers, without empeaching vnitie
in Faith) and opinions, euer to be subiected to the triall
of Scriptures, by their owne free consent and desire. Iudge
by an instance or two, that this matter may not be a meere
skirmish of generalities. Tertullian in his latter times, whether
as Saint Hierome writes through the enuie and reproach
of the Roman Clergie, or out of the too much admiring
chastitie and fasting, became a Montanist, and
wrote a Booke de Pudicitia, blaming the reconciling of Adulterers
and Fornicators. In the very entrance almost thereof,
he hath these words. Audio etiam edictum esse propositum,
& quidem peremptorium. Pontifex scil. Maximus Episcopus
Episcoporum dicit. Ego & maechis & fornicationis delict
a paenitentiâ functis dimitto. Pamelius in his noate vpon
this place, writes thus, Bene habet: & annotatu dignum
quod etiamiam in haeresi constitutus, & aduersus Ecclesia
                        ••
                     
scribens, Pontifice
                        •
                      Romanum Episcopum Episcoporum nuncupet,
& infra Cap. 13. bonum Pastorem, & benedictum Papum

& Cap. 21. Apostolicum. Thus Pamelius; and presently
la
                     •
                  ches forth into the Priuiledges of the See of
Rome, and brings a number of testimonies for that forgery
of Constantines donation. The like note hee hath in
the life of Tertullian, where hee makes the Pope
that set forth the former Edict to haue beene Zephyrinus;
quem, saith hee, Pontificem Maximum etiam
iam haereticus Episcopum Episcoporum appellat. Baronius
also makes no small account of this place, and saith,
The title of the Pope is here to bee noted. And indeed,
prima facie (as you say) they haue reason. But hee
that shall well examine the whole web of Tertullians discourse,
shall finde that hee speakes by a most bitter and
scornefull Ironie, as Elias doth of Baal, when hee saith,
hee is a God. The word scilicet might haue taught them
thus much. Yea, the title Pontifex Maximus, which in
those dayes, and almost two ages after, was a Pagan
terme, neuer attibuted to a Christian Bishop, first laid
downe by Gratian the Emperour, as Baronius also notes,
in the yeere of our Lord, 383. because it 
                     •
                  auoured of
Heathenish superstition, though it had beene, as a title of
Royalty vsed by the former Christian Emperours, till that
time. This title, I say, might haue made them perceiue
Tertullians meaning; vnlesse the immoderate desire of exalting
the Papacie did so blind their eyes, that seeing,
they saw, and yet perceiued not. In the same character,
though with more mildnesse and moderation, is the same
title for the other part of it, vsed by Saint Cyprian, in his
Vote in the Councell of Carthage. Neque. n. quisquam
nostrum se esse Episcopum Episcoporum constituit aut tyrannico
terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem Collegas suos adigit. Bellarmine
saith, hee speakes here of those Bishops that were in the
Councell of Carthage; and that the Bishop of Rome is not included
in that sentence, who is indeed Bishop of Bishops. What!
and doth hee tyranniously inforce his Colleagues to obedience
also. For it is plaine that Cyprian ioynes these together,

the one as the presumptuous title, the other as the
iniurious act answering thereto, which hee calls plaine
tyranny. And as plaine it is out of Firmilianus Epistle, which
I vouched before, that Stephanus Bishop of Rome heard
ill for his arrogancie and presuming vpon the place of his
Bishopricke, Peters Chaire, to seuer himselfe from so many
Churches, and breake the bond of peace, now with
the Churches of the East in Asia, now of the South in Africke.
And hee was in as ill conceit with Cyprian for his
breaking good order, and communicating with Basilides
and Martialis iustly depriued in Spaine; as Saint Cyprian
was with him, when he stiled him, a false Christ, and a false
Apostle. But the holy Martyr was of a more patient and
calme spirit, then to be moued with such reproaches; nay,
hee tooke occasion, as it should seeme, thereby to write of
patience. From this mildnesse it was, that hee so closely
taxed the presumption of him, that made himselfe Bishop
of Bishops, and by terror (which what it was Firmilianus
Epistle shewes, threatning Excommunication) would
compell his Colleagues to his owne opinion. None of vs
saith he, doth thus. As the Apostle, we preach not our selues;
we commend not our selues; Wee are not as many, that adulterate
the Word of God, &c. Bellarmine takes the first kindly.
No maruell, saith hee, for this the Bishop of Romes due.
But they goe together, hee must be content to take both,
or leaue both. Such another place there is in Saint Augustines
Epist. 86. the wordes are, Petr
                        ••
                      etiam inquit
Apostolorum Capu
                        •
                     , coeli 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & Ecclesia fundamentum.
Where in the Margent, the Diuines of Louaine, the ouerseers
of Plantines edition, set this note, Petrus Ecclesia fundamen
                        ••
                     m. Why might they not? The words yee will say
of the text. But these words of the text be not Saint Augustines,
whose opinion is well enough knowne, That it is
Christ confessed by Peter; that is the foundation of the Church;
but they are the words of an vndiscreet railerVrbici cuinsd
                        •
                     m. 
                  of the Citie
of Rome, against whom Saint Augustine in all that Epistle

most vehemently inueighs. This arrogant Author endeauours
so to defend the Romane custome of fasting on the
Saturday, as hee reproaches all other Churches that vsed
otherwise. And that we may see with what Spirit he was
led, he brings the same text that is brought, in Pope Siricius,
and Innocentius Epistles, against the marriage of Clergie
men, Qui in carne sunt Deo placere non possunt, and many
other Scrip
                     •
                  ures wrested, and farre from the purpose; at
last comes the authoritie of Peter, and his tradition very
Pope-like alledged, Peter, he saith, the head of the Apostles,
porter of heauen, and foundation of the Church, hauing ouercome
Simon the Sorc
                        •
                     rer, who was a figure of the Deuill, not to
be ouercome but by fasting, thus taught the Romanes; whose
faith is famous in the whole world. I remit you to Saint Augustines
answere to this tradition. This I note, that where
your Censors do race out of the Margents of former editions,
such notes as do expresse the very opinions of the
ancients, and in their owne wordes, here they can allow
and authorize such marginall notes, as are directly contrary
to their meaning. Yea, which are earnestly oppugned
by them; when they seeme to make for the authoritie of
the Pope. Good sir, examine well this dealing, and iudge
if this bee not wresting the Fathers, and applying them
cleane from their purpose.
               In fine, you found your selfe, you say, euidently conuinced.
Perswaded, I beleeue, rather then conuinced. Else if the
force and euidence of the Arguments, and not the pliablenesse
of your minde were the cause of your yeelding, mee
thinkes they should worke like effect in others, no lesse
seriously seeking for truth, and setting all worldly respects
aside, earnestly minding their owne saluation then
your selfe. Which I well know they do not, neither those
which hitherto haue beene examined, nor those which
yet remaine to be considered in the rereward.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               Of the Inuisibilitie of the Church, said to bee an
euasion of Protestants.
               THe first whereof is, the dislike of the Protestants euasion,
as you call it, by the inuisibilitie of their Church. Giue
mee leaue here to tell you plainly, yee seeme to mee not
to vnderstand the Protestants doctrine in this point. Else
yee would haue spared all that, The Catholike Church must
euer be visible, as a Citie set on a hill, otherwise how should shee
teach her children, conuert Pagans, dispence Sacraments? All
this is yeelded with both hands. The Congregations of
which the Catholike Church doth consist are visible. But
the promise made to this Church, of victory against the
gates of hell, the titles, of the house of God, the base and piller
of Truth (an allusion, as I take it, to the bases and pillers
that held vp the veile or curtaines in the Tabernacle)
the body of Christ, his Doue, his vndefiled, are not verified of
this Church in the whole visible bulke of it, but in those
that are called according to Gods purpose, giuen to
Christ, and kept by him to bee raised vp to life at the last
day. This doctrine is Saint Augustines in many place
                     •
                  ,
which it would bee too tedious to set downe at large. In
his third booke, De doctrina Christiana, among the rules of
Tychonius, there is one which hee corrects a little for the
tearmes, De Domini corpore bipertito; which he saith, ought
not to haue beene called so, for in truth that is not the Lords
body, which shal not be with him for euer, but he should haue said
of the Lords true body and mixt, or true and fained, or some
such thing. Because not onely for euer, but euen now, hypocrites
are not to be said to be with him, though they seeme to be in his
Church. Consider those resemblances taken out of the holy
Scripture, wherein that godly Father is frequent, of chaffe
and wheat in the Lords floore, of good and bad fishes in the net,
of spots and light in the Moone. Of the Church carnall and spirituall,

of the wicked multitudes of the Church, yet not to be accounted
in the Church. Of the lilly and the thornes; those that
are marked which mourne for the sinnes of Gods people, and the
rest which perish, which yet beare his Sacraments. Consider
the last Chapter of the booke, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, and
that large Treatise which he hath of that matter, Epist. 48.
The place is long, which deserues to bee read, for the
obiection of the Vniuersality of Arianisme (like to that of
Papisme in these last ages) which Saint Augustine answeres
in the fifth booke, De Baptismo contra Donatistas
cap. 27. That number of the iust, who are called according to
Gods purpose, of whom it is said, The Lord knoweth who are his,
is the inclosed garden, the sealed fountaine, the well of liuing
waters, the orchard with Apples, &c. The like hee hath. l. 5.
c. 3. & 23. he concludes, that because such are built vpon the
Rocke, as heare the Word of God and doe it, and the rest vpon the
sand: now the Church is built vpon the Rocke, all therefore that
heare the Word of God and doe it not, are out of question without
the Church. In the seuenth booke, cap. 51. Quibus omnibus
consideratis
                        •
                     
                  —Read and marke the whole Chapter.
Out of these and many more like places, which I forbeare
to mention, it appeares, that albeit the true Catholike
Church is such as cannot bee hid, yet considering that it
consists of two sorts of people, the one, which is the greater
part, who doe not indeed properly belong to it: the
other, the fewer, truely and properly so called, to whom all
the glorious things spoken of the Church doe agree. The
face therefore of the mixt Church may be ouer-run with
scandals,De Vnitate Eccl. c. 24. Euarrat. in Psal. 103. com. 1. as in all times almost. The greatest number may
sometime bee Idolaters, as in the Kingdome of Israel vnder
Achab. The principallest in authoritie may bee false
teachers, as the Priests and Prophets in Ieremies time: the
sonnes of pestilence may sit in Moses Chaire, as they did
in Christs time. Yet still the Church is the ground and piller
of Truth in the Elect: Ipsa est praedestinata columna & firmamentum
veritatis. The Sheepe heare not Seducers, Iohn 10. 8.

to wit, finally, and in any damnable point. Thus was it before
Christ, thus since, thus in the Church of England, before,
yea, and since it was reformed. Thus in that of Rome
it selfe at this day. There is a distinction of Thomas, of
those that be in the Church, which rightly 
                     •
                   interpreted agrees
fully herewith.2. 2. q. 2. ar. 9. There are some, De Ecclesia numero
tantum. Some, numero & merito. The former are such as
haue onely fidem informem, the latter formatam. Now
though the persons of such, as be in the Church be visible,
yet the Faith and Charitie of men wee see not, and to argue
from the priuiledges of the Church, numero & merito,
to the Church, numero tantum, is a perpetuall, but a palpable
para
                        •
                     ogisme of the Romish faction: which is grosser,
yet when they argue to the Church representatiue; and
grossest of all when one man is made the Church, and he (as
themselues grant may fall out) a Deuill incarnate.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Of lacke of Vniformitie in matters of Faith, in
all ages and places.
               ANd in this selfe same Paralogisme you were beguiled
with, in the next point of Vniformitie and concord in
matters of Faith. The true Church, yee say, 
                        •
                     uer holds such
Vniformitie. It is vtterly false in the Visible and mixt Church,
both before Christ and since. It is false in the Church
of Rome it selfe; whose new-coyned faith, patched to the
Creed, by Pius the Fourth, came in peece-meale out of
priuate opinions and corrupt vsages, nor euer was in any
age vniformely holden, or taught as matter of Faith, euen
in it, as it is at this day. So by your owne discourse it
should be no true Church. And taking matters of faith so
largely as it seemes you doe, in opposition to such things
as bee cer
                        •
                     m
                        •
                     nies or of gouernment; it is vntrue also of the

                  Church of the Elect, or properly so called. For though the
Faith in the principles thereof bee euer the same, yet many
conclusions of Faith haue sometimes lien vnsearched out,
and like some parts of the world vnknowne, till by the
industrie of Gods seruants, occasioned also by the importunitie
and opposition of Heretikes, they were discouered.
Sundrie common errours also there haue beene, which in
succeeding ages haue beene cleered and reformed: as, the

                     
                        •
                     hiliastes. That Angels haue bodies: That children after they
be baptized are to be communicated: That Heretikes are to be
rebaptized.
               
               To the Assumption First, the Protestants challenge not
to themselues any Church as their owne; which I must aduertise
you of here, because formerly also you doe vse this
phrase. The Church is Christs, both the visible and inuisible.
Next, taking matters of Faith for foundations or articles
of Faith necessarie to saluation, the Church of Christ
hath in all ages had vniforme concord with the Protestants
at this day in such matters, as appeareth by the common
rule of Faith the Creede; and so hath also the Church
vnder the Popes tyrannie. As to the Trent-additions they
are forraine to the Faith, as neither principles nor conclusions
thereof: neither can your selues shew vniforme consent
and concord in them (and namely, in the 11. of them)
in any one age, especially as matters of saluation, as now
they are canonized. How much lesse can yee shew it in all
other conclusions of Faith; whereabout there haue beene
among you, as are now among vs, and euer will bee differences
of opinions, without any prejudice for all that vnto
the vnitie of the Faith of the Church, and title to the name
of it. As for Wicliffe, Hus, and the rest, if they haue any of
them borne record to the Truth, and resisted any innouation
of corrupt Teachers in their times, euen to bloud, they
are iustly to be termed Martyrs, yea albeit they saw not
all corruptions, but in some were themselues carried away
with the streame of error. Else, if because they erred in

some things, they bee no Martyrs, or because wee dissent
from them in some things, we are not of the same Church,
both you and we must quit all claime to Saint Cyprian, Iustine
Martyr, and many more whom wee count our Ancients,
and Predecessors, and bereaue them also of the honour
of Martyrdome, which so long they haue enjoyed:
You see, I hope, by this time the weaknesse of your Argument.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Of the originall of reformation in Luther, Caluin;
Scotland, England, &c.
               
                  IN your next Motiue taken from the originall of Reformation,
before I come to answere your Argument shortly
coucht in forme, I must endeuour to reforme your iudgement
in sundrie points of storie, wherein partly you are
misse-led and abused by Parsons and others of that spirit,
partly you haue mistaken some particulars, and out of a
false imagination framed a like discourse. First for Luther,
it was not his ran
                     •
                  our against the Dominicans that stirred
him vp against the Pope, but the shamefull merchandize of
Indulgences, set to sale in Germanie, to the aduantage of
Magdalen, sister to Pope Leo X. Beleeue herein if not
Sleidan yet G
                     ••
                  cciardine l. 13. And of all that mention
those affaires, it is acknowledged, that at the first, and for
a good time he shewed all obedience, and reuerence to the
Pope. The new Historie of the Councell of Trent, written
by an Italian a subiect and part of the Church of Rome, as
should appeare by the Epistle Dedicatorie of the Reuerend
and learned Archbishop of Spalato, prefixed to his Maiestie,
speaketh thus of the matter. Questo diede occasione, &c.
This gaue occasion to Martin,
                  Pag. 6. to passe from Indulgences to the
authoritie of the Pope, which being by others proclaymed for the

highest in the Church, by him was made subiect to a Generall
Councell lawfully celebrated. Whereof hee said that there was
neede in that instant, and vrgent necessitie. And as the heat of
disputation continued, by how much the more the Popes power
was by others exalted, so much the more was it by him abased,
yet so as Martin contayned himselfe within the termes of speaking
modestly of the person of Leo, and sauing sometimes his
iudgement.Pag. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Againe, After his departure from the presence of
Cardinall Cajetan at Augusta, hee saith, hee wrote a letter to
the Cardinall, confessing that hee had beene too vehement, and
excusing himselfe by the importunitie of the Pardoners, and of
those that had written against him, promising to vse more modestie
in time to come, to satisfie the Pope, and not to speake any
more of Indulgences, prouided that his aduersaries would doe
the like. This was Luthers manner at the first, till the Bull
of Pope Leo came out, dated the ninth of Nouember, 1518.
Wherein he declared the validitie of Indulgences, and that hee
as Peters Successor and Christs Vicar had power to grant them
for the quicke and dead; that this is the doctrine of the Church
of Rome, the Mother and Mistris of all Christians, and ought
to bee receiued of all that would bee in the Communion of the
Church. From this time forward Luther began to change
his stile,
                  Pag. 
                        •
                     . And (saith he) as before hee had for the most part
reserued the person and iudgement of the Pope, so after this
Bull he resolued to refuse it, and thereupon put forth an Appeale
to the Councell▪ &c. You see then how submissiuely Luther
at first carried himself. But extreme tyrannie ouer-comes
often a well prepared patience.
               
               Touching his causing rebellion also against the Emperour,
yee are misse-informed: his aduice was asked about the association
of the Protestants at Smalcald,
                  Sleidan l. 
                        •
                     . hee said plainly,
hee could not see how it could bee lawfull, further then for
their owne defence, Ioh. Bodin, in his second Booke de Repub.
cap. 5. hath these wordes. We reade also that the Protestant
Princes of Almaine before they tooke armes against the
Emperour, demanded of Martin Luther if it were lawfull. He

answered freely that it was not lawfull, whatsoeuer tyrannie, or
impietie were pretended. He was not beleeued; so the end thereof
was miserable, and drew after it the ruine of great and illustrious
houses of Germanie. As for the warre in Germanie it
began not till after Luthers death, neither was it a rebellion
of the Protestants; the truth is they stood for their
liues. The Emperour with the helpe of the Popes both
mony and armes, intended to roote them out; and although
at the first the Emperour did not auow his raysing
armes against them to be for Religion, yet the Pope in his
Iubilee published vpon this occasion, did not let to declare
to the world, that himselfe and Caesar had concluded a league
to reduce the H
                        •
                     retikes by force of armes to the obedience of the
Church, and therefore all should pray for the good successe of
the warre.
               
               That Luther euer reuiled the Emperour, I did neuer till
now heare or reade, and therefore would desire to know
what authors you haue for it. Touching other Princes,
namely, King Henrie the eighth, I will not defend him,
who condemned himselfe thereof. It is true that he was
a man of a bold and high stomacke, and specially fitted
thereby through the prouidence of God, to worke vpon
the heauie and dull disposition of the Almaines, and in so
generall a Lethargie, as the world then was in, hee carried
himself (as fell out somtimes) very 
                     •
                  oisterously. But arrogancie,
sch
                        •
                     sme, rebellion, were as farre from him, as the intention
itself to plant a Church.
               
               As to his Vow-breaking lastly, if that Vow were foolishly
made and sinfully kept, it was iustly broken: perhaps
also charitably, if hee would by his owne example reforme
such, as liued in whoredome, and other vncleannes,
and induce them to vse the remedie that God hath appointed
for the auoiding of them, to wit, honorable marriage.
All this matter touching Luther, vnlesse I be 
                     •
                  eceiued,
you haue taken from 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Harding; that at least
touching his rancour against the Dominicans, for it is his

very phrase. But Master Harding both in this, and many
things else discouereth his passion, and lack of true information
in this affaire. When with one breath he affirmeth,
that, first, it was a Pardon of a Croisade against the Turkes
which was preached whereas it was an Indulgence to those
that should put their helping hands for the building of Saint
Peters Church at Rome, as the Articles of this Pardon printed
in English, one of the Copies whereof I haue my selfe,
doe shew. Secondly, next hee saith the preaching hereof
was granted to Friar Iohn Tetzet. It was Friar Iohn Thecel,
or Tecel. Thirdly, hee saith, the Elector of Mentz Albert
granted this to T
                     •
                  ecel and the Dominicans, whereby Luther
was bereft of the gaine hee exspected. The truth is, it was
Aremboldus a Bishop liuing at the Court of Rome, whom
(hauing before been a Merchant of Genoa) Magdalen the
Popes sister put in trust with this merchandize, that appointed
the Dominicans to bee the retaylers of these Pardons.
The Archbishop of Mentz had nothing to doe with
it, otherwise then to allow and suffer it, which occasioned
Luther to write to him, as to the Bishop of Brandenburgh,
and to Leo himselfe, to represse the impudence of
the Pardoners. And Luther saith further in one place, that
the Archbishop vndertooke to giue countenance to this
businesse, with that condition, that the halfe of the prey
should goe to the Pope, and himselfe might haue the other
halfe to pay for his Pall. By these errors hea
                     •
                  ed together
it may appeare what credit it is like Master Hardings tale
be wort
                     •
                  y of, touching the remnant, that of rancour and
malice against the Dominicans, and because hee was bereaued
of that sweet morsell, which in hope hee had almost swallowed
downe, Luther made this st
                        •
                     rre. A hard thing mee thinks it
is, for any that liued at that day to set downe what was in
Luthers heart, what were his hopes, his desires, rancour,
and spleene; much more for Master Harding, most of all
for you and mee. When the actions of men haue an appearance
of good, Charitie would hope the best, Pietie

would reserue the iudgement of the intention to God.
               Let vs come to Caluin, touching whom I maruell not
much that you say nothing of all that which Bolseck brings against
him, who being by his meanes chased out of Geneua,
discouereth as I remember in the verie enetance, that
hee was requested by some of his good Masters to write against
him. I once saw the book while I liued in Cambridge;
it hath no shew of probabilitie that Caluin would goe about
to worke a miracle to confirme his doctrine, who
teacheth that miracles are no sure and sufficient proofe of
doctrine. I maruell rather that euen in reading Doctor
Bancroft, Master Hooker, and Sarauia, all opposites to Cal
                     
                        •
                     in
in the question of Church Discipline, and therefore not
all the fittest to testifie of him or his actions, all late Writers,
and strangers to the Estate and affaires of Geneua: of
whom therefore besides their bare word, sufficient proofe
were to bee required of what they say, you not onely receiue
whatsoeuer they bring, but more then they bring.
You say, they proue what neuer came in their mindes; and
what is not onely vtterly vntrue, but euen vnpossible. As
that Caluin by his vnquietnes and ambition reuolued the State
of Geneua, so vni
                        •
                     stly expelling and depriuing the Bishop of
Geneua, and other Temporall Lords, of their due obedience, and
ancient inheritance. When as the Bishop and Clergie of
Geneua, vpon the throwing downe Images there by popular
tumult, departed in an anger, seuen yeeres ere euer
Caluin se
                     •
                   foot within the gates of that Citie. A thing not
onely cleere in storie, by the Writers of that time, and
since, Sleidan, Bodine, Caluins Epistles, and life, but set down
by those whom yee cite. Master Hooker in his Preface
speaking of Caluin. Hee fell at length vpon Geneua, which
Citie the Bishop and Clergie thereof, had a little before, as some
doe affirme, forsaken, being of likelyhood frighted with the peoples
sudden attempt for the abolishment of Popish Religion. And
a little after. At the comming of Caluin thither, the forme of
their Regiment was popular, as it continueth at this day, &c.
                  
Doctor Bancroft. The same yeere that Geneua was assaulted
viz. by the Duke of Sauoy, and the Bishop, as he had said
before, Page 13.) which was Anno 1536. Master Caluin
came thither. If Caluin at his comming found the forme of
the gouernment popular, If hee came thither the same
yeere that the Bishop made war vpon Geneua to recouer
his authoritie, being indeede either affrighted, or hauing
forsaken the Towne before, how could Caluin expel him?
And in truth Bodine in his second Booke, De Rep. Chapter
sixt, affirmeth, That the same yeere Genoa was established in a
State Aristocraticall, which was, hee saith, Anno 1528. Geneua
was changed from a Monarchy Pontificall, into an Estate
Popular, gouerned Aristocratically, although that long before
the Towne pretended to bee free, against the Earle, and against
the Bishop, &c. What Sarauia hath written touching this
point I cannot tell, as not hauing his Booke. But in Beza
his answere to him, there is no touch vpon any such thing.
He ioynes with his complaint, of the sacrilegious vsurping
Ecclesiasticall goods, in answere to his Proême. He dissents
in that Sarauia accounts the Seniors of the reformed Churches
like to that kinde which Saint Ambrose speakes of, brought
in out of wisdome onely, to rule the disorderly. Beza saith, they
were not introducti, but reducti, Cap. 12. For the rest in all
that answere there is nothing of Caluin, or any such reuoluing
of the state as you accuse him of. Which makes mee
thinke, that herein your memorie deceiued you. It may
be that in your younger time, falling vpon these Authors,
by occasion of the question of Discipline, which was then
much tossed, ere euer your iudgement were ripened, you
formed in your minde a false impression of that which
they say of Caluin. You conceited them out of your zeale
in the cause, to say more then they do, & thus possible vnawares
receiued the seeds of dislike of the doctrine of Caluin,
as well as his discipline, which haue since taken root in
you. But you shall doe well to remember, the difference
you put a little before of these two▪ Christian doctrine is

vniforme and euer the same; gouernment is changeable in
many circumstances, according to the exigence of times
and persons. And euen the same men that write somewhat
eagerly against Master Caluin, yet giue him the
pra
                     •
                  se of wisdome to see what for that time and state was
necessarie. Master Hooker saith of him, That he thinkes him
incomparably the wisest man that euer the French Church did
enioy since the houre it enioyed him, and of his platforme of
discipline, after hee hath laid downe the summe of it.
This deuice I see not how the wisest at that time liuing could
haue bettered, if wee duely consider what the present state
of Geneua did then require. But bee it (and for my part I
thinke no lesse) that herein hee was mistaken, to account
this to bee the true forme of Church policie, by which all
other Churches, and at all times ought to bee gouerned;
let his error rest with him, yea, let him answere it vnto his
Iudge; but to accuse him of ambition, and sedition, and
that falsly, and from thence to set that brand vpon the reformation,
whereof he was a worthy instrument (though
not the first either there, or any where else) as if it could
not bee from God, being so founded; for my part I am
afraide you can neuer bee able to answere it, at the same
Barre; no, nor euen that of your owne conscience, or of
reasonable and equall men.
               For the stirres, broiles, seditions, and murthers in Scotland,
which you impute to Knox and, and the Geneua Gospellers, they
might be occasioned perhaps by the reformers there, as
the broiles which our Lo
                     •
                  d Iesus Christ saith he came to
set in the world by the Gospell. Possible also, that good
men out of incōsiderate zeale, should do some things rashly.
And like enough the multitude which followed them,
as being foreprepared with a iusthatred of the tyrannie of
their Prelates, and prouoked by the opposition of the aduerse
faction, & emboldned by success
                     •
                  , ran a great deale
further then either wise men could foresee, or tell how to
restraine them. Which was applauded and fomented by

some politicke men, who tooke aduantage of those motions
to their owne ends. And as it happens in naturall
bodies, that all ill humors runne to the part affected, so
in ciuill, all discontented people when there is any sorance
runne to one or other side; and vnder the shew of
common griefes, pursue their owne. Of all which distempers,
there is no reason to lay the blame vpon the seekers
of reformation, more then vpon the Phisitians, of such accidents
as happen to the corrupted bodies which they
haue in cure. The particulars of those affaires are as I beleeue
alike vnknown to vs both, and since you name none,
I can answere to none. For as for the pursuing our King
euen before his birth, that which his Maiestie speakes of
some Puritans, is ouer-boldly by you referred to Master
Knox and the Ministers, that were authors of Reformation
in Scotland. Briefely, consider and suruey your owne
thoughts, and see if you haue not come by these degrees
                     •
                  
First, from the inconsiderate courses of some to plant the
pretended Discipline in Scotland, to conceiue amisse of the
Doctrine also. Then to draw to the encreasing of your ill
conceit thereof, what you finde reported of any of the
Puritans, a faction no lesse opposed by his Maiesty in Scotland
then with vs in England. So when we speake of religion
(though that indeede be all one) yee diuide vs into Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Caluinists, Protestants, Brownists, Puritans,
& Cartwrightists, whensoeuer any disorder of all this
number can be accused, then loe are we all one, and the faul
                     •
                  
of any faction is the slander of all, yea of the Gospell it selfe,
and of reformation. Iudge now vprightly if this be indifferent
dealing.
               From Scotland you come to England. Where because
you could finde nothing done by popular tumult, nothing
but by the whole state in Parliament, and Clergie in Conuocation,
you fall vpon King Henries passions, you will not insist
vpon them you say; and yet you doe, as long as vpon any
one member of your induction, though it matters little

whether you doe or no, since F. Parsons will needes auerre
that hee liued and died of your religion. Here first you
mention, his violent diuorcing himselfe from his lawfull wife.
Wee will not now debate the question how his Brothers
wife could bee his lawfull wife: you must now say so.
Whatsoeuer the Scriptures, Councels, almost all Vniuersities
of Christendome determined. Yet mee thinkes it
should moue you that Pope Clement himselfe had consigned
to Cardinal Campegius a Breue formed to sentence for
the King, in as ample manner as could be, howsoeuer vpon
the successe of the Emperours affaires, in Italie and his
own occasions, he sent a special messenger to him to burn
it. But what violence was this that you speake of? The
matter was orderlie and iudiciouslie by the Arch-bishop of
Canterbury with the assistance of the learnedest of the
Clergie according to the ancient Canons of the Church,
and lawes of the Realme heard and determined. That indeede
is more to be maruelled at, what moued him to fall out
with the Pope his friend in whose quarrell he had so far engaged
himselfe, as to write against Luther, of whom also
he was so rudelie handled as you mention before; hauing
receiued also for some part of recompence, the title of the
Defender of the Faith, hauing beene so chargeablie thankefull
to the Pope for it. All these things considered, it must
be said, this vnkindnesse and slipperie dealing of Clement
with him was from the Lord, that hee might haue an occasion
against the Pope, and that it might appeare that it
was not humane counsell, but diuine prouidence that
brought about the banishment of the Popes tyrannie
from among vs. His marriage with the Ladie Anne
Bullen, her death, and the rest which you mention of the
abling or disabling her issue to inherit the Crown, I see not
what it makes to our purpose. The suppression of the Monasteries,
was not his sole Act, but of the whole State, with
the consent also of the Clergie, and taken out of Cardinall
Wolsey his example, yea, founded vpon the Popes authoritie

granted to him, to dissolue the smaller houses of religion,
on pretence to defray the charges of his sumptuous buildings
at Oxford and l
                        •
                     swich, wherein if it pittie you (as I
confesse it hath sometimes mee) that such goodly
buildings are defaced and ruined, wee must remember
what God did to Sh
                        •
                     loh,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      7. 12. 
                  yea to Ierusalem it selfe, and his
Temple there.
                  Matth. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   And that Oracle, Euery tree that beareth not
good fruit shall be cut downe, and cast into the fire.
               
               You demand, If this man, King Henry, were a good head of
Gods Church? What if I should demand the same touching
Alexander the Sixth, Iulius the Second, Leo the Tenth, or
twentie more of the Catalogue of Popes, in respect of
whom King Henry might bee canonized for a Saint? But
there is a storie in Tullies Offices of one Lutatius, that laid
a wager that he was (bonus vir) a good man; and would
bee iudged by one Fimbria, a man of Consular dignitie.
Hee, when he vnderstood the case, said, Hee would neuer
iudge that matter, least either hee should diminish the reputation
of a man well esteemed of, or set downe that any man was
a good man; which hee accounted to consist in an innumerable
sort of excellencies and praises. That which hee said of a
good man, with much more reason may I s
                     •
                  y, of a good
King, one of whose highest excellencies is to bee a good
head of the Church. And therefore it is a question which I
will neuer take vpon mee to answere, whether King Henry
were such or no, vnlesse you will before hand interpret this
word as fauourably,Lib. 16. as Guicciardine doth tell vs men are
wont to doe in the censuring your heads of the Church.
For Popes, he saith, now adayes are praised for their goodnesse,
when they exceed not the wickednesse of other men. After this
description of a good head of the Church, or if yee will that
of Cominaeus, which saith hee is to bee counted a good
King, whose vertues exceeds his vices. I wil not doubt to say
King Henry may be enrolled among the number of good
Kings. In speciall, for his executing that highest dutie of
a good King, the imploying his authoritie in his Kingdome,

to command good things, and forbid euill, not onely concerning
the ciuill estate of men, but the religion also of God. Witnesse
his authorizing the Scriptures 
                        •
                     o be had and read in Churches
in our Vulgar tongue, enioyning the Lords Prayer, the Creed,
and ten Commandements to bee taught the people in English,
abolishing superfluous Holy-dayes, pulling downe those iugling
Idols, whereby the people were seduced, namely, the Rood
of Grace, whose eyes and lips were moued with wires, openly
shewed at Pauls Crosse, and pulled asunder by the
people. Aboue all, the abolishing of the Popes tyranny, and
merchandise of Indulgences, & such like chafer out of England.
Which Acts of his whosoeuer shall vnpartially consider
of, may well esteeme him a better head to the
Chur
                     •
                  h of England, then any Pope these thousand
yeeres.
               In the last place you come to the Hugenots and Geuses,
of France and Holland. You lay to their charge, the raising
of ciuill warres, shedding of bloud, occasioning rebellion, rapine,
desolations, principally for their new religion. In the latter
part you write, I confesse, somewhat reseruedly, when
you say, occasioning, not causing, and principally, not onely
and wholly, for religion. But the words going before, and
the exigence of your argument require, that your meaning
should be, they were the causers of these disorders.
You bring to my minde a story, whether of the same Fimbria
that I mentioned before, or another, which hauing
caused Quintus Scaeuola to bee stab'd (as F. Paulo was,
while I was at Venice) after he vnderstood that he escaped
with his life, brought his action against him, for not hauing
receiued the weapon wholly into his body. These poore people
hauing endured such barbarous cruelties, massacres, and
martyrdomes, as scarce the like can be shewed in all stories,
are now accused by you as the Authors of all they
suffered. No, no, Master Wadesworth, they bee the Lawes
of the Romane religion, that are written in bloud. It is
the bloudy Inquisition, and the perfidious violating of the

                  Edicts of Pacification, that haue set France and Flanders in
combustion. An euident argument whereof may b
                     •
                  e, for
Flanders, that those Geuses that you mention, were not all
Caluinists (as you are mis-informed) the chiefe of them
were Romane Catholikes; as namely, Count Egmond, and
Horne, who lost their heads for standing, and yet onely
by petition, against the new impositions, and the Inquisition,
which was sought to bee brought in vpon those
Countries. The which when the Vice-roy of Naples, D.
Petro de Toledo would haue once brought in there also,An. 1547.
the people would by no meanes abide, but rose vp in
Armes to the number of 50000. which sedition could
not bee appeased, but by deliuering them of that feare.
The like resistance, though more quietly carried, was
made when the same Inquisition should haue beene put
vpon Millaine,
                  1563. sixteene yeeres after. Yet these people
were neither Geuses nor Caluinists. Another great meanes
to alienate the mindes of the people of the Low-countries
from the obedience of the Catholike Maiestie, hath
beene the seueritie of his Deputies there, one of which
leauing the gouernment after hee had in a few yeeres put
to death18000. 8000. persons, it is reported to haue been said,
the Countrie was lost with too much lenitie. This speech
Meursius concludes his Belgick history with all. And as
for France, the first broiles there, were not for religion, but
for the preferring the house of Guis
                        •
                     , and disgracing the
Princes of the bloud. True it is that each side aduantaged
themselues by the colour of religion, and vnder pretence
of zeale to the Romane, the Guisians murthered the
Protestants, being in the exercise of their religion assembled
together, against the Kings Edict, against all Lawes
and common humanitie. And tell 
                     •
                  ee in good sooth▪ Master
Wadesworth, doe you approue such barbarous crueltie?
Doe you allow the butchery at Paris? Doe you thinke subiects
are bound to giue their throates to bee cut by their
fellow subiects, or to their Princes at their meere wills

against their owne Lawes and Edicts? You would know,
quo iure, the Protestants warres in France and Holland are
iustified. First, the Law of Nature, which not onely alloweth,
but inclineth and inforceth euery liuing thing, to
defend it selfe from violence. Secondly, that of Nations,
which permitteth those that are in the protection of others,
to whom they owe no more but an honourable acknowledgement,
in case they goe about to make themselues
absolute Souereignes, and vsurpe their libertie, to
resist and stand for the same. And if a lawfull Prince
(which is not yet Lord of his Subiects liues and goods)
shall attempt to despoile them of the same, vnder colour
of red
                     •
                  cing them to his owne religion after all humble
remonstrances, they may stand vpon their owne guard,
and being assailed, repell force with force, as did the Macchabees
vnder Antiochus. In which case notwithanding,
the person of the Prince himselfe, ought alwaies to be sacred
and inuiolable, as was Sauls to Dauid. Lastly, if the
inraged Minister of a lawfull Prince, will abuse his authoritie
against the fundamentall Lawes of the Countrie, it is
no rebellion to defend themselues against force, reseruing
still their obedience to their Souereigne inuiolate. These
are the Rules of which the Protestants that haue borne
Armes in France and Flanders, and the Papists also both
there and elsewhere, as in Naples, that haue stood for the
defence of their liberties, haue serued themselues. How
truely I esteeme it hard for you and mee to determine, vnlesse
we were more throughly acquainted with the Lawes
and Customes of those Countries, then I for my part am.
Once for the Low-Countries, the world knowes that the
Dukes of Burgundy were not Kings or absolute Lords of
them, which are holden partly of the Crowne of France,
and partly of the Empire. And of Holland in particular
they were but Earles. And whether that title carries with
it such a Souereigntie, as to bee able to giue new Lawes,
without their consents, to impose tributes, to bring in garisons

of strangers, to build Forts, to assubjects their honors
and liues to the dangerous triall of a new Court, proceeding
without forme or figure of iustice, any reasonable man
may well doubt; themselues doe vtterly denie it.
               Yet you say boldly they are Rebels, and aske why wee did
support them? It seemes to some that his Catholike Maiestie
doth absolue them in the treatie of the Truce, An. 1608.
of all imputation of rebellion. And if they were Rebels, especially
for heresie, why did the most Christian King support
them? As for Queene Elizabeth, if shee were aliue,
shee would answer your question with another. Why did
Spaine concurre in practice and promise aide to that detestable
conspiracie that was plotted against her by Pius V. as you may
see at large in his life, written by Girolamo Catena? It is,
you say, an easie matter to pretend priuiledges. But it is no
hard matter to discerne pretended priuiledges from true,
and Treason from Reason of State, and old corruptions
from old Religion. But to take armes to change the Lawes
by the whole Estate established, is treason whatsoeuer the
cause or colour be: and therefore is was treason in the Rebels
of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire in King Henries dayes,
and in the Earles of the North in Queene Elizabeths, though
they pretended their old Religion: and the same must bee
said of all Assasinates attempted against the persons of
Princes, as Parryes, Someruilles, Squires, against Queene
Elizab
                        •
                     th, and the late powder-plot the eternall shame of Poperie
against King Iames.
               
               To your Argument therefore in forme, admitting that
it is no true Church, which is founded and begun in malice,
disobedience, passion, bloud, and rebellion, no nor yet a true
reformation of a Church (for in truth the Protestants pretend
not to haue founded any.) The Assumption is denyed
in euery part of it. And here I must needes say you haue
not done vnwisely to leaue out the Church of England, as
against which you had no pretence, all things hauing been
carried orderly, and by publike counsell. But you haue

wronged those which you name, and either lightly beleeued,
or vnjustly surmised your selfe, touching Luther, Caluin,
Knox, the French, and the Hollanders, when you make
them the raysers of rebellion and shedders of bloud. Whose
bloud hath beene shed like water in al parts of those countries,
against all Lawes of God and Man against the Edicts
and publike Faith, till necessitie enforced them to stand
for their liues. Yet you presume that all this is euident to
the world, whereas it is so false and improbable, yea in
some parts impossible, as I wonder how your heart could assure
your hand to write it.
               Giue me here leaue to set down by occasion of this your
motiue, that which I professe next to the euidence of those
corruptions which the Court and faction of Rome maintaynes,
hath long moued my selfe. And thus I would enlarge
your Proposition. That Monarchie (as now without
lisping it cals it selfe) which was founded, supported, enlarged,
and is yet maintayned by pride, ambition, rebellion,
treason, murthering of Princes, warres, dispensing
with perjurie, and incestuous marriages, spoiles and robberie
of Churches, and Kingdomes, worldly policie, force
and falshood, forgerie, lying, and hypocrisie, is not the
Church of Christ, and his Kingdome, but the tyrannie of
Antichrist. The Papacie falsely calling it selfe the Church
of Rome is such. Erg
                        •
                     . The Assumption shall bee proued in
euery part of it, and in truth is alreadie by the learned and
truly noble Lord of Plessis in his Mysterium iniquit at is. But
his booke I suppose you cannot view, and it would require
a iust volume to shew it, though but shortly. It shall bee
therefore, if you will, the taske of another time. And yet
because I doe not loue to leaue things wholly at randon,
consider a few instances in some of these. Pope B
                        •
                     niface
III. obtayned that proud and ambitious title of Oecumenicall,
so much detested by Saint Gregorie. Pope Constantine
and Gregorie the second, reuolted Italie from the Greeke
Emperours obedience, forbidding to pay tribute or obey

them. Pope Zacharie animated Pipine high Steward of
France, to depose Chilperick his Lord, and dispensed with
the oathes of his subiects. Pope Stephen II. most treacherously
and vniustly perswaded the same Pipine not to
restore the Exarchate of Ranenna to the Emperour, after he
had recouered it from Astulfus King of Lombards, but to
giue it to him. Pope Nicholas II. and Gr
                        •
                     gorie VII.
parted the prey with the Normans in Calabria, and Apulia,
creating them Dukes thereof,He
                        •
                     ri
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   to hold the Emperour of
Constantinoples countrie in vassallage of them. This latter
also was the first as all Historians accord, that euer attempted
to depose the Emperour, against whom hee most impiously
stirred vp his owne children, which most lamentably
brought him to his end. Pope Paschal II. would
not suffer (for the full accomplishment of this Tragedie)
his sonne to burie him. Pope Adrian IV. demanded homage
of the Emperor Frederick, Alexander III. trode on
his neck. Celestine III. crowned Henrie VI. with his feet.
Innocent IV. stirred vp Fredericke the seconds owne seruants
to poison him, practised with the Sultan of Aegypt
to breake with him. This is that Innocent, of whose extortions
Matthew Paris relates so much in our storie; whom
the learned, zealous, and holy Bishop of Lincolne on his death-bed
proued to be Antichrist, and in a vision strooke so with
his Crosier-staffe that hee died. Boniface VIII. challenged
both swords, pretended to be superiour to the King of
France in temporall things also. Clement V. would in the
vacancie of the Empire, that all the Cities and Countries
thereof should be vnder his disposition, made the Duke of
Venice, Dandalus, couch vnder his Table with a chaine on
his neck like a dogge, ere he would grant peace to the Venetians.
This Clement the V. commanded the Angels to carrie
their soules to heauen, that should take the Crosse to
fight for the holy Land.
               What shall I say more? I am wearie with writing thus
much, and yet in all this I doe not insist vpon priuate and

personall faults, blasphemies, perjuries, necromancies,
murthers, barbarous cruelties, euen vpon one another, aliue
and dead, nor on whoredomes, incests, sodomies, open pillages,
besides the perpetuall abuse of the censures of the
Church. I insist not vpon these, more then you did vpon
King Henries passions. I tell you not of him that called the
Gospell a fable, or another that instituted his Agnus Deis
to strangle sinne like Christs bloud. Of him that dispensed
with one to marrie his owne sister (for the vncle to marrie
with the neece, or a woman to marrie two brothers, a man
two sisters by dispensation, is no rare thing at this day.)
The facultie to vse Sodomie, the storie of Pope Ioane, are almost
incredible, and yet they haue Authors of better credit
then Bolseck. It may bee said that Iohn the two and
twentieth called a deuill incarnate, that Alexander VI. the
poisoner of his Cardinals, the adulterer of his sonne in
lawes bed, incestuous defiler of his owne daughter, and riuall
in that villanie to his sonne, sinned as men, which empeacheth
not the credit of their office. That Paulu
                        •
                      V.
Vice-deus takes too much vpon him, when hee will bee
Pope-almightie; but the chaire is without error. Wherein,
not to insist for the present, but admitting it as true
that wickednesse of mens persons doth not impeach the
holinesse of their functions, which they haue receiued of
God, nor make Gods ordinances, as his Word and Sacraments
of none effect. But tell me for Gods loue, Master
Waddesworth, is it likely that this Monarchie thus sought,
thus gotten, thus kept, thus exercised, is of God? Are
these men that wholly forsaking the feeding of the flocke
of God dreame of nothing now but Crowns and Scepter
                     •
                  ,
serue to the Church to no vse in the world, vnlesse it be to
breake the ancient Canons, and oppresse with their power
all that shall but vtter a free word against their ambition
and tyrannie, are they, I will not say with you, good heads
of Gods Church, but members of it, and not rather limbes
of Satan? Consider those Texts: My Kingdome is not of this

world, Vos autem non sic. Consider the charge which Saint
Peter giues to his fellow Presbyters, 1. Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. Now
I beseech our Lord deliuer his Church from this tyrannie,
and blesse you from being a member of such a Head.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Of lacke of succession, Bishops, true Ordinations,
Ord
                     •
                  rs, Priesthood.
               I Come now to your motiue from succession. Where I
maruell first, that leauing the succession of Doctrine,
which is farre more proper and intrinsecall to the Churches
being, you stand vpon that of Persons and Offices.
Yea, and about them too, immediately passe from that
which is of Essence, to the externall formalities in consecration
and ordination, according to the ancient Councels. Haue
you forgotten what you said right now, that matters of ceremonie
and gouernment are changeable? Yea, but in France,
Holland, and Germanie, they haue no Bishops. First, what if
I should defend they haue? because a Bishop and a Presbyter
are all one, as Saint Ierome maintaines, and prooues out
of holy Scripture, and the vse of Antiquitie. Of which
iudgement, as Medina confesseth, are sundrie of the ancient
Fathers, both Greeke and Latine
                     •
                   Saint Ambrose,
Augustine, Seduliu
                        •
                     , Primasius, Chrysostome, Theodorit, Oecumenius,
and Theophylact: which point I haue largely treated
of in another place, against him that vndertooke Master
Alablasters quarrell. Besides, those Churches in Germanie
haue those whom they call Superintendents, and generall
Superintendents,
                  Cap. 8. as out of Doctor Bancroft by the testimonie
of Zanchius, and sundrie Germane Diuines, you
might perceiue. Yea, and where these are not, as in Geneua;
and the French Churches, yet there are, saith Zanchius,

                        •
                     sually certaine chiefe men that doe in a manner beare all the

sway, as if order it selfe and necessitie led them to this
course. And what are these but Bishops indeede, vnlesse
wee shall wrangle about names, which for reason of State
those Churches were to abstaine from. As for that you say
Lay men intermed
                        •
                     le there with the making of their Ministers,
if you meane the election of them, they haue reason;
for anciently the people had alwayes a right therein, as
Saint Cyprian writes to the Churches of Leon and Astorga
there in Spaine, Plebs ipsa maxime habet potestatem vel eligendi
dignos Sacerdotes vel indignos recusandi; and in sundrie
places of Italie this vsage doth continue to this day.
If yee meane it in Ordination, yee are deceiued, and wrong
these Churches, as Bellarmine himselfe will teach you, lib.
De Cl
                        •
                     ricis, cap. 3. For amongst the Lutherans and Caluinists
also, saith hee, which haue taken away almost all Ecclesiasticall
rites, they onely lay on hands and make Pastors and
Ministers, who though they be not Pastors and Bishops indeede
would be so accounted and called.
               
               In England you misse first the lesser orders, and say, we
are made Ministers per saltum, as if all that are made Priests
among you were Psalmists, Sextens, Readers, Ex
                        •
                     rcists,
Torch-bearers, Subdeacons, and Deacons before. Remember
I pray what the Master of the Sentences saith of Deaconship
and Priesthood. Hos solos primitiu
                        •
                      Ecclesia legitur
habuisse, & de his solis praeceptum Apostoli habemus. Hee
meanes in the Epistles to T
                        ••
                     othy and Titus. Againe, Subdiaeonos
vere & Acolythos precede
                        •
                     te tempore Ecclesia sibi
constituit. What? and were the Primitiue and Apostolike
Churches no true Churches? or neede wee to bee ashamed
to bee like them? Besides, those Councels that yee speake
of, it should seeme were of no great either antiquitie or authoritie,
when not onely Presbyters, without passing
through any order, but Bishops without being so much as
baptized, were ordayned. As Nectarius of Constantinople,
Synesius of Cyrene, Ambrose of Millaine, Constantine II. of
Rome it selfe. This therefore is a very sleight exception.
               
                  
Your next is well worse, touching the Ordination at the
Nags-head, where the Consecration of our first Bishops, as
you say was attempted, but not effected. It is certaine, you say,
and you are sure there was such a matter, although you know,
and haue seene the records themselues, that afterward there was
a Consecration of Doctor Parker at Lambeth. Alas Master
Wadesworth, if you bee resolued to beleeue lies, not onely
against publike Acts, and your owne eye-sight, but
against all probabilitie, who can helpe it? I had well hoped
to haue found that ingenuitie in you, that I might
haue vsed your testimony vnto others of that side, touching
the vanitie of this fable, as hauing shewed you the
Copie of the record of Doctor Parkers consecration,
which I had procured to bee transcribed out of the Acts,
which your selfe also at your returne from London, told
mee you saw in a blacke Booke. Now I perceiue by your
perplexed writing, and enterlining in this part of your
Letter, you would faine discharge your conscience, and
yet vphold this lie, perhaps, as loth to offend that side
where you now are: and therefore you haue deuised this
temper, that the one was attempted, the other effected. But
it will not bee. For first of all, if that at the Nags-head
were but attempted, what is that to the purpose of our
Ordinations, which are not deriued from it, but from the
other, which as you say was effected at Lambeth? And are
you sure there was such a matter? How are you sure? Were
you present there in person, or haue you heard it of those
that were present? Neither of both I suppose: but if it
were so that some bodie pretending to haue beene there
present told you so much, how are you sure that hee lied
not in saying so; much more when you haue it but at the
third, or fourth hand, perhaps the thirtieth or fortieth. But
consider a little, is it probable that men of that sort, in an
action of that importance, and at the beginning of the
Queenes reigne, when especially it concerned both them
and her to prouide, that all things should bee done with

reputation, would bee so hastie and heedlesse, as to take a
Tauerne for a Church? Why might they not haue gone to
the next Church as well? They thought to make the old
Catholike Bishop drunken. Thus the Wisbich and Framyngham
Priests were wont to tell the tale. Is it likely that
they would not forethinke that possible this good old
man would not drinke so freely as to bee drunken, and if
hee were, yet would not be in the humour to doe as they
would haue him? for who can make any foundation vpon
what another would doe in his cups? What a scorne
would this bee to them? Men are not alwaies so prouident
in their actions. True, but such men are not to bee
imagined so so
                     •
                  tish, as to attempt so solemne an action,
and ioyned commonly with some great feast, and as you
obserued well out of the Acts, with the Queens mandate
for the action to be done, and hang all vpon a drunken fit
of an old man. Besides, how comes it to passe that wee
could neuer vnderstand the names of the old Bishop, or
of those whom hee should haue consecrated, or which
consecrated themselues, when hee refused to doe it. For so doe
your men giue it out; howsoeuer you say, it was not there
effected. And in all the space of Queene Elizabeths reigne,
wherein so many set themselues against the reformation
by her established, is it possible wee should neuer haue
heard word of it, of all the English on that side the Seas, if
it had beene any other then a flying tale? After fortie fiue
yeeres,
                     
                        ••
                     ristophorus à Sacro bosco Dubliniensis. there is found at last an Irish Iesuite that dares
put it in print, to proue by it as now you doe, that the
Parliamentary Pastors lacke holy orders. But he relates sundry
particulars, and brings his proofes. For the purpose,
this ordainer or consecrater, hee saith, was Laudasensis Episcopus
home senex & simplex. His name? Nay, that yee
must pardon him. But of what Citie or Diocesse was hee
Bishop? for wee haue none of that title. Here I thought
once that by errour it had beene put for Landaffensis of
Landaffe in Wales, saue that three times in that Narration

it is written La
                        •
                     dasensis; which notwithstanding, I
continued to bee of the same minde, because I found Bishop
Boners name twice alike false written Bomerus. But
loe in the Margent a direction to the Booke, De Schismate
fol. 166. where hee saith this matter is touched, and it is
directly affirmed, that they performed the Office of Bishops, without
any Episcopall consecration. Againe, that great labour was
vsed without an Irish Arch-bishop in prison at London to ordaine
them, but hee could by no meanes be brought thereto. So
it seemes we must passe out of Wales into Ireland, to finde
the See of this Bishop or Archbishop. But I beleeue we
may saile from thence to Virginia to seeke him; for in
Ireland we shal not find him. Let vs come to those that he
should haue ordained, what were there names? Candidati,
if that wil content you, more yee get not. Why they might
haue been remembred as well as the Nags-head, as well as
Boners name, and his See, and that hee was Dean
                        •
                      of
the Bishops, hee meanes of the Archbishopricke, sede vacante,
and that he sent his Chaplaine (his name also is vnknowne)
to forbid the Ordination. At least their Sees.
To cut the matter short. Quid plura? Scoraeus Monachus
post Herefordensis pseudo-episcopus coeteris, ex coeteris quidam,
Scor aeo manus imponunt: fiuntque sine patre fili
                        •
                      & pater à
fili
                        •
                     s procreatur, res seculis omnibus inauditae. Here is at length
some certaintie: some truth mingled among, to giue the
better grace, and to be as it were the Vehiculum of a lie. For
Iohn Scory, in King Edward his times, Bishop of Chichester,
and after of Hereford, was one of those that ordained
Doctor Parker, and preached at his ordination. But that
was the ordination effected as you call it: wee are now in
that which was not effected, but attempted onely. And here
wee seeke againe, who were these quidams that laid hands
on S
                        •
                     ory? Wee may goe looke them with La
                        •
                     dasensis the
Archbishop of Ireland. Well; heare the proofes. Master
Thomas Neale, Hebrew Reader of Oxford, which was present,
told thus much to the ancient Confessors, they to F. H
                        •
                     lywood.
                  
This proofe by Tradition as you know is of little credit
with Protestants, and no maruell: for experience shewes
that reports suffer strange alterations in the carriage, euen
when the reporters are not interessed. Iremeus relates from
the ancient Confessors,
                  Lib. 2. c. 29. 
                  which had seene Iohn the Disciple, and
the other Apostles of the Lord, and heard it from them, that
Christ our Sauiour was betweene fortie and fiftie yeeres of age
before his passion. I doe not thinke you are sure it was so.
For my part, I had rather beleeue. Irenaeus and those ancients
hee mentions, and the Apostles; then F. Haliwood and his
Confessors, and Master Neale. But possible it is, M. Neale
said, hee was present at Matthew Parkers ordination by Iohn
Scory. These Confessors being before impressed, as you are,
with the buzze of the ordination at the Nags-head made
vp that tale; and put it vpon him for their Author. Perhaps
Master Neale did esteeme Iohn Scory t
                        •
                      bee no Bishop,
and so was scandalized though causelesly, at that action.
Perhaps Master Neale neuer said any such word at all. To
helpe to make good this matter, hee saith, It was after inacted
in Parliament, that these Parliamentary Bishops should
be holden for lawfull. I looked for some thing of the Nags-head
Bishops, and the Legend of their ordination. But
the lawfulnesse that the Parliament prouides for, is (according
to the authoritie the Parliament hath) 
                     
                        •
                     iuill, that
is, according to the Lawes of the Land. The Parliament
neuer intended to iustifie any thing as lawfull, iure diuino,
which was not so; as by the Preamble it selfe of the Statute
may appeare.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   In which it is said, That diuers questions
had growne vpon the making and consecrating of Arch-bishops
and Bishops, within this Realme, whether the same were, and bee
duely and orderly done according to the Law or not, &c. And
shortly to cut off F. Halywoods surmises, the case was
this, as may bee gathered by the bodie of the Statute.
Whereas in the fiue and twentieth of Henry the Eight,
an Act was made for the electing and consecrating of Arch-bishops
and Bishops within this Realme. And another in the

third of Edward the Sixth, for the ordering and consecrating
of them, and all other Ecclesiasticall Ministers, according
to such forme as by sixe Prelates, and sixe other learned
men in Gods Law to bee appointed by the King should
bee deuised, and set forth, vnder the great Seale of England.
Which forme in the fifth of the same Kings reigne,
was annexed to the Booke of Common Prayer, then explained,
and perfected; and both confirmed by the authoritie
of Parliament. All these Acts were 1. Mariae & 1.
& 2. Philippi & Mariae repealed; together with another
Statute of 35. Henr. 8. touching the stile of supreame
Head to bee vsed in all Letters Patents and Commissions, &c.
These Acts of repeale in the 1. Elizabeth were againe
repealed, and the Act of 25. Hen. 8. reuiued specially.
That of 3. Edwar. 6. onely concerning the Booke of
Common Prayer, &c. without any particular mention of
the booke or forme of ordering Ministers and Bishops.
Hence grew one doubt, whether ordinations and consecrations
according to that forme were good in Law or
no. Another was, Queene Elizabeth in her Letters Patents
touching such Consecrations, Ordinations had not
vsed as may seeme, besides other generall words importing
the highest authoritie in causes Ecclesiasticall, the
title of Supreame Head, as King Henry, and King Edward
in their like Letters Patents were wont to d
                     •
                  : & that notwithstanding
the Act of 35. Hen. 8. after the repeale of the
former repeale might seeme (though neuer specially) reuiued.
This as I ghosse was another exception, to those t
                     •
                  at
by vertue of those Patents were Consecrated. Whereupon
the Parliament declares. First, that the Booke of Common
Prayer, and such order and, form
                        •
                      for consecrating of
Archbishops and
                        •
                      Bishops, &c. as was set forth in the time of
King Edward the Sixth, and added thereto and authorised by
Parliament, shall stand in force and be obserued. Secondly,
That all Acts done by any person about any consecration, confirmation,
o
                        •
                      in
                        •
                     esting of any elect to the Office or Dignitie of

Arch-bishop or Bishop, by vertue of the Queenes Letters Patents
or Commission, since the beginning of her reigne bee good
                        •
                     
                  
Thirdly, That all that haue beene ordered or consecrated
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, &c. after the said forme
and order, be rightly made, ordered, and consecrated, any Statute,
Law, Canon, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding.
These were the reasons of that Act; which as you
see doth not make good the Nags-head-ordination as
F. Halywood pretends, vnlesse the same were according to
the forme in Edward the Sixth dayes. His next proofe is,
that Bo
                        •
                     er Bishop of London while hee liued, alwayes set light
by the Statutes of the Parliaments of Queene Elizaboth, alleadging
that there wanted Bishops, without whose consent by
the Lawes of the Realme there can no firme Statuee bee made.
That Boner despised and set not a straw by the Acts of
Parliament in Queene Elizabeths time, I hold it not impossible,
and yet there is no other proofe thereof, but his
bare word, and the ancient Confessors tradition, of which
we heard before. Admitting this for certaine, there might
bee other reasons thereof, besides the ordination at the
Nags-head. The stiffenesse of that man was no lesse in
King Edwards time, then Queene Elizabeths. And indeed
the want also of Bishops might be the cause, why he little
regarded the Acts of her first Parliament. For both much
about the time of Queene Maries death dyed also Cardinall
Poole, and sundry other Bishops: and of the rest some
for their contemptuous behauiour in denying to performe
their dutie in the Coronation of the Queene were committed
to prison, others absented themselues willingly.
So as it is commonly reported to this day, there was none
or very few there. For as for Doctor Parker and the rest,
they were not ordained till December, 1559. the Parliament
was dissolued in the May before. So not to stand
now to refute Boners conceit, that according to our
Lawes there could bee no Statutes made in Parliament
without Bishops (wherein our Parliament men wil rectifie

his iudgement) F. Halywood was in this report twice deceiued,
or would deceiue his Reader. First, that he would
make that exception which Boner laid against the first Parliament
in Queen Elizabeths time, to be true of all the rest.
Then, that he accounts B. Boner to haue excepted against
this Parliament, because the Bishops there were no Bishops
as not canonically ordained: where it was, because
there was no Bishops true or false there at all. His last
proofe is. That D. Bancroft being demanded of M. Al
                        •
                     blaster,
whence their first Bishops receiued their orders? answered, that
hee hoped a Bishop might bee ordained of a Presbyter in time of
necessity. Silently granting, that they were not ordained by any
Bishop: and therefore, saith he, the Parliamentary Bishops are
without order Episcopall, & their Ministers also no Priests. For
Priests are not made but of Bishops, whence Hierome. Qu
                     •
                  d facit,
&c. What doth a Bishop, sauing ordination, which a Presbyter
doth not? I haue not the meanes to demand of D. Alablaster,
whether this be true or not. Nor yet whether this
be all the answere he had of D. Bancroft. That I affirme,
that if it were, yet it followes not, that D. Bancroft silently
granted they had no orders of bishops. Vnlesse he that in a false
discourse, both where propositions be vntrue, denies the
Maior, doth silently grant the Minor. Rather he iested at
the futilitie of this Argument, which admitting all this lying
Legend of the Nags-head, and more to; suppose no ordination
by any Bishops had beene euer effected, notwithstanding
shewes no sufficient reason why there might not be
a true consecration, and true Ministers made, and consequently
a true Church in England. For indeed necessitie
dispences with Gods owne positiue Lawes,Mark 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   as our Sauiour
shewes in the Gospel much more then with mans:
and such by Hieromes opinion are the Lawes of the
Church, touching the difference of Bishops and Presbyters,
and consequently touching their ordination by Bishops
onely. Whereof I haue treated more at large in
another place, for the iustification of other reformed

Churches, albeit the Church of England needs it not. To
confirme this Argument, it pleaseth F. Halywood to add
                     •
                  ,
That King Edward the Sixth, tooke away the Catholike rite of
ordaining, and in stead of it, substituted a few Caluinisticall
prayers. Whom Queene Elizabeth followed, &c. And this
is in effect the same thing which you say, when you adde,
that Couerdale being made Bishop of Exceter in King Edwards
time, when all Councells and Church Canons were little obserued,
it is very doubtfull hee was neuer himselfe canonically consecrated,
and so if hee were no canonicall Bishop, hee could not
make another canonicall. To F. Halywood I would answere,
that King Edward tooke not away the Catholike rite of
ordaining, but purged it from a number of idle and superstitious
rites prescribed by the Popish Pontifical. And the
praiers which he scoffes at if they were Caluinisticall, sure
it was by prophecie, for Caluin neuer saw them
                     •
                  ill Queene
Maries time; when by certaine of our English exiles,
the Booke of Common Prayer was translated and shewed
him; if he saw them then. Some of them, as the Let any,
and the Hymne Veni Creator, &c. I hope were none of Caluins
deuising. To you, if you name what Councells and
Church Canons you meane, and make any certaine exception,
either against Bishop Couerdale, or any of the rest
as not canonicall Bishops, I will endeauour to satisfie
you. Meane while remember I beseech you, that both
Law, and reason, and Religion should induce you in
doubtfull things to follow the most fauourable sentence,
and not rashly out of light surmises to pronounce against
a publike and solemne ordination, against the Orders
conferred successiuely from it, against a whole Church.
Wherein I cannot but commend Doctor Carriers modestie,
Pag. 7. whose words are these. I will not determine against the
succession of the Clergie in England, because it is to mee very
doubtfull.
                  De des
                        •
                     erata 
                        〈◊〉
                      causa. 
                        •
                     . 11. And the discretion of Cudsemius the Iesuire,
which denies the English Nation to be Heretickes, because
they remaine in a perpetuall succession of Bishops. And to take

away all doubt from you, that some of these Ordayners were
onely Bishops elect, and vnconsecrated; besides Miles Couerdale,
in King Edwards time Bishop of Exceter, cast in prison
by Queene Mary, and released and sent ouer Sea to the
King of Denmarke, know that William Barlow was another;
in King Edwards dayes Bishop of Bath and Welles,
in Queene Maries beyond the Seas in the companie of the
Duchesse of Suffolke and Master B
                        •
                     rtie her husband; at the
time of Doctor Parkers ordination Elect of Chichester.
A third was, Iohn Scorie, in King Edwards time Bishop of
Chichester, and at the time of the said ordination Elect of
Hereford. A fourth was Iohn Hodgeskin, Suffragan of Bedford.
And these foure, if they were all ordained according
to the forme ratified in King Edwards dayes, were presented
by two Bishops at least to the Archbishop, and of him
and them receiued imposition of hands, as in the said forme
is appointed.
               One scruple yet remaines which you haue, in that these
men did consecrate Doctor Parker by vertue of a Breue from
the Queene, as head of the Church who being no true head, and
a woman, you see not how they could make a true consecrationr
grounded on her authoritie. But to cleare you in this also,
you must vnderstand the Queenes mandate serued not to
giue power to ordaine (which those Bishops had before
in
                     •
                  rinsecally annexed to their office) but leaue and warrant
to apply that power to the person named in that Mandate.
A thing, vnlesse I haue beene deceiued by reports, vsed in
other Countries, yea in the Kingdomes of his Catholike
Maiestie himselfe. Sure I am by the Christian Emperours
in the primitiue Church, as you may see in the Ecclesiasticall
histories, and namely, in the ordination of Nectarius,
that I spake of before. Yea, which is more in the consecration
of the Bishops of Rome, as of Leo VIII. whose
Decree, with the Synode at Rome touching this matter, is
set downe by Gratian, Dist. 63. c. 23. taken from the example
of Hadria
                        •
                     , and another Councell which gaue to

                  Charles the Great, Ius & potestatem eligendi Pontificem, &
ordinandi Apostolicam sedom, as you may see in the Chapter
next before. See the same Dist. c. 16. & 17. & 18. and you
shall finde,C. Lectis. that when one was chosen Bishop of Reate,
within the Popes owne Prouince, by the Clergie and
people,C. Reatina. and sent to him by Guido the Count to be consecrated,
the Pope durst not doe it till the Emperours licence
were obtained. Yea, that hee writes to the Emperour for
Colonus,C. Nobis. 
                  that receiuing his licence hee might consecrate him
either there, or in the Church of Tusculum, which accordingly
vpon the Emperors bidding he performed.
               Yet another exception you take, to the making our Ministers,
that wee keepe not the right intention. First, because
we neither giue nor take Orders as a Sacrament. By that reason
we should haue no true marriages amongst vs neither,
because we count not Matrimonie a Sacrament. This Controuersie
depends vpon the definition of a Sacrament, which
if it be put to be a signe of a holy thing, these be both so, and
a many more then seuen. If a seale of the New Testament,
so are there but those two, which we properly call Sacraments;
Lib. 4. dist. 12. 
                  Baptisme, and the Lords Supper. In which last, as
to the intention of sacrificing, surely, if yee allow the doctrine
of the Master of the Sentences, that it is called a Sacrifice
and Oblation, which is offered and consecrated by the
Priest, because it is a memorie and representation of the true
Sacrifice and holy immolation made on the Altar of the Crosse.
And, that Christ once dyed on the Crosse, and there was offered
vp in himselfe, but is daily offered vp in a Sacrament, because
in the Sacrament there is a remembrance of that which
wa
                        •
                      once done;
                  De Consecrat. dist. 2. which he there confirmes by the authorities
of the Fathers, cited by Gratian in the Canon Law. If this
Doctrine,L
                        •
                     c. The
                        •
                     . lib. 12. cap. 12. I say, may yet passe for good, and this bee the
Churches intention, wee want not this intention of sacrificing.
Adde to this the confession of Melchior Canus, who
saith, the Lutherans doe not wholly denie the sacrifice, but grant
a Sacrifice of thanks giuing, which they call the
                  f. Fucharisticum. 
                  Eucharist:

they will haue none for sinne which they call propitiatorie. If he
had put hereto, vnlesse it bee in a mysterie, hee had rightly
expressed the opinion of the Protestants.
               Thirdly yee object, wee want the matter and forme with
which orders should be giuen: namely, for the matter in Priesthood
the deliuerie of the Patena with bread, and the Chalice
with wine: in Deaconship the deliuerie of the booke of the Gospell,
&c. By which reason the seuen first Deacons had no
true ordination, for then there was no Gospell written to
be deliuered them. Nor those Priests whom the Pope shall
make by his sole word, saying, Esto Sacerdos. Whom notwithstanding
sundrie famous Canonists hold to bee well
and lawfully ordained; and Innocentius himselfe saith,
that if these formes of Ordination were not found out, any
other Ordainer might in like manner make Priests,
with those words, or the like: for as much as these formes
were in processe of time appointed by the Church. And if
wee list to seeke for these Metaphysicall notions of matter
and forme, in Ordination, which at the most can bee but
by Analogie, how much better might wee assigne the persons
deputed to sacred functions to be the matter (as those
that contract are by your selues made the matter in matrimonie)
and the imposing of hands, with the expressing the
authoritie and office giuen to bee the forme? In Dionysius
though falsly called the Areopagite, yet an ancient Author,
yee shall finde nothing else; nor which I may tell
you by the way, any other orders, saue Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons.
               And to come to that wherein you say wee faile most of
all, the substantiall forme of Priesthood, tell mee ingenuously,
good Master Wadesworth, how doe you know that our Lord
Iesus Christ made his Apostles, or they others Priests with
this forme, which hath no mention or footstep in the Gospell,
or otherwhere in holy Scripture! Nor so much as in
the Councell of Carthage; that from whence the manner
of giuing other orders is fetched, nor in Gratian, nor in any

other ancient Author that I can finde, saue in the Pontificall
onely. And is the present Pontificall of such authoritie
with you, as the forme of Priesthood, the substantiall
forme, can subsist in no other wordes then those that
bee there expressed? To omit the late turkesing whereof,
consider what Augustinus Patritius writes in his Preface
before that which at Pope Innocent VIII. his commandement
he patched together: That there were scarce two or
three bookes found that deliuered the same thing: Quot libri
tot varietates. Ille deficit, hic superabundat, alius nihil omnino
de eâre habet, raro ant nunquam conueniunt; saepe obscuri, implicati,
& librariorum vitio plerung mendosi. And in truth
in this your essentiall forme of Priesthood, the old Pontificals
before that which he set forth, either had other words
at the giuing of the Chalice and Paten as may seeme; or
wanted both that forme and the matter also together.
The Master of the Sentences declaring the manner of the
Ordination of Priests, and the reason why they haue the
Chalice with wine, and Paten with hosts giuen vnto
them, saith it is, Vt per hoc sciant se accepisse potestatem placabiles
Deo hostias offerendi. Hugo in like manner, Accipiunt
& Calicem cum vino, & Patenam cum hostia de mann
Episcopi, quatenus potestatem se accepisse cognoscant, placabiles
Deo hostias offerendi. Stephanus Eduensis Episcopus, in the
same wordes: Datur eis Calix cum vino, & Patena cum hostia,
in quo traditur ijs potestas ad offerendum Deo placabiles
hostias. So Iohannes Ianuensis in his Summe, intituled, Catholicon,
verbo Presbyter. If yee ascend to the higher times
of Rabanus, Alcuinus, Isidorus, you shall finde that they
mention no such matter, of deliuering Chalice or Paten, or
wordes vsed at the deliuerie; and no maruell, for in the
Canons of the fourth Councel of Carthage they found none.
Diony
                     •
                  ius falsly called Areopagita, whom I mentioned before,
setting downe the manner of ordaining in his time.
The Priest vpon both his knees before the Altar with the Bishop
                        •
                     
right hand vpon his head, is on this manner sanctified by

his Consecrator with holy inuocations. Here is all, s
                     •
                  ue that
he saith, after he hath described that also which pertaines
vnto the Deacon, that euery one of them is signed with the
crosse when the Bishop blesseth them, and proclaimed, and saluted
by the Consecrator himselfe and euery one of that sacred
Order that is present. The Greeke Schol
                     •
                  ast very l
                     •
                  uely
shewes the meaning and manner of this proclaiming. Her
saith, The Ordayner pronounceth by name when hee signeth
him, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Such a man is consecrated from bein
                        •
                     
Presbyter to be a Bishop in the name of the father, &c. and s.
in the Presbyter and Deacon. Clemens Romanus 
                        •
                      F. Turrian
and the rest of the Romish 
                     •
                  action deceiue vs 
                     〈…〉
                  
be not deceiued themselues, in attributing to him the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
bookes of the Apostolike Constitutions that 
                     〈…〉
                  
name) cuts the matter yet more short, and without 
                     〈◊〉
                  
crossing or proclaiming, appoints the Bishop to lay his 
                        〈◊〉
                     
vpon him, in the presence of the Presbyterie and the Deacor
                        •
                     
vsing a Prayer, which you may see at length in him; 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  the increase of the Church, and of the number of them that by
word and worke may edifie it: for the partie elected vnto 
                        •
                     he 
                        ••
                     
                     fice
of Priesthood, that being filled with the operations of healings,
and word of Doctrine, he may instruct Gods people with
meeknesse and serue him sincerely with a pure minde, and willing
heart, and performe holy seruices without spot for his
people through his Christ, to whom &c. These last words
which are in the Greeke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
Carol
                        ••
                      Bouius Bishop of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
interprets, & sacrificia pro populo tuo immaculata 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
Maruell that he added not, tam pro 
                        〈◊〉
                      quam pro defunctis.
Sure if Saint Paul, Rom. 15. 16. had not added the
word' 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , hee had sacrificed also. This was the 
                     ••
                  
                  cient
and Apostolike manner of ordination, if the Author
be worthy of credit. But that ye may perceiue what tampering
there hath beene to bring ordinations to the forme

which the present Pontificall prescribes, consider with
me the words of Amalarius Bishop of Triers in his second
Booke de Ecclesiast. Offic
                        •
                     s, where in the office of the Subdeacon
thus hee writes; Miror quâ de re sumptus vsus in
Ecclesia, &c. I maruell whence the vse was taken in our
Church, that very often the Subdeacon should reade the Lesson
at Masse, since this is not found committed vnto him, by the
Ministry giuen him in consecration, nor by the Canonicall writings,
nor by his name. And straight after, Nam primaro tempore;
For in ancient time the Deacon read not the Gospell
which was not yet written; but after it was enacted by our Fathers,
that the Deacons should reade the Gospell, they appointed
also that the Subdeacon should reade the Epistle or Lesson.
It appeares, then that in Amalarius time, who liued with
Charles the great and Lewes his Sonne, that ridiculous
fo
                     •
                  me was not in the Pontificall, where the Booke of the
Epistles is giuen to the Subdeacons, and power to reade
them in the holy Church of God, as well for the quicke as the
dead. The same Author comming to speake of Deacons,
telleth of their consecration by praier, and imposition of
hands, & confuteth that in the present Pontificall (which
he saith he found in a little Booke of holy Orders) made
he knowes not by what Author, that the Bishop alone should
lay hands on the Deacon. At last he addes, There is one Ministrie
added to the Deacon, viz. to reade the Gospell, which
he saith, doth well befit him, quia Minister est. But of the deliuerie
of the Booke of the Gospels, with authoritie to
reade the Gospell for the quicke and dead, not one word.
In the next Chapter of Presbyters hee expounds their
name, and saith further, hunc morem tenent Episcopi nostri.
Our Bishoppes haue this fashion, they annoint the hands of
Presbyters with oyle, which ceremonie he declares; touching
imposition of hands vpon them, he remit
                     ••
                  s to that
he said before in the Deacon. Then he shewes out of Ambrose,
and Hierome, that these are all one Order with Bishops,
and ought to gouerne the Church in common, like Moses with

the seuentie Elders: as for deliuerie of Chalice and Wine,
or Paten and Host, with power to sacrifice so well for
the quicke as the dead, he makes no mention. Iudge you
whether these were thought to be the matter and essentiall
forme of Priesthood in his time. Yet one Author more wil
Iname in this matter, not onely because hee is a famous
Schooleman, and one of Luthers first aduersaries, and
therefore ought to be of more account with that side, but
because he professeth the end of his writing to be, circa
Sacramentum ordinis cautos reddere, ne pertinax quisquam
aut leuis sit circa modum tradendi aut recipiendi ordines. It is
Cardinall Caietane, in the second Tome of his Opuscula,
Tit. De modo tradendi seu recipiendi Ordines. Reade the
whole where these things I obserue for our present purpose.
1. If all be gathered together which the Pontificals, or
which reason or authoritie hath deliuered, the nature of all the
rest of the orders except Priesthood onely, will appeare very vncertaine.
2. The lesser Orders and Subdeaconship according
to the Master of the Sentences, were instituted by the Church.
3. The Deacons instituted by the Apostles, Act. 6. were not Deacons
of the Altar, but of the Tables & Widdowes. 4. In Deaconship
there seemes to be no certain forme for according to the old
Pontificals, the laying of hands vpon the Deacon hath no certaine
forme of words, but that prayer. Emitte q
                     •
                  aesumus in eos
S. Sauctum: which according to the new Pontificals is to be said
after the imposition of hands. For the giuing of the Booke of the
Gospels, hath indeede a forme of words, but that impresseth not
the Character for before any Gospell was written, the Apostles
ordained Deacons by imposition of hands. 5. In the Subdeaconship
also there is no Pontificall which hath not the matter
without forme, viz. the deliuery of the emptie Chalice, &c.
These things with more which hee there sets downe he
would haue to serue to the instruction of the learned touching
the vncertaintie of this whole matter to 
                        •
                     each men to be wise to
sobrietie, that is, euery man to be content with the accustomed

Pontificall of the Church wherein he is ordained. And if
ought be omitted of those things which be added out of the new
Pontificals, as for example, that the Booke of the Epistles was
not giuen, with those words (Take authoritie to reade the Epistles
as well for the quicke as the dead) there is no neede of supplying
this omission by a new ordination, for such new additions
make no new law. Learne then of your owne Caietane, that
the new additions of deliuery of the Chalice with wine, and
Paten with Hosts, and authoritie to offer sacrifice for the
quick and dead make no new Law. Learn to be content with
the Pontificall of the Church, wherein you were ordained.
Wherein first is verbatim all that which your Pontificals
had well taken out of the holy words of our Sauiour,
Accipe Spiritum Sanctum quorum remisseris peccata
remittuntur eis & quorum retinueris retenta sunt. Which me
thinkes you should rather account to containe the essentiall
forme of Priesthood then the former, both because
they are Christs owne words, and ioyned with that ceremonie
of laying on hands, which anciently denominated
this whole action, and do expresse the worthiest and principallest
part of your Commission, which the Apostle cals the
Ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 18. 19. Then, because
this office is not onely deputed to consecrate the Lords
body, but also to preach & baptize (which in your Pontificall
is wholly omitted) in a larger, and more conuenient
forme, is added out of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 1. and be thou
a faithfull dispenser of the word of God and of his holy Sacraments.
In the name of the Father, &c.
               
               As to that you adde, that we offer no sacrifice for the quicke
and dead, and therefore well may be called Ministers, as
all lay men are, but are no Priests. I haue met with sundry
that pull this roape as strongly the other way, and affirme
that because by the very forme of your ordination you are appointed
Sacrificers for the quicke and dead, well may ye be Masse-Priests
as ye are called, but Ministers of the New Testament,
after S. Pauls phrase ye are none. For that office stands principally

in preaching the word, whereof in your ordination
there is no word said. And as little there is in Scrip
                     •
                  ure
of your sacrifice, which makes Christ not to be a Priest
after the order of Melchisedech, &c. with much more to
this purpose. Where my defence for your Ministrie hath
beene this, that the forme Receiue the holy Ghost, whose
sinnes ye remit they are remitted, &c. doth sufficiently comprehend
the authoritie of preaching the Gospell. Vse you
the same equitie toward vs, and tell those hot spirits among
you, that stand so much vpon formalities of
words, that to be a dispenser of the word of God and his holy
Sacraments, is all the dutie of Priesthood. And to you
I adde further, that if you consider well the words of the
Master of the Sentences which I vouched before, how
that which is consecrated of the Priest is called a Sacrifice and
oblation, because it is a memoriall and representation of the
true sacrifice and holy offering made on the altar of the Crosse,
                  Heb. 10. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
and ioyne there to that of the Apostle, that by that one offering
Christ hath perfected for euer them that are sanctified, and
as he saith in another place, through that bloud of his Crosse
reconciled vnto God all things whether in earth or in heauen;
you shall perceiue, that we do offer sacrifice for the quick
and dead, remembring, representing & mystically offering
that sole Sacrifice for the quicke and dead, by the which
all their fins are meritoriously expiated, and desiring that
by the same, wee and all the Church may obtaine remission of
sinnes, and all other benefits of Christs passion.
               
               To the Epilogue therefore of this your last motiue, I
say in short. Sith we haue no neede of Subdeaconship, more
then the Churches in the Apostles times, & in truth those
whom wee call Clerkes and Sextens performe what is necessarie
in this behalfe. Sith we haue Canonicall Bishops,
and lawfull succession. Sith we neither want due intention to
depute men to Ecclesiasticall functions, nor matter or
forme in giuing Priesthood; deriuing from no man or woman
the authoritie of ordination, but from Christ the head of

he Church; yee haue alleadged no sufficient cause, why
we should not haue true Pastors, and consequently a true
Church in England.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               Of the Conclusion. Master Waddesworths agonies
and protestation, &c.
               YEt by these (you say) and many other arguments, you
were resolued in your vnderstanding, to the contrary. It
may well be that your vnderstanding out of it owne
heedlesse haste, as that of our first Parents while it was
at the perfectest was induced into errour, by resoluing
too soone out of seeming arguments, and granting too
forward assent. For surely, these which you haue mentioned,
could not conuince it, if it would haue taken the
paines to examine them throughly, or had the patience to
giue vnpartiall hearing to the motiues on the other side.
Bu
                     •
                   as if you triumphed in your owne conquest, and captiuitie,
you adde that which passeth yet all that hitherto
you haue set downe, viz. That the Church of Rome was and
is the onely true Church, because it alone is Ancient, Catholike,
and Apostolike, hauing succession, vnitie, and visibilitie in all
ages, and places. Is it onely ancient? To omit Hierusalem,
are not that of Antioch, where the Disciples were first called
Christians, and Alexandria, Ephesus, Corinth, and the
rest mentioned in the Scriptures ancient also? and of Antioch
ancienter then Rome. Is it Catholike and Apostolike
onely? Doe not these and manie more hold the Catholike
faith receiued from the Apostles, as well as the Church of
Rome? For that it should be the Vniuersall Church, is all
one as yee would say the part is the whole, one Citie the
world. Hath it onely succession? where to set aside the inquirie
of Doctrine, so manie Simoniacks, and intruders

haue ruled, as about fiftie of your Popes together, were
by your owne mens confession Apostaticall, rather then Apostolicall?
Or Vnitie, where there haue beene thirtie
Schismes, and one of them which endured fiftie yeares
long, and at last grew into three heads, as if they would
share among them the triple Crowne? And as for diffentions
in Doctrine, I remit you to Master Doctor Halls peace
of Rome, wherein hee scores aboue three hundred mentioned
in Bellarmine alone; aboue threescore in one onely head
of Penance out of Nauarrus. As to that addition, in all
ages and places▪
                   I know not what to make of it, nor
wher
                     •
                  o to refer it. Consider, I beseech you, with your wonted
moderation what you say, for sure vnlesse you were
begu
                     •
                  led, I had almost said bewitched, you could neuer
haue resolued to beleeue and professe, that which all the
world knowes to be as false, I had (welnigh) said as God is
true, touching the extent of the Romish Church to all ages
and places?
               
               Concerning the agonies you passed, I will say onely thus
much, if being resolued though erroniously that was truth,
you were withholden from professing it with worldly respects,
you did well to breake through them all. But if besides
these, there were doubt of the contrarie (as me thinks
needes must be) vnlesse you could satisfie your selfe touching
those many and knowne exceptions against the Court
of Rome, which you could not be ignorant of) take heede,
lest the rest insuing these agonies were not like Sampsons
sleeping on Dal
                        •
                     lahs knees, while the locks of his strength
were shauen, whereupon (the Lord departing from him)
he was taken by the Philistims, had his eyes put out, and
was made to grinde in the prison. But I doe not despaire,
but your former resolutions shall grow againe. And as I
doe beleeue your religious asseueration, that for very
feare of damnation you forsooke vs (which makes mee to
haue the better hope and opinion of you, for that I see you
doe so seriously minde that which is the end of our whole

life;) so I desire from my heart the good hope of saluation you
haue in your present way may be as happie, as your feare I
am perswaded was causelesse.
               For my part, I call God to record against mine owne
soule, that both before my going into Italie, and since, I
haue still endeauoured to finde and follow the truth in the
points controuerted betweene vs, without any earthly respect
in the world. Neither wanted I faire opportunitie
had I seene it on that side, easily, and with hope of good
entertainment to haue adioyned my selfe to the Church of
Rome, after your example. But (to vse your words) as I
shall answere at the dreadfull day of iudgement, I neuer saw,
heard, or read any thing, which did conuince me: nay, which did
not finally confirme me daily more and more, in the perswasion,
that in these differences it rests on our part. Wherein I haue
not followed humane coniectures from forraine and outward
things (as by your leaue mee thinkes you doe in these your
motiues, whereby I protest to you in the sight of God, I am
also much comforted and assured in the possession of the
truth) but the vndoubted voice of God in his word, which is
more to my conscience then a thousand Topicall Arguments.
In regard whereof I am no lesse assured, that if I
should forsake it I should be renounced by our Sauiour, before
God and his Angels, then in the holding it be acknowledged
and saued; which makes me resolue, not onely for no
hope if it were of 10000. worlds, but by the gracious assistance
of God, without whom I know I am able to doe nothing, for
no terrour or torment euer to become a Papist.
               
               You see what a large distance there is betweene vs in
opinion. Yet for my part, I doe not take vpon me to foreiudge
you, or anie other that doth not with an euill minde
and selfe condemning conscience onely to maintaine a faction,
differ from that which I am perswaded is the right.
I account we hold one and the same faith in our Lord and
Sauiour Iesus Christ, and by him in the blessed Trinitie. To
his iudgement we stand or fall. Incomparably more and

of more importance are those things wherein wee agree;
then those wherin we dissent. Let vs follow therefore the
things of peace, and of mutuall edification. If any be otherwise
minded then he ought, God shall reueale that also to
him. If any be weake or fallen, God is able to rai
                     •
                  e him vp.
And of you good M. Waddesworth, and the rest of my Masters
and Brethren of that side, one thing I would againe
desire, that according to the Aposiles profession of himselfe,
you would forbeare to be Lords ouer our Faith, nor straightway
condemne of heresie,2 Cor. 8. 24. our ignorance or lacke of perswasion
concerning such things as wee cannot perceiue to
be founded in holy Scripture. Enioy your owne opinions;
but make them not Articles of our Faith: the analogie
whereof is broken as well by addition as subtraction. And
this selfe same equitie we desire to find in positiue Lawes,
Orders, and Ceremonies. Wherein as euerie Church hath
full right to prescribe that which is decent and to edification,
and to reforme abuse; so those that are members
of each are to follow what is enioyned, till by the same authoritie
it be reuersed.
               And now to close vp this Account of yours, whereof you
would haue Doctor Hall and me to be as it were examiners
and Auditors. Whether it be perfect and allowable or no,
looke you to it. I haue here told you mine opinion of it, as
directly, plainely, and freely as I can; and as you required
fully, if not tediously. I list not to contend with you about
it. Satisfie your owne conscience, and our common
Lord and Master, and you shall easily satisfie me. Once yet
by my aduice review it, and cast it ouer againe. And if in
the particulars you finde you haue taken manie nullities for
signifying numbers, manie smaller signifiers for greater▪
                   correct
the totall. If you finde namely that out of desire of Vnitie,
and dislike of contention, you haue apprehended our
diuersities to be more then they are: conceiued a necessitie
of an externall infallible Iudge, where there was none: attributed
the priuiledge of the Church properly called, to that

which is visible and mixt. If you finde the reformed Churches
more charitable, the proper note of Chists sheepe:
The Roman faction more fraudulent, and that by publike
counsell, and of politicke purpose, in framing not onely all
later writers, but some ancient, yea the holy Scriptures for
their aduantage: If you finde you haue mistaken the Protestants
doctrine touching inuisibilitie, your own also touching
vniformitie in matters of Faith: If you haue beene misinformed
and too ha
                     ••
                  ie, of credit touching the imputations
laid to the beginners of reformation: For as touching the want
of Succession and the fabulous Ordination at the Nags head,
I hope you will not be stiffe, and persist in your errour, but
confesse and condemne it in your selfe: If (as I began to say)
you finde these things to be thus; giue glorie to God, that
hath heard your praier, entreating direction in his holy truth;
and withhold not that truth of his in vnrighteousnesse. Vnto
him that is able to restore and establish you, yea to consummate
and perfect you according to his almightie power
and vnspeakeable goodnesse, toward his elect in Christ
Iesus, I doe from my heart commend you: and rest you,
               Your very louing brother
in Christ Iesu,
W. BEDELL.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Faults escaped.
            
               PAge 3. line 30. for them reade him. p. 6. l. 17. for 
               
                  〈◊〉
                V. p. 7. l. 4. for
come r. came. p. 33. l. 19. for whereby r. whereof. p. 49. l. 36. for them
r. thee. p. 54. l. 35. for Court r. course. p. 55. l. 4. for 
                  〈◊〉
                b E
                     ••
                  l. r. 
                  
                     •
                  ate Ecclesiast.
p. 63. l. 14. for bumorum r. humerum. p. 64. l. 7. for you r. thee. p. 65
l. 8. for To prooue r. 
               
                  •
               . To prooue. p. 
               
                  •
               8. l. 31. side, one r. side one, p. 82
l. 3. for These r. Those. p. 83. l 1. for to all r. to take all. p. 85. l. 36. for report
r. reports. p. 87. l. 24. for adiure r. abiure. p. 90. l. 32. for word r. sword.
p. 97. l. 15. for the state r. that State. l. 3. for Gratian, neither r. Gratian
neither, ibid. l. 1. for force r. farce. p. 103. l. 32. for sernone r. ser
                     ••••
                  .
p. 108. l. 1. for 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                For. r. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   hi
                     •
                  . For. p. 109. l. 13. for Bishops r. Bishop.
p. 112. l. 4. for greatest shewes, r. greatest, shewes another. p. 114
l. 16. for iust or r. iuster. ibid. l. 13. for maechis r. maechiae. p. 116. l. 13. 
                  〈◊〉
               
But the r. But that, ibid. l. 
               
                  •
               26. for Such. r. 
               
                  •
               . Such. p. 11
                  •
               . l. 72. for whererein-frequent
r. wherein-frequent. p. 119. l. for Com. 1. r. Cou
                     •
                  . 1.
p. 120. l. 13. for grosser, yet r. grosser yet, ibid. l. 19. for and in this r
and this. p. 130. l. 10. for affaires, in Italy r. affaires in Italy, p. 135. l. 1.
for a ubiects r. assubiect. p. 147. l. 22. for both where r. where both
p. 148. l. 19. for Letany r. Litany. p. 151. l. 33. for Gospell r. Gospel
p. 154. l. 9. for primaro r. primaero.
            
         
      
   