
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Certaine wholeſome Obſeruations and Rules fo Jnne-keepers, and alſo for their Gueſts, meet to be fixed vpon the wall of euery Chamber in the houſe; but meant more ſpecially for the good of Mr. Henry Hunter and his wife, of Smithfield, his louing brother and ſiſter, and of the Gueſts which vſe their houſe.
            1. WE Reade of Inkeepers that they were of ancient time, as in Ioſ. 2. Iudg. 19. verſe. 21. 22.
            2. Our Sauiour in the Goſpel commends the vſe of Innes. Luke 10. ver. 34. and brought to an Inne.
            3. Yea Chriſt himſelfe by his owne preſence did ſanctifie the vſe of Innes by eating his paſſeouer there. Mat. 26. 18.
            4. In Acts 28. there is expreſſe mention of an Inne with approbation and liking. They came to meet vs at the market of Appius, and at the three Tauerns.
            5 Common experience ſheweth all men what vſe there is of Innes for caſe of Trauailers, that their bodies which are the members of Chriſt, and Temples of the holy ghoſt appointed to a glorious reſurrection, may be refreſhed after weariſome labour.
            6 It muſt not be accounted a ſmall matter to affoord houſe roome, lodging, reſt and food to the comforts of Gods children.
         
         
            Rules for Innekeepers.
            1. THough your houſe (as an Inne) bee open for all men to come vnto, yet account honeſt men your beſt gueſts: euer hold their company better then their roomes.
            2 Amongſt honeſt men, let ſuch as be religious withal, be moſt welcome. The feet of the Saints are bleſſed, and often leaue bleſsings behind them, as we read of Ioſeph. Gen. 39. 4. 5.
            3. Of religious and godly men let faithfull Miniſters haue heartieſt intertainement. The feet of ſuch as bring glad tidings of peace and good things, oh how beautiful are they. Rom. 10. Such as receiue a Prophet in the name of a Prophet ſhal haue a Prophets reward. Mat. 10. Be not ſo glad of your gain▪ as that you may pleaſure ſuch.
            4 Becauſe your gueſts be Gods children, and their bodies the members of Chriſt, let their vſage for meat, lodging, diet, and ſleepe bee ſuch as becomes ſuch; worthy perſonages, as bee heires with God, euen fellow heires▪ with Chriſt. Rom. 8.
            5. In ſeruing and louing your gueſts, remember you do ſerue and loue God, who takes all as done to himſelfe, which for his ſake is done to his. Mat. 25. 34. 33. 36.
            6. Content your ſelues with an honeſt gaine, ſo vſing your gueſts as they may haue an appetite to returne to you when they are gone from you.
            7 Make choice of good ſeruants, ſuch as know God and make conſcience of their waies: for theſe are likelieſt to be true, faithfull, diligent, and cheerefull in their ſeruice; alſo ſuch will beſt pleaſe your beſt gueſts, and will not iuſtly offend your worſt. Moreouer, God will cauſe your buſines to proſper beſt in the hands of ſuch.
            8. Giue your ſeruants no euill example in word or deed, beare not with their lying, deceit, ſwearing, prophaning of the Sabbath, or wantonnes. Cauſe them to keepe the Lords day holy, going to the Church by turnes: examine them how they profit by Sermons; loue ſuch ſeruants beſt, as moſt loue Gods word.
         
         
            Rules for Gueſts.
            1. VSe an Inne not as your owne houſe, but as an Inne; not to dwell in but to reſt for ſuch time as ye haue iuſt and needfull occaſion and then to returne to your owne families.
            2. Remember ye are in the world as in an Inne to tarry for a ſhort ſpace; and then to be gone hence.
            3. At night when ye come to your Inne thanke God for your Preſeruation: next morning pray for a good Iourney.
            4. Eat and drinke for neceſsity and ſtrength, and not for luſt.
            5. At table let your talke be powdred with the ſalt of heauenly wiſedome, as your meat is ſeaſoned with material and earthly ſalt.
            6. Aboue all abhorre all oathes, curſing and blaſphemy, for God will not hold him guiltleſſe which taketh his name in vaine.
            FINIS.
            
               T. W.
            
         
      
   