
      
         
            
            
            THE
SVMME OF
A DISPVTATION,
BETWEENE Mr. VVALKER
Pastor of St. Iohn Euanglists in
Watling-street London; and a popish Priest,
calling himselfe Mr. Smith, but indeed
Norrice, assisted by other Priests
and Papists.
            HELD IN THE PRESENCE OF
some worthy Knights; with other
Gentlemen of both
Religions.
            Printed. 1624.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The summe of a Disputation bebetweene
Mr. Walker, Pastor of St Iohn Euangelists
in Watling street in London: And a popish
Priest, calling himselfe Mr. Smith, but indeed Norrice,
assisted by other Priests and Papists; May
last 1623. held in the presence of some
worthy Knights, with other Gentlemen
of both Religions.
            The occasion of the Disputation.
            SIr William Harington Knight, hauing a Kinsman
of the Romish Catholike Religion, by much
reasoning with him, and many perswasions had
brought him to wauering, so that he stood in doubt
which was the true religion, and desired to be satisfied.
The forenamed Priest Mr. Smith alias Dr.
Norrice for the setling and hardening of him in the
popish religion, told him that the Protestant
Church of England vnto which he seemed to incline,
had no faith, neither indeed was it any
Church of Christ at all: and also challenged his
kinsman Sir William Harrington to bring any Minister
of the English Church whatsoeuer into any
conuenient place of meeting, and he would by
disputation, and by inuincible arguments proue against
him before their faces, and in their hearing,

that English Protestants had neither Church nor
faith. Sir William Harrington did take his offer, vpon
condition that he would answer to such questions
as the Diuine which he would bring should propound
against the Romish religion; it was agreed;
the day and place appoynted. Whereupon Sir
William requesting a reuerend Doctor of his acquaintance
to take the charge vpon him; hee being
to preach in his charge vpon a necessary occasion
the very day which was appointed: sent him to
Mr. Walker, whom he assured him to be a man ready
for such a purpose, And who at the first motion
vpon a dayes warning embraced the offer, promised
to come the next day to Sir William, and to attend
him to the place of meeting, And Sir William
requesting him to name before hand some questions
opposite to the Romish religion which hee
would dispute vpon against the Priests; he gaue
him these three following. 1. That the present Church
of Rome is the Whore of Babylon. 2. That the Pope is Antichrist.
3. That the Popish doctrine of Peters being Bishop
of Rome is a forged fable contrary to the Scriptures.
            
            These positions Sir William Harrington sent to the
Priest, that he might arme himselfe for the defence:
The next day Mr. Walker came to Sir Williams lodgings
to dinner, and accompanied him and Sir Edward
Harwood, with some other Gentlemen to a priuate
house by the Thames side, where they found
some Romish Catholike Gentlemen, and they said
Smith with other Priests. Before they entred into
disputation, Mr. Smith alias Norrice, called Master
Walker a side, and desired that the disputation might

be performed louingly and sweetly with all mildenesse,
and without bitter words or byting speeches.
Mr. Walker answered, that he desired to byte and
gall no aduersary but with sound reasons, which do
most commonly cut to the quicke, such as defend
errors: as for other speeches, he promised for his
part to be milde or sharpe, according to the behauiour
of his Aduersaries. And thus they proceed
to a formall manner of disputation, the one sitting
downe at the one end of a Table, the other at the other
end, and the auditors sitting along on both
sides, and some standing about in a large vpper Parlor,
But first Mr. Walker desired a Bible▪ vnto which
they might appeale, and by which testimonies of
Scriptures; which both parties alleaged might bee
tried; whereupon there were two Bibles brought,
and agreed vpon; the one a vulgar Latine, which
the Counsell of Trent, and the whole Romish
Church holds to be most authenticall; the other
an English Bible, for the standers by to looke vpon.
Then Mr. Smith alias Norrice, begins first with an
apologie for himselfe, telling the gentlemen that
he had of late by reason of some bodily infirmity,
beene forced to take Phisicke, and to vse a dyet
drinke, and therefore if his memory should faile, or
if paine in his head should force him to breake off
abruptly, desired them to beare with him, and to
haue him excused; By which he seemed wisely to
prouide before hand for a lesse shamefull flight, if
he found the fight too hot and sharpe for him to be
endured. Mr. Walker on the other side desired, that
they might goe to it hand to hand, and but one

speake at once for auoiding of confusion; that the
disputation might be in short syllogismes: and desired
also that the Arguments & the answers might
be writ downe, for preuenting all false relation and
misreports afterward, and withall, did put it to the
Aduersaries choyce, whether he would oppose or
answer first? Mr. Smith desired, that hee might first
dispute vpon his owne questions, and promised that
afterwards he would answer Mr. Walker, disputing
vpon his questions: It was agreed vpon; And
thereupon he putting off his hat, and crossing his
face and breast, began to speake to Mr. Walker as followeth.
            
               
                  Mr. Smith, alias Norrice.
               Sir, I haue here receiued three questions from you,
which you haue taken vpon you to proue by Argument, I
haue here written downe, and will relate them vnto you:
First you say you will proue the Pope to be Antichrist:
2. The Church of Rome to be the whore of Babylon:
3. That St. Peter was not Bishop of Rome as we
hold; These questions are such as are not fit to be named,
much lesse to be disputed or answered; they are deliuered
in tearmes very vnseemely and vnmannerly: for
what can be more vnfit or vnseemly then this, that you
should call the holy Father the Pope Antichrist, and
the Church of Rome the whore of Babylon now in
these dayes, when it pleaseth the Kings Maiestie to giue
the Pope that honour, as to send and sue to his holinesse
for a dispensation for the marriage of thr Prince his
sonne: I pray you therefore let vs haue no more of these
questions, but let vs haue some other, or else propound
them in other tearmes, as that the Church of Rome is

not the true Church or the like: As you see I haue
done, in that I haue vsed milder words in my questions:
holding that you protestants in England, haue no
Church nor faith.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Seeing it is your pleasure thus to speake at large
in loose speech, and not in strict Syllogisme, I will
answer you in your kinde. First, I maruell that you
are not ashamed to slaunder the Kings Maiestie with
honouring of the Pope, by suing to him for dispensation,
which we all know he will neuer doe; because
he hath not onely said, that he is Antichrist,
but also publikely in his learned writings proued
him so to be, and the Romish Church to be the whore of
Babylon. I warrant you our King will marry his Son
and aske the Pope no leaue, if the other party will
aduenture it as well as he. It is most intollerable,
that you should so boldly slaunder his Maiestie.
               Secondly, for the tearmes of my questions, which
you call vnmannerly, they are the same which it
pleaseth Gods spirit to vse in the holy Scriptures;
and his holinesse hath in his wisedome been pleased
to stile the Pope and Church of Rome by the
same titles, as I shall quickly proue, if you will vndertake
to answer me. And therefore you are too
bold to taxe Gods spirit of vnmannerlinesse: But
perhaps this is a shift of yours, to put off our disputation
vpon these poynts which pay you home,
with a cleanely excuse of vnmannerly tearmes: yet
it shall not serue your turne; for the more vnseemly
that the questions are, the more disgrace it will
be to me, and the more hard taske to proue them:

and to you it will be more credit and ease to defend
the contrary, so that this is no excuse for you at all.
Thirdly, in that you doe charge vs here at home so
manifestly contrary to common sense, that we haue
neither Church nor Faith, when as we beleeue and
professe all holy truthes taught in the holy Scriptures,
which by your selues cannot be denyed to be
Gods infallible word. But I pray you let vs leaue
all loose and idle discourses, and come to a strict
forme of Disputation, writing downe the Arguments
and answers which doe passe betweene vs.
Your taske which you haue vndertaken is to proue,
that we haue no Church nor Faith: let vs heare
your arguments briefly.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               Well, that we may come quickly and closely come home
to the matter, let me aske you a question, and doe you answer
me, that I may ground my Arguments vpon your
owne words, and I shall quickly proue against you my
assertion, and make the truth of it plainely appeare.
First I aske whether the true Catholike Church be visible?
            
            
               M. Walker.
               The true Catholike Church is not visible, neither
can it be seene with eyes of any mortall man
on earth.
            
            
               
                  M. Smith.
               Marke Gentlemen, he will deny this Canon: he saith
the Catholike Church is not visible, which I will proue
to be against all reason.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               Indeed if I should say that it were visible, considering

it as it now is, I should speake against all reason;
For the greatest part of it being Saints in
heauen are without the reach of mans eyes, and
cannot be seene.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               You doe but equiuocate of purpose to decline all Disputation;
you know that I meane, not the Church triumphant
in heauen, but the Catholike Church militant on
earth.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Nay, rather doe you equiuocate or worse; for
to say that the Catholike Church is militant on
earth is as absurd, as to say that all mankinde, euen
the whole vniuersall race of Adam are now liuing
on earth, when reason and experience teach vs, that
the greatest part are dead, and many also yet vnborne:
I hope you know that the word Catholike,
signifies vniuersall: and therefore the Catholike
Church is vniuersall company of the Elect and
faithfull, and includes in it euery one whosoeuer
hath beene, or is, or shall be hereafter a true beleeuing
member of Christ, and a
                     •
                  l they cannot bee
seene at once on earth, because they neuer were altogether
on earth. The militant number of them on
earth, are the least part of them.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               You doe wrangle to auoyde D
                     •
                  sputation; I therefore
tell you; that by the Catholi
                     •
                  e militant Church, I vnderstand
the true Church of Iesus Christ, which all true Christians
here on earth ought to heare and obey, as it is the pillar
and ground of tru
                     •
                  h: now answer whether you hold
that to be visible or inuisible?
            
            
               
               M. Walker.
               I iudge of your meaning by your words, and
therefore I cannot conceiue this Church which
you doe speake of, to be the Catholike, that is the
vniuersall Church: for euery true particular
Church, in which euery true Christian doth loue,
and whereof he is a member, is that which he ought
to heare and to obey, because by reason of the faithfull
and elect which are in it, it is the house of God,
and the pillar and firmament of truth. Now euery
such Church is partly visible, and partly inuisible.
            
            
               
                  M. Smith.
               How is it visible, and how is it inuisible?
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               Euery such true Church hath in it elect and faithfull
men, professing outwardly in word, and practise
true Christian religion, who doe belong to the Catholike
Church, and are true liuely members of
Christ: It hath also some hypocrites and carnall
professors, which doe also make an outward show
and profession of christianity, but are not truely ingraffed
into Christ, by vnion and communion of
the Spirit, neither haue the true holy sauing Faith,
and by consequent are not members of the true
Catholike Church. Now the men who professe religion
in the Church, and are the members of it, if
we consider them as they are men, and as they practise
and performe outward duties of christians, as
preaching and hearing of the word, administring
and receiuing the Sacraments publike outward
worship and such like, they are visible: But as for
the election faith, spirituall, and in word graces and

deuotion in the one sort, by which they are indeed
true christians, & belong to the Catholike Church:
and the hipocrisie and carnall corruption lurking
inwardly in the other sort, by meanes whereof, they
are seperated from communion with Christ in spirit,
they are things inuisible, and to be discerned spiritually,
not with bodily eyes. Thus euery true
Church is partly inuisible, to wit, in respect of the
spirituall graces, which make men true Christians
indeed; and partly visible, to wit, in respect of the
outward profession, common both to elect and reprobates,
to faithfull men and hypocrites.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               No sooner was the answer giuen but Mr. Smith as one
full of anger, protested with vehemency of words, that
now he saw indeed, there was neither Church nor Faith among
Protestants; they were all so contrary among themselues,
neuer agreeing together in any opinion: He affirmed
to the standers by, that Doctor Whitakers, Doctor
Reignolds, Mr. Perkins, and many other chiefe Protestants
did euer grant, that the true Catholike Church was
visible. Another Priest sitting by, scornefully repeated
the name of Perkins, and spake of him as of a poore
silly man, not worthy to be counted among the learned.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Mr Walker moued with the falshood of the one,
and the scorne of the other, first answered the scorner,
that none could count Mr. Perkins silly and vnlearned,
but either out of ignorance or wilfull mallice:
and that he knew it to be the fashion of popish
Priests, outwardly to sleight & vilifie before the people,
such as do most cut and gall them. To Mr. Smith
                  
he answered, that if he would grant that Protestants
haue a true Church, and the true faith, as truely as
that which he affirmed of Doctor Whitakers and the
rest was false, he would desire no more for the victorie:
Yea (saith hee) if you haue read Doctor Whitakers,
you know that he holds as I doe; and that you
wilfully and falsely father on him things vntrue.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               Mr. Smith enraged with this answer, protested what he
had said was true, and the more to perswade the standers
by, he added more specially, that Doctor Whitakers doth
in his writings maintaine, that the whole essence of the
true Church, consists onely in the true preaching of the
word, and the right administration of the Sacraments
which are things visible.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Sir I doe not loue to contend by oathes and protestations,
but by proofes. I will here write downe
your wordes (which he did, and read them in the
hearing of all, and asked if hee had not truly written?
and all assented he had: Then hee proceeded
thus.) I doubt not sir, but you haue learned Logick,
and doe knowe that the definition of a thing doth
expresse the whole essence, and that what a man defines
a thing to be, that he holds to be the essence of
it: Tell me here doe you not grant this?
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I doe.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Well then, it must be granted, that Doctor Whitaker
doth hold that to be the essence of the Church
which he doth comprehend in the definition of the
Church. Now his definition of the Church is

                  Coelus electorum & fid
                        •
                     lum, A company of elect and
faithfull men, and he proues against Bellarmine, that
none can be seene with the eye to be members of the
Catholike Church, because the elect onely faithfull
and godly, belong to it, whose graces are inuisible,
and not hypocrites and reprobates, as Bellarmine
doth hold. Dare you deny this?
            
            
               Mr. Smith.
               I am sure he holds as I said before, that the whole essence
of the Church consists in true preaching of Gods
word, and in administration of the Sacraments.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Because I will not spend time in contesting with
you; let this be the issue before these Gentlemen:
let vs send for Doctor Whitakers workes, and if I doe
not shew that he doth proue against Bellarmine, that
the Catholike Church is inuisible, and that this is a
maine point largely disputed by him, and a maine
controuersie betweene him and Bellarmine, let mee
be branded with the marke of a wilfull lyer, impostore
and false prophet. But if I shew it presently
before them all out of his owne writings, then shall
you confesse your selfe a forger and falsifier, an impostor,
and a priest of Baal; The Gentlemen all
confessed that this was faire play, and desired it
might bee so. Whereupon Mr. Smith began to
draw backe, and shewed himselfe vnwilling, and
much affraid to hazard his credit so quickly, and
would gladly haue left this point, and fallen into
another, But Mr. Walker proceeded on this wise and
said: Gentlemen it is true, that Doctor Whitakers
maintaines, that the Word truly preached, and the

Sacraments rightly administred, are the certaine
and infallible notes and markes, by which euery true
particular Church may be discerned to bee Christs
true church: and you know that the markes of a
thing differ from the essence and substance of it: as
the signe hanging at the dore of a Tauerne, and
shewing that house to be a Tauerne, differs from the
Tauerne it selfe: and the habit and Cowle of a
Monke or Frier, which is the marke of his order,
differs from the Monke himselfe, and is not any
part of his essence. I beseech you therefore take
notice of the boldnesse and impudency of popish
Priests, how they can snatch here and there a speech
out of our learned mens writings, without any vnderstanding
of it, and thereby make show, as if they
had throughly read those Authors; yea, and can in
common talke, and in titles of their printed pamphlets
professe, that they haue confuted Whitakers,
Reignolds, Field, Perkins, and many others, whose
bookes they neuer durst reade throughly, neither
haue the hardinesse to sift any of their maine arguments.
I assure you, that as you see this which I say
here verefied, so I finde it a common thing among
them all.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               Mr. Smith and all his company on his side were very
vnwilling to insist any longer vpon this point, & therfore
answered nothing; but presently proceeded to another
question, and asked Mr. Walker Whether the whole
militant Church on earth may erre?
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               I answer, that this question is captious and

ambiguous, and cannot directly in one word negatiue
or affirmatiue bee answered: my reasons are
these; First, because the whole militant Church, if
such a Church may be acknowledged, is nothing
but the whole number of particular Churches militant
on earth; and in diuers points they doe differ
among themselues: and it is impossible for any
man to finde out the iudgement of them all in euery
point, as it is impossible to gather them all at once
into one place. Secondly, it may bee said both that
it may erre, and also that it cannot erre in diuers respects
and considerations, if wee consider it by it
selfe alone, as it is militant, and according to the
militancy and weaknesse of it (as I may so speake)
we grant that it may erre, and in euery particular
part of it, there may bee found some errors: but if
we consider it according vnto the relation and dependance
which it hath vpon the Triumphant
Church, and the assistance which it hath from
Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, vpon whose
doctrine and Scriptures it doth wholly cast it selfe,
and builds all the doctrines of faith,, so it cannot
erre, for in so doing it doth follow infallible guides:
euen as the Apostle saith of a man regenerate and
borne of God, that he cannot sinne, 1 Ioh. 3. to wit,
in the maine, against the maine precepts of the Gospell,
Beleeue and Repent, for he cannot fall into impenitency
and infidelity, because the seede of God,
euen his holy Spirit abides in him: But that he hath
sinne, and doth lie if he saith he hath none, to wit,
through infirmity and weakenesse of the flesh: So
likewise it is truely said of the true Church, and

euery part thereof, that as it builds onely on the
Scriptures, and doth vrge no doctrine of faith of
necessity to be beleeued, but such as the Scriptures
teach: So it cannot erre no more then the Scripture,
for this is a work of infallible faith. But because
all men liuing in the Church; haue as infirmities of
life, so imperfections in iudgement, and some peruersnesse
in affections, and therefore may faile in
conceiuing some doubtfull and obscure places of
Scripture amisse, or in cleauing not so close to the
word as they ought, or following their owne affections
to much, as we see in all the writings of the Fathers,
and in the most part of the generall Councells,
in this respect we truly say, that the Church
militant may erre.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               You doe what you can to keepe off, and not to come to
the point; but I will bring you to it doe what you can if
you will answer me this question. Whether the who
                        •
                     e
militant Church of England may erre?
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               I answer to this as before, that it is a captious and
ambiguous confused question, and that this militant
Church as the rest may erre and not erre, according
to the former diuers respects and considerations.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               Whether is the Church of England so tyed to the word
of God, and such helps, that it cannot erre nor misinterpret
the Scriptures in fundamentall points of Faith?
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               I answer, that as in all other particular Churches

so in the particular Churches of England, there is a
double voice, one of the Church, as shee is the true
Church of Christ, and that is both her voice commending
the Scriptures, onely to bee beleeued as
necessary for sauing knowledge and true faith, and
also the voice of GOD plainely speaking in the
Scriptures, in this respect she is so tyed that shee
cannot erre. There is another voice which the
Church vttereth not immediately from her selfe, by
the Commission which Christ gaue vnto her; but
by her fraile members, suppose a Synode and assembly
of Pastors taking vpon them to determine
things doubtfull out of obscure places of Scripture,
and to make them more plaine then the Scriptures
doe vpon which they build; This voyce may
erre, and by it the Church may be said after a sort to
erre in some part, though not wholly, nor finally,
nor obstinately: because if it bee a true Church, it
will not absolutely and peremptorily determine
that which the Scriptures leaue doubtfull: neither
will it persist alwayes in the errors if they be deadly,
but either the whole number, or at least some in the
number of the Church will renounce it; and so the
whole shall not erre finally. This is my answer; But
because I would giue you some ground whereon to
fasten, that we may not spend time in questions, but
may come to disputation, which is the intent of our
meeting; I will grant you thus much, that the
Church of England may erre for a time, and after
some manner in a point fundamentall or necessary
to saluation. Ground what you can vpon this,
and let vs haue some disputation by way of

strict Arguments and Syllogismes.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith
               I haue enough out of your owne confession to proue
that you haue neither Church nor Faith. And I pray you
Gentlemen to marke and take notice, he grants that the
Protestant Church of England may erre in a fundamentall
point, if in one, then as well in another, and so
from one to another till it erre in all, and so haue no faith
at all, and hauing no faith it is no Church. Thus you see I
haue proued that Protestants haue neither church nor
Faith: and therefore I beseech you all take heede of them,
who by their owne confession haue forsaken the Catholicke
Church and faith, and doe wilfull runne into all damnable
errors and heresies, and lead men into destrustion.
You see how plainely they are conuinced; and I appeale
to you all, Iudge whether I haue not plainely proued that
which I did vnder take, to wit, that they haue neither
Church nor Faith, and so are in a most damnable estate.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               To these words vttered, with great vehemency and
action of the hands and whole body, Mr. Walker
standing vp, and putting of his Hat made this reply:
First (saith hee) though it was your motion, and
my desire that I might talke mildly without bitter
words: yet seeing hee first breakes out so
vnreasonably, and goe about by bitter and reproachfull
words and gestures to beare downe the
truth: I must craue leaue of these Gentlemen to answer
you in your kinde, though it be very vnseemly
that in my manner of answer, you may behold the
vnseemlynesse of your disputing: and then with
like words, voice, and gestures, he answered to this

effect: First, where as you say that you haue proued,
that which you did vndertake▪ you shew your selfe
without wit or reason: for you are not able to bring
one word of reason by way of argument, till I doe
lay you a ground, as all here doe see; and therefore
if you seeme to proue any thing, you must thanke
me for it, who doe yeeld more then you can proue:
Secondly, your argument is without all forme, order,
or reason; for it doth not follow, that euery
Church which may erre in one point, may erre in all
points at once, and fall wholly away, because God
hath promised, that the gates of Hell shall not preuaile
against his Church so farre as to put it quite
from the foundation, though it may Build stubble
and straw vpon the foundation, by erring in some
points for a time. Thirdly, though it bee not impossible
for the true Church to erre yea though it
were granted that it might wholly fall away from all
faith: yet it doth not there vpon follow that it doth
so, and that now presently it hath no faith, neither
is a Church at all: Thus Gentlemen you see how I
haue proued this man by his owne speech to bee
without wit, reason modesty or honesty, roauing
without wit or reason, railing without modesty, and
falsly charging vs against all shew of honesty: But
I feare me that this kind of Frier-like preaching, is
odious and distastfull to all iudicious beholders: I
pray you let vs dispute orderly, and according to
art: And if you be able to dispute Scholler-like, let vs
haue one argument framed into a short Syllogisme.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I warrant you I can make Syllogismes to your small comfort.
            
            
               
               Mr. Walker
               
               And I doubt not but I shall as easily answer them
to your small ease.
            
            
               Mr. Smith.
               
               
                  Then he with much adoe vttered this Syllogisme, and
caused it to be written downe. That Church which hath
not the word of God truely preached, and infallibly
deliuered vnto it, is not the true Church of Christ:
But the Protestant Church is such, Ergo.
               
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               I distinguish vpon the Maior proposition: For if
you meane the word truly preached, and infallibly
deliuered in euery particular point, so that it can neuer
erre any manner of way in any such point. I denie
the Maior vpon example and warrant from the
Apostles: and doe hold that a true Church may for
a time haue the word not truly deliuered, and infallibly
in some point, and yet be a true Church: But if
you vnderstand a totall erring in all points, and a
preaching of the whole word vntruly: then is your
Minor most false, for Protestant Churches doe not
preach the whole word vntruly at any time. Now
proue you which of your propositions you please:
For in these senses which I haue named both are
false.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               The Maior is so manifest that it needs no proofe, neither
can be denyed, for how is it possible for any Church to
be a true Church which hath not the word truly preached
in all points.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               It is to mee a manifest vntruth, and therefore proue

it true if you can; if you cannot, then yeeld the
cause, that is false.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I proue it thus. That Church which hath not the word
of God truly preached, but falsely translated, is no true
Church. Such is the Church of England. Ergo.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               This is no proofe of that proposition which I
denyed, and which you did vndertake to proue, and
therefore you shew your selfe ignorant in disputing
and doe commit that fallacy against the rules of Logicke
which wee call Ignorationem elenchi.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith
               It is a true Syllogisme, and proues the maine matter in
controuersie, to wit, that you haue no true Church.
            
            
               Mr. Walker
               
               But the thing which you were to proue, was that
the Church which hath not Gods word truly preached,
and infallibly deliuered in euery point at all
times, is not a true Church. This because you cannot
tell how to proue as you did vndertake, therefore
you flee to another new Argument, to which
also I doe answer, as I did to the former: First, that
the Maior proposition is false: For a Church which
hath the word of God falsely or erroneously translated
in some parts, and so not truely preached in euery
part, may be a true Church. Secondly, if you
meane falsely translated, and not truely preached of
purpose and wilfully, then the Minor is false, for
though the translation of the Church of England
may faile and misse of the true meaning of diuers
places, (as all the best translations, especially the

vulgar Latine approued by the Romish Church
doth,) yet it is not so erroneously translated of purpose,
neither doe all the Preachers thereof build,
certainly on such erronious and false translations,
but many doe discerne them, and preach and teach
the true oppositions; and the Church alloweth
them so to doe, when they shew good reasons for
their doings, from the circumstances of the Text.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               But I will shew plainly by diuers Examples, that you
haue diuers places of Scripture falsly translated in your
translation of set purpose, and wilfully contrary to the
words of the Hebrew Text, contrary also to the Greeke and
Latine, receiued in all ages and Churches heertofore.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               You threaten largely in wordes which are but
winde; but indeede you can neuer performe that
which you say. Let vs see if you bee able to shew any
part of our translation, wherein one word is
falsely translated of purpose: I desire no more but
to ioyne a Combat with you hand to hand about the
Hebrew text, and about the truth of our translation,
and the agreement of it with the Originall.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I shall quickly proue what I say, and what you require.
First, I haue a plaine example, Malachi 2. 7. where your
translators read the words thus, The Priests lippes
should keepe knowledge, and they should seeke the
Law at his mouth. First this translation is false, because
it is contrary to the Hebrew text, wherein the words are
Iishmeru they shall keepe, and Iebakshu they shall seek:
and not, they should keepe, nor, they should seeke.
                  
Also it is contrary to the Greeke, wherein the words are,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and to the Latine translation of
St. Hierome, which is Custodient, and requirent.
Secondly, it teacheth heresie and false doctrine, namely;
that Gods Priests, & they who sit in Moses Chayre, may
erre, contrary to the words of Christ who commands his
Disciples to heare all such as sit in Moses Chayre, because
they shall not erre, but their lips shall preserue knowledge.
Thirdly, it is thus corrupted of purpose, to gainsay the infallibility
of the Pastors of the Church, who doe succeed
in the Chayre of the Apostles, and to blinde the peoples
eyes, that they may not see the certainty and infallibility
of iudgement in the Priests and Pastors who sit in Moses
Chaire, & how they are bound to seek the Law at their
mouth: but may follow any vpstart teachers which separate
from the Catholicke Church. Thus you see Gentlemen
all, how plainely I haue proued that the Church of
England hath of purpose corrupted the Scriptures, and
therefore is no true Church.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Indeed if that which you say were true, you did
speake something to the purpose; but great words
and protestations cannot make truth to be falshood,
nor falshood truth, as for the Example which you
cite out of our English translation. Mal. 2. 7. I deny
it to be contrary to the Hebrew text: yea I will easily
proue both from the Hebrew words, which you
haue here shewed in the Hebrew Interlinear Bible,
and also from the whole scope, and all circumstances
of the place, that the English is the best translation,
& more perfect then either the Greek or Latine.
First, though the Hebrew words Iishmeru & Iebakshu
                  
be of the Futuretense, yet this doth not proue: that
they should be translated so in our tongue, because
you cannot but know, if you haue any skill in the
Hebrew tongue, that the future tense in Hebrewe,
sometime simply, and sometime by meanes of Vau
conuersiue signifies time, either perfectly or imperfectly
past; somtimes it stands for the Optatiue,
Potentiall, and Subiunctiue moode; therefore our
translation is not differēt, nor irregular from the Hebrewe,
which is the originall. Secondly, it was neuer
the purpose of Gods spirit in that place, or by these
words to teach, that the Lawe should alwayes bee
taught truly and infallibly by the Priests and Pastors
who succeede Moses, or the Apostles locally in
the Church by a continued succession: for that is a
falshood contrary to the experience of all ages: this
very place confutes it most euidently; For the
Priests vnto whome the Prophet here speaks in these
places were Leuites, and succeeded Aaron in the
Priesthood: and yet they were departed out of the
way they caused many to fall in the law by their corrupt
glosse, and their abuse of the Couenant of Leui. As
it appeares in the next words immediately following:
yea some of them had sacrificed to Idolls, as Iosephus
shewes in his History of those times, and therfore
the Lord threatens to corrupt their seed by
cutting off the male progeny, and to cast the dung of
their Sacrifice in their faces: so that the Priesthood
of Phineas should by a sister married into the Tribe
of Iudath to one of Dauids line fall to Christ, who
desended of her, and hee should take it away to
himselfe for euer as is intimated in the 3. verse of the

same Chapter. So then it is no heresie but Gods holy
truth, that Priests succeeding in the place and office
of Aaron and Moses may erre and haue erred:
Moset his Chaire in which the Scribes and Pharisies
did sit, was the seat wherein they were wont to
read the Law of Moses, and the expositions of
the Prophets to the people, and therfore what they
there did teach was true, and Christ commanded
his Disciples to obey it: But in their owne glosses
and traditions they erred damnably, & made void
Gods Law,Math. 13. 4. 16. 12. and their Doctrine our Sauiour called
soure leauen, and warned his Disciples to beware of
it. Thirdly, they who translate the words thus:
The Priests lippes shall keepe knowledge, and they shall
seeke the Law at his mouch: Did neuer intend to shew
thereby, that God did make here a promise, that so
it shall bee for euer, but onely to shew that this is
the Law and Commandement of God, teaching
what the Priests and People should doe and ought
to doe, euen as in the Commaudement, Thou shalt
haue no other Gods but me. The words doe not promise,
that the Israelites should alwaies acknowledge and
worship Iehouah the true God alone, (for the euent
shewed the contrary within 40. payes) but shew
what they ought to doe; but the words are a coms
mandement recited, not a promise made, the wordof
the 4. verse shew. Therefore our English translation
is most perfect of all, shewing not onely the
sense and meaning of the Law, but also how it did
binde the Priest and People, and how they ought
to obey it. Thus you see how your example doth
make for vs against your selfe.
            
            
               
               Mr. Smith.
               Mr. Smith finding worse successe then hee expected
in this example, and perceiuing the standers by to be well
satisfied with this answer, flees presently to another, to
wit, Dan. 4. 27. where in our English Translation the
words run thus. Breake off thy sins by righteousnes,
& thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poore:
Here saith he, the word in the Chaldee, which is the Originall,
Perok, signifies to Redeeme, and so the Greeke
and Latine Translations render it; but your Translations
of purpose, contrary to all the ancient receiued Translators,
and to the nature of the word in the originall, do
translate it, Breake off, and that of purpose to oppose
the true doctrine of satisfaction & merit by good works.
Therefore your Church is a false Church.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Howsoeuer other translations run, I am sure our
English is in sense most sound & Orthodoxe. That
translation which counsels Nabuchadnezar to redeeme
his sins by righteousnesse, is (as the words
doerun) senslesse and against all reason; For God
neuer appointed that mens sinnes should bee redeemed;
but his will is, that they should bee mortified
and destroyed, and he so hates them, that hee cannot
leaue them vnpunished, but will haue iust vengeance
to be executed for them, eithervpon the sinner
himselfe, or on his surety. If you vnderstand
the words (as you seeme to vrge them) that Nabuchadnezar
a wicked Heathen King, should by his
own righteousnesse redeeme himselfe from his sins;
you doe make Daniel a teacher of heresie and blasphemie:
for it is no lesse then blasphemy, to hold

that an Idolatrous Pagan may by his owne righteousnesse
redeeme himselfe: it makes void the promise
of Christ the Redeemer. But our English
translation doth teach excellent truth; to wit, that
a true conuert ought not only to beleeue in Christ,
and by faith to put on the Robe of Righteousnesse,
that therin he may appeare righteous before God,
and comely in his sight; but also to breake off his
sinfull course of life, and neuer to goe on any longer
in any knowne sinne, as Papists doe, in hope of
absolution by confession and pennance. And therefore
I doubt not, but the word in the originall will
be more agreeable to our translation, when wee
come to see and examine it, if you be pleased to let
me see your Hebrew Bible.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               Loe here in the originall the word is in the Caldee Perok,
which signifies onely to redeeme, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as the
Greeke translation renders it: and the Latine Redeeme.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               I thought that wee should finde it thus, when we
came to the tryall; dare you here before these Gentlemen
put on such an impudent face, as to affirme
without feare or shame that this Parak signifies only
to redeeme and nothing else?
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I confesseit signifies also to breake in sunder, but neuer
to breake off.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Yea, it signifies all kinde of breaking, euen breaking
asunder, breaking a pieces, and breaking off;
for indeed it is an Hebrew word, and the Caldee

borrowes it form the Hebrew, the first and most
proper signification of it, is to breake asunder, or to
breake off: and it doth signifie to Redeeme only in
a trope by a Metominie of the cause for the effect,
for men are redeemed out of bondage, by hauing
their yoke of bondage broken off from their necke,
and their chaines and fetters broken in sunder, and
that that breaking is the meanes of their Redemption:
That it signifies properly to breake off, appeares
by the common vse of it in the Scriptures,
as Gen. 27. 40. where Isaac saith to Esau. Thou shalt
breake off his yoke from thy necke: Exod. 32. 2. where
Aaron said to the people, Breake off the golden earerings
which are in the eares of your wiues, &c. Thus
Gentlemen you see what a bold face this man can
set vpon a falshood, and how hee goeth about to
beare downe the truth with great words.
            
            
               Sir Edward Harwood.
               
               Vpon this Sir Edward Harwood stood vp and said,
that Mr. Smith hath failed much in this proofe, seeing
the word in the original did beare another sense
more proper, then that which he vrged for the only
true sense. And that the proper sense which the
English translation did follow, being so agreeable
to the rule of faith was rather to be embraced.
            
            
               M. Smith.
               M. Smith thus confounded had no shift but this: That
the Hebrew text was by the malice of the Iewes corrupted
in many things, and that it was written of old without
pricks, vntill the Iewish Massorites did inuent pricks
and vowels, by which we doe reade it, diuers hundreds
of yeeres after Christ: And therefore he would not build

naturall point on the originall Hebrew words.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Now (saith Mr. Walker) you shew you selse
what you are in your owne colours, euen one who
esteemes no authority or testimony either of God
or man, further then they serue your owne turne:
while you immagined that the Hebrew Text was against
our translation, you did vrge it with great vehemencie,
as the authority and testimony of God.
Now when it failes you and contrary to your expectation
doth make for vs: you vilifie it and reiect
it, as a thing corrupted by the Iewes, and formed
according to the minde and pleasure of the Iewish
Massorites: wherein you shew not onely vanity of
mind and inconstancie: but also malice and wickednesse
ioined with wilfull ignorance. For how soeuer
Elias Leuita a turnecoate Iew of later times, may
seeme to affirme such a thing (perhaps to please his
Patron Aegidius) that the Vowels were inuented
by the Massorites of Tiberias: yet it is the iudgement
of all the best learned, both Iewish Rabbins
and Christians, that the pricks, vowels and accents,
were from the beginning. And the Massorites were
Iewes gathered both out of the East and West of
purpose, to compare their most auncient and authentick
Manuscrips together, and when they found
them all to agree in Letters and points, they made
their Massorah, and noted how many times such a
word was written with such pricks in the Scripture;
how many verses, words, yet letters were in the
Law, and which was the middle verse, word and
letter, so that by their Massorah, if it hab beene kept

perfect, a man might finde out, if there were but
one word, letter, or prick altered or taken away out
of all the old Testament. All the differences which
were found between the Bibles of the Easterne and
Westerne Iewes, are recorded and kept to this day,
the one set down vnder the names of the Sonnes of
Ashur, the other vnder the names of the Sonnes of
Nephtali, and they are such as do not alter the sense
at all, as may bee seene in all our great Rabbinicall
Bibles; The end therefore of the Massarites meeting,
and of their worke, was not to inuent vowels
and prickes, but onely to note how they did finde
the Scriptures pricked and vowelled from the daies
of old, and to set downe rules from the knowledge
thereof, and for the preseruing them without alteration
or corruption to all posterities: Thus much I
haue learned out of the Rabbins, though my skill
bee but small in their Language, and though I haue
had no time to spend in the study of them, but such
as I haue stollen from my other necessary studies of
Diuinity, which properly concerne my Calling.
And if you know not this to be true, I am sure you
are but a weak Hebrutian, and slenderly read in Hebrew
Rabbins.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               All the Rabbins are of opinion, that the pricks of the
Bible were inuented by the Massarites, and vndoubtedly
that opinion is the truth.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               I pray you name one Rabbin of note, who is of
that opinion, and I will name you ten of the contrary;
I haue ten or twelue of the best Rabbin Comentaries

vpon the Law of Moses, which I will shew to
you, and if you can finde any of them to be of that
opinion, I will yeeld vnto you in this point. Nay,
more then that, I will shew out of the Scriptures
written by Moses, that the originall Scriptures of
Moses his Law, which were kept in the Tabernacle
by the Priests, were written, not single without
pricks as common coppies were, but double, both
with letters and pricks, so that none could doubt of
the right reading of them.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               It is easily said; but impossible to be proued, if you can
shew me any such thing out of the Scriptures, you shall do
more then any euer yet could doe.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Looke Deut. 17. 18. and there it is plainly testified,
that there was a booke of the Law appointed
to be kept before the Priests & Leuites in the Sanctuary;
out of which, the King was commanded to
write him a double written Copie of the Law, that
is a copie written both with letters and pricks, and
so most easie to be read and vnderstood; for the Hebrew
word there vsed is Mishneth, which signifies
Double, and so you see here in your interliniall Bible
Pagani doth translate it (Duplum legis) that is,
the Law written in the double forme, both with
letters and pricks.
            
            
               Another Priest.
               Mr. Smith being confounded with this proofe could
answer nothing, & therfore another Priest who did sit by
to assist him, answered for him, that the Hebrew word
Mishneth doth not signifie the originall Scriptures, but

the exposition of the Rabbins vpon the text of Scripture.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               It is true that the Rabbins call their Expositions
somtimes by this name, as for example Rabbi Moses,
Maymonides call his Summe of the Talmid, Mishueth
Torah: But you must know that in Moses his dayes,
when he wrote this Booke of Deuteronomy, there
were no Rabbinical Commentaries, nor for a thousand
yeares after; only the Law it selfe was kept before
the Priests, and the King was commanded to
write it onely into a Booke; There Mishueth cannot
here signifie any thing but the Text of the Law
written in double forme, which double forme of
writing was easie to bee read and vnderstood, and
was an exposition in respect of the single writing
without prickes. Whereupon this word Mishueth
came to signifie an Exposition or Commentary
which doth largely expresse the meaning of the
Law, which is more short and obscure: and the
Iewes do call by this name the Book of Deuteronomy,
because it is an Exposition of the Lawes written
more obscurely in the other bookes: And their
Expositions of the Law set down in their Talmud:
they also call Mishueth and Mishuai
                        •
                     th.
               
            
            
               Priest.
               The word Mishueth doth not signifie properly the
Scripture, but the doubled Law: for the Scripture is
called Mickra in the Hebrew tongue.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               The Law is the first Scripture which was written,
and therefore the word Mishuith by your own confession,
signisying the Law doubled, is written in

double forme, signifies the Scripture written both
with letters and pricks, and so you contradict your
selfe in your speech: Whereas you alledge another
name, by which the Hebrewes call the Scripture, to
wit, Mickra, and from them would inferre, that the
Scripture is neuer called Mishueth by them: I answer,
that your reason is ridiculous, for one name of the
Scripture doth not take away the rest, but it hath diuers
names in all languages: we in English call it the
Scripture, and the Bible, and the Booke of God, and
Gods word: So in Hebrew the Scripture is called
by diuers names; sometimes Torah, that is, the Law,
because it is the rule of Life; sometimes Chethab,
The Scripture or writing, because it is written. Sometimes
Mickra, because it is read of all Gods people.
And as it is written full and plaine in letters and
pricks, it is called Mishueh. The Priest hauing nothing
to reply to this answer, but holding his peace.
Some of the Gentlemen desired, that these disputations
about the Hebrew text, which they could not
vnderstand might cease, and that Mr. Smith would
dispute in plaine English by way of Syllogismes;
To which motion both parties agreed. And so Mr.
Smith proceeded to another Argument, which was
written downe first, and then answered.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               That Church which may erre for a time in a fundamentall
point necessary to saluation, is no true Church. Yours
is such.
            
            
               
                  Mr. VValker.
               I deny your proposition; for a true Church may
so erre for a time.
            
            
               
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               That Church which may erre for a time in a fundamentall
point necessary to saluation, hath no certainty for
that time, yours is such, Ergo, it is no true Church.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Your Argument is Sophisticall and faultie diuers
wayes: First, it doth not proue the proposition which
I denyed, and so it is a fallacy, which we call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
Ignorationem Elanchi. Secondly, it is no true
Syllogisme, because it hath foure tearmes. For the
premisses tend to proue that our Church hath no
certaintie, and you conclude otherwise: to wit, that
it is no true Church. Thirdly, the proposition is
false, for actuall erring in one point, doth not take away
certainty in all the rest, much lesse possibilitie
of erring for a time.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I proue it thus. That Church which may erre for a time
in a fundamentall point necessary to saluation, hath not
sufficient meanes of saluation for that time: yours is such,
Ergo, it is no true Church.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Here are the same three faults, which were in your
former Argument. First, no proofe of the proposition
denyed. Secondly, foure tearmes. Thirdly,
the manner is still false: for possibilitie of erring
doth not take away sufficiency of meanes for the
time.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I proue it thus. That Church which may erre for a time
in a fundamentall point necessary to saluation, for that
time hath not the whole infallible truth requisite to

salvation. But your Church may so erre: Ergo. It hath
not the whole infallible faith requisite for salvation.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               I see you cannot bring one argument to proue
that which I denyed; but still you doe begin a new
Argument to proue new things. Notwithstanding
I will follow you wheresoever you goe; and therefore
I deny the maior, and doe require you to proue
that possibility of erring, takes away the whole infallible
faith from such as are subiect to it.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I proue it thus. The beliefe of the whole infallible
faith, is a meanes necessary to salvation. The English
Church hath not the whole infallible faith: Ergo. That
Church which may erre for a time in a fundamentall
point, for that time hath not meanes sufficient.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Now sir I see you haue lost the question, and your
reason, and your selfe, and all your speech is a Chaos
without forme or figure, and proueth nothing at
all: If you be not able to make a Syllogisme; I pray
you confesse your weakenesse: and let mee dispute
one of my questions against you, and let vs trie
what facultie you haue in defending your cause; I
am sure you haue none to any purpose in opposing
it.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               Stay a little, and I will bring it into a Syllogisme
presently. The whole intire, infallible faith in all fundamentall
points, is onely a meanes sufficient to salvation:
That Church which may erre for a time in a fundamentall
point, hath not the whole infallible faith:

                  Ergo: it hath not sufficient meanes, &c.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               You cloy me with crasie Syllogismes which haue
neither mood nor figure, and which tend to proue
nothing but onely to repeat what hath beene before
denyed; to wit, That possibility of erring for a time
in a fundamentall point, doth depriue a Church of
the whole infallible faith. Thus you bring in againe
as your minor, though it hath before beene denyed:
and therefore I will still put you to proue it. But I
pray you let your assistant write downe your Syllogismes,
for I am weary of writing, and of wasting
paper, with false fallacies and confused speeches,
which hath neither mood nor figure.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I am sure I shall quickly bring my Argument into
forme, if you stand so strictly on artificiall Syllogismes:
Hauing thus sayd, he arose from the table, as if hee would
breath himselfe; and after much scratching of his head,
and other gestures, he turnes to the Priest his assistant and
bids him write: and did dictate vnto him another false
Syllogisme of some tearmes: which Mr. Walker reiected
and derided; And after that another, which was so reiected:
And after that a third, and so on till he had spent a
side of a leafe in folio in writing downe fallacies, and a
large halfe houre and more of time.
               So that Mr. Walker began to intreat him that he
would giue him leaue to make his Syllogisme for
him, for he perceiued what he intended
               Whereat Mr. Smith chafed, and sayd to the Gentlemen,
he confounds me, or else I could haue long agoe
brought it into a Syllogisme.
               
                  
Mr. Walker answered: you doe me wrong to attribute
to mee the honour which belongs to God
and his truth, for they confound you and not I.
               Then one of the Roman Catholikes began to sweare by
God, that Mr. Smith did make a true Syllogisme, which
Mr. Walker had without cause reiected.
               Mr. VValker desired him to repeat it, and to shew
it to be regular, according to moode and figure.
               The Roman Catholike swore againe divers great
oathes, and sayd that he would take the Sacrament vpon
it, and renounce his salvation if hee did not heare Mr.
Smith make a true Syllogisme, and that one of them
which Mr. Walker reiected was it.
               Mr. VValker answered, that oathes could not proue
false Syllogismes to be true, neither could the Sacrament
turne a fallacy into a sound Argument. And
told him that if he were so prodigall of his saluation,
he might sooner lose his soule, then make a Syllogisme
out of Mr. Smiths confused speeches and
fallacies. At length after much adoe Mr. Smith hammered
out this Syllogisme.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               That Church which hath not the whole intire infallible
faith, hath not meanes sufficient to salvation, That
Church which may erre for a time, hath not the whole intire
infallible faith, Ergo, it hath not meanes sufficient.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               I deny your minor, and doe put you to proue, that
the Church which may erre, hath not the whole infallible
faith.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I proue it thus: That Church which is subiect to error,

hath not the whole infallible faith. That Church which
may erre is subiect to error. Ergo.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Now sir I thanke you, that you haue bestowed a
Syllogisme vpon me, to proue the proposition denied.
But I must tell you, that your maior proposition
is false. For a Church may be so far subiect to
error, that it may haue a possibility to erre, and yet
not be voide of the whole infallible faith: It is one
thing to be subiect to error, and another thing to
erre actually: we hold that our Church or any other
particular Protestant Church may erre; but doe not
thinke that our Church doth erre in any fundamentall
point.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               You doe but cavill; for if it may erre, it is as bad as if
it did erre, and therefore I haue sufficiently convinced
you by my argument.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               I hope you doe not speake as you thinke, nor
thinke as you speake: For you know that by our
Law euery Seminary Priest is subiect to hanging
and quartering, and there is no impossibility of executing
the Law vpon them; And yet you hope
that all or the most part of them in England shall not
be actually executed; and you know that they are
not all in the same case, as if they were hanging actually:
For an Argument doth not follow a posse ad
esse, as we Schollers speake. But now seeing your
argument is hanged vp, and wee haue spent foure
houres and more in hearing you dispute to no purpose,
I pray you let mee prosecute one of my

questions against you for the time which remaineth,
and I hope to make more Syllogismes in an houre,
then you haue done in foure, if you will answer me
directly.
               Here some of the Roman Catholikes said that it
was full sixe a clocke, and now there was little time
left. But some of the Protestants desired to heare
Mr. Walker dispute vpon his questions. Which when
Mr. Smith seemed loath to yeeld vnto, as being weary
already. Mr. Walker desired, that he might but
turne one Argument against Mr. Smiths question,
and proue the contrary to be true. To this all assented,
and the Gentleman who began to distrust his
former professed Popery comming to Mr. Walker,
and standing at his backe desired him to presse one
Argument against Mr. Smiths question. Whereupon
Mr. Walker thus began to proue, That a true Christian
Church might erre for a time in some fundamentall point,
and yet be a true Church.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               That which the auncient Apostolicall Church
might doe, other succeeding Churches may doe
with the same successe. The Apostolicall Church
might erre and did erre in a maine point, and yet
haue a true faith, and was a true Church, Ergo, other
Churches also.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I deny the minor, the Apostolicall Church did not erre
in any maine point.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               The resurrection of Christ from the dead taught
in the Scriptures, is a fundamentall point of Faith.

The Apostolike Church did erre in it, Ergo:
               
            
            
               Mr. Smith denyed the minor.
               
               Mr. VValker proued it thus. That which the Gospell
teacheth in expresse words is true. This the Gospell
teacheth, that the Apostles erred in Christs resurrection,
Ergo.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               If you say that they erred in the resurrection de facto,
that is concerning the act of it, I grant the minor: But
if you speake of the resurrection as it is a point of Faith, I
deny your minor.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. VValker.
               You distinguish strangely betweene a thing and it
selfe; for the very act of Christs resurrection is a point
of Faith, without which our faith is vaine as the Apostle
sayth, 1 Cor. 15. 17.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               It is now a point of faith, but it was not then, because
the Scriptures had not expressely revealed, that Christ
should rise from death.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               That which Christ had expresly taught by word
of mouth, was thereby made a point of Faith, and
they were bound to beleeue. But he had told them,
that he must suffer and rise againe the third day:
and that in plaine words, as the Gospell testifies,
Ergo.
               
               Here some of the Gentlemen said, that the point
was sufficiently proued.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               But I deny that the Apostles erred in the Resurrection:
shew me that out of the Gospell.
            
            
               
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               
                  It is testified Ioh. 20. 9. That they knew not the Scripture
that he must rise from the dead. Loe thus it is testified
in your owne vulgar Latine Bible.
               
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               I say still, that the Scriptures had not reuealed it sufficiently,
and therefore it was no point of faith.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               The text shewes that the Scripture had reuealed,
for else how could it truely say, that they knew not
the Scripture; if the Scripture had not taught it?
It is no ignorance of Scripture, not to know what
the Scripture neuer taught.
            
            
               
                  Sir William Harrington.
               O well sayd, I protest I neuer heard any point so plainely
proued; and then turning himselfe to the wauering
Gentleman said: Now cousen, if euer thou wilt be conuerted,
be conuerted with these proofes.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               But yet I will proue it more fully, Luk. 24. 44. 45.
Our Sauiour there saith, that he had told them before,
that he must die and rise againe, and that it was
written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets,
and in the Psalmes, and it is said there, that he opened
their vnderstanding, that they might vnderstand
the Scriptures.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Smith.
               This was an error of ignorance or forgetfulnesse, for
want of instruction and exercise in the Word, which succeeding
Churches haue more aboundantly.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               You cauill against common sense, for I dispute

not whence this error proceeded, but whether they
erred in that maine point of the resurrection or not;
and that you cannot deny, so that the point is fully
proued which I vndertooke. Againe, I can shew
you yet further, that Christ having instructed them
in the Scriptures, and from his owne mouth, it could
not be for want of instruction that they erred, but
this error proceeded from incredulity and hardnes
of heart in them, so it appeares, Mark. 16. 14. where
it is said that our Sauiour appeared to the eleven Apostles,
and vpbraided them with their incredulitie and
hardnesse of heart, because they beleeued not them which
had seene him after he was risen.
               
            
            
               Another Priest.
               Mr. Smith being put to silence with those proofes, the
other Priest to make vp this breach, fled to another shift,
and denyed the Apostles to haue beene a Church at that
time, because the holy Ghost was not yet come downe, nor
the Euangelicall Law reuealed.
            
            
               
                  Mr. Walker.
               Vpon this, Mr. Walker first spake to the wauering
Gentleman, and asked him, whether he thought it
not well for him to be of such a Church as St. Peter
was, when Christ said. Math. 16. Happy art thou Simon,
&c. And, vpon this rocke I will build my Church.
Who answered, that he desired to be of no better
Church. Secondly, he proceeded thus; The Kingdome
of God which comes by the Preaching of the Gospell
is the true Church. But that was come alreadie, as
our Sauiour himselfe testified, Matth. 11. 28. and
Luk. 11. 20. It is a base shift, to say that the comming
downe of the holy Ghost made them a Church:

For his extraordinary gifts came not to make them
Christians, and members of the Church of Christ,
but to make them fit messengers to Preach to all Nations,
and to euery people, in their proper tongue.
But if all this will not conuince you, let vs know
who were the Church in those dayes, if the Apostles
were not. Peter had receiued that commission
and promise long before, vpon which you build the
Church of Rome, if it was not then able to make
him of the Church, how can it now vphold your
Church against all the gates of hell? Now then to
conclude, I beseech you as you loue your soules,
take heed of sinning against your owne Conscience,
and of rebelling against the light: you know that
the Apostles were elected from all eternitie; they
were effectually called by Christ himselfe, not onely
to beleeue, and to be Christians and open professors,
but also to be Apostles and Preachers, and by
the Gospell Preached and Miracles wrought, they
had conuerted many to the faith, as the Gospell testifieth;
And therefore nothing being wanting in
them, which is required to the essence of a Christian
Church: vndoubtedly they were a true Church,
and to deny this, is to resist the manifest truth of the
Gospell. Thus the disputation ended; for the Priests
did not giue any answer, but were very willing to
make an end. The Protestant Gentlemen seemed
well satisfied, and made them readie to depart. And
one of the Roman Catholikes calling Mr. VValker
aside, began to collogue and flatter with him; telling
him, that he was a good Logician, a good Linguist,
and well read, and that God had giuen him a sharpe

wit and ready tongue: And therefore no maruell
though he preuailed and made a good cause seeme
bad, when he opposed it, and a bad seeme good
when he defended it: But saith he, take heed that
you do not trust to your wit and learning too much,
least they deceiue you, and make you triumph ouer
the truth.
               To him Mr. Walker answered, that he knew himselfe
inferiour to many hundreds in the Church of
England; that it was not any power in himselfe, but
the power of the true cause which made him to preuaile.
For, Magnus est veritas & praeualebit, Great is
truth and will preuaile. A Gentleman ouer-hearing,
laughed and sayd, I am glad that you finde some of
our Ministers more learned then your Priests; contrary
to your common bragging and boasting, that
all learning is among your Priests and Iesuites. And
so they parted. Mr. Smith alias Norrice embracing
Mr. Walker, and saying; I pray God we may meet in
heauen; and Mr. Walker replying and saying, I
desire so also, and hope we shall so doe, if
you will forsake your errours and
embrace the truth, which is
professed in the reformed
Churches of
CHRIST.
            
            Soli Deo gloria.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   