
      
         
            
            
            FISHERS folly unfolded:
OR
THE VAVNTING
IESVITES VANITY
discovered in a challenge of his (by
him proudly made, but on his part
poorely performed.)
VNDER TAKEN AND
answered by GEORGE VVALKER
Pastor of S. IOHN Euangelist in
Watlingstreet LONDON.
            M.D.C.XXIIII.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            FISHERS folly unfolded:
OR
THE VAVNTING
Iesuits vanitie discovered in a challenge
of his (by him proudly made, but on
his part poorely performed) undertaken
and answered by GEORGE WALKER
Pastor of S. IOHN Euangelist in
Watlingstreet LONDON.
            
               IN the hot Moneth of Iune last
past, viz. Anno 1623. when the
courages of our true-hearted
English people were generally
much cooled through the absence
of our rising Sunne the illustrious
Prince CHARLES then
detained too long in Spaine
among the Antipodes of our Nation; but the Priests
and Iesuites those hot lovers of the Romish Babylon
enraged with the lusts of that proud whore, and puffed
up with hope of prevailing in this Land, were as busie

as waspes and hornets about our beehives, and as
wolves about our folds seducing our flocks, and sending
generall challenges of disputation to our Shepherds
every where. It so hapned that Father Fisher
the Iesuit, a man as famous for his forwardnesse and
impudencie in challenging, as foolish in performance;
and of as great esteeme and name among the blinde
Papists; as of little worth in himselfe and in the judgement
of wise learned men, was by the meanes and
procurement of one of his disciples drawne into the
lists to fight a single combat with Master Walker above
named in manner and forme following.
            First, a disciple of his, a desperate Popish Novice,
resorting often to the house of an elder brother of his
owne who dwelt in Cheapside, and (as the fashion of
such seduced Popelings is) railing upon the religion,
and vilifying the learning and gifts of Protestants, did
most intemperately extoll the Church of Rome, and
the learning of her Priests, especially of Fisher the Iesuit,
whom he did by name praise to the heavens for
his disputation with Doctor White before the Kings
Majestie, and did not only boast of a glorious victory
which there he had obtained, but also did proclaime
him a challenger of all Preachers in England, and did
dare the most hardie to meet him face to face in any
place or before any Auditors, where they might
dispute conveniently. A younger brother of his who
was a Protestant, and lived in the house with his elder
brother, being often assailed and attempted by him,
and not able to endure any longer his boasting and daring
speeches, did by his elder brother and others importune
Master Walker to accept the challenge, which

he did upon condition that a convenient day might be
agreed upon and appointed by both parties. That the
challenge is accepted they signifie to their Popish
brother, Fishers Novice. He wonders that any dare
be so hardie as to yeeld so far in promise, and tels
them, that the promise will never be performed, neither
will any Protestant Minister be so bold as to meet
his invincible Master Fisher; but being urged and
pressed to make a triall, hee brings word at length
upon a Satturday at night, that the next Munday the
Iesuit Fisher will come to his brothers house to encounter
with any opposite whomsoever. They send
word to Master Walker, who having urgent businesse,
desired to have the meeting deferred till the next day,
or till the evening of that day, but could not obtaine
so much; neverthelesse because he would in no case
forgoe that opportunitie of disputation with Fisher,
nor give occasion to the insulting Novice to triumph
(who upon his excuse of urgent businesse in that day,
began to boast that the victorie was gotten, and that
he knew and foretold before hand how they should
finde it, and that no Protestant durst be so hardie as to
meet Fisher in the face) he willingly did lay aside all
businesse, and promising to be ready at the time appointed,
sent word to the Iesuit, that if he did not appeare
at his owne houre, which was upon Munday at
ten of the clocke before noone, he should be judged
the coward and left without all excuse. At the houre
appointed Master Walker came, and heard nothing of
the Iesuit, for he came not till toward dinner time, but
then comming with his Novice, who was brother to
the master of the house, he was entertained with a

dinner, till Master Walker was againe sent for. Who
about one of the clocke returned, and by the way called
upon Master Burton Pastor of S. Matthewes parish
in Friday street, and did request him to goe along with
him, and to be a witnesse of the whole cariage of the
businesse. At their first entrance Master Fisher complained
because they came two against one. Master
Burton did assure him that he came onely to be an hearer,
and promised that he would not speake nor intermeddle,
except when both parties should agree to it.
Then (divers friends and neighbours to the Master of
the house comming in to heare and see what passed)
Master Walker began to speake to the Jesuit as followeth.
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Sir, if that fame and report, which you and your
friends have raised, and which goeth abroad concerning
your worth and learning be true, you must needs
be a man able to doe more for the Romish religion,
than any other of your fellowes now living, or of your
predecessors going before. We who have heard of
your bold intrusion into the Court and the presence
of our learned King, and of your challenges which you
have made and sent to Doctor White, and other men
of great learning and note, doe expect from you some
extraordinarie grounds and arguments for the Popish
religion, and such skill and learning, as hath not beene
seene before in any of your profession. Our desire is
therefore, that at this time you will make knowne unto
us some of your best skill, and shew us some of the
chiefe grounds upon which you build your faith and
religion. And I for my part, if I cannot overthrow

them by Gods word, will very willingly yeeld unto
them, and acknowledge that you have the truth on
your side.
            
            The Iesuit at the mention of his great fame and report
shewed a kinde of itching delight, and used never
a word tending by way of modestie to extenuate
his learning and gifts; but as one desirous to increase
his owne fame, and to justifie the report which the
blinde Papists give out concerning his worth, breaks
out with a smiling sigh into a Pharisaicall commendation
of himselfe to this effect.
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               
               Indeed I must confesse, that I have alwaies from my
childhood loved the truth, and diligently sought after it.
Once I was a Protestant (God forgive me) and did with
an hungring desire inquire after the truth, but could never
receive any satisfaction among any sects of Protestants,
but spent my labour in vaine, still remaining full
of doubts and scruples. Whereupon I did with all humilitie,
fasting and prayer seeke unto God, and pray unto
him, to guide me into the way of truth. Who at length
for my humilitie and the sinceritie of my heart, did grant
my request, and did draw me unto the Catholike Church,
where I found the truth and a sure ground to rest upon,
from which I purpose never to be moved, but will hold me
to it for ever.
            
            
               Mr. Burton.
               
               Mr. Burton grieved to heare the Iesuit boasting after
such a Pharisaicall manner, could not refraine, but
taxed him of pride and hypocrisie for ascribing his
calling and his knowledge of the truth and of true religion
(as he termed it) to the merit of his owne humilitie,

sinceritie, and his praiers, which he made before
his conversion, while he remained in ignorance.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Mr. Walker also taking hold of his speech desired
to ground a disputation upon his words, and offered
to prove that the Iesuit did erre most damnably and
heretically in the first grounds of his faith and religion,
in that he builded his first calling upon the merit
of his owne vertues and of his works which he performed
before his calling in the state of ignorance and
blindnesse. He also taxed him of manifest absurditie
and contradiction in his speech, in that he first so
farre vilified and condemned the Protestant state, and
counted it so sinfull and damnable, that he asked forgivenesse
of God for his once being a Protestant: and
yet immediatly did attribute his conversion and calling
into the Catholike Church unto the merit of
works which in that state he performed. Moreover
he charged him with extreame folly and madnesse for
abandoning and forsaking that Church & state, wherein
(by his owne confession) he did performe works
meritorious, and betaking himselfe to the service and
slaverie of the Church of Rome that whore of Babylon,
the reward and just wages of whose servants and
followers is shewed in Gods word, Revel. 19. to
be the wrath of God and eternall vengeance in the
lake that burneth with fire and brimstone for evermore.
            
            For answer to these obiections, the Iesuit complained,
that it was uneqvall for two to set against one
both at once. And Master Burton desiring to bee excused
for that he could not but out of his zeale reprove

his palpable boasting of his owne merits, promised to
be silent hereafter, if he would fall to disputation with
Master Walker. Then the Iesuit proceeded and spake
to this effect.
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               The Church of Rome, of which I am a member, is the
onely true Catholike Church, for it holdeth the same truth
which Christ and his Apostles commended to it, and hath
not altered nor erred in any maine point, but holds the
same still, which all true Catholike and Orthodox Fathers
and Doctors did teach, as here is manifestly shewed and
proved in this booke by Gualtherius (meaning Gualtherius
his Chronographica sacra, which there hee had
brought and laid before him on the table) who doth produce
plaine testimonies of the Fathers in all ages, from the time
of Christ, confirming the maine points of the Roman Catholike
religion, wherein Protestants dissent from Catholikes.
I doe challenge you to shew the like evidences for the
Religion and doctrine which your Church doth hold; which
because you cannot doe, it is manifest that you have not the
truth, neither are a true Church.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Well Master Fisher, if this be the best ground which
you have to build vpon, wee shall easily answer you,
and make it appeare that you are not the man which
flying fame reports you to be, and that you build on a
sandie foundation. I did expect some grounds and
arguments gathered out of the sacred Scriptures, and
hewed out of the rocke of Gods word by the hand
and art of some deeply learned Divine: but I perceive
that the best testimonie which you have to alleage for
your Religion, is that booke composed by one of your

owne side, and all you can say for your selfe, is as the
old Proverbe runnes; Aske my fellow theese if I be a true
man, which you know it stands him upon to affirme
whether true or false. As for 
                     •••••
                  rius, hee is as
bold, impudent, and shamelesse a Pa
                     ••
                  st, as needs put
pen to paper; For those testimoni
                     •
                  s of forged Fathers,
and of old Liturgies, which all the learned of
your Religion (who have any wit, learning, or dram
of modestie appearing in them) have reiected, he doth
boldly and familiarly cite and produce for proofes
without any shame or blushing. If I should for our
Religion cite and produce a booke of Luther or Calvin,
or any other Protestant, you would laugh mee to
scorne: yea, you reiect the bookes of the Fathers
printed or set forth among us, though you could never
iustly tax or convince any one of us of partiall
dealing, or of the least wilfull falsification. Let mee
further admonish you, that you shew little discretion
in bringing humane testimonies, especially of late
writers, to maintaine your Religion against me, or to
confute my Religion; For I am, as you know, a
Preacher of the Gospell, one of them whom yee call
Protestants, and wee doe not build upon any but the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himselfe
being the head corner stone. We doe not regard
in a controverted point of faith, what any Father or
Doctor doth hold, or hath held in former ages; but
what Christ and his Prophets and Apostles haue left
recorded in the infallible Scriptures of the old and
new Testament, and what the Fathers haue truly from
thence observed. We use the learned who have gone
before us as helps and guides in places of Scripture

and opinions which are doubtfull; but wee doe (as
they desired) denie their testimonies to bee grounds of
faith. Wherefore let us leave off all superfluous and
idle allegations and discourses, and let us come to a
strict forme of disputation about some maine points
of controversie. If you be pleased to oppose any speciall
article of our faith, I will defend it, or if you will
take upon you to answer, I will prove against you,
That your father the Pope is Antichrist, That the
Church of Rome is the whore of Babylon: That
your doctrine of merit of iustification before God by
your owne workes is hereticall; And that your Imageworship
is damnable idolatrie.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               If you bee so forward to dispute, I am for you, and I
come for that purpose; But have you no other points to
prove, saue these, That the Pope is Antichrist, and the
Church of Rome the whore of Babylon? I remember
that you urged me to dispute upon these above three yeeres
agoe, when you came to me in the New-prison, belike you
spend all your time and studie in these questions.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               It is true that I desired to dispute upon these questions
foure yeeres agoe, and then you refused, I hope
you have since studied how to defend them, though
then you were unprovided. Indeed I doe offer these
questions first of all to every Priest and Iesuit with
whom I meet, because the proving of any one of them
doth at one blow overthrow all Poperie: but you all
are as much afraid of these questions as a dog of the
whip. I could never yet meet with one of you, which
durst vndertake to maintaine the negative part: For

you are as wise as Serpents in your generation: you
know by wofull experience, what hard and base & silly
shifts Bellarmine, Suarez and others of your most learned
Iesuits, have beene driven to seeke, while they labour
in writing to answer vs in these questions, and
how miserably they are confounded, contradicting
one another, and every one himselfe in many things.
And this is the cause why you cannot endure to deale
with vs in these killing points of controversie, wherein
you are sure to be overthrowne. But if these please
you not, doe you name any other questions, and you
shall finde mee ready and willing to dispute with you
without further delay.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               I am content: But that we may have some ground to
build on; First, I will propound some questions to you in
writing, to which I require your answer in writing also,
that there may bee no mistaking or misreporting hereafter
of that which passeth between vs.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               If you will set downe any question in writing, and
write downe also your arguments, I will also write my
answers to them, but all other kinde of questioning I
refuse, as a meanes tending to prolong the time, and
keepe us off from strict disputation. I remember that
when I was with you foure yeeres agoe, you did trifle
away a whole afternoone by ambiguous questions,
and could not be drawne at all to disputation.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               Wee cannot dispute without some ground laid downe
and agreed upon: I will therefore first here propound in
writing this question, (then he wrote downe as followeth)

                  God the Father sent his Sonne our Saviour to teach
all points of faith necessarie to salvation, bidding his
Apostles heare him.
               
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               This is no point of controversie betweene you and
us; but if you make it questionable, I answer affirmatively,
granting the proposition to bee true, doe you
prove the contrarie if you can.
            
            * Then the Iesuit taking the paper, wrote a second
proposition, viz.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               Our Lord said to his Apostles, As my Father sent mee,
so send I you, hee that heareth you heareth mee, goe teach
all Nations, baptizing them, &c. and teaching them to observe
all things which I have commanded you; behold, I
am with you all daies untill the end of the world.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               To this Master Walker answered when hee read it;
That he desired an argument, not a new proposition,
and urged him either to dispute upon the former question,
or else to propound some point of controversie;
for hee would not bee deluded nor spend any more
time in trifling and writing downe propositions not
controverted.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               If this proposition be not controverted, doe you grant it
vnder your hand, and I will upon your owns confession
ground a controversie and an argument which shall hold
you fast.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Before you can make an argument, you must agree
with mee upon some point of controversie, let us

therefore know what I shall defend, and what point
you will dispute against.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               I come instantly to the point, if you will grant the last
proposition to bee true, under your hand, (this being done)
he takes the paper and writes the third proposition. This
commission of our Sauiour to his Apostles, was not onely to
their persons, and for their lives, but to those which should
by them bee sent, and should lawfully succeed them in all
ages, yeeres, moneths and daies, untill the end of the world.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Master Walker seeing this, refused to answer to any
more questions or propositions in word or writing,
except it were a proposition disputable; and when the
Iesuit said that by degrees hee meant thus to bring him
on to a maine point of controversie, upon which hee
would dispute; Indeed (saith hee) you have so promised,
and deceived mee now three times, I will no
longer bee held in suspence; and if you can no way
come to disputation but by such propositions, I will
trie whether I can by the same meanes draw you to
some head of controversie: Then taking a paper, he
wrote downe this proposition: They who teach, hold
and maintaine doctrines contrarie and repugnant to
the Scriptures, even the word of God taught by Christ
and his Prophets and Apostles in the old and new
Testament, are not the true successors of Christ and
his Apostles.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               This assertion the Iesuit granted, but would not write
downe any thing, and still urged Master Walker to grant
his third proposition.
            
            
               
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Stay (saith Master Walker) I must first have you to
answer a second proposition, before I answer your
third; then hee wrote downe a second to this effect.
The Church Teachers and Pastors, who doe teach no
other doctrine as necessarie to salvation, but that, and
onely that which is taught in the Scriptures by Christ
and his Apostles and Prophets, are undoubtedly the
true Church of Christ, and the true successors of Christ
and his Apostles.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               To this the Iesuit seemed unwilling to answer, till at
length being much urged, hee for very shame yeelded to
grant the proposition, by saying, I doe not denie it.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Whereupon Master Walker spake thus: Now Master
Fisher, you have granted me two maine grounds,
upon which I will dispute, and upon the first I will
proue, That the Church of Rome and her Pope and
Priests, are not the true Church, nor true successors of
Christ and his Apostles. And upon the other I will
prove, That the Church of England and her Protestant
Pastors are the true Church and successors of
Christ and his Apostles.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               But stay (saith Fisher) let me first have your answer
to my third proposition, and then wee will come to disputation
immediatly.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               If I doe answer, you will not dispute, because there
is no matter of controversie in your proposition. Neverthelesse,
that you may have no excuse nor colour

of delay, I grant your assertion thus vnderstood, viz.
That to all those who are sent by the Apostles, and in
calling and doctrine lawfully succeed them in all ages,
yeeres and daies, untill the end of the world, Christ
gave commission to teach people of every Nation,
and to baptize them, and promised to bee with them.
But if you meane by the last clause cunningly to imply,
that there are in all ages, yeeres, moneths and
daies, a continued succession of Bishops and Pastors
in one and the same visible Chaire and Sea, sent by the
Apostles, and lawfully succeeding them as in place,
so in all points of doctrine; I denie your proposition,
and if you please, let this be the question betweene us,
and let it be your part to prove it against me.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               This answer Master Fisher desired him to write downe,
which hee promised, upon condition Fisher would first
write downe his answers to the two propositions by him
propounded. And after much adoe, the Iesuit takes the
paper, and under the first assertion which hee had before
granted, viz. That they who teach doctrines contrarie to
Gods word, are not lawfull successors of the Apostles, hee
writes an ambiguous answer in these words: I grant, but
Catholikes doe not so.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Against this answer Master Walker excepted, that it
was an equivocation, and might bee vnderstood two
waies, either thus; I Fisher, out of my private opinion,
or for some purpose, grant this proposition to bee
true, but it is not granted by Catholikes generally; or
else thus, I grant that they who teach doctrines contrarie
to Gods word, are not true successors of the

Apostles; but Catholikes doe not so teach: If you
meane the first way, and in the first sense, you doe but
mocke us: But if you speake in the latter sense, your
answer is more than needs, and is a denying of an assumption
which I have not yet expressed, viz. That
Catholikes doe teach doctrines contrarie to the Scriptures.
If by Catholikes you understand all such as
hold the true Catholike faith, I doe not, neither will
charge them with that which you denie before hand.
But if by Catholikes you understand Papists, your
conscience doth accuse you before hand, and I will
prove that supposed assumption which you denie, to
wit, That the Papists teach doctrines contrarie to the
Scriptures.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               I pray you be not so hastie, let us come fairely and easily
to another chiefe thing, unto which I labour to bring you,
which will bee more materiall, as you shall see presently;
then taking the paper, hee writes a fourth proposition in
these words: This companie of Doctors and Pastors succeeding
one another, appointed to instruct people in all
ages, and to confirme them in faith, could not performe
their duties without being so knowne in the world, that all
men of all ages might haue recourse to them, and might
learne from them all truth, neither could they be so secret,
that all stories should bee silent of the Doctors and doctrines
taught by them in all ages.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               This proposition when Master Walker had read
with an audible voice, hee asked the Iesuit whether it
were his purpose to dispute upon it (which hee affirming)
hee answered, that it was not a fit proposition

to be disputed, because it contained a great number of
questions and equivocations, and being urged by the
Iesuit to shew his exceptions against it, hee noted
downe these particulars. First, that it is absurd to
hold, that all Pastors and Doctors lawfully succeeding
the Apostles, were knowne in the world to all men of
all ages; for there be many thousands of such Pastors
who were knowne to none but to the men of the ages
in which they lived. Secondly, it is an error to hold
that all the men of the ages in which they lived had
recourse unto them, and learned of them the truth;
for it is sufficient that their owne flocks, even the
sheepe of Christ, did know them and heare their
voice. Thirdly, men may bee true Pastors lawfully
succeeding the Apostles, though they teach not all
truth, but onely the maine points of faith necessarie
to salvation. Fourthly, such true Pastors may bee so
secret that all stories may bee silent of them, and of
their teaching and doctrine. Fifthly, though their
names and doctrines were recorded in the stories of
those ages, yet the stories now extant may be silent of
them; because some Popes, by name Gregorie the 7.
did corrupt and deface all sorts of records and writings
both civill and ecclesiasticall, which made against
their forged primacie, pride and corrupt doctrine, as
Aventine testifies, lib. 5. Annal. Boiorum. By which
meanes many ecclesiasticall stories perished, and others
are corrupted untill this day.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               To the first of these exceptions, the Iesuit yeelded, and
limited his long speech by adding immediatly after the
word (ages) this clause (in which they lived.) Concerning

the second exception, he asked this question, Whether
none but the sheepe of Christ did know the true Pastors and
heare them? It was answered, That it was enough that
they were knowne and heard by the sheepe of Christ: To
which Fisher replied, That their persecutors must needs
know them, and heare of their doctrine, or else how coula
they actually persecute them and their doctrine. Master
Walker answered, That their persecutors did not know
Christ to be the Lord of life, nor them to bee his seruants,
nor the truth of their doctrine, for then they would not have
persecuted them; onely such as in persecuting them did
sinne against the light of the holy Ghost (if there were any
such persecutors) they did know them and their doctrine.
To the third exception Fisher first yeelded, and inserted
after these words (to learne from them all truth) this
clause (in all the maine points necessary to salvation)
and then he asked what he did understand by a maine point.
            
            
               Master Walker answered, That by a maine point he understood
that which the infallible Scriptures of the old and
new Testament doe teach to bee necessary to salvation, and
require that we should so beleeve it.
            
            To the fourth and
fifth exceptions he gave no answer, but labouring to decline
the mention of them, takes the paper and writes down
                  •
                a
cavilling demand, concerning the maine points necessary to
salvation, in these words: Name what particular points
these are, or give a generall definition, by which all sorts
even of Protestants shall agree to be such. Which when
Master Walker had read, he answered to this effect.
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Now Mr. Fisher you doe shew your selfe in your
colours what you are indeed, and what I have ever
since I first knew you suspected you to be, even a very

idle wrangling Sophister, unskilfull in the art of Logicke,
and ignorant in the rules of disputation. First,
if you demand a generall definition of a maine point
necessary to salvation, that I have given already when
I wrote downe that it was, that which the infallible
Scriptures doe teach to be necessary to salvation. But
your words are senslesse in themselues, and I cannot
tell what you meane by this clause (a definition by
which all sorts of Protestants shall agree to be such.) This
speech savours of distraction: For no sorts of Protestants
doe goe about to make themselves to agree
to be maine points of truth necessarie to salvation, we
desire only to know, beleeve, and teach such points.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               
                  Fisher thus caught in his owne net, had no other way
to winde out himselfe, but onely urged Master Walker to
name all the particular points which the Scriptures doe
teach for maine points necessarie to salvation. To which
Master Walker thus answered.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Indeed I commend your wit and wise providence:
for if you could perswade me to undertake the naming
of all such particular points, you know it would
require more time than till to morrow night, and by
this meanes you should escape without disputation,
and sleepe quietly in a whole skinne this night. But
you shall not so escape, For I doe appeale to all here
present, whether this be not a meere wrangling shift
to avoid disputation for the present. And I doe here
charge you (if your owne conscience doth not inwardly
tell you, that either your Religion is so false
that it cannot be defended; or you your selfe so unlearned

that you are unable to maintaine it) that you
doe without further delay agree to dispute with me
vpon some maine points of controuersie betweene
Protestants and Papists. If you refuse, I will tax you
for a faint hearted coward and dastard, and so esteeme
you hereafter at all times.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               But if I yeeld to dispute with you, who shall be Iudge
betweene us?
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               The chiefe judge of all shall be the word of God,
and these hearers shall judge of the forme and cariage
of our disputation, and to whom the victory doth belong.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               They know not the word of God, neither can you your
selfe certainly tell which is the true word of God.
            
            
               M. Walker.
               
               Yes, I haue it here at hand to shew (and taking out
of his pocket Plantines Hebrew Bible in octauo without
pricks, bound with a Syriacke and Greeke Testament)
Loe (saith he) here is the true word of God, even
the whole Scriptures of the old and new Testament,
in the originall tongues wherein they were first spoken
by the spirit of God, and written by his penmen.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               How doe you know that this booke is the word of God
and the originall Scriptures?
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               I know that all, not only Protestants but Papists, acknowledge
and confesse it so to be. First Papists, because
Arias Montanus a great learned Doctor of the

Church of Rome did set it forth, and Plantine a Catholike
Printer did print it, and that at the charges
of Philip the second your great Catholike King of
Spaine: so that you being a Romane Catholike cannot
(except you have cast off all shamefastnesse) but
acknowledge it for the word of God in the originall
tongues. Secondly, we Protestants are so confident
of the infallible truth of the word contained in this
booke, that we altogether build our faith and religion
upon it.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               How doe you know that Plantine printed this booke?
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Loe here the title page, where it is testified to be
printed by him at Antwerp, and the yeere of the world
according to the lesse account of the Iewish Rabbins
is here specified (with these words he shewed the book
and page to Fisher) who discerning it to be printed in
such a Character as he could not reade, put it from
him, as if he had beene afraid to looke on it. Whereupon
Master Walker began to play upon him, and taking
advantage of his ignorance, made the company
some sport, saying: What Master Fisher, are you a learned
Iesuit, and one of the Popes great champions, and
yet can you not reade this faire print? I cry you mercy,
Graecum est non potest legi: yea it is worse than so,
it is Hebrew printed in Hebrew words and letters,
which to the common sort of Popish Priests is more
terrible and dreadfull than conjuring figures. But in
good sadnesse can you not reade it? or doe you but
dissemble, Master Fisher? I am afraid by your gestures
that you are in earnest, and your countenance doth

make me so confident of your ignorance, that I will
adventure my booke upon it, and though I will not
otherwise take twenty shillings for it, yet I here before
all this company promise to give it you for your
paines, if you can but reade one sentence in it out of
the originall text. Which offer when Fisher refused,
some of the standers by laughed at him, others wondred
whether this were Fisher the Iesuit, and made a
question of it. Master Burton who had promised silence,
observing the Iesuits folly by this behaviour and
other idle speeches, told him, that he must give him
leave to laugh and not be offended, for he had by his
promise at the beginning bound himselfe from speaking,
but not from laughing.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               The Iesuit plunged into this perplexitie, thought it best
to be gone, and said that his businesse called him away, he
could stay no longer.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Mr. Walker answered, that this was an idle excuse.
For (saith he) you know Master Fisher that this day
and houre was appointed by your selfe and set apart
for disputation, and though my businesse was great, I
was forced to lay all aside for this worke, because no
other day nor time would be accepted. Therefore it is
very unlikely that any businesse should now call you
away, or that you should appoint this time for any
other imployment, except you came either in hope to
finde no adversarie which durst encounter you, or
with purpose, if any appeared, to shift off disputation
by some such device. By these and such speeches, as
also by the importunitie of the standers-by, the Iesuit

was detained, and falling into the question about the
infallible word of God, after many speeches which
passed to and fro about the originall Scriptures and
the translations, which was most authenticall, and
which translations the best and most uncorrupt and
free from grosse errors. Master Walker to cut off all
needlesse discourse about such questions, did very earnestly
demand of the Iesuit, whether he thought the
vulgar Latine translation of the Bible to be the most
pure, uncorrupt and authenticall edition of the Scriptures,
and the true word of God according to the determination
of the Councell of Trent.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               Fisher answered, that he held it to be the uncorrupt
word of God, and the most authentike edition of the
Scriptures,
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               And though I doe much dissent from you in this
opinion (saith Master Walker) and doe hold that of all
translations which are of any esteeme among Christians,
there is none so full of errors and mistakings, even
in the judgement of S. Hierome himselfe, upon whom
the Papists falsly father it: yet so far I doe approve of
it, that I doe not doubt but any learned Divine may
easily gather, teach and confirme out of it all doctrines
which are necessarie to salvation. For whatsoever necessarie
truth is omitted in one place by mis-translatiō,
it is plainly expressed in some other places of the
same, which are truly and faithfully translated. And
here I doe make a faire offer, and most equall motion
to you before all here present, viz. That I will undertake
to make a plaine confession of the Protestants

faith, and of all the articles of religion (which the
Church of England holds necessarie to salvation) in the
very words and sentences of the vulgar Latine Bible
without any materiall alteration at all, upon condition
that you (when I have made good my word and promise)
will grant and acknowledge that the confession
so made is a true confession of the true Christian faith,
and that all such articles are to be received and embraced
for articles of the true religion.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               This offer when the Iesuit refused to accept, he was
much condemned, censured and reproved by the hearers.
Wherefore to avoid all further urging in this point, and
for the escaping of more reproofe and censure, he flies backe
to the generall question concerning the word of God, and
taking a paper wrote downe his assent:
               That the word of
God comprehends in it, 1. The Scriptures. 2. Whatsoever
by good consequence is gathered from the holy Scriptures.
And withall he wrote downe this question, viz.
who must be the Iudge when the Scriptures are doubtfull,
and when the question is of the goodnesse of the consequence.
And withall he professed that for his part he held
the Church to be the Iudge, and that when the Church hath
iudged, no private man must oppose.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Mr. Walker on the other side professed, that for the
goodnesse of the consequence Logicians must judge
by reason and the rules of Logicke. And for the sense
and meaning of the doubtfull places, the Scripture is
the best expositor of it selfe, and the plaine places of it
doe give light to the places which are obscure, and
doe best expound them. And therefore every private

person, and the whole Church it selfe in matters
doubtfull must flie to the Scriptures themselves, as the
last Iudge of controversies in matters of faith and salvation.
And here he asked Master Fisher if he durst, in
this controversie, stand to the judgement of the ancient
Fathers, such as S. Augustine, Chrysostome, and
others of that ranke.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               The Iesuit answered, that he knew the Fathers were
on his side, and did altogether flie to the iudgement of the
Church in matters of faith, when any controversie did
arise.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               
                  That (said Master Walker) is most untrue, & the cō
                     trary
shall be shewed presently out of their owne writings,
set forth and printed by Papists: then calling for
two volumes, the one of S. Chrysostome upon Matthew,
the other S. Austens third Tome, both printed and set
forth by Papists, as the inscription did shew, and Fisher
could not denie: First he turnes to the Homilie of
Chrysostome upon these words of the Gospel, Math. 24.
(When you see the abomination of desolation stand in the
holy place, then let him that is in Iudea flie to the mountaines)
and shewes the Authors exposition, which was
to this effect: That when Antichrist rules and beares
sway in the holy place the Church, then all professors of
Christian religion who are in the true Iudaea, that is, Christianitie,
must flie only to the Scriptures, for they are the
mountaines upon which the Church is founded; according
to that saying of David, Her foundations are upon the
holy mountains, Psal. 87. 1. And in those daies when Antichrist
sits and succeeds in the Sea of holy Bishops, and

over-rules all, workes miracles and makes great shew of
godlinesse in hypocrisie, then the Church cannot be knowne
by succession of Pastors, nor by the miracles and holy life
of teachers, as in former ages, but only by the Scriptures.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               The answer which the Iesuit gave to this testimonie▪
was, that this could not be proved to be the worke of Chrysostome.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               More shame (said Master Walker) it is to your Doctors
and Printers, who cite places out of this booke
under the name of Chrysostome, and doe print and set
it forth in his name: but suppose it be not the worke
of Chrysostome, yet you cannot denie it to be the worke
of an ancient writer of great antiquitie, and therefore
it makes much against you being approved in the
Church so many ages. Neither shall you so escape;
For loe here in the third booke of S. Augustine, De doctrinâ
Christianâ, which was never questioned, but is
generally received and acknowledged by all, it is most
plainly taught by the learned Father, That the best
way of expounding the Scriptures is, in words which
have many significations, to observe the scope and
circumstances of the place, and thereby to expound
them; and to expound obscure places by comparing
them with other plaine places of the Scriptures, which
speake of the same matter and subject. Then hee
shewed the words to Fisher, and read them in Latine
to him, who could not deny them, but heard them
read with much impatiencie, as his gestures shewed;
but when he began to expound them in English to the
people there present, the Iesuit could not containe

himselfe, but said; Away, this is nothing to the purpose,
we will examine these things some other time.
And when words would not prevaile, hee reacheth
with his hands to the booke, and did strive to shut it,
that the words might not bee read; notwithstanding
Master Walker held it by strong hand, and read the
words, which when the people present did heare and
see, they confessed that Fisher was openly convinced;
some of them told him that his owne conscience did
witnesse against him, and all condemned his impudencie
joined with most intolerable and desperate
obstinacie.
               The Iesuit thus condemned on all sides, and not
able to outface the matter any longer, did make shew
as if he stood vpon coales, and would gladly be gone,
and his Disciple who brought him thither, being ready
to helpe him at a dead lift, when hee saw him so confounded,
calls vpon him to remember the place which
they were to goe unto, whereupon they made haste to
depart, but by much importunitie were staied, and
Master Walker still urging him to propound and prosecute
one argument upon any question of controversie
before they parted; he answered, that now there
was no time, but promised to dispute at some other
time. At length, out of an earnest desire to draw one
argument from the Iesuit, he offered to him this advantage,
That if for the iustifying of any point or article
of the Romish religion, hee would make a perfect syllogisme
in moode and figure, and presently upon the
deniall of any of the premises, second it with a prosyllogisme,
not failing in forme, to prove and conclude
the proposition denied, the point or article so farre

proved, should for this one time bee yeelded to him,
and he should haue libertie to make his best advantage
of it, for the justifying of any other point of Poperie
which hee would presently dispute upon. But all this
could not prevaile to wring one syllogisme from him,
which made the hearers thinke that hee had no art nor
skill to make an argument: And that they did not
thinke amisse nor erre in their opinion, appeared by
that which followed; for although hee durst not undertake,
during the time of the conference, to make
one syllogisme, or to propound an argument in forme,
yet at the breaking up, when hee was ready to depart,
he tooke his paper and wrote downe and gave to Master
Walker, desiring him to answer at leasure this argument
which followeth, and which is yet to be shewed
under his owne hand, though perhaps to men of
judgement it may seeme incredible that any Priest or
Iesuit of his name and note, should be so absurd, as to
propound for a syllogisme such a confused speech,
without forme, moode or figure: It runnes word for
word thus; That Church which beginning with Christ,
and his Apostles, hath visibly professed in all ages that faith
(which Christ and his Apostles taught) without change in
any point necessarie to salvation, is that Church whose
judgement is to bee followed, and no private man must oppose
his judgement against it. There must bee one such
Church in all ages. But no such Protestants can be shewed.
This syllogisme no doubt will appeare (as it is in
forme) very absurd to all the judicious, who shall
heare of it, or reade it: And yet the author thereof (if
we consider either the time when, or the manner how
he propounded it) was therein farre more absurd and

ridiculous. For hee delivered it for an argument of
such force and strength, that it was not to be answered
but at leasure, and upon much studie and meditation.
Yea, hee wrote it downe, after that every point and
tittle therein, which requires any answer, had beene
by the present adversarie Master Walker, there at that
time abundantly answered, to the full satisfaction of
the hearers (as they confessed.) For after Master Walker
had fairely offered, and earnestly urged that all controversies
of religion which were betweene them,
might be tried, first, by the originall Scriptures; secondly,
by the sincere writings of the ancient Fathers;
thirdly, by disputation in strict syllogismes: and
all these were refused and rejected by the Iesuit, as is
before related; They who were present, wondering
at him, and some of them asking him, whether he had
any ground of his faith and religion, besides his owne
sense and will.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               He answered, that he would bee judged by the Church.
For (said hee) when the Church hath judged, no private
man must oppose his judgement. And this I made a Protestant
Preacher confesse heretofore in a conference, and
that under his owne hand.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Master Walker answered, that the Church of God
never judgeth (as it is a true Church) but by the Word
of God in the holy Scriptures; and as it is said of a just
Iudge in a Common-wealth, that hee is Lex loquens,
so it is said of every true and faithfull Church, that it
is Scriptura loquens, The speaking Scripture. Now
against this judgement of the Church no private man

must oppose his judgement, that is, his owne private
opinion: for all singular opinions of private men are
vaine errors; if they were true they could not bee
singular, seeing all truths necessarie to salvation taught
in the Scriptures, are common to all the faithfull.
Therefore the Protestant Preacher which you named,
did grant nothing but the truth, from which you can
picke no advantage to helpe you; for you, when you
appeale to the judgement of the Church, doe in many
things differ from this truth. First, by the Church you
understand no other Church but the Church of Rome,
that whore of Babylon, your owne mother; and your
appealing to her to be the judge of your Religion, is
as if a Bastard should seeke to be judged by the whore
his mother, whether hee be lawfully begotten, which
he knowes shee will affirme and judge him to bee for
her owne credit. Secondly, you rest on her judgement
in the maine principles of Religion, which are already
most plainly and infallibly determined in the holy
Scriptures, and in which no Christian truly sanctified
and regenerate, being growne up to yeeres of discretion,
and well read in the Scriptures, needeth the judgement
of any other judge, besides the Spirit of God
enlightening his heart. Thirdly, when you speake of
the judgement of the Church, you understand such a
judging power and authoritie, as doth by determining
points of faith and manners, make them true and lawfull,
whereas the true Church of God hath no power
to coine new Scriptures, or to make articles of faith,
but onely the gift of revealing, propounding and expounding
of the word of God, and the articles of
Religion, which Christ hath commended to the faithfull.

Fourthly, you require in the true Church, and attribute
to your Church of Rome such properties, as
cannot bee found in any particular Church on earth,
viz. that it hath continued in the same place, state
and condition, visibly and sensibly professing from the
daies of Christ and his Apostles, the same faith in all
points necessarie to salvation; whereas by consent of
all stories, and by manifest experience it is plaine, that
doctrines which by the Apostles were taught to the
old Romane Christians, as justification by faith without
workes, and by imputation of Christs righteousnesse,
Rom. 3. & 4. & 5. are now condemned by the
present Romish Church. And others which the Apostle
did call Doctrines of Devils, as forbidding to
marrie, and abstinence from meats, &c. 1 Tim. 4. 3.
it urgeth as necessarie to bee beleeved and obeyed for
salvation, by some persons.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               I doe hold that the Church is the chiefe judge of all controversies,
in the matters of Religion, and that all private
persons must submit to it, and not seeke to the Scriptures;
First, because the Scriptures are translated out of the originall
tongues before that private men can reade or understand
them, and the translations are not to be beleeved nor
received, but by the authoritie and approbation of the
Church. Secondly, the Church gives such authoritie to
the Scriptures, that without it we are not bound to beleeve
them, nor receive them for Gods word, according unto that
excellent profession of Saint Augustine, Non crederem
Evangelio nisi me Ecclesiae moveret authoritas; I
would not beleeve the Gospell unlesse I were thereunto
moved by the authoritie of the Church.
            
            
               
               Mr. Walker.
               
               And I answer, that all this which you say makes no
more for the Church of Rome than for any other particular
Church; for all other particular Churches
have as much authoritie in this kinde, yea, more, because
shee is more impure and corrupt than any of
them, and hath least abilitie or sinceritie to judge of the
truth. And undoubtedly Saint Austen meant not the
Church of Rome (of which hee was no member) but
rather the Church of Millaine in which he was converted.
Secondly, I say that Saint Austen in the place by
you cited, speakes by way of supposition, and not by
way of asseveration, as the learned have well observed
from the scope and circumstances of the place. Thirdly,
it is true that over-weake Christians, who are babes
in Christ, the Church in which they live and are baptized,
hath such authoritie (as you speake of) namely,
to translate the Scriptures, and to commend them for
the word of God, and for truth, and they are bound
to give credit to it therein, and not to oppose their
owne fancies and conceits. But when Christians are
growne up in grace and knowledge, and have felt by
their owne experience, the effects and worke of the
Spirit in their soules wrought by reading and hearing
of the holy Scriptures, and when not onely by the inward
testimonie of the Spirit, testifying that they are
the truth; but also by the inward heavenly comforts
and spirituall strength which they thereby and from
thence receive, doe sensibly perceive that Gods hand
is with them, and he doth in them speake to their consciences:
then they need no more the judgement of
the Church, nor of any externall judge, to assure them

that the Scriptures are Gods true infallible word; for
though all professors in the world, or an Angell from
heaven should preach and affirme the contrarie, they
will not assent unto them; but rather count them
as Anathema and accursed, as the Apostle commands,
Gal. 1. 8.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               They who are true Catholikes, and rest upon the judgement
of the Church, have as much assurance and certaintie
of the truth of the Scriptures, as is needfull, from the testimonie
of the Church; for they build vpon the rocke
against which the gates of hell cannot prevaile: But you
teach men to build their faith on their owne private spirit,
and you are lead every one of you by his owne conceit, which
is the cause of so many sects and schismes and severall
opinions among you, every one assuming to himselfe presumptuously
such an infallibilitie of judgement in matters
of faith, as doth not belong to any private man, neither
can bee attained unto by the common and vulgar sort of
Christians.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               You shew your selfe by this speech of yours to be
not onely a meere carnall man, such a one as hath never
felt the lively worke of Gods spirit in his heart, nor
tasted of the heavenly gift; but also a brutish man corrupting
that reason and darkning that light which by
nature is in you; which I will evidently shew divers
waies. First, you preferre the externall testimonie of
the Church, before the internal testimonie of Gods spirit,
and make it a more sure rocke to build on, than the
Holy Ghost who is the spirit of truth. Secondly, you
seeme to exempt and exclude the common sort of

Christians, and all private men from the communion
of the Holy Ghost, and from that gift and grace and
inward worke of the spirit, by which they are illuminated
to see, and perswaded to beleeve the truth of Gods
word every one particularly in his owne soule and
with his owne heart, contrary to the Scriptures, which
teach, that the spirit of Jehovah resting first and originally
on Christ the head, Isa. 11. 2. is from him inspired
and infused into all and every faithfull member of
his body the Church, Rom. 8. 9. in such sort, that they
are said, by that one spirit to be baptized into one bodie,
whether they be Iewes or Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and their
bodies are said to be temples of the Holy Ghost which
dwelleth in them, 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19. and by this spirit
they are said to have the gift of knowledge and faith,
1 Cor. 12. and to be led into all truth, Ioh. 16. Thirdly▪
you call the holy spirit of Christ (which we challenge
in Christ by a common right, as common to all the
elect, and which doth worke the same faith and knowledge
in every particular Christian) by the name of a
private spirit; wherein you shew most palpable ignorance
overspreading your carnall eyes, and possessing
your carnall heart. For that spirit which flowes from
that one common fountaine of all goodnesse, even
God the Father of all, and is sent forth in and through
the name of that one common Mediatour and Saviour
of the world his Sonne Iesus Christ; which is
also the same in Christ the head, and in the whole universall
bodie of the elect and faithfull, and doth worke
in all and every one particularly the same common
knowledge of the same truth, and the same common
faith in the same promised seed: And all this by no

private motions or inspirations separated from the
word of God; but onely by that common meanes,
even the word of Christ spoken by his mouth, and
written by his Prophets and Apostles in the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament; this spirit can
in no case be called a private spirit. For it is the propertie
of the Holy Ghost, the true Comforter, to
come from the Father in the Sonnes name, and to
teach the truth, and worke faith by the common rule
and meanes of the Scriptures, and not to speake of
himselfe new things which Christ had not spoken before;
but onely to speake what he hath heard, and so
to receive of Christs, and to give to us; and to lead us
into all truth by calling to our mindes the word spoken
by Christ and recorded in the Scriptures, and by
writing it in our hearts, as our Saviour plainly testifieth,
Ioh. 16. 13, 14. This spirit which is discerned by
these properties we challenge to our selves, by the
common right of the elect in Christ, and he it is who
doth testifie to our spirits, that the holy Scriptures are
the true infallible word, and doth transforme our
soules into the obedience of them, and doth worke in
us that same faith by which all the Saints have beene
justified and saved from the beginning of the world.
But now as I have shewed you, which is the true spirit
of God common to all the elect and faithfull, and that
by his properties observed from the words of Christ
our Saviour, and also that the spirit of Protestants is
that spirit: So I demand of you, whether you Papists
have any such spirit working in you that faith and
knowledge of the Scriptures, which you build on the
testimonie and authoritie of the Church. If you say

that you have no such spirit, but are led every one by
his owne sense; then are you carnall and sensuall men,
not spirituall by your owne conf
                     •
                  ssion: If you say
that you have the spirit moving every one of you particularly
to rest on the judgement of the Church of
Rome, and causing you to beleeve that the Pope cannot
erre, and that the Scriptures which he doth commend
unto you, are therefore Gods word, then I
would know of you, why that spirit so resting and
working in every particular Papist should not be esteemed
a private spirit, as well as that which works in
every Protestant.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               Your spirit is a private spirit, because he leads every one
of you into severall opinions and private interpretations
of Scripture, which have never beene received in the
Church, nor commonly acknowledged of the godly Fathers
and Doctors.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               If you have no more to say for your selfe than this,
I shall easily convince you by your owne mouth, and
prove from your owne words, that the spirit of Papists
(not the spirit of Protestants) is indeed a private
spirit. For first our spirit perswades us to receive for
Gods infallible word no other Scriptures, but those
which by the common consent of all the ancient Fathers,
and of all sorts of Christians, even of you Papists
your selves, are held for Canonicall: but you
Romanists receive divers Scriptures for Canonicali,
which by S. Hierome and other Ancients, and by all
the reformed Churches are and have beene censured
for Apocrypha; and so you are in this more private in

your opinion than we. Secondly, we Protestants build
upon no other rock but that which is common to all
the faithfull from the beginning, even God himselfe,
who is prima veritas, the first truth, and upon his word
of promise made in Christ the promised seed; and we
are founded on the Prophets and Apostles, who are
the common foundation both to all the fathers in the
old Testament, and to all Christians in the time of the
Gospell. But you build upon a new rocke, even the
Pope of Rome, whom yee call the universall Bishop
sitting in Peters chaire, a foundation which all the
faithfull forefathers before the comming of Christ
were ignorant of, and never heard or dreamed. Neither
did the first Christians in the primitive Church
for divers hundred of yeeres after Christ acknowledge
any such name or title; but even Gregorie the Great, a
Bishop of Rome, who lived 560. yeeres after Christ,
condemned it as a note of Antichrist and his forerunner,
as by his epistles is manifest. Thirdly, though
divers sects of Anabaptists, Familists, and Enthusiasts,
men of fanaticall spirits, have growne up like tares in
the field of the reformed Churches, who follow their
owne private fancies, imaginations, and divers inspirations
of Satan, which have no warrant from the
Scriptures, but are contrary to the written word: yet
they are not of us, we renounce their society, and expell
them out of our Churches, and say of them as the
Apostle did, 1 Ioh. 2. 19. They went out from us, but they
were not of us. And as for the interpretations of some
obscure Scriptures, which Luther, Calvin, and other
learned men have lately found out, and doe finde out
daily, which were not knowne of old nor commonly

received; we embrace them not for novelty, nor because
they are singular, nor for the authoritie of the
expositors themselves; but because we finde them to
be agreeable to the originall text, and to other plaine
places of the same Scriptures, and to containe the old
and common doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles and
Prophets, which hath beene beleeved and embraced
in all ages of all true Christians: But a great number
of the articles of the Romish religion concerning
Image-worship, Canonization of Saints, Purgatorie,
Pardons, Indulgences, Transubstantiation, Massing, sacrificing
for the dead, and such like, they are builded
vpon private visions, apparitions, dreames, imaginations
and fancies of Friers, and upon singular inspirations
of Monks, and other doating persons slavishly
devoted to your superstitions, so that the Popish spirit
is indeed the same with the private fanaticall spirit of
Anabaptists and Enthusiasts, as plaine reason and experience
doe shew.
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               
               The Iesuit taking little pleasure in the hearing of these
things, made great shew of a desire to breake off, and to
be gone, onely he put on a bold and impudent face to deride
the opinion of Protestants concerning the gift of the spirit;
by which particular Christians are enabled to know and beleeve
the Scriptures, and to be fully perswaded and assured
of the truth and true meaning of them: And as for you
(saith he to Master Walker) it is well for you that you
have such an infallible spirit which doth enable you to discerne
the word of God, and doth more assure you of the
truth thereof, than the publike testimonie of the Church.

But pardon us if we hold it doubtfull, seeing we have no
more but your owne word for it.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               Yea and I will have your word professing the same
of your selfe also, or else I will make you appeare to
all here present, to be void of all true Christianitie.
First, you shall see that all your scoffs shall not make
me ashamed to professe and to proclaime the grace
and gift which God hath given me for the knowledge
of his word, and how I come to know it by the worke
of his spirit. Secondly, I will urge you upon your
conscience, to answer me whether you have experience
and feeling of the same grace in you. That which
I can with a good conscience testifie of my selfe, I
hold to be no singular gift, but a grace common to all
true Christians, and it is this: First, I confesse that I
was borne of Christian parents, and my father and
mother who tenderly loved me, and were also of me
dearely beloved, did teach me the first principles of
religion from my infancie, and did tell me that the
holy Scriptures contained in that Bible which was
read and expounded in our Church were the true
word of God; I being not able to judge of it my selfe,
beleeved it so to be upon their word and authoritie
for the reverent respect and esteeme which I had of
them. Afterwards they caused me to frequent the
Church, and to heare that word read and expounded
by learned Preachers, and told me that I ought to beleeve
what I heard out of it preached in the Church;
and so I did: for I beleeved the Preachers publishing
that word, in so much that partly by their exhortations,

and partly out of a care which I had of my
soules health, and in a desire of Gods favour and
blessings which were thereunto promised, I did
even from my youth give my minde to reade and
learne the Scriptures. Howsoever I must confesse,
that at the first and in my childish yeeres, I did finde
but little savour & sweetnesse in the most profitable
parts of the Scriptures; such as Davids Psalmes, Salomons
Proverbs, the bookes of the Prophets, the
Epistles of the Apostles, and such like; yea though
I beleeved that they were Gods word: yet by reason
of my naturall corruption, I did take more pleasure
and delight in Poeticall fables and feigned histories,
which did feed my corruption, and were a
kinde of fuell to my sinfull lusts and vanities. Neverthelesse
whether it was mine owne conscience
urging me, or the spirit of God which moved me,
I cannot certainly tell; but sure I am, that still I
did upon the testimonie and authoritie of my Parents
and Teachers, reverence the Scriptures as
Gods word, and force my selfe to reade them contrary
to my rebellious nature; and at length when I
came to more ripe yeeres: I found that the word
which was most opposite and distastfull to my sinfu
                     •
                  l
corruption, did worke upon me most strongly
and effectually, which is an infallible token of Gods
hand in it, and a sure signe of the divine power and
supernaturall excellencie thereof, I felt the promises
of the Gospell, and the words of the Prophets
and Apostles which before had little relish, begin
by Gods grace to be most sweet and comfortable

in all crosses and afflictions, and to be most profitable
by strengthning me with the spirit of prayer
and faith against temptations, by mortifying my
fleshly corruptions, and by reforming my life; so
that I began to rejoyce in the Scriptures, more than
in any earthly treasures, and did devote my selfe to
the studie of them; and now partly upon the testimonie
of Gods spirit witnessing inwardly with my
spirit, and partly upon the sense and experience
which I have of the power of them in overcomming
my naturall corruptions, as it were against my
will; and partly upon that particular sight and
knowledge which I have of the glory and divine
Majestie shining in them, I am so confident and
assured, that they are Gods most holy and infallible
word, that my conscience tels me, I had rather
forgoe all the world, and my dearest bloud and bodily
life, than denie the truth of them. Yea if the
Church and Teachers which perswaded me first to
receive them for Gods word, should fall away by
apostasie, forsweare and denie them, or any part of
them; or if any Angell from heaven should teach
the contrary, I would count them accursed, as the
Apostle enjoines me, Gal. 1. 8. And now I can say
to the Church and my Teachers, as the Samaritans
did to the woman who brought them to Christ:
Loe I have heretofore beleeved the Scriptures to
be Gods word upon your testimonie and authoritie;
but now I see with mine owne eyes, I have the
inward testimonie of Gods spirit, and feele by
powerfull effects and by experience in my selfe▪
                  
that these Scriptures are Gods holy word, and the
power of God to salvation. This (I freely confesse)
is my knowledge and perswasion of Gods word,
which by these degrees I have attained unto. And
I daily have experience and evident signes of the
same grace in all other Christians, with whom I
doe converse familiarly. Now therefore in the second
place, I charge you before God and upon
your conscience to answer directly and plainly before
this people here present, whether you have
experience of the same grace in you, and whether
you have by these degrees o
                     •
                   any of them attained
to this full assurance of knowledge and understanding
of the Scriptures?
            
            
               Mr. Fisher.
               What is that to you, whether I have or have not? Or
what if I hold it needlesse to assume so much unto my
selfe?
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               It is very necessarie that you should doe either
the one or the other. And whether you confesse or
denie, you are taken and ensnared. If you say that
you have experience of this grace in you, and of
this gift and testimonie of the spirit, then you are
plainly convinced by your owne mouth of wilfull
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, in that you
have denied, contradicted, derided, and scoffed at

that worke of his in the Saints of God, of which
worke you have experience in your owne soule.
But if you confesse that you never felt this order
and worke of grace in you, and that your faith is
nothing but an implicit beleeving of the Scriptures
upon the Churches testimonie and authoritie, without
any sense or experience of the power and vertue
thereof in your soule, and that you blindly and
desperatly cast your selfe on the Church, without
any particular discerning of the truth of the Scriptures,
or any inward testimonie of the spirit; then
it is certaine (to say the best) that you are yet a
babe in Christianitie, and Christ Iesus is not yet
formed in you. Yea I feare that you are worse
than so: for (if after so many yeeres studie of Divinitie,
and so long continuance in the publike calling
of a Priest, and teacher of others) you be
found not onely destitute and void of this necessarie
grace of a Christian; but also an opposer and
gainesayer of it, and a scorner of such as professe it;
we cannot but deeme you a very Atheist and sonne
of Belial, in whom is verified, that which S. Paul
foretold of the slaves of Antichrist, 2 Thess. 2. 12.
viz. That God should send them strong delusions, that
they should beleeve lies; and be damned, not beleeving
the truth, but having pleasure in unrighteousnesse.
Also that which is testified by S. Iude of such reprobates,
who are of old ordained to condemnation,
viz. That they speake evill of those things which
they know not, and whatsoever things they know naturally,
as beasts which are without reason in those

things they corrupt themselves, and that they are corrupt
trees, and without fruit, twise dead and plucked
up by the roots, and raging waves of the sea foaming
out their owne shame, and wandring starres to whom
is reserved the blacknesse of darknesse for ever.
               
            
            
               Mr. Fisher
               You are very sharpe and uncharitable in your judgement;
but it is no matter what you say; neither will
I argue more with you at this present, for it is time for
us to depart.
            
            
               Mr. Walker.
               
               I doe not judge you but by your owne mouth,
and by the infallible word of God, and from henceforth
I leave you to the judgement of God, and to
the censure of all here present, who have heard you
at this time; onely thus much I must tell you, that
I doe manifestly discerne by your cariage, speeches,
and behaviour, your evill conscience, and that you
doe dolo malo wilfully oppose the truth, and factiously
cleave to the Romish religion. For all here
present have seene that you refuse, and are afraid to
be tried either by Scriptures, or Fathers, or disputation,
and reason, or by the spirit of God, which
you would never doe so openly to your shame, if
your conscience did not tell you, that they are all
against you in the speciall articles of your religion
wherein you dissent from us.
            
            To this divers of

them who were present gave their assent, and professed
that they were exceedingly deceived in their
opinion of Fisher, wondering that one so vaine and
ridiculous, as he shewed himselfe, should dare to
undertake the defence of his religion face to face
against any learned man, before any understanding
hearers; or that any should be either so foolish and
blinde, as to be seduced by him, or so impudent
and void of iudgement, as to give him the name
and report of a learned man, or to number him
among subtle disputants. And one among the rest
calling unto the Iesuit, asked him very earnestly,
whether he were indeed that Fisher the Iesuit who
disputed with Doctor White before the King, which
when he acknowledged;
            
               Surely (said the man) I
should never have beleeved it if any other had told
me so; for it could never have sunke into my
minde, that any of your name and report should be
so absurd and ridiculous, as you have here shewed
your selfe. For I see that neither the Originall
Scriptures, nor your owne translation of them, nor
the Fathers, nor disputation and argument are of
any account with you. Doe you thinke that any
man will be so foolish, as to beleeve you, who have
no ground but your owne word and will? But now
I am glad that you have given me iust occasion, as
to abhorre your religion more than ever before,
and to esteeme you a vaine wrangler of no judgement:
so also to stop the mouth of some of my
kinred, who are of your religion, and great admirers
of your person, and praisers of your learning,

by reporting and testifying unto them concerning
you, what I have seene with mine eyes, and
heard with mine eares this day.
            
            But the thing
which did most astonish the beholders was, the
desperate behaviour of the Popish Novice, the procurer
of this meeting, who did in the time of this
conference most lively expresse the slavish nature
of a seduced Romane Catholike, to whom God
hath sent strong delusion, to cleave to lies, and to
reject the truth. For he did most manifestly shew,
(as the standers by well observed) that he came
with a full purpose and resolution, and an heart
and forehead hardned to scoffe, deride and gainesay
whatsoever was said against the minde of his
ghostly father Fisher the Iesuit, whether good
or bad; and to extoll and admire with most intemperate
noise and clamour, whatsoever Fisher
did averre, without regard of right or wrong,
truth or falshood. In so much, that one time
when Master Walker had spoken something which
seemed to give content to the hearers, and they
openly applauded, and the Novice (as his manner
was) scoffing at the speech, said to his younger
brother, and others neere unto him, that he never
heard a more absurd and foolish reason, and that
any childe might answer it: Master Walker overhearing,
urged him to tell wherein the absurditie
and foolishnesse of his reason did consist, and
what it was: But he was not able to repeat one
word, so that all the hearers laughed, and condemned
him for an headstrong foole, in speaking

evill of that, which he neither knew, nor cared
to understand. But all this could not bridle his
tongue, nor make his impudent face ashamed. For
a little after, when Master Fisher the Iesuit was
speaking something, which Master Walker seemed
to sleight, and to smile at, the popish Novice spake
out in a passion more loud than ordinary to his brothers,
and others about him: Loe there is an argument
to the purpose, which I warrant you
can never be answered by the best of your Ministers;
let him answer it if he can. Which Master
Walker noting, turned once more to the Novice,
and desired him to repeat that strong argument, or
if he could not doe that, to tell the meaning or the
matter of it; but hee was not able to repeat a word,
nor to tell what was the matter in hand, which
made the beholders astonished at his desperate impudencie
and wilfull blindnesse; in so much that
some sharply rebuked him to his face, others blamed
Fisher for nuzling him up, and suffering him
to goe on in such notorious impudencie and wilfull
blindnesse, and divers did not sticke to say,
that they never saw nor heard of such a dangerous
example, and that undoubtedly they perceived this
Novice to be so devillishly addicted and devoted
to his Master Fisher, that if Fisher would blaspheme
the name of Iesus Christ, this Novice would iustifie
his blasphemie, and maintaine it unto death. And
thus the conference ended. But at the breaking
up, the Iesuit gave in writing to be answered at leysure,
the confused speech before mentioned. And

Master Walker wrote downe an argument, which he
gave to him to be considered and directly answered
in writing upon mature deliberation. The
summe of the Argument was this.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           That Church which hath the chiefe properties of the
great whore of Babylon, mentioned Revel. 17. is undoubtedly
that great whore, and the Church of Antichrist.
                           The present Church of Rome now subject to the
Pope, hath those properties,
                           
                              ergo it is the great whore.
                        
                        
                           The assumption confirmed.
                           These following are the chiefe properties of the
great whore. First, shee must bee such a Church as
being once most famous and renowned over all the
faithfull Spouse of Christ, hath by degrees fallen
away into spirituall whordome, that is, Idolatrie
and Image-worship: for the Scriptures doe never
stile by the name of whore any Citie or Church,
but such as thus fall away.
                           Secondly, shee must still hold her visible succession
of Bishops in the same place and Sea, and professe
her selfe the chiefe spouse of Christ, while she
commits Idolatrie in the Churches of Christ, and
mingles it with his outward and verball worship,
and while hee doth by persecution sacrifice to her
God Molech, such children, as she, by meanes of the
Scriptures and some parts of his worship, which
shee still after a sort retaineth, hath begotten and
borne to Christ.
                           
                              
Thirdly, shee must bee the mother of whoredomes,
by assuming to her selfe the power to canonize
for Saints whom she pleaseth, and to authorize
the worship of them and their Images: and by
obtruding upon the Churches of other nations,
Cities and Countries her formes of idolatrous
worship.
                           Now there is no Church or Citie in the world
which hath, or can have these properties, but onely
the present Church and Sea of Rome. 1. For she
was for faith renowned in all the world, as Saint
Paul, Rom. 1. and many of the ancient Fathers in
their writings doe shew. 2. And she now continuing
her visible succession of Bishops ever since the
Apostles, in the same place and Sea, is become a
worshipper of Images, which is Idolatrie, as all the
world may see and observe. 3. And though shee
doth challenge to her selfe the authoritie to canonize
Saints, and to authorize all Image-worship,
going a whoring from Christ her first love, after his
pretended Vicar the Pope, and his superstitions,
and obtruding upon all nations her abominations:
yet she still glories in the name of the chiefe spouse
of Christ, and under shew and colour of zeale and
love to him, doth persecute and murder such godly
men as (being converted to Christ by those meanes
of Christianitie which shee still retaineth) doe reprove
and rebuke her for Idolatrie, superstition,
and other vices; as Ierusalem did when shee was a
great spirituall whore and adultresse, Ezech. 16.
Therefore the present Church of Rome, now subject

to the Pope, hath the chiefe properties of the
great whore of Babylon, and by consequence is
that great Babylonish whore, and the Church of
Antichrist:
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            This argument being to this effect delivered
in writing to the Iesuit, hee departed, and
hath not yet returned an answer. Onely hee sent
within a few daies after to Master Walker, by his
disciple above mentioned, certaine propositions
which hee commonly carries about him as the
chiefe weapons of his warfare, and by which
he doth provoke and challenge all Protestant
Divines with whom hee
doth meet in any place.
            FINIS.
         
      
   