
      
         
            
            
            To the Honorable Aſſembly of Commons in houſe of Parliament.
            The humble Petition of the Waggoners or Carriers of the Cities of Oxford, Cambridge, Norwich, Colcheſter, Northhampton, and other Townes and places within this Realme. And alſo of the Clothiers and Tradeſ-men vſing traffique and commerce in the ſaid Townes and places.
            Humbly ſhewing,
            THat the Kings Maieſties Proclamation giuen at Winſor the ſixt day of Auguſt in the twentith yeare of his Highneſſe moſt happie Reigne ouer vs of this his Realme of England, hereunto annezed, is a great hindrance and grieuance to your Petitioners; for reliefe whereof your Petitioners about February laſt was twelue moneths, did moſt humbly petition the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie, who thereupon was graciouſly pleaſed to refer your Petitioners ſaid grieuance to the conſideration of the Lords of his Highnes moſt honorable Priuie Councell, vnto whom your Petitioners repairing with his Maieſties ſaid gracious reference, their Honours being buſied with more important affaires, had no leiſure to conſider thereof, and ſo did nothing therein.
            Wherefore your humble Petitioners being ſtill moleſted and troubled by vertue of the ſaid Proclamation if they go with their ſaid Waggons, doe moſt humbly pray and beſeech this honorable Aſſembly to receiue this their Petition into conſideration, and to reade their grieuances and allegations hereafter following, importing both a neceſſitie and conueniencie that Waggons with foure wheeles ſhould rather be in vſe then Carts with two wheeles; And to be a meanes that the ſaid Proclamation may be called in, and they at libertie to vſe their Waggons with foure wheeles as in former times, not carrying aboue twentie hundred weight the ſix moneths in the Winter ſeaſon; And they ſhall dayly pray, &c.
            
               Their Allegations.
               
                  1. Firſt, a Waggon or Drug hauing foure wheeles will ſeldome or neuer ouerthrow (whatſoeuer his loading be) becauſe when one of the wheeles doth riſe, the other doth incontinently pull him downe againe, and by that meanes the paſſengers and goods that are therein, and alſo the Driuer, are in ſafetie.
                  Where on the contrary, a Cart with two wheeles will very often (inevitably) ouerthrow, and in ouerthrowing indanger the liues of the Paſſengers, if any be therein, and ſpoile, hurt and ſoyle the goods, to the loſſe of the owners market.
               
               
                  2. A waggon by reaſon of ſuch his ſecure trauell, doth make more ſpeed on the way then a Cart, and is ſooner at his iourneys end, and therefore ſeldome or neuer much benighted.
                  Where on the contrary a Cart (for feare of being ouerthrowne) cannot make ſuch ſpeed, and ſo is inforced to trauell late in the night to accompliſh his accuſtomed iourneys, to the exceeding toyle and danger of the Carter.
               
               
                  3. By the convoy of waggons, many Paſſengers, both men, women and children, aged, lame and impotent perſons are carried to and fro, from place to place, as their occaſions driues them, drie and ſafe, and that for a ſmall charge, which otherwiſe could not ride on horſebacke, or trauell on foote, to the great eaſe and benefit of many of the Kings ſubiects, and profit to your Petitioners the Waggoners.
                  Where on the contrary, not any can be ſo convoyed in Carts, without great perill and danger of their liues, by reaſon of ouerthrowing, whereof there hath been lamentable examples of certaine perſons killed neare Ingerſtone, to the griefe of the ſubiect, and loſſe to the Waggoner.
               
               
                  4. A waggon may be guided by a ſlight and engine downe any ſteepe hill.
                  Where on the contrary a Cart cannot, and therefore is not fit for trauell in all places.
               
               
                  5. If a waggon be ſet faſt in a mire-pit, the ſame is with leſſe ſtrength drawne forth with the motion of foure wheeles, then a Cart can be with two wheeles.
               
               
                  6. A waggon with foure wheeles hauing a loade of thirtie hundred weight laid vpon the ſame, will make a leſſer cut or impreſſion in the ground then a Cart with two wheeles, hauing but twentie hundred weight; and the reaſon is, becauſe the thirtie hundred weight lying vpon the foure wheeles, viz. ſeuen hundred and a halfe vpon a wheele, and the Carts two wheeles bearing ten hundred vpon a wheele, the weight of ten hundred vpon a wheele doth cut and ſinke deeper in the ground then ſeuen hundred and a halfe.
               
               
                  7. A Cart will be driuen and turned aſide euery way, and ſo ſearch out and run ouer the whole compaſſe of the wayes, and often times in turning ſhort, doth make ſuch a ſlough or cut in the ground, that a loade of ſtones will ſcarce fill vp the ſame pit againe.
                  Where on the contrary, a Waggon cannot turne out of the way, but go ſtraight outright.
               
               
                  8. It is a hinderance to the Waggoner, and almoſt a double charge to the Merchant or tradeſ-men vſing cariage, that the Waggoner is reſtrained and limited by the ſaid Proclamation, that he may not carrie no greater loades in the Summer time, when the wayes are impreſſible, then in the Winter ſeaſon, when they are almoſt impaſſible.
               
               
                  9. For that ſince the ceſſation of Waggons with foure wheeles, and recourſe of Carts onely with two wheeles, experience ſhewes it to be true, that the roade wayes are neuer a iot bettered or preſerued, but rather worſer and impaired: therefore and for the reaſons aforeſaid, your Petitioners do humbly pray as they haue prayed.
               
               
                  Laſtly, the cauſe of the foulneſſe and badneſſe of the high wayes, is not cauſed through the recourſe of Carts and Waggons, without which the Common wealth cannot be, but for lacke of due amending and repairing in the moſt needfull places in times conuenient.
               
            
         
      
   