
      
         
            
            
            Nevves from Sea,
Of two notorious Pyrats
Ward the Englishman and Danseker
the Dutchman.
            
            VVith a true relation of all or the most
piraces by them committed vnto the sixt of
Aprill. 1609.
            
            Printed at London for N. Butter and are
to be sold at his shop, at the Signe of the
pide Bull. 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
VVorshipfull & most worthy
gent M. William
Cockin.
            
               SIr, if the greatnes of your worth
can extend it selfe to the lownes
of this discourse, or the dignitie
of your curtesie (in accepting
my loue) proue a counterscale to my presumption
and bouldnes, you shall engraue
in mens mindes the nobilitie of your humblenes,
& fortifie my endeuours to inheighten
your name and memory. To be a Patron
(although but to a begger) is the office
of a King, and to be a protector of the meanest,
I doubt not 
                  〈…〉
                well become the
Magistrate. 
                  〈…〉
                that induced me to
select you from 
                  〈…〉
                of the worthy,
whose wisedomes like firme bases are the vphoulders

of our peace, is not onely that your
merit stands transparent with the highest,
but that you being as it were ētring into the
Temple, where Iustice hath her sacrifices,
and your selfe aduancing your self vp those
degrees of dignity, at the foot of which, ofēses
shalbe corrected & the offenders cut off,
you may but in looking ouer this litle body,
be remembred, how vgly vice lookes, how
deformed she seemes without, and how
loathsome she is within: so that when the
edge of authority shalbe put into your hand,
you may giue this corruption such a blow,
that her power shallsinke, like the name of
the wicked, not worthy to be remembred,
& her sinewes be so infeebled, that she shal
neuer renue her strength to haue foot againe,
wherein if I plaid the bad workeman,
and that this picture be not drawne out to
the life, I beseech, you le
                  •
                your countinance
be as a curtaine to shade it from the contempt
of the world 
                  〈…〉
                painter is studying
how to lay 
                  〈…〉
               , the glory
of which, shall 
                  〈…〉
                vnderstanding,
and be of you receiued, as thought worthy
of your eyes.
         
         
            
            To him that desires nevves;
whosoeuer h
                  •
                be,
Or,
            TO the Reader, which is as much as to say, I
care not what he be, so he be not a Turke:
thou hast heard much talke of one captain Ward,
and I know thou desirest to vnderstand what he
is? then not to bely him (since tis a sin to bely the
deuil) he is a notable theefe, he has vndone many
of your country men, by which he giues you
warning to haue care of your selues: he has
made slaues of many poo
                  •
               e Christians, and I

                  •
               old him no good Christian, that wil blesse him
for it, To content thee, I haue heere in (white &
black inckle) hung him out to thee at Sea, who
could better haue wished to haue seene him
hang'd to death (in hemp) a shore. If thou hast a
minde to heare more of him, spend thy time on
a fewe foule papers following, an
                  •
                thou shalt
know as much as I know.
            Farwell.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Wards Skiffe when he was a
Fisherman.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Wardes first Fight
going foorth from Plimouth in a
man of Warre, & of his practises
& proceedings in the Streights,
and of his comming to
Argier.
            
               Chapter 1.
               
                  
                     THis Ward, as base 
                        •
                     n
Birth as bad in condition, in the
last yeare of her late Maiesties
raigne, gaue the first onset to his
wicked intendments: his parentage
was but mean
                     •
                  , his estate
lowe, and his hope 
                     •
                  esse. His profession
was a fisherman of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
in Kent, though 
                     〈…〉
                   would be confinde
to no limits, nor any thing 
                     •
                  ould ser
                     •
                  e him but the wide
O
                     •
                  ean to walke in. In this wicked resolution, he set
foorth from 
                     
                        •
                     euersham in a small Ca
                     •
                  ch towa
                     •
                  ds Plimouth.
               
               He stayed not long there, but he be
                     •
                  ooke himselfe to

the Streights, where lying off and on the 
                     〈…〉
                  
Cape, called Saint Vincent▪
                   he tooke a small 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of some foure score Tunne: with her m
                     •
                  king a continuance
of his course, and setting forward his 
                     •
                  icked purposes,
to the tryall of their fortunes, he tooke also another
smal vessell called a Setty: and her he brought out of the
Streights into A
                        •
                     gier, euen at that time 
                     〈◊〉
                   as the
Turkes Gallies should haue bene burnt. Howbeit the
practise tooke not effecte vpon the Turkes, but that the
Tu
                        •
                     kes ga
                     •
                  e the ouerthrowe to that assault▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
as thirteene of the English were put to death for that, attempt,
that were vnder the commaund of Captaine Gifford
an English Pirate, and some 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Wards
company at that time imprisoned also for the same fact.
               But Ward hauing gotten much money at Sea, and
greatly inricht himselfe with vnlawfull purchase by his
Setty, ioynes wth certaine Ianisaries, promises a somme
of money, and so procures the peace and inla
                     •
                  gement of
his followers. This is the first of Wards proceedings
in the Streights, till he came into the Turkish Dominions.
            
            
               Of VVards setting foorth from Argier into
the Streights, and his taking a man of
Warre of Ma
                     ••
                  a.
               Chap. 2.
               THis VVard had 
                     〈…〉
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
custome of his wicked 
                     〈◊〉
                  , had cleane taken away
the feeling of his wickednes. All his felicity was
placed in the prosecuting of mischiefe, he n
                     •
                  ither 
                     〈◊〉
                  
present death, nor feareth daungerous endurance;
or 
                     〈◊〉
                   of torments: so the Barke of his 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
but ride at Anchor, that is wasted in streames of spoyle
and r
                     •
                  ine. Euery perrill vndertaken in his vnn
                     •
                  turall
actions, seeme a pleasant to him, euery reproac
                     •
                   honorable,
euery doubt delig
                     •••
                  ome, yea the very wounds that
come by occasions of others harmes, seeme void of smart
vnto him. His life is nothing but a continuall bat
                     •
                  aile
and defiance with Christians, with whome he ought to
make his best peace. His senc
                     •
                  s are as so many swordes
that f
                     •
                  ght against him, his words so many blowes, his
deedes so many wounds.
               He stayed not long in Argier but his heart was on
fire, till he had made proofe of the fortunes of his Setty,
for he had now left the Catch he came foorth in, and made
the Setty (which he took) his man of Warr
                     •
                  : with her he
went from Argier towards the bottom of the Streights,
or about Scicillia or Malta▪
                   where vnderstanding there
was a man of VVarre of Malta set foorth on purpose to
take him, he began to bestirre himselfe, for his desires admitted
no limtiation, nor could he perswade his minde to
submit his necke to any seru
                     ••
                  e yoake. The lawe of nature
(quoth he) allowes euery man to defend himselfe being
ass
                     •
                  ild, and to withstand force by force, and in that
resolutiō opposeth himself against the force of his enemy.
Many assaults were made, and seuerall showers of shot
sent foorth on both sides, yet the forces of VVard, did so
farre disanimate the Maltan, as the edge of his courage
was cleane taken away, and forct to submit himselfe to
the mercy of his enemy. VVard that in all his intentiōs
aymd at nothing more then to strengthen himselfe with
men, munition and money, to gaine successe to his attempts
hauing gotten the vpper hand in this encounter,
made purcha
                     •
                  e of what 
                     〈◊〉
                   found, and left it to the choice
of such as were taken in her, either to be resolued to subiect
themselue
                     •
                   to his se
                     •
                  uice, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   their neckes to
the stroke of death. Of the two they rather chose the first
as hoping after a long time of enforced 
                     〈◊〉
                  , to obteine

an vne
                     •
                  pected freedome and releasement. Ward by
this purchase (the ship of Malta being welmand) did add
much 
                     •
                  ower to his former strength, and therefore 
                     •
                  ayling
from thence he bended his course to Tunis, where he intended
to 
                     〈◊〉
                   his ship, and to prouide himselfe to the
like wicked imployments.
            
            
               VVard hauing staied a while at Tunis and
victualed himselfe, sets foorth againe to Ciprus,
& takes his first Argosie of Venice.
               CHAP. 3.
               DV
                     •
                  ing the time of his stay at Tunis, his march
was still vnder the maske of vanitye, and folly at
                  
                     •
                  ended
vppon all his actions. He neuer thought on
the seruice of God, but as Traian numbred not that day
among
                     •
                  t the date of his life wherein he had not done
something worthy of memory, So he held that Nefanda
dies, wherein he did not triumph in the doing of some notable
villany. Thus as the Sea might by experience relate
his spoiles and cruelty, so the Land was 
                     •
                  n eye-witnes
of his drunkennes and idle prodigallity.
               He made no long abode there, before he put on the habit
of his former resolutions, and hauing v
                     •
                  ctualled
the said Malta man of Warre, he set forth from Tunis
to Cyprus: heere he lay ho
                     •
                  ering vp and downe for purchase,
but initium malorum haec: These are but smokes
in respect of the ansuing fires, wherewith he burnt & consumed
the goods of many Christians, for euery day he
had new inuentions for effecting his villanous attempts:
euery day new proiects to obtaine purchase: and as often
as fashions alter, so often dooth he alter his Stra
                     •
                  agems,

and hath new plots to make prey of other mens
goods and labours.
               Heere he met with his first Argosey of Venice, which
after he had subdued, being a ship of nin
                     •
                   hundreth tunne
and very rich, and that he had seased vpon her, & sworne
her men to that subiection which he did them of Malta:
he brought her to Tunis and made sale of all her goods,
Hauing by great guifts and large promises made the
great Turke so much his friend, as that he had free recourse
and liberty, to make marchādize of what purchas
                     •
                  
soeuer he got and brought into the country. And by this
also the Turkes much inriching themselues, are not a
little pleased with Wards continual concourse into those
parts. This was the first Argofey he tooke, and now being
much stronger then he was before, hauing left the
Catch in which he came from Feuersham to Plimouth,
his Pincke also, his Setty, and the Malta man of war:
he makes his Argosey his vessell of warre, and in her he
performes his other spoiles and exploits.
            
            
               Wards being in Tunis with this Argosey, and
his trauaile with her towards Candy, where he
tooke another Argosey also of Venice.
               Chap. 4.
               AT this time Ward made his continuance and ab
                     •
                  ad
in Tunis for 5. monthes, where he spent his time in
his accustomed riotous and lasciuious manner. His licentious
liberty so ouer-maistered his reason, and conquerd
the good that should remaine in the mynde and inclination
of a Christian, that the strength and power of
all vertuous or good thoughts, were taken from him, so
as he was diuerted and abased to most vile actions, cloathing

his mind with the most vgly abiliments that either
Pride, Luru
                     •
                  ie, or Cruelty can produce from the blindnes
of vnruly desires: his chiefe of trust in his practises,
was one Bishop, whome he imployed as his vice Admirall,
giuing him his full authoritie to goe forth, and bring
in prizes at his pleasure: with him one Iohn Brian of
Lyme in the west Country was maister.
               Vnder Ward, Iames Procter of Southampton, and
Iohn Frith of Plimouth were his chiefe Gunners. These
were his true and trustie associates in all his false and
wicked proceedinges: with these and with his other fellowes,
making that Argosie his man of warre, he went
againe to the souther most part of Candy, betwixt which
and the Southermost part of Cipr
                        •
                     s, he tooke his other
great Argosie, being likewise of Venice, and a vessel also
of nine hundreth tunne, or thereabouts. This Argosie
came in like maner to surprize VVard, and to repell his
forces, hauing another of lesser burthen in her company:
which he perceiuing, added a further desire to his aspiring▪
minde, and set his thoughts on worke vpon such other attempts
as he soone gaue discouragement to his aduer
                     •
                  ary,
and brought her to subiection.
               The lesser Argosie seing her to be vanquished and ouercome,
and to rest at the commaund of C
                     •
                  ptain Ward
and his company▪ gaue way to necessitie, & made a spéedy
and sodaine flight away, which the Venetians took in such
disgratious maner, as that the Maister was adiudged to
death for the same: no other infliction was thought a sufficient
punishment for forsaking his company, and lea
                  
                     •
                  ing
them to the spoile of a merciles enemy. This great
A
                     •
                  gosie he likewise brought to Tunis, making hauock of
what she had, and selling her goods, which were thought
if they had bene solde to their value, had bene worth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
score or an hundred thousand pounds.
            
            
               
               His going in on this course: His lying about
the Gulfe of Venice, where many were cast
away by foule weather
               Chap. 5.
               AFter the flight of these Venetians▪
                   and the sale of
their goods afore said, and that Ward in his consultations
had aduisd him selfe what his next course should
be, it was thought best that he should goe forth in course,
and at randon, and make pray and spoile of whome soeuer
they met. Hauing the last great Argosie of Venice his
admiral, and a fly boate of three hundred Tun, his vice
Admirall. In this resolue lying off & on, (as he did then)

                     〈◊〉
                   the gulfe of Venice, an accident be
                     •
                  el worthy note,
for example, and may be a warning in the like head strōg
and irregular enterprise
                     •
                  . The
                     •
                  e hapned a great storme,
and tempest, and the ship being ouer-charged with ordnance,
and cutting away her timber to make more 
                     〈◊〉
                  
to place ordnance, he so w
                     •
                  akned his ship, that meeting
the same foule weather, the rage of wind and Sea was
so great as his Argosey was filled with waues, her tacklings,
sails, and Anchor
                     •
                   lo
                     •
                  t▪ and the violent storme so
dashed her bulks and brused her bottom, as she was
made altogether vnfit, and vnable for resistance, and so
was sunke, and cast away. His maister was one Master
Grafton: in her there were some foure score English men
and three hundred Turkes, all drownd and that lost
theirliues. Some foure dayes before this tempest this
Ward with his liestenant 
                     •
                  ne William Graues a trūpeter

                     •
                  orsooke the great Argosey by reason that the Turks
being so manie in number, tooke vpon them to beare too
great a sway, and grew too peremptory & insolent, which

the haughtines of wards minde could not any way brook
or disgest, and went into the vice-admirall, and so saued
his life, and seapte that daunger.
               This losse was so great, that it was accounted the first
of aduersse fortunes that hapned vnto him in all his proceedings,
and it was obserued by some in his company
that were a litle better minded then the rest, & adiudged
an efficient that breathed hope and life into them if they
would leaue the pursuite of their vnlawfull li
                     •
                  ing, and
forsake their 
                     •
                  mpions and detestable courses, in which
they had béen so gracelesse and generall offenders, and
trespass
                     •
                  rs against the princes & subiects of most nations,
as Fraunce, Spaine, Italy, Germanie, Barbary &c.
               
               But ward soone changd
                     •
                   their mindes from these good
motions, for he that was so obdurat to all goodnes himselfe,
could not indure to perceiue any relenting spirits,
in others.
               
                  Graues, (his lieftenāt) was very inward with him, and
one that among the rest might doe most with him, yet
in their contentions, and falling out at their feastinges.
and Bachanals, would often reuile ward, calling hi
                     •
                  
Boore, and Oister-catcher, and vpbra
                     •
                  de him with th
                     •
                  
meane basenes of his beginning, and would often tel him
that if it should one day be his fortune to kill him (as he
thought it would) he doubted not but God would presently
send an Angell from heauen so carry him imediately
thither for depriuing the earth of such a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
creature.
            
            
               
               Sir Anthony Sherley hearing of this Ward,
sent letters vnto him to disswade him from
this detestable life.
               Chap. 6.
               SIr Anthony sherley in Iuly 1607. came from Genoa
to Naples, being in imployment from the King of
Spaine, and made his admirall for all his shipping of the
Leuant Seas, was royally feasted, and entertaynd by the
Neopolitans. From thence Sir Anthony sent his letter
to Warde, directed to Tunis (where Warde was then
resident) to disswade him from that wicked & villanous
manner of liuing, and the rath
                     •
                  r (he told him) he was
perswaded to vrge him to it for that he was his Country
man; or (which is most of al) for that he was a Christian:
alleaging the incumbent paine in the world to come for
euery Senses pleasure in this life, and pro
                     ••
                  ising to doe
the vtmost of his power, to effect his peace with al people
if he might but preuaile to call him in, or be the happy
meanes to intice him, rather to serue and beare Armes
with the christians against the Turke, then to doe the
Turk seruice, or by the robbing or spoiling of Christians
to inrich him or his dominions: But what bootes words
to deafe eares, or aleadgmēt of reason to such as are wilfully
bent to follow mischiefe? what though he be able to
tryumph in his chaines of gold, in his Iuels of pearle and
pretions stone, or his other riches wonne and got by rapine
and Theft and the spoyle of others? What though
he be able as yet to boast of freedome, when euery threed
about him, is a manifest marke of his captiuity like to
happen? and when his sence, body and minde, is seruile
to his owne sensuality? It is with him, as with those

who one the one side, by their brauery seeme great and
mighty▪ when if you consider on the other side them 
                     ••
                  auish
actions, their base and villanaus filthines, and their
dayly dr
                     •
                  dgery in 
                     •••
                  n
                     •
                  ful enterprises, you cannot but

                     •
                  eeme them extreamly miserable that are in thralled in so
h
                     •
                  uie a bōdage of con
                     •
                  cience. Wel▪ no 
                     〈◊〉
                   wold
take effect with Warde to 
                     •
                  duce him from those courses,
or to draw him to a lawful, & reguler kinde of li
                     •
                  e▪ but that
continuing his first resolutions, hee made answere that
he would giue no credit to any fayre promises, or hazard
his life on the hope of words, but would rather venture
himselfe amongst the Turks, then in to the handes of
Christians.
               
                  Dansker at this time assotiated Warde, who hauing
taken a Spanish caruiil, and vnderstanding of Sir Anthonyes
letter sent to Warde, reprehending the life he
lead, and perswading him to surcea
                     •
                  e the same, 
                     •
                  elease
                     •
                  
this caruill vnto the marchant and maister, & sets it free
againe, but vpon this Condi
                     •
                  ion and charge deliuered
vnto them by oath of the holy Sacrament: that is, that
they should tell Sir Anthony he meant to lye about the
mouth of the streights, some 2. or 3. daies if he dared to
come to remooue him. This was the pride of his minde,
this was (as he thought) a reuenge for the letter, and in
maner of a chalenge vpon the same.
               At this time also that Dancker was Wards companion,
there liued with him one Robert Roupe, Tiball Susbridge,
and one Long castle, very resolute fellowes, and
farre more sitte for better imployments: they were very
strong, and when they met together, were able to put to flight
a great fleete, and to make (as they did) much
spoile and hauocke.
               
                  Dansker liues now of himselfe, and is apart and seperate
from ward and his company: the one keepes continually
at Tunis, the other at Argier: the one robbes the
Dutch, French, Spanish, &c. and all but the English: the

other robbes the English, French, Spanish, &c. and all
but the Dutch: The cause of their seperation, is reported
to be, a breach and contention had betweene them, about
the sha
                     •
                  ing and deuiding of some spoiles and booties
that they had gotten.
            
            
               How Ward serued one Fisher of Redriffe
Maister and owner of a shippe, by whome
he sent money to his wife.
               Chap. 7.
               THere haue bene diuers and various reportes of
VVards inritching his friends, especially his wife
by sending guifts vnto her: the truth whereof is
not knowne, howbeit it may wel be perceiued and
coniectured by the estate she beares, (which is very poore)
that those reports are vntrue▪ and that he sent nothing to
his wife, or if any thing that then it 
                     •
                  aild in the carriage,
as this did which is credibly related for truth. That
Ward and Fisher meeting together in the Streights, about
September last, after many conferrences and spéeches
past betweene them. Amongst which Ward perceiued
that Fisher was bound for England, VVard deliuered
vnto him the valew of one hundreth pounds, to
be giuen to his wife, and others likewise of the company
(according to their abilities) deliuered Fisher money
for their wiues and friends vpon his faithfull promises
to see the same performed.
               
                  Fisher possest of these seuerall sommes of money, was
better fraught homewards then he made account he
should haue beene. howbeit he neglected that office and
duety that he was put in trust to do: VVard by some
meaues or other had notice of this false measure, which

he meant he should neither cary to hell nor to heauen at
their next meeting, which was not long after. For Fisher
being implo
                     •
                  ed in a Marchants ship, VVard hales
him to him in the streights, & at his comming questions
with him about his wife, and whether he had deliuered
the hundreth pounds he sent by him? Fisher affirmd
that he had, but he knowing the contrary, and charging
him with it, Fisher could not greatly deny it. VVard
thought to pay himselfe for his losse before they parted,
and made no more adoe but entred his ship, and dispossest
him of all such goods as he was fraught with,
leauing him to take what order, and to make what reckoning
he could with the Marchant, and giuing peaceable
departure to him and his company.
               This strooke Fisher into a deepe quanbary, yet hee
knew not how so mend himselfe: but after the shippes
were cleere, he began to reuile and raile against VVard
and to giue him bad and discontented speeches, which
stood not with VVards minde and resolution to brooke,
or put vp, so as he presently fitted himselfe and boorded
him againe: this encounter was worsse then the first, for
it was deadly. He was no sooner possest of him, but full
of fury and impatience, he causd him to be very vildly
handled, and after he had duc
                     •
                  t him at his yard arme,
he tooke his life also from him. The rest of Fishers company,
he gaue liberty to choose whether they would serue
him, or follow the way their Maister went before them.
The fellowes in this case of extremitie, knew not well
which part to take, 
                     •
                  or that in them both they found doubt
and danger, yet at last resolued vpon the first, and so being
sworne to be true vnto him, he gaue them admittance
and entectainement.
            
            
               
               How Warde made lawes for the gouerment
of his shipp, and was the first breaker of them,
vppon which arose a mutiny.
               Chap. 8
               HIs lawes were, that in seuerall places in his
ships, there should be wine sould, as familiarly as
there is in Tauerns on land: but with this law
(which himselfe made) that if any one in his Drunkennes,
or otherwise falling out, should kill or stab any man
in that disorder, he should presently be bound to the dead
mans backe, and both cast into the Sea. The law-maker
was heere the lawe breaker for in the fury of his heat,
in drincking he sodainly stabd one West a maisters mate
in the ship: vpon which some thee score of his other men
knowing the daunger of their owne estates, if they
should passe that abuse without exceptiō, began a daungerousmutinie
against him: & plainly tould him, yt they
would be no longer vnder his commaund, and did absolut
                     ••
                  ly
refuse to follow those head strong cources and detestable
plotts which he had practised, respecting nothing,
but to satisfie his longing hopes, and cruell condition Perfas,
aut nefas, by any wayes
                     •
                   o meanes whatsoeuer.
               
                  Warde was much perplext with the contemptuous and
vnruly behauiour of his men in his owne shipp
                     •
                  , and
first vsed threats and menaces befitting his place and
commaund: but the mutiny being amongst so many, he
thought he did but adde fuell to that fyre, that raged so

                     •
                  reiu the mindes & tongues of his mutinous company, so

that he was inforct at last to leaue all extent of the authority
of a commaunder, and as a common and priuate
person with continuance vnanswerable to his minds,
in milde termes to intreat them to desist, and surce
                     •
                  se
their impatience: vowing amendment and satisfaction,
for what his ouer sight had committed rashly: which appeased
them all for that time, howbeit it was like to haue
proued very daungerous to their generall estate, had
not good words so easily pacified it.
            
            
               How he reiected Longcastle that cal'd him
to prayers in a time of tempest.
               Chap. 9
               
                  WArd and his company being thus againe
incorporated, and as it were mixt together
in one opinion of r
                     •
                  ot and disorder,
pampering and fatting themselues
with the poyson of their soules, began
to put on another resolution of purchace,
and spoile, in any Coast, or by any preposterous course
whatsoeuer. And ryding to that purpose in the
streights vnder Saracota, there fell a great storme
of lightning, and thunder, by which foule weather,
he was put from all Cables, and anchors but one: notwithstanding
which extremitie of Tempest, he was
deeply drinking in his accustomed manner. They al perc
                     •
                  iued
they were in imm
                     •
                  nent daunger, and there vpon
one Longcastle a then follower of his, and some others

likewise of his company called him to goe to prayers, as
nessessity of the time required but such were his distempered
passions, and the frantick errours of his owne wil,
bent all to mischie
                     •
                  e, that the heat thereof in flames, with
burning ordor, and 
                     •
                  ete the soule on fire to persue all
things that are farth
                     •
                  st from God and goodnesse, and
neerest vnto those thinge that ar
                     •
                  opposit and cotrary vnto
reason: he bad them pray that would, for his owne
part he neither feared God nor the deuill.
               Thus was his heart hardned with sinne, neither
willing nor able to imbrace any godly or wholsome
aduice or counsell.
            
            
               Of his strength of ships at Sea, the maner
of his guard, and how he came
to Tunis.
               Chap. 10.
               HE hauing growne very rich by the spoyle of many
Nations, crept into their fauours by his often
comming to Tunis to make sale of such goods
as he made wrongfull purchace of at Sea, which
liberty he had by all fol
                     •
                  eration, and allowance from the
Turke, so as he might goe and come at his pleasure,
for they had them at such prises, as they made great
profit of them, in so much as the Vice roy of Tunis gaue
him a large peece of groūd, that somtimes before was an
old Castle, and all the stone that belonged vnto it: vpon
which it is reported he hath built a very stately house,

farre more fit for a Prince, then a pirate: By Sea he is
said so be of the strength of three or foure and twenty
sayle of shippes: he is guarded at Sea in a Cabbin with
a doubleguard of 12. Turkes, alwayes standing at his
cabin doore, in the name of his Court a guard: His respect
and regarde is reported to be such with the
Turke, as he is made equall in estimation with the Bashaw.
               
               But these honoures are like letters written in the sand,
which are blowne away with euery gust of winde, and
in the end shall proue sorwes to his heart, being paynd
with a thousand passions, and 
                     •
                  tung with a continuall
gnawing of conscience, for committing so may impieties,
and doing such open wrongs and iniuries, to many thousands
of men, women and children, whome hee
hath brought to vnrecouerable distresse, by his
rapines, spoyles, and robberyes.
               
            
            
               NEVVES FROM SEA,
OF WARD THE PIRATE.
OR
A Letter sent from the Masters
of certaine Ships, to their worshipfull Owners
the Marchants of London: of what hath happened
by him, and his Confederates, since the
sixth of Aprill. 1609.
               
               
                  BEING by you imployed (our
right worshipfull Masters) in
your seuerall shippes, called the
Charitie, and the Pearle of London,
for your seuerall ventures
beyond the St
                        •
                     eights, wherein
we were bound, aswell to offer
our bodies and liues, to enlarge
our owne fortunes, as to increase
your possessions; and hauing found for a reasonable
season our V
                     •
                  yage to sueceed so prosper
                     •
                  usly, that
it gaue vs encouragement to goe on, euen to the vtmost
of our Commission: wee now your more carefull (although
at that time your most cheerefull) seruants, at
Grand Malliga, had laid our Paper ready, and with our
Pens full of that Iuce, to haue registred Letters, at the

reading of which your heart should haue tickled wi
                     •
                  h
ioy: so inconstant is Fortune, so transitorie is the state
of man, so mutable are the seasons, and so lamentable
are the trauels of poore Sea-
                     •
                  aring m
                     •
                  n, That Tempora
m
                        •
                     tan
                        •
                     ur, & nos mutamur cum illis. And from L
                        •
                     sborne
we are now inforced to write, and we must intreat
you with patience to read, of nothing but of the
worlds Period makers, Death and Destinie: of sorrow
insteed of prosperons successe: of our lamentation
at Sea, insteed of bringing profite to shoare: and of dire
                     ••
                  ing
teares to the eyes of our wines, who were ordained
as fathers for the féeding of our children.
               Yet least I should to much discomfort you in the beginning,
that it should prooue burthensome vnto you to
read he acci
                     •
                  ents of the end; we will in this, play the
Phisitions with you, who giue a milde preparatiue,
before a sower potion: wherein wee promise vnto you,
that although our fortunes haue happened to bée m
                     •
                  st
wretched, yet are they not in the halfe degrée so miserable
as our neighbours. For whereas of English, French,
Dutch, Spanish, Italian, nay, euen of all Christian nations,
they haue lost all that euer they were Owners of,
and their bodies condemned to perpetuall slaueris: Yet
happēs 
                     〈◊〉
                   not so desperate with vs, notwithstanding we
were held in chase th
                     •
                  ice, and taken twise, whereby we
lost all we might eall our own: since we are by the grace
and leaue of God to vs, bringing home our selues, and
part of that we had in charge of yours. The trueth and
manner how, I pray you, thus vnderstand.
               The 15. of March last past, we put out of the Ro
                     •
                  e of
Aucona, and according to our English Prouerbe, transported
our selues from foorth a safe 
                     •
                  ay, to an infortunate
Sea; so that hauing a faire and prosperous
winde, in 
                     〈◊〉
                   daies we cleared out of the mouth of the
Gulfe, when presently (although it prooued otherwise)
we thought it hapines, to méet M. Lewes of Lime-house,
                  
in the Pearle (which was M. Patisons) withwhom (as
reioycing one at anothers company) for the safety of all,
we desired to be conforted; so that both consenting, with
this flattering winde, that neuer forsooke vs vntill wee
anchored sa
                     •
                  e, as high as Caithagenia, néere adioyning
to Cape Paul, & by the aduantage of which, we had run
in 15 dates almost 500 leagues with a Leuant, which is
as much as to expresse to him that vnderstands not the
word is, when the winde is Northeast; and as they call
it a Penent, when it blowes Southeast: a thing in these
seaes chansing, is by all and the best Marriners accounted
very rare and wonderfull, which prosperous & hopefull
promising passage, was by all of vs accounted to be
of great aduantage, since that nothing could happen (although
with much industry desired) that might stand
mor auaileable to the furtherance of our Veiage to good
effect.
               But it is a saying no lesse common, then commonly
prooued true, that many things happen betwéen the cup
and the lip, man purposeth and God disposeth: that who
trus
                     •
                  s himselfe vpon the pinacles of fortune, is most readiest
to fall vnder the tempest of ruine: that when good
hap and hope, health and wealth are at the highest, and
like the glorious morning Sunne is vp early to awake
vs, with the promise of a delightfull day, yet euen then
immediately, by the ouercharging of the clowds, the day
is ouercast and our expectation frustrate, the Sun hath
forsooke his promise to lend vs his beames; calmenesse
is turnd to tempests, & the fairnes we had but hope on,
is turned to fearfulnes we had proofe once, euen such
was our hopefull estate, & so sudden was our alteration.
For hauing gotten with this faire wind so high as Cape
Paul, the winde presently began to be more duller and
calme, and shortly after to chop vp westerly (which was
against vs) when neither hands nor mindes being idle
we plyed it off on the Cape, as the winde would giue vs

leaue for our best aduantage. In which paines hauing
spent some time, and being that day the third of Aprill,
at length we discried thrée saile of ships, whom we after
prooued to be confederates of Wards; & within 2. houres
after, perceiued without any amazement (as yet hauing
no cause to mistrust them, that they had vs in chase,
but in the effect they being cleane vessels, by which it
appeared they were newly come out of harbor, & which
helped them to be of better speed, then our consort the
Pearl: they came first vp to him, and in conclusion made
him strike saile, but we being of better swiftnes (& hauing
seen what they had offred, it was no boot to bid vs
make haste) so that we gaue our Vessell all the saile we
could, but to a bootles purpose, for alter long chase, they
came vp also to vs; and being ech within the vnderstanding
of the other, they called aloud to vs, and bad vs amain
for the great Turke, their Master: to whō we an
swered, that we were Englishmen and Christians, who
whilest we had either power or abilitie to resist, would
not pesantly yéeld vp our freedom to any Pagan breahing.
But what of all things we least doubted (séeing
they who hayled vs were Turkes) it was that Christians
and our Countrymen, should do seruices amongst
Infidels.
               Yet for certaine it prooued contrary, namely, that
all the Saylers and Sea faring men within these three
ships; to wit, of the Admirall, Vizeadmirall and Rear-Admirall,
were all of them Englishmen, and all are most
of them knowen to our Master M. Daniel Banister, or to
diuers of our Company.
               Namely, one Linckes Master of the Admirall.
               One Powell, of their Vize-admirall.
               And one Foxeley, an ancient man of their Rear-admirall.
               The last of which, most sternely looking vp, as sternly
told vs, that if we would not presently strike our topsaile,

thereby to shew our yéelding was immediate, they
would ley vs directly aboard with their ships & as readily
sin
                     •
                  ke vs.
               When we as resolute to repell, as our enemies were
ready to offer, boldly answered them, that if they were
as constant as their speech to lay vs aboard, we willed
them come on, for we were fitted to bid them welcome.
But such a hot intertainment should they finde, as all
the water that bare them, should hardly bring them into
a coole temper againe, béeing then indeed purposely
minded (finding little comfort by resistance, and no assurance
to escape) to burne our selues and them together.
               When they vnderstanding our intent, by the boldnesse
of our answere, compassed vs about on euery side,
with preparation to fight, and at length to sinke vs
with their ordinance, béeing so well enabled for such a
deadly purpose, as Turkish Pirats (before this our calamitie)
haue, bin neuer heard to bée so strongly furnished.
               But to our purpose, wée séeing them so ready for the
encounter, neglected nothing of the strength wee had,
to fortifie vs for our defence, some of vs managing all
things fitly veneath, whilst that others mand al things
readily aboue: euery man of vs hauing made his soule
fit for heauen, and consenting his body to a watry
graue. So that we bes
                     •
                  ch you now to conceiue, that we
had fitted our netting, 
                     •
                  ung out drablers, & that you sée
vs ready for a Sea fight, we hauing little but faithfulnesse
and courage to withstand them, and they like a violent
Sea ready to beat against an vnfortified shoare,
where the weakest must of force be ouerthrowne.
               So that as they were ready to call vpon vs in fire, and
we as furnishe
                     •
                   to make answere in flame there were
diuers Englishmen among them (whom they had taken
before) imprisoned in chaines like slaues, and condemned

to perpetuall slauerie in pitty of vs belike, finding
it vnprofitable (it should seeme) to complaine for themselues,
with teares in their eyes, which shewed they
had sorrow in their hearts, who cryed and called aloude
vnto vs (& specially to our Master, M. Banister, by name)
that as we were men, as we tendred our owne safeties:
if we had a desire to see our Countrey againe: if we had
parents to mourne for their sonnes; wiues to lament for
their husbands, or children to cry out for their fathers,
not to shoote so much as the voice of one small shot against
them: for if we did, such as was their sentence,
such should be our ends, continuall thraldom. For this
was a decrée amongst them (which they had established
should stand irreu
                     •
                  cable) that what Christian soeuer
they met, (be he of what Country soeuer) if hée submitted
it not vpon the first sommons, or durst be so hardy,
as to outdare them with the least of breath betokening
death: if he were taken he should die a slaue, if not taken,
they would s
                     ••
                  ke them in the sea. For our partes
(quoth they) we haue had our sentence, we doe 
                     •
                  eele the
affliction, we can hope for no releasment, and therefore
are compelled to be content.
               Ferre quam sor
                     •
                  em patiuntur omnes nemo recusat.
               What all suffers no man refuseth to suffer. You are
our Countrey-men, yet wée desire not your company,
although it be a comfort to thinke:
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.
               
               But we admonish you as brothers, and desire you to
remember.
               Felex quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
               We haue withstood them (as you may doe) which hath
brought vs into slauerie as you shall be. O be aduised
then, before you fall, and séeke to saue your selues before
you perish.
               But if you thinke it not necessarie to bée aduised by

our admonition: or your resolution be such, to preferre
an honourable death before a dishonorable peace, then
fight it out brauely, while you haue any refuge of life,
or that your ship hath any saf
                     •
                  tie wherwithall to swim,
since that death is the eas
                     •
                  est taske, the which you now
haue in hand.
               With which words of theirs, euen the Infidels themselues
being mooued to compassion, by which you may
iudge (séeing no other safetie but destruction) that wo
had reason to be driuen into consideration of our states,
so that after a second summōs we had parl
                     •
                  y with these
our desperate enemies, for the space of an houre, the end
and purpose was, Wether we would yéeld for our liberties,
or giue our bodies to ye Sea: when we considering
how vnequally we were matched, beeing incompassed
round about and assaulted with thrée shippes, the Admirall
carrying 30. pieces of Ordinance, and the other
two wherwith they were consorted, hauing 28. a piece:
beside sixe hundreth▪ Turkes with small shot, who are
held the best shot in the world, wée béeing but 20. men,
& our ship bearing but a 11. pieces of Ordinances, we
strucke our sailes and yéelded, holding it more discretion
to stand to their mercie for our liberties whome we
had no abilitie to confound, then desperately and wilfully
to destroy our selues, and the estate wée had of
yours, fore-seeing that by fighting wée could not purchase
our safetie, and the best of our resistance must determine
with perpetuall slauery.
               Thus after our yéelding, Sir; they presently b
                     •
                  arded
vs, & commanded that our Master, and eleuen of our
Company were carryed aboard their Admirall, where
after consultation had amongst them, and wée seuerally
dispersed into their shippes, and diuers appointed to
goe aboard of ours, it béeing almost darke when wée
were taken, we were for that night guarded, and euery
man hauing his Centinell to watch him.
               
                  
The next Mo
                     •
                  ning, the Captaines of the men of
Warre consulted, how to dispose of vs and our shippes,
where in this misfortune it fortunately fell out, that our
Master hauing in former Voyages, much vsed the
Trade of transporting of Passengers, from Argier, and
Tunis, to Alexandria, and Constantinople, hee séemed
well to be remembred by many of these Pirates (whom
more then we expected lamenting our case) inforni
                     ••
                  
their Captaine, what seruice heretofore our Master had
done to their Nation, as also what 
                     〈◊〉
                   both themselues,
and 
                     •
                  iuers of their friendes had receiued at his
hands, that our shippe was not a stranger vnto them,
for our Master had brought in her the 
                     •
                  ast Voyage, the
great 
                     •
                  ashaw of Tunis, from Constantinople to Tunis.
               
               Which fortunate accident, was one and the chiefe
cause, that you shall sée your Vessell againe, or, we our
Countrey & Families: and another, that our ship was
layden with corne, which they vtterly neglected, as a
commoditie vnworthy of them. In briefe, the 
                     •
                  nde of
their consultation was, that our shippe should bée restored:
which vnderstood by the souldiers (I beseech
you, let it not grieue you to read, what with terror wée
did behold) how they presently came aboard vs, fell violently
to ransake: pilliging our Traffick, cutting down
our Cabbens, and stanin
                     •
                   our chefts to pieces, leauing
vs nothing to call our owne, but what wee had on our
backes, they tooke away all the powder we had, sauing
what our Ordina
                     •
                  te was laden withall, leauing vs
not so much beside, 
                     〈◊〉
                   would preyne one Peece. They
bereft vs of most of our great shot, all our muskets, all
our small shot, of our match, pikes, ladles, spunges, rapiers,
swords, daggers of al necessary munition for defence
whatsoeuer: leauing nothing with vs (what necessitie
so euer should succéed) but the vaste sea, and the
vnconstant windes to defend vs.
               Neither seemed this crueltie to them sufficient, but

as they were about to lea
                     •
                  e vs, hauing as it were bethought
thē of some new encounter▪ they violently 
                     〈◊〉
                  
backe, at whose return
                     •
                   (building no great confident
                     •
                  
in the promises of Tu
                     •
                  kes and Pira
                     •
                  es) wee expected
(either slaughter or 
                     ••
                  auery▪) But contrary to our expectation
(although 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) better was their purpose,
namely so 
                     •
                  eare from vs part of our Sailes and Ta
                     •
                  klings;
to take from vs our Bée
                     •
                  e, Porke, Cables, all
our Butter, and Ch
                     •
                  ese-Rise, and Oyle so that although
they gaue vs 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ they would not leaue vs without
languishment, although they could finde in their hearts
to 
                     •
                  id vs farewell, yet they would doe the best in them
consisted, to 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs ea
                     •
                  e wée could come home. In
briefe we were left nothing to defend vs, little or nonothing
to féed vs, 
                     〈◊〉
                   enough to torment vs, so that
to your charitable considerations we submit our lamentabl
                     •
                  
cause by your selues, but to bee adiudged in what
distresse they left vs.
               But eare I shall procéede to driue you into wonder,
by relating all our succéeding accidents: I beséech you
let me with your patience to deliuer at full what hath
happened in this.
               First, you cannot forget (I am certaine) that I related
vnto you, that vppon our first yéelding, diuers of vs
wer
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   aboorde of their shippes, and many of
them (as well Turkes as English) shifted vnto ours,
euery man of vs hauing for the first night his sentinell
appointed to guarde him: where hauing little mind to
sléepe, who were in 
                     •
                  oubt euery minute to haue our
throats cut. Our purpose is to deliuer what with waking
eyes wee were witnesses of in this nights imprisonment.
The Englishmen being the first that boorded
vs▪ they 
                     〈◊〉
                   of vs with what was our lading to
whome we answered, that the whole for the Marchant
was Corne, besides we had euery one some little particuler
venture for our selues, or our friends: The which

being matters of no 
                     •
                  alew, wee desired and hoped they
would not make prey of, to which they answered it
was no way their intents, neither was it their Captain
Captaine Wards pleasure, that any priuate Sea-faring
mans venture should be any wayes hindered by him or
his confederates. Wherefore 
                     〈◊〉
                   they, least these
Turkes whome I doubt not but you haue heard to bee
cruell enough, and as the affaires with you now stand,
haue as much commaund or more than our selues?
Wherefore if you haue any thing that you would haue
defended from their gripe, deliuer it in trust to vs, and
as we are your Countrimen, while wee continue together
wee will see it faithfully reserued, and vppon your
free discharge re
                     ••
                  ored to you at full, with this pit-fall
poore birds were we caught: so yt partly with feare not
to dare to distrust them▪ and partly with hope to reserue
some what, who were certaine wée had lost all, euery
man distributed vnto them what he had, namely of our
needefull shift
                     •
                   of appar
                     •
                  ll, to witte, 
                     〈◊〉
                   and woollen,
and our Master M. Banister, who was to goe aboorde of
them, euen his whole prouision, to the stluer whistle and
Chaine about his necke, so that all that euery man had,
hee might say it was on his backe. Still hoping that
theeues might prooue to be men of their words, and that
there might be found some cōsci
                     •
                  nce in thē, because they
were our countrimen. In short this was the successe of
it, when wee found ourselues to bee discharged, euery
man began to enquire for him to whome he had deliuered,
but non est Inuentus they were stolne away in the
night, and our owne Countrymen had made vs their
Cosens. So that being thus 
                     •
                  heated of all our shift
whatsoeuer, the incurrence of which at Sea. I knowe
you need not he remembred off, wee began to complaine
vs of our wrong, to the Turkes, and implored their assistance,
who straight made vs this answere, since our
owne nation had serued vs so vneristi
                     •
                  nly, what conscience

were it in them to bee courteons vnto vs? at
which cold comfort Sir, euery man began to shrincke
already, for want of shift he knew hee should bee lowsie
before he gotte home, but Necessitas non habet legem, and
when there is no remedy to bee had, it is but bootles to
make resistance.
               By this time our master and his company (I beséech
you vnderstand) are discharged and sent backe againe
and our Consorts men put in to vs, so that when they
sawe they could take no more, they heaued vp their
hands and bad vs be gone, onely in our sight directing
our Consorts ship the pearle for Tunes.
               
               If any man shall further aske of you what entertainment
our owne Countrimen gaue vs since you had before
to vnderstand, that Master Masters make cosens,
nay all their Sea-faring men were Englishmen, truely
I must report to you they vsed vs well, I and so well
that the deuill in the habbit of a Turke, would not haue
vsed vs worse, for hauing had that which they expected,
they could by no meanes affoord vs good woordes, and
with much a 
                     〈◊〉
                   allow vs bread and water. Now if this
were not curtesie from our owne Countrimen, I hope
there is no man will erpect further 
                     •
                  uidence.
               But by the way, I beséech you to vnderstand, that
when we had proued it fer certaine, Necessitas non habet
legem, when we saw there was no remedy, but for safety
wee must submit euery one of vs so farre as the occasion
of time would permit, ende auoured to make the
best shift as he could for himselfe, which was to conuey
in secret the particuler commodities and aduentures
both of our owne and others of our especiall freindes at
home, and which purpose of ours (before they had boorded
vs) with much industry we had purchased▪
some of their déepe amongst the Corne, and ordering
some in one place, some in another, where we thought it
might 
                     •
                  e the most guarded from their search.
               
                  
But the deuill, hauing broad eyes and quicke sighted
they looke farre, and little is done that can be concealed
from him, and I hope you will not deny but these
are of his neare acquaintance, so that bee wee as charie
as ere wee could (these golla
                     ••
                  of
                     •
                  y of ro
                     •
                  gues, I dar
                     •
                  
now call them so, béeing indéede more renegad
                     •
                   than
Turkes, for what conference we had we receiued from
them in Italion) they did such ro
                     •
                  ige in euery corner,
that they were ouerlookers of all and what they did find
which they thought not vnworthy to bee contemned for
the taking, they held it discourte
                     ••
                  e to leaue it aboord, it
was vnnecessary to bewaile vnto them, this is the Marchants,
this is our own, or this is our friend
                     •
                  , for whatsoeuer
they liked and layd ha
                     •
                  ds on (béeing all 
                     〈◊〉
                  )
they cryed one to another, this is for vs, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      posse non
est esse, their will is a law, they are frée men of the Sea,
and their liberty must haue no resistance.
               In briefe, we beséech you to conceiu
                     •
                  , that you sée vs
parted, and whereas, it is continued as a comm
                     •
                  ndable
custome, for euery man to be sorry for his particuler losses,
it is now contrary with vs, for we were glad euen
to our soules when we had lost them, our eyes had bidde
them heartily farewel▪ y
                     •
                  t had we not the heart to shake
hands together, we were not a little glad when we looked
backe, and sawe them as farre a stearne as we could
descry them▪ but we were glad indéed, when we beheld
for certaine that we discerned them not at all, so that for
that night we were out of 
                     •
                  en the one of the other.
               But the morning after by breake of the day (although
to o
                     •
                  r colde comfort) wee might espye they were come
vp within a mil
                     •
                   of vs againe, in which nearenes wee
might perceiue (as they formerly had had vs,) so there
was a frenchmā had now found they had him in chase,
who first vsing the best wings he had for his escape, but

to a fruitles purpose, and after resisting them by an honourable
fight, yet to as bootles an end, for that as we
were formerly forwarned, hee would not vaile his topsaile,
and submit at their first shot: but trusting to their
owne ablenes, stoode out till they were surprised: our
eies were made witnesses that they tooke the Merchant
and the master, and hanged thē vp at their yard armes,
and as before they had sent away one of ours so they
commanded away his ship to Tunes, & made slaues of all
the rest of the company, being fourescore and foure men
in her: the pittifulnes of which spectacle, wee being in
the view of beholding, would haue compelled any but
such sated villaines, euen with teares for to haue lamented.
               Heere might you haue séene the poore captiues knéeling
for pitty, while the Conquerours triumphing ouer
them, bound them backe to backe. Heere might you
haue beheld the eies of the one full of sorrow, intreating
for compassion, whilest the other euen in their faces did

                     ••
                  éere at their calamitie, this we viewd (and not without
much pittie) had happened vnto them: this wee
knew, had we not yéelded, must haue befallen vnto vs.
Théeuing is their liuing, bloud is their exercise, tiranie
is their practise: Christians are turned Turkes, and
Turks are the sons of deuils, then what good can be expected
from them? O what a lamentation is this, that
in one minute by ye cruelty of villaines fourscore & foure
Fathers shall be b
                     •
                  rest of their sons, so many wiues be
bereft of their husbands, and no doubt so many Childrē
be dispoild of their parents: a calamitie so excéeding,
that me thinks, euen but at the report thereof, all christendome
should bee made vp into one hand for the reuenge
theirof.
               But well a day▪ this Tragedie is acted, death and slauery
vsurped vpon these Innocents, well might we pitie

them, but we knew we could no way preuaile to
their helpe, so they neither making to vs, nor w
                     •••
                  strous
to haue more a
                     •
                  qua
                     •
                  ntance with them, away
steard we for the shore, and ioyfull men we were you
must thinke, hauing now nothing to loose but our liues
where we were cleere of them the second time.
               But who is desirous to shunne Scillas doth commonly
fall vpon Caribdis, who carefully striues to auoid
a dangerous rocke, doth often fall vpon more deuouring
sa
                     •
                  ds: one mischance doth seldome or neuer come, but
there succéedes another as his inheritor, or according
to our English prouerbe, we striue out of Gods blessing
into the warme sunne; euen so it fared with vs, for the
verie next day after we had discharged our selues of bad,
we were subiect to fall into the iawes of worse, being
now most eagerly pursued by a bloudy French man of
warre, and a Pirate like the other, of whose cruelty we
had heard of so many before, that we accounted our
selues compassed euen in the armes and gripe of death,
being but c
                     •
                  me within his sight, for when the other doth
vse but to kill some, and make slaues of the rest, this vphold
it as custome to make murther of all that ere he
takes: this is not glutted with the hanging of one, two,
thrée, nay twenty, but if he happen to be at the taking of
a hundred, he bindes them back to backe, and buries thē
together.
               For two dayes and a night this French Pirate had
vs in chase, and the wind beginning to grow duller and
calme (although our shippe was of indifferent spéede)
he was come within a mile of vs, so that the neerer wée
percei
                     •
                  ed him, the neerer we iudged our selues to our
sudden destruction; it was in vaine to striue to make
shift for our bodies; for we had nothing to any purpose
wherewith to make shift withall Wherefore euery one
hauing betaken himselfe to his prayers for the good of

his soule, we were ready to offer our selues vp into the
hands of him from whom it was in vaine to expect any
mercy.
               So that being all armed with this determination,
and voide of all feare, since we had no hope whereon to
anchor our trust, yet it p
                     •
                  eased God who is the defence
of his seruants, when we least thought of helpe, when
all expectation of res
                     •
                  ue was frustrate, and when wée
had giuen our liues ouer to the ruin of their hands, and
our bodies to ye seas, to send in sight of vs fiue ships vnder
sayle, when we (although we knew not what they
were) chose rather to fall into the hands of them, whose
pursuit made no attempt against vs, than to submit our selues
vnder the crueltie of him, who so long had held
vs in chase, which to effect we made al the spéed we could
to get vp to them, & which intent of ours this Frenchman
mistrusting▪ he on the contrarie stroue as much as
in him lay to cut vs off from our purpose: but spight of
his practise, we being come within their ken, and that
we gest they might discerne our inward mystery by our
outwarde signes, wee exprest the liuely motions of distressed
men, as by kneeling on our knées, and holding
vp our hands, which they perceiuing, although not
knowing what we were, they in charity made vp to vs,
and in short time we were come within their command,
which this French-man considering, and gessing
it would not prooue much for his ease to make vp any
néerer, he sprang aloofe, and left vs.
               These Ships prooued to be foure Englishmen, and one
Fleming. But by your patience, I must giue you to vnderstand,
that vntill we had truely tasted their 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
we were as 
                     •••
                  lous of them as of any of the rest, making
a doubtfull question, whether it were possible that
truth or honesty might be met at sea.
               Of these Ships English, one was Master S
                        •
                     anley, another

was Master Humfrey; the other two Ships, the
one was of Yarmouth, and the other of Linne, at the m
                     ••
                  
                  ting
of whom, I pray you vnderstand there was no little
ioy on both sides, in them, that they had been a means
to res
                     •
                  ue their countrey-men; in vs, that they had preserued
our liues, and what was left of yours.
               But nothing is there in this world, but is transitorie
like our selues, our life is not permanent, no more is our
fortunes; we haue ioy in this m
                     •
                  nute, and sorow in
the next; we came crying into the world, and we must
goe wéeping out, all which is verified in vs, for as I
began with sorrow, so far as I can see yet, I must make
my period in sadnes: for sca
                     •
                  ce had our ioy felt an houre
of embracement, or our comfort giuen a harty sal
                     •
                  tation
the one to the other, when presently they might perceiue
our selues the third time to be had in chase by a
man of warre, and his Pinnesse, who drawing néere
vp to vs, we perceiued it was Captaine Danseker of
A
                        •
                     gier, which Ship of his is so potent in shew, that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
séemed to vs any way res
                     •
                  stlesse, for he caried 55. péeces
of Ordinance, besides 400. Turkes with small shot.
               Roome, comes he amongest the thickest of our fleet, as
if he had had power to swéepe vs away with his breath,
but when he came neere to vs, he caused his followers
to wafte vs amain with their glistering swords, threatning
tos
                     •
                  nke vs the one after the other, if at his command
we did not immediatly strike, so that we thought
we were now falling à 
                        •
                     aloa
                        •
                     peius.
               
               The first Ship they came vp into was Master Startop,
who séeing thē so strongly furnished, so laden with
Ordnance, and so powerfull in shot, he forthwith yéelded
himselfe vnto him.
               Master Humfrey and the other two Ships of Y
                        •
                     rmouth
and Lin, by this hauing got the winde of Danseker,
they steared backe againe to Master Startop, intending
their vtmost endeauour to rescue him.
               
                  
and calling aloude to him, they bid him hoyse vp his sa
                     •
                  
                  les
againe, vowing to him by the faith they ought to
their Countrey and loue to their Countrey-men, they
would neuer forsake him, they would fight for him, 
                     •
                  eskue
him, or die with him.
               But whether it were that M. Startop misliking of
their resolution, fore séeing the ouerstreng
                     ••
                   of the Dansker,
or whether he was conquered with the Dutch-mans
oath and promise, which was, that hée would neither
ransacke nor pillage any thing from him, he refused to
h
                     •
                  yst his sailes and consented to the yéelding.
               Which M. Humfrey and the rest perceiuing, and not
willing further to daunger their owne shippes, euery
man shifted for them selues, and so escaped. Our shippe,
and the Flemming were the Lée ward of the whole
Fléete, so that when he was poessed of M. Startop,
then comes he vp to vs poore v
                     •
                  nquished men, but it is a
bootelesse mention to remember you how casily it was
for him to deale with vs, who had neither powder nor other
munition to offend him.
               The first hee spoke when hée came vp to vs, was,
I command you to strike saile and follow me, and we séeing
it were a bootlesse resistance and that there was no
remedie obeyed him, onely we entreated him to be good
vnto vs, and told him that we had béene robbed by the
Tunis men of wa
                     •
                  re, Confederates with Ward, not fixe
daies before. Captaine Danseker demaunded of Master
Startop, whether the relation of our suprisall was true
or no? who constantly in our behalfe affirmed it to bée
true, when he like a proude (yet we may call him an honest)
Pirate tolde vs, that since the men of Tunis, had had
vs in hand, he scorned to rob an hospitall: to afflict where
was miserie before, or to make pray of them who had nothing
left. Onely by a Messenger commanded vs, to

shoot off thrée péeces of Ordinance as a thankes to him or
ransome for our libertie and depart: but we certifying
him, that such was the crueltie of our enemies, that wee
had not so much left whereby to gratifie his curtesie, and
answer his command, he forthwith gaue order we should
be dismist, but kept the Flemming and M. Startop.
               
               The Flemming was laden with Corne, and vpon it
lay diuers trusses and bales of rich stuffes to the valew
of twentie thousand pound, the which Stuffes hée tooke
away from them, being the Marchants goods, but not any
perticuler aduenture that was due to any priuate
man: so that this is the difference betwéene these two
Pirates, (Ward of Tunis, and Danseker of Argier:)
Ward makes prey of all and Danseker hath compassion
of some: the one contemning to be charitable to any, the
other holding it hatefull to take any thing from them,
who labour in continnall danger to maintaine their
liues. And we haue heard that the like cause as this, was
the falling out betwixt these two Pirates: for certaine
they are now at difference.
               This 
                     
                        •
                     lemming (who before wee haue spoken of)
though at the first he commanded him with him, the next
day he dismissed him and sent him after vs: but M. Startop
and his whole companie hee carryed away directly
for Argier, where what will succéed vnto them it is yet
vncertaine.
               But I must be bolde to remember you, what in this
discourse I haue omitted, that before hee left vs, some of
our confederates, men, who vpon our first taking were
discharged out of their ship, into ours of the Chari
                        •
                     ie séeing
how vncertaine was their hope, and how continuall
was their danger (since euery shippe we saw, wee must
feare to be a Pirate) they intreated of the Danseker, that
he would be pleased to set them a shoars: when hee not

onely condiscended to their request, but also gaue them
foure shillings a péece, to helpe to carry them vp into the
Countrey of Spaine.
               
               Thus to our sorrow, hauing séene our good friend
Maister Startop, and his whole Companie hoysted toward
Argier, our selues (conforted with the Dutchmā
                  )
put in at Almanika in Spaine, where we intended to repaire
vs, of what necessaries wee lacked that might furnish
vs for our better safetie home ward. The Gouernour
of which (hauing at large vnderstood what had
happened vnto vs) commaunded that wee should haue
all things that we thought needfull for vs, and offered vs
a hundred men for a safe-guard euery night, while wee
stayd there to repaire our wants, least they should come
backe, or any other of their Crue to doe vs iniury.
               But while we remained in this Harbor, repairing
our ships and 
                     ••
                  rnishing our wa
                     •
                  ts, there was Newes
brought to the Gouernour: the tenure whereof were
spread thus: That the Cr
                        •
                     simo, who at the first was but
a Ianizarie, and since aduanced by his consederacie with
Ward, is now the prime Gouernour of Tunis, That
Ward hath a while retyred him from Sea, and sendes
forth his Colleagues, as he did the fléete which surprised
vs, not minding to put himselfe to hazard againe vppon
the maine, till they can take a ship for him, shall be Owner
of thréescore péeces of Ordinance, in emulation that
Danskers beares 55. That whatsoeuer his consederates
bring in to him, they transport it for saile to Sophe,
and Sancta Cruce, 2. Port Townes, that lead vp to Morocco
and Fesse, & that while he continues in Tunis he is
not idle, but practiseth the casting of ordnāce, & in training
vp those Turkes which hee hath purchased leaue to
leauy (as it is reported of the Grand Signior) in Military
Discipline.
               
                  
Thus haue I truly del
                     ••
                  ered vnto you what hath happened
to vs at sea, by which you may iudge what difference
there is betwixt our states and yours a shea
                     •
                  e: I
haue giuen the marchant cause to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , & haue giuen him
h
                     •
                  art to strengthen himselfe for desence: Which if he

                     〈◊〉
                   not do, and not leaue till these Pirates be deprest,
they may hang vp their shippes and
bid farewell with their Traffick to
the Straights.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Catalogue of all such Shippes, as
haue beene taken by these two Pirates, Captain
Ward, and Captaine Danseker, or their Confederates,
to the sixth of Aprill. 1609.
            
            
               THe Yorke bonauenter of Hull,
of the burthen of 180. tunnes, of
whome Andrew Barker was Maister:
this ship had 15. peeces of
ordnance.
            The Troian of London, of burthen 106. tuns,
Leonard Iohnson Maister, who for shooting off
one shot, all the company were made slaues.
            The Pearle of London, of burthen 80. tuns,
William Levves Master.
            The Charitie of London, taken the Owner
M. William Megges.
            
            The Elizabeth of London of 70. tuns, laden
with oyle, from Tallon in France, Tho. Hilles, M.
            One Maister Long, in a ship of Bristol.
         
         
            
            By Danseker.
            Maister Iohn Reekes, in a great ship of London,
of burden 200. tunes, & 17. peeces of ordnance.
M. Bennet, of Tower wharffe in a ship of 80. tuns.
M. Read of Lime-house in a Flieboat of 70. tuns.
            The Charitie, the second time taken.
            M. Startop, in the Prosperous of London, of
150. tuns, laden with Muskadine.
            A Flemming in his companie; in burthen 150.
tuns laden with Corne, and other goods.
            Besides, there are many more shippes haue
beene taken by these Pirats: the names of whose
Maisters and the names of which shippes are
not yet collected to bee knowne: as for certaine,
few or no parts in our Land hath escaped free.
            As 2. from Bristole, 2. of Foy, 1. of Saltash,
2. of Plimoth, one great ship of Dartmoth, one
of Saleren, one of Douer, 3. ships of the North-countrey,
and many more there are yet abroad,
which before they can compasse our Harbour,
must if they doe escape, yet not escape without
great danger.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  The charity of M. Megs of London, taken twise
               
            
         
      
   