
      
         
            
            
            IETHRO'S
IVSTICE OF
PEACE.
            A
SERMON PREAched
at a generall Assises
held at BVRY St. EDMVNDS,
for the Countie of
Suffolke.
            
            By SAMVEL WARD Batchelour
of Diuinitie.
            LONDON,
Printed by Edw. Griffin for Iohn Marriot,
and are to bee sold at his shop, at the signe of the
white Flower-de-luce neere Fetter-lane
end in Fleet-street. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE
Sr. FRANCIS BACON
Knight, Lord Chancelor
of England, &c.
            
               WHen wee see one goe or
doe amisse, though his
feet or hands bee the
next actors and instruments
of his error: yet
wee say not, Are you lame? but, Haue
you no eyes? or, Can you not see? What
euer sweruings or stumblings any part of
the body politique makes, the blame lights
not vpon the Gentry or Comminalty, the
immediate delinquents, but on the principall
lights in Magistracy or Ministery,
               
which being as Guardians and Tutors of
the rest, should either preuent or reforme
their aberrations. And herein miserable
is the condition of these two opticke peeces,
that they are more subiect, and that
to more distempers then other inferiour
parts: yet heerein more, that being hurt,
they are more impatient of cure; not only
of searching acrimonious waters (which
yet oft are needefull) but shie of the most
soft and lawny touches: but most of all in
this, that being once extinct, they leaue a
voyd darknesse to the whole body, exposing
it to the pits of destruction. As exceeding
great on the other hand, is the
happines, honor & vse of them, if cleere
and single. For this our Nationall body,
it will little boot either to applaud the
one, or to bewaile the other: I rather wish
and looke about mee for some eye-salue,
which may help to descry and redresse, if
any thing bee amisse. And behold heere
(Right Honourable) a confection poomising
something thereto: It was prescribed
first by Iethro, whom Moses calls the

               eyes of Israel, Num. 10. 31. And newly
compounded by an Oculist, of whom as I
may not, so I need not say any thing at all.
Next vnder the sacred Fountaine of
light (the light of our Israel) I worthily
accompt your Lordship most sufficient in
law to accept, to make vse, to iudge, to patronize
it. The subiect of the booke is the
principall obiect of your office, to elect,
direct and correct inferiour Magistracy.
To which purposes, Nature, Literature
and Grace haue inabled you, that if you
should faile the worlds expectation, they
will hardly trust any other in hasle. Many
in rising haue followed the stirrop, pampered
and ietting honor not standing the
ground, but once seated haue done renownedly.
But your Lordship had neuer
any other greeces then your birth and desert;
to which, hereditary dignity hath
so gently tendred it selfe, that you haue
not let fal your name of religion in getting
vp. Therefore now you are in the top of
honour, all that know you, looke you will
bee exactly honourable. For my part,

bounden to your Lordship for a fauour
formerly receiued, greater then your Honour
knowes of, or I can expresse: I shall
leaue Iethro to be your Montoir, and my
self remain euer an humble suitor to God,
who hath made you a Iudge of conscience,
that hee would make you continue a conscionable
Iudge, improouing your place
and abilities to the best aduantage belonging
to it, the furtherance of your reckoning
at the last day.
            
               Your Honours daily
Beadsman,
NATH. WARD.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               EXOD. 18. 21. 22. 23.
               
                  Moreouer, thou shalt prouide out of all the
people able men, such as feare God, men
of truth, hating couetousnes, and place
such ouer them, to bee rulers of thousands,
and rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens.
                  And let them iudge the people at all seasons:
and it shall bee that euery great
matter they shall bring vnto thee, but
euery small matter they shall iudge: so
shall it bee easier for thy selfe, and they
shall beare the burthen with thee.
                  If thou doe this thing, and God command
thee so, then thou shalt bee able to endure,
and all this people shall also goe to
their place in peace.
               
            
            
               IF Iethro were, as the fashion
of those times, and the
nature of his stile will
beare, and (as some conceipt)
both Prince and Preist;
               Cohen. then

was hee beyond all exception, euery
way qualified; for skill, as a Iudicious
Diuine; and for experience, as an aged
Gouernour, to giue direction in
matters of Magistracy, and to cast Moses
a molde for a Politie in Israel. Sure
I am, a godly and religious man hee
was, for hee begins with prayer and
ends with sacrifice. And such as himselfe,
was his aduise, sage and holy.
And howsoeuer it passed from him at
the first vnder Gods correction, yet
afterward allowed by God and practised
by Moses, becomes of good policie,
sound diuinity; of priuate counsell,
a generall oracle: ruling for the
substance of it, all ages and persons.
            
                Venerable it is for the very antiquity
of it. What price do men set vpon
olde copies,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Ignat. ad Marian Cassob. coynes and Statues? who
passeth by a christall fountaine bearing
some ancient name or date, and
tastes not of it, though no thirst prouokes
him? Such is this, the cleare
head-spring of all ensuing brookes in

Scriture and other writers concerning
Magistracy. All those texts (which I
wish were set as a frontlet betweene
the eyes, and as a seale vpon the hearts
of all in authority) Iehosaphats charge,
2 Chro. 19. 5. Iob his character, cha. 29.
Dauids vow, Psal. 101. The scattered
Parables of Salomon, and passages of
the Prophets, cheefly that round and
smart one Isai. 33. 14. are they not all
branches of this root? In which respect
it must needes bee of soueraigne
vse for the discouering and reforming
of whatsoeuer error time hath soyled
gouernment withall. How are defaced
copies and disfigured pictures
better amended, then by reducing
them to their originall? if the pipe
faile, goe we not to the head?
            Heere is the Archetype or first 
draught of Magistracy, worthily in
this regard chosen by Iudicious Bucer
to presse vpon Edward the sixt, for the
purgation of his offices and lawes,
from the drosse and filth contracted

vnder the Romish confusion: which
considering, that worthy Iosiah of
ours tooke in such good part, and
practised with such good successe.
Yea, Moses himselfe learned in all
good literature, trained vp in Court,
the greatest Law-giuer that euer was,
and father of all Law-giuers, of the
thrice great Hermes, Lycurgus, Solon.
Plato, Iustinian, & the rest. Yea, Gods
familiar fauorite, faithfull in his house,
knowen by name and face, honoured
with miraculous power, &c. And
that at the hands of one (age and fatherhood
excepted) his inferiour. I
trust that none will dare to reiect or
sleight it of, remembring that Diuinity,
as the mistresse taketh vpon her to
direct her hand-mayd, and that the
Scripture is the best man of counsell
for the greatest Statesman in the
world: This little portion therof containing
in it more then all Lipsius his
Bee-hiue, or Machiauels Spider-web. All
which will best appeare by the opening

of this rich cabinet, and viewing
the seuerall Iewels in it, which are
these.
            
               The parts of the Text.Diuision.
               
               It first giues order for the care and 
circumspection in the choyce,
Prouide.
               
               Secondly, it directs this choyce by 
foure essentiall characters of Magistrates.

                     1. Men of ability.
                     2. Fearing God.
                     3. Men of truth.
                     4. Hating couetousnesse.
                  
               
               Thirdly, it applies these foure to 
Magistrates of all degrees, in an exact
distribution of them, by way of gradation
descending step by step, from
the highest to the lowest. And place
such ouer them to be rulers. 1. of thousands.
2. of hundreds. 3. of fifties.
4. of tens.
               
               Fourthly, it prescribes to the Magistrates,
thus qualified and chosen,
their offices; viz. to iudge the people

in the smaller causes, &c. and their
assiduity and industry therein. And
let them iudge the people at all seasons,
&c. And it shall bee that they shall bring
euery great matter to thee, but euery
small matter they shall iudge.
               
               
                  
                  Lastly, it propounds the blessed
fruit and emolument that will necessarily
ensue thereupon. First, to Moses
himselfe, So shall it be easier for thy selfe,
and they shall beare the burthen with
thee, and thou shalt bee able to endure.
Secondly, to the people, And all this
people shall goe to their place in peace.
               
                   The first point, Techezeh, Prouide,
or looke out.Circumspection. A word implying all
exactnesse and curiosity incident to
elections, as Inspection, circumspection,
inquisition, suspition, information, deliberation,
comming of Chozah, to see
or contemplate, whence the Prophets
were called Chosi, Seers. It is in a manner
translated by a word of the like
force in a businesse of the like nature.
Acts 6. 5. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , suruey the whole

body of the people, and chuse the best
you can cull out. It were somewhat
strict and strange to say, that prayer
and fasting must be vsed: And yet this
I finde practised in such cases, Acts 1.
and Numb. 27. 16. Let the Lord God
of the spirits of all flesh set a man ouer this
Congregation. Yea, Iethro himselfe
sanctified this his aduice with a prayer,
verse 19. God bee with thee. And
good reason hee should bee called to
counsell whose the iudgement is, and
whose prouidence is alwayes very
speciall in those elections, whether
sought or no. If God supravise not,
Samuel the Seer shall take seuen
wrong before one right.1 Sam. 16. Some mens
faults are palpable, and goe before election,
some are cunningly concealed
and breake not out till after. First,
therefore looke vp to God, and then
amongst the people, haue thine eyes
in thy head, all the care that may bee
will bee little enough. Say not there
are no sufficient persons, nor yet think

euery one that thinkes himselfe so, or
commonly goes for such, is sufficient:
seeke out such, and such may be
found. Looke among the Oliues,
Vines, and Fig-trees: such trees must
be climbed. Brambles will lay holde
on the sleeue for preferment. Ne fit
qui ambit. Let him neuer speede that
sues. Lay hands on none rashly. They
that are fit and able, must and will bee
sought to; yea, haled out of their ease
and priuacy into the light of employment:
the charge and danger whereof
they weighing, as well as the credit, or
gaine, and knowing them to bee callings,
will not meddle with them, till
they bee called to them. Which ambitious
Inconsiderates not being able
to ponder, much lesse to sustaine,
thrust their shoulders vnder, and either
by hooke or crooke come in, or
climbe into the chaire of honor, more
tickle then the stoole Eli brake his
necke off: whither when they haue
aspired with much trauaile and cost

they sit as in the top of a mast in feare
and hazard, and often fall with shame
& confusion. Not vnlike to some rash
youth, that hauing gotten an horse as
wilde as himselfe, with much adoe
backes him, sits him in a sweat, and
comes downe with a mischeefe.
               For the preuention of all which euils 
vnauoidably attending ambition,
lighting partly vpon the intruders
themselues, partly vpon the admitters,
but most heauily vpon the common-weale,
see how needefull Iethro's
counsell was and euer will bee; That
such be prouided, not as would haue
places, but as places should haue.
Which care, as Iethro commits to
Moses, so both the Scripture and reason
imposeth vpon the superiour Magistrate,
in whose power and place, it
is either to nominate or constitute inferiour
Authorities: and whose fault
cheefly it is, if they be otherwise then
they ought, or the people iniured in
in this kinde. How circumspect and

religious ought such to be, in the performance
of this greatest and waightiest
duty.
               
                   Vnlesse you will reply, as I feare
many a Fox doth in his bosome;
Thus indeede you haue heard it sayd
of olde, but those times were plaine,
and Iethro a simple meaning olde
man. A beaten Politician of our
times, learned in the wisdome of newer
state, and acquainted with the mysteries
of the market, that knowes how
to improoue things to the best, for his
owne time and turne, and to let the
common body shift for it selfe, would
haue proiected Moses a farre more
commodious plot, after this or the
like manner: Now you haue offices
to bestow, a faire opportunity in your
hand, to make your selfe for euer, to
raise your house, to pleasure your
friends, either proclaime it openly
or secretly, set it abroach by some
meanes or other, see who bids fairest,
waigh the sacrifices, chuse the men of

the best and greatest gifts.
               Oh gall of bitternesse, oh root of 
all euill to Church and Commonwealth,
when authorities and offices
of Iustice shall bee bought and solde,
as with a trumpet or drum to the candle
or outrope.Tanquam sub hasta. The particular branches
whereof, when I seriously consider,
I wonder not that Christ with
such zealous seuerity brake down the
bankes, and whipt out the chapmen
out of the Temple: nor that Peter
with such fiery indignation banned
Simon and his money. For if such
men and mony perish not, Kingdoms
and Churches must perish, and both
Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall Courts will
soone prooue dens of theeues.
               Whose soule bleedes not to see 
mens soules bought and solde, like
sheep at the market to euery Butcher?
of this you Lawyers much complain
against the Clergy men, for buying of
benefices: which you might doe the
more iustly, if your selues were not

often the sellers of them. I would the
fault rested onely in benefices, and
reached not into offices and ciuill
dignities. Indeede that kinde of purchase
we call not simony, it may from
his other name be fitlier stiled magick:
for by I know not what kinde of
witch-craft, men sinne by leaue and
law in these ciuill purchases. The
lawes and statutes prouided for the
remedie of the euil in some cases, tolerating
it in other, and the practise by
meanes of this allowance growing intolerable.
Some of them (as the world
reports) offices for life & at pleasure,
amounting to the rate of lands and inheritances.
               
                   I am not ignorant of the distinction
of Iudicature, trust and paines; but
are they not all offices of Iustice? doe
they not prepare to Iudicature, and
lies it not in them to guide or misguide,
to hasten or delay Iustice, &c.
which how can they freely giue,
which buy dearely.
               
                  
Doth not Bucer deale faithfully 
with his Soueraigne? Offices are not
liuings and salaries; but charges and
duties: not preferments for fauourites;
but rewards of deserts, &c.
Doth Iulius, Iustinianus, or Theodosius
their lawes giue allowance to any?
See then how prouidently Iethro prouides
against this Hemlock-root of
Iustice? out of whose prouiso I conclude
that which Augustine saw in his
time, and deere experience confirmes
in others:Aug. Lib. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   That such as prouide themselues places, and are not prouided
for them; come into them, and execute
them, not with a minde of doing
good, but domineering; not of prouiding
for others welfare, but for their
owne turnes. Let vs pray, that if it be
possible this fault may bee forgiuen
and amended.
               And not this onely, but another 
neere of kinde to this,Generality. met withall in
the very next clause of my text, Among
all the people Micol Hagnam.)
                  
Where Iethro restraines not Moses to
his owne Family, to any particular
Tribe, or to the richer sort: but requires
this freedome, as well as the
former circumspection. Generality
and impartiality being requisite to
the good being of a choyce: and limitation
and restraint the very banes of
Election; yea, contradictions to it.
As if one should say, you shall chuse
amongst twenty, but you shall chuse
this or that one: Doth he not in effect
say you shall not haue your choyce?
will a man when hee goes to Market
be confined to any shop or stall, if hee
meane to prouide the best? How
grossely is the countrey wronged and
befooled, cheefly in the choyce of
such, as into whose hands they put
their liues and lands at Parliaments,
by a kinde of Conge defliers, vsually
sent them by some of the Gentry of
the Shires, perswading (if not prescribing)
the very couple they must chuse.
Thus haue we seen Naturalls tied to a

poste with a straw, which they durst
not breake.
               This text bids you know and stand 
fast in your lawfull liberties of election,
which that you may not abuse, I
come to the second part of the Text.
            
            
               The second part.
               It teacheth you how to order and 
direct it by these foure markes following:
which I reckon as foure supporters
of the throne of Iustice, not
altogether vnlike to those foure in
Christs throne, so often mentioned in
the olde and new Testament, which
being properties of Angels, are symbolls
both of Magistrates and Ministers.
               These foure whosoeuer is compounded 
of, is a man after Gods owne
heart, and a starre in his right hand.
Hee that wants any of them, is but a
blazing comet, how high soeuer hee
seemes to soare. These will not onely
serue for the triall of such as are Candidati,
and to bee chosen: but also of

such as are inuested and already in
in place to approoue or reprooue
their condition. And for this end and
purpose, let vs vse them this day, as
foure waights of the Sanctuary, wherunto
whatsoeuer Officer heere present,
from the Iudges to the Bayliffes,
shall not answer: This Text (as the
hand-writing on the wall) shall say
vnto him from God; Thou art waighed
in the ballance, & found too light,
and thine office (at least ought to bee)
taken from thee.
            
            
               The first Character or weight.
               Abilitie.
               The first and prime marke is Abilitie
(Anishi Chaijl). So our new translation
expresseth it well in a comprehensiue
word, and so I finde it in
Scripture signifying and comprising
all the seueralls that belong to facultie
or abilitie: whereof I number first
three complementall for conveniencie;
secondly, three substantiall and
of necessitie.
               
                  
First Chaijl includes strength of body
and manhood,Strength. such as inableth
them for riding, going, sitting, watching,
and industrious execution of their
place: Such as the scripture commends
in Caleb at fourescore and fiue,
and stories in Vespasian, our Alfred,
Hardicanutus, Ironsides, &c.
               Which our straight buttoned, carpet 
and effeminate Gentry,Wealth. wanting,
cannot indure to hold out a forenoon
or afternoone sitting without a Tobacco
baite, or a game at Bowles, or
some such breathing to refresh their
bodies and mindes, litle acquainted
with the tediousnes of wise and serious
businesse: Woe to the people (saith
Salomon) whose Princes are children
and eat in the morning; and blessed are
the people whose Gouernors eat in time
and for strength. Eccles. 10.
               Secondly, neither is wealth to be
excluded: That Diana of the world,
which it onely accounts Abilitie, and
calls it opes & potentia, which yet is

better called value than valour, yet
may it concurre to make vp that
which our Law terme calls mieulx
vailiant; and though at the beame of
the Sanctuary money makes not the
man, yet it adds some mettall to the
man.
               
                   And besides there is some vse of
these trappings to the common sort,
Ad populum phaleras, which taught
Agrippa to come to the Iudgement
seat with pompe, state, and attendance,
like that of our Sheriffs not to
be neglected, as that which procures
some terror and awe in the people:
which Alexander well aduised of, left
his Gigantique armour behinde him
among the Indians, and vsed more
state then at Greece.
               
               
                   Yet remembring that these complements
without the substance are
but empty gulls and scarbuggs of maiestie,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Cassa & hordea
                        •
                     ea morionu sceptra. Chapm. Z
                        •
                     ch.
the Sophistry of gouernment, as
one calls them. And as Zachary the
Prophet saith, the instruments of a

foolish Gouernour. And such as Ieremie
derides in Shallum the sonne of
Iosiah,
                  Ierem. 22. 14. 
                  Thinkest thou to rule because of
thy large building, Cedar seeling, painted
with vermilian, did not thy Father prosper
when he did execute Iudgment and
Iustice? which is indeed the truth and
substance, th' other but the flourish.
               Thirdly, I exclude not birth and 
blood,Birth. which many times conveyes
spirit and courage with it, Blessed is the
land whose Princes are the sonnes of
Nobles.
                  Eccles. 10. 17. Eagles produce Eagles, and
Crowes Crauens, yet regeneration
and education often corrects this rule:
and experience tells vs, That cottages
and ploughes haue brought forth as
able men for the gowne and sword, as
Pallaces and Scepters.Iudg 6. 15. 
                  Gideon came
out of the poorest of the familie of
Manasse, and he the least in his fathers
house, a poore thresher. Dauid was
taken from the sheepefold &c. yet
both mighty men of valour, and
speciall Sauiours of their people. And

the wisdome of some of our neighbour
Nations is much to be commended
in this, that if they discerne an excellent
spirit and facultie in any man,
they respect not his wealth, or birth,
or profession, but chuse him into
their Magistracie and weighty imployments.
               
                   But these three are but of the by
and well being,1 Wisdome and experience. the three following of
the maine and essentiall to Magistracy,
all comprised vnder the word Chaijl,
as first wisdome and experience, which
the Preacher tels vs is better then
strength,Eccles. 9. 16. either of body or estate. And
of this ability Moses expounds this
word in his practise, Deutro. 1. 15.
which is a good Commentary vpon
his fathers aduice.
               
                   And indeede without this what is
a Magistrate,Monstrum eui lumen ademptum. but a blinde Polyphemus,
or a monster without an eye. If hee
want either skill in the lawes, or obseruation
of his owne, must hee not bee
tutored by his Clarke, as it often falls

out? or shall hee not bee misled by
some Counsellor, crossed and contradicted
by euery stander by, that shall
tell him this you cannot doe by Law,
or I take it you are besides your book.
               The second is strength of minde, to 
gouerne and manage passion and vnruly
affections,2 Moderation of minde, or equanimity which hee that weilds
at will, is stronger then hee that subdues
a city and conquers a Kingdom,
to beare and forbeare, and to order
the mutinous perturbations of the
minde, is that ability which the Grecians
call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Very requisite in a Iudge, who must 
not suffer his affection to disquiet his
iudgement and vnderstanding, in rising
at the first complaint; nor at any
accident or present miscarriage of either
party, suddenly occasioned,
which is collaterall to the cause, and
impertinent to the question, but hee
must bee patient and meeke towards
their personall weaknesse. Likewise
long-minded, to endure the rusticity

and homelinesse of common people
in giuing euidence after their plaine
fashion and faculty, in time, and multitude
of words, happily with some
absurdities of phrase or gesture, nor
impatient towards their foolish affected
eloquent termes, nor any thing
else whereby the truth of their tale
may be ghessed at.
               
                   Lastly and principally, I vnderstand
with the Geneua translation,
that fortitude,Courage or Magnanimity. valour and magnanimity,
which wee call courage and spirit;
typified in Iudah the Law-giuing
Tribe, whose embleme or scutchion
was the Lyon Couchant, that sits or
lies by the prey without feare of rescue,
that turnes not his head at the
sight of any other creature, Prou. 30.
which Salomon symbolized in the
steps of his throne adorned with Lyons:
The Athenian Iudges by sitting
in Mars-street.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Some thinke that from
this vertue Constantine was termed
Reuel. 12. the Churches male or manchilde:

others apply it to Luther: others
to Christ, the true Lyon of Iuda.
               
               And though I regard not the Salick 
Law, because the God of spirits hath
often put great spirits into that sex;
yet I mislike not Theodorets obseruation
vpon that in Leuiticus,
                  Leuit. 
                        •
                     . 22. & 27. where the
Ruler for his sinne is enioyned to offer
an hee-goat,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the priuate man a shee-goat.
The male suits the Ruler best,
and the female the ruled.
               This ability is so requisite, that it is 
often put for the onely quality, as if
this alone would serue, as in Moses
charge to Ioshua, and Dauids to Salomon.
And experience hath taught,
that where this one hath abounded,
though the other haue beene wanting
in some Magistrates: they haue done
more good seruice to their Countrey,
then many others who haue had
some tolerable measure of the rest, but
haue failed onely in this.
               Had not the principall posts of an 
house neede to be of hart of oake? are

rulers & standarts that regulate other
measures, to bee made of soft wood,
or of lead, that will bend and bow at
pleasure? doe men chuse a starting
horse to lead the teeme? had not hee
neede be of Dauids valour, and Sampsons
courage, that must take the pray
out of the Lyons mouth, and rescue
the oppressed from the man that is
too mighty for him? had not he need
to bee of some spirit and resolution,
that must neglect the displeasure and
frownes, reiect the letters and suits of
great men and superiours?
               
                   It is incredible to those that know
it not, what strength great men will
put to (especially if once interested)
for the vpholding of a rotten Alehouse,
countenancing of a disordered
retainer, &c, the resistance wherof requires
it not some spirit? had not the
braine neede to bee of a strong constitution,
that must dispell and disperse
the fumes ascending from a corrupt
liuer, stomacke, or spleene? I meane

the clamours, rumours, and sometimes
the flatteries of the vulgar,
which often intoxicate able men, and
make them as weake as water, yeelding
and giuing as Pilate, when hee
heard but a buzze that he was not Caesars
friend, and saw that in dismissing
Christ, he should displease the Iewes.
               What heroycall spirit had he neede 
haue, that must encounter the Hydra
of sinne, oppose the current of times,
and the torrent of vice, that must
turne the wheele ouer the wicked;
especially such roaring monsters, and
rebellious Chora's, such lawlesse sons
of Belial, wherwith our times swarme,
who sticke not to oppose with crest
and brest, whosoeuer stand in the way
of their humours and lusts? Surely, if
Iethro called for courage in those modest
primitiue times, and among a
people newly tamed with Aegyptian
yokes: what doe our audacious and
fore-headlesse Swaggerers require?
our lees and dregs of time; not vnlike

to those wherein God was faine to
raise vp extraordinary Iudges, to smite
hip and thigh, &c. What Atlas shall
support the state of the ruinous and
tottering world, in these perilous ends
of time?
               
                   For all these fore-named purposes,
how vnapt is a man of a soft, timorous,
and flexible nature? for whom
it is as possible to steere a right course
without sweruing to the left hand or
right, for feare or fauour, as it is for a
cock-boat to keep head against winde
and tide, without helpe of oares or
sailes: experience euer making this
good, that cowards are slaues to their
superiours, follow-fooles to their equals,
tyrants to their inferiours, and
winde-mills to popular breath, not
being able to any of these to say so
much as no.
               
                   Wherfore this text proclaimes and
speakes, as Gedeon in the eares of
all the faint-hearted. Whosoeuer is
fearefull and timorous, let him depart

from mount Gilead,
                  Iudg. 7. 3. and there departed
twenty thousand; and yet God
the second time, out of the remnant,
viz. ten thousand, defaulks all the lazie
persons, and reduced that huge
army to three hundred able persons.
               It were excellent for the Commonwealth,
if such a substraction might
bee made: and the weake-hearted
would resigne their roomes to able
men. For what haue seruile cowards
to doe with the sword of the Lord,
and Gedeon, with God and the Kings
offices.
               On the contrary, it sayth to all men 
of ability, as the Angell to Gedeon,
The Lord is with thee thou mighty man
of valour, goe on in this thy might to saue
Israel, &c. What is our office that
are Ministers, but as Gods Trumpetters
and Drummers to encourage,
hearten and put life in those that fight
his battles and doe his worke. By the
vertue then of this my text, I say to
euery good-hearted Magistrate, proceede

and goe on from strength to
strength.
               
                   And if any aske mee, who then is
sufficient for these things? or where
shall we get this strength, that are but
flesh and bloud, and men as others? I
answer with Iob,
                  Iob 28. 
                  Siluer hath his veine,
and gold his mine where it is found, iron
is taken out of the earth, and brasse moulten
out of the stone, but the place of this
ability is not to bee found in the land
of the liuing. Nature saith it is not to
be found in me; Wealth and Honor
sayes not in mee: It is falsely sayd of
Cato and Fabricius, that the Sun might
sooner be stayed or altered in his race,
then they in the course of Iustice. The
stoutest and the richest will yeeld. But
Dauid tells his sonne Salomon on his
death-bed, where hee shall finde it.
Thine,
                  1 Chron. 29. 11. & 12. 
                  o Lord, is greatnesse and power,
thou art the head of all riches, honor and
strength are in thy hands, it is in thee to
make great, &c. This God hath taught
Dauid to breake a bow of steele with

his hands: It is hee that looseth the
coller of Princes, girdeth their loines,
& vngirdeth them again, befooles the
Counsellor, the Iudge and the spokesman:
He it was that made the shooes
of Ioseph as strong as brasse, Ieremiah
as a wall of brasse, Caleb as strong at
fourescore and fiue as at forty; if
Sampsons haire be off, and God departed
from him, he is as other men, and
he can strengthen him againe without
his lockes at his pleasure.
               If any man want wisdome or 
strength, let him pray, and hee can
make him wiser then the children of
the East, and stronger then the Anakins:
wherefore bee strong in the
Lord, faint not, be not weary of well-doing,
for feare of opposition and
crossing: though in rowing this ship,
the windes blow, and the seas rage,
Christ can straight send an Halcion,
and set it on shore.
               It is the fault of many Christian Magistrates,
euer to be complaining and

groning vnder the burthen: as if ease
and delicacie were to be sought for in
gouernment. What if there be a Lyon
in the way? the righteous is bolder
then the Lyon: what if thou bee
weake? is not God strength? and doth
not hee perfect his strength in our
weaknesse? what if there be many opposites
in the way, true courage is
strong as death,Cant. 8. and will trample all
vnder feet without resistance.
               
                   Yea, but what if an host come against
thee, and as Bees encompasse
thee? true faith sees more on Gods
side then against him, euen guards of
Angels, as plainely as men doe the
Sheriffs halberts, and doubts not, but
in the name of the Lord to vanquish
them all.
               
                   One concluding place for all, out
of a Preachers mouth,Eccles. 7. 1
                        •
                     . that knew what
he sayd, wisdom strengthens one man
more then twenty mighty Potentates
that are in a city, he that feareth God
shall come foorth of all dangers.

Whence by way of passage, note that
the next poynt of the feare of God, is
that which giueth life to the fore-going,
and to the two following also:
and is placed in the text, as the heart
in the body, for conueying life to all
the parts; or as a dram of muske, perfuming
the whole box of oyntment.
            
            
               Fearing God.
               
                  Iethro must be vnderstood not of the
poore bastardly slauish feare,The second Character. which
depraued nature hath left in all: nor 
of any sudden flash of feare wrought
by word or workes, such as Felix,
Balshazzar & Caligula were not voyd
of, and yet neuer the better Magistrates:
But such a filiall feare, as faith
and the assurance of Gods loue and
saluation breeds; such as awed Ioseph,
Cornelius, Dauid, &c. This is the feare
required by Iethro, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  quae parit
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , godlinesse which breedeth an
heedfulnesse in all our wayes and
actions.
               Without this feare of God, what is 
                  
ability but the Diuels anuile, whereon
he forgeth and hammereth mischiefe?
what is wisdome but subtilty? what
is courage vnsanctified, but iniustice?
wherein is such skill in the lawes commonly
employed, but in colouring
and couering bad causes and persons,
and in making the lawes a nose of wax
to priuate ends? other men haue other
bits and restraints; but men in
authority, if they feare not God, haue
nothing else to feare. Wherefore
Christ ioynes them well in the vnrighteous
Iudge, that hee feared neither
God nor man. If hee bee a simple
coward, he feares all men, if a man of
ability, he feares none at all.
               
                   What are the nerues and sinewes
of all gouernment, the bonds and
commands of obedience, but an oath?
and what are oaths to prophane men,
but as Sampsons cords, which hee
snapt asunder, as fast as they were offered
him. The common sort of our
people count the oathes that men take

when they take offices, no other then
formall: so they distinguish them (a
strange distinction) from other oathes
of contract, and dally with them accordingly.
               They discerne God no more in
oathes, then Christ in the Sacraments:
and therefore take them, and breake
them rashly and regardlesly, which
when they haue done, the Diuell enters
into them, as into Iudas; and runs
them headlong into all periured courses:
which makes the land to mourne
for the contempt of oathes, and neglect
of duties. What is the ground of
all fidelity to King and Countrey, but
religion? welfare Constantius his maxime,
He cannot bee faithfull to mee, that
is vnfaithfull to God. Why then, what
are oathes for Atheists and Papists, other
then collers for monkies neckes,
which slip them at their pleasure? such
neither are nor can be good subiects:
muchlesse good Magistrates. Papists
will keep no faith with Protestants,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . let

Protestants giue no trust to Papists,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
though they swear vpon all the books
in the world.
               Finally, what is the principall scope
 of Magistracy in Gods intention,
whose creature and ordinance it is;
but to promote his glory, countenancing
the Gospell and the Professours
of it, safe-gard of the Church and
Common-wealth, the first and second
table, and principally the two former.
Now for all these, cheefly for the
cheefest, what cares a Cato or a Gallio,
who beares the sword in vaine for
God and his ends; who neuer minds
any thing but his owne Cabinet, or
the ship of the Common-wealth at
the best: for the other, sincke they
swim they, all is one to him, he tooke
no charge, nor will hee take notice of
them.
               
                   Wherefore I conclude, that the
feare of God is the principall part, as
of my Text, so of a good Magistrate,
whom Christ calls a Ruler in Israel,

                  Paul Gods Minister and sword-bearer:Iohn 3.
yea,Rom. 13. the very forme and soule of
such an one: yea, it troubles mee to
make it,Eccles. 12. 13. but a part which Salomon calls
the whole of a man, especially such a
man who is sent of God,1 Pet. 2. for the praise
of the godly, and the punishment of
euill doers. In which respect being
the maine of my Text, giue me leaue
to giue you a short character of such a
Magistrate, as this quality will make
him, where euer it is found in any
good latitude.
               Hee is one that came into his place 
by Gods doore, and not by the Diuels
window: when he is in, hee eyes
him that is inuisible, euen God in the
assembly of Gods: and therefore sits
on the Iudgement seat in as great,
though not in so slauish a feare of offending,
as Olanes vpon the flead skin
of his 
                     〈…〉
                  , nayled by Cambyses
on 
                     〈◊〉
                   Tribunall: or as a Russian
Iudge that feares the boiling caldron,
or open battocking: or the Turkish Senate,
                  
when they thinke the great Turke
to stand behinde the Arras, at the dangerous
doore.
               
                   Who hath alwaies, (as God enioyneth,
Deut. 17. 18.) a copy of the
law of his God before him, and reads
it all the dayes of his life, that he may
learne to feare the Lord his God, and
to keep the Commandement without
turning aside, either to the right hand
or left.
               
                   If at all he be glad of his place, it is
not as a chaire of honour, or farme
of commodity, nor sword of reuenge:
but onely as a meane of furthering his
reckoning, and pleasuring his Countrey.
For his oath, he remembers it,
and trembles, lest if carelesly he transgresse
it, the winged flying booke ouertake
him before he get home: if he
cut but the skirt or lap of Iustice, his
heart smites him with a priuy pinch,
till hee sets all right againe with God
and man. Hee dares not so much as
by countenance offend any of Gods

little ones, nor affoord a good looke
to a varlet, nor yet so to respect their
persons, as to wrong their cause; for
he knowes all these to be abhomination
to his Lord, into whose hands he
dreads to fall, as knowing him a consuming
fire, and one that hath prouided
Tophet for Princes. When an vnlawfull
suit is commenced by power
or by friendship, his heart answers
if not his tongue) with Iob: How shall
I doe this, and answer God when hee
comes to iudgement.
               
               As for bribes, hee dares not looke 
on them, lest they blinde his eyes before
he be aware: such pitch he dares
not touch, nor receiue into his bosome,
lest it defile him in the open
sunne, if tendered in closet or chamber,
he feares the timber and stones in
the wall would be witnesses against
him.
               When he comes in court, he fixeth 
his eye, neither before him on that
person, nor about him on the beholders,

nor behinde him for bribes,Summa boni Iudicu est ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      respicere, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      despicere, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      circumspicere, sed suspicere. 
                        〈◊〉
                      in Ioh. 5. 30. but
vpward on God: generally considering
that Christ is Lord Paramont of
all courts of iustice, and that now his
father hath resigned all iudgement into
his hands. Hee stewards all to his
content, promotes his profits without
wrong to the Tennant. Looks so
to the Church, that the Common-weale
receiue no detriment: and so to
the Common-wealth, as the Church
shall surely flourish: so countenancing
the seruants of God, that hee
wrong not the worst worldling:
maintaines piety, and neglects not equity:
keepes his house well, but
his Church better: in frequenting
whereof, he with his family are presidents
to all the hundreds where hee
dwells: And in a word, doth as much
good by his example, as by his authoritie.
               
                  
                  This is the godly man, whom the
Lord chuseth and guideth, whose
praise and reward is of God: which
                  
Dauid hauing found true in his life, a
little before his death, recordeth to all
ages.
                  2 Sam. 
                        〈…〉
                     . 3. 4 The spirit of the Lord spake by me,
and his word was in my tongue. The
God of Israel spake to me, the strength of
Israel sayd, thou shalt beare rule ouer
men, being iust, and ruling in the feare
of God. Euen as the morning light when
the sunne riseth, the morning, I say, without
clowds, so shall mine house be, and not
as the grasse of the earth is by the bright
raine. For God hath made with mee an
euerlasting couenant, perfect in all poynts
aud sure.
               Let the Diuell and the world storm
and burst with enuy, one of these is 
worth a thousand of the common
sort, though men will see no difference,
but say, Are not all honest and
sufficient men? Let men talke of their
quiet and peaceable neighbours, and
good house-keepers, good Common-wealths
men: though these bee good
things, yet if religion com not in, as a
number to make them of some value,

they are but all as cyphers in Gods account.
               
                   Now if God thinke of meanely of
these, who are either meere ciuill and
politique men, or idle pleasurable
Gentle-men, what reckoning doe we
thinke hee makes of such prophane
vncircumcised vice-gods (as I may in
the worst sence best terme them) that
sell themselues to worke wickednesse?
that giue themselues to all good fellowship
(as they call it) and to all
excesse of ryot (as the Apostle calls it)
and that hate to bee reformed: such I
meane as hold religion a disparagement
to Gentry, and feare nothing
more, then to haue a name that they
feare God, who thinke when they
haue gotten an office, they may swear
by authority, oppresse by licence,
drinke and swill without controll.
               
                   What shall I say of such? are these
Gods, and children of the most high,
or the characters of his most holy Image?
Diuels are they rather, then

Deputies for him, Imps of his Kingdome,
farre better becomming an
Ale-bench, then a Shire-bench, and
the barre, then a Iudgement seat.
               But what shall I say to such mock-god-like
Esau's? shall I take vp the
words of Moses: if thou wilt not feare
this glorious name, The Lord thy God,
I will make thy plagues wonderfull,
and of great continuance: Or those of
Dauid, which perhaps will sit them
better, and these times of imminent
changes, They know not, and vnderstand
nothing; they walke in darknes,
albeit the foundations of the earth be
mooued: I haue said ye are Gods, but
yee shall die like men, and fall like others.
Or will they suffer the Prophets
exhortation, who art thou that dreadest
a mortall man,Isa. 52. 8. 12. 13. whose breath is in
his nostrils, whom the moth shall eat
like a garment, and the worme like
wooll: And forgettest thy maker, that
hath spred the heauens, laid the foundations
of the earth, that giueth the

first and latter raine, that hath set the
bounds to the sea,Ier 5. 22. 24. &c. Or will they
heare Salomons end of all? Feare God,
that will bring euery secret to iudgement:
or a greater yet then Salomon,
Feare him that is able when he hath killed
the body, to destroy the soule also in
hell fire for euermore.
               
               
                   Well, the Lord cause them to
heare, that hath planted the eare: and
plant his feare in their hearts where it
is not, encrease it where it is, that there
may bee more holy Magistrates, and
that the holy may yet bee more holy.
And then we hope the other two properties
following will more abound,
and wee shall spend the lesse time and
labour about them: For men fearing
God truely, will be also
            
            
               Men of truth.
               Without which, shew of religion
 is but lying vanity:The third Character. a glorious profession,
but plaine hypocrisie: And courage,
if it bee not for the truth and in
the truth, is but either Thrasonicall

audacity, or wicked impudency. And
therefore this character added to the
former, ioynes those which are in the
forme of Iurates, and ought to bee in
all Officers, good men and true.
               
               This stile, men of truth, admits two 
interpretations, both compatible with
the text and theme. A man of truth is
either a true Israelite, a true Nathaniel
voyd of guile, as truth is opposed to
hypocrisie:
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . or else a louer of the truth,
as truth is opposed vnto falshood.
One that in particular cases, suits, and
controuersies between man and man,
counts it his honour ro sift out the
truth, maintaine the truth, sticke to it,
not suffering himselfe to be misinformed
by Tale-bearers, Promoters and
Sycophants: nor misled and peruerted
by the false pleading and colouring
of consciencelesse Counsellours:
But brings iudgement to the ballance
and rule of righteousnesse, & delights
(as the hound doth naturally in senting
out the hare) to search and trace

out the truth, out of all the thickets
and dens of iuggling and conueyance,
labouring as much to boult it out by
examination in Hypothesi, as the Philosophers
by disputations in Thesi: being
of his temper that worthily sayd,
Plato is my friend, Socrates my friend,
but the Truth is my dearest friend.
Or like Iob,
                  Iob. 29. 16. who couered himselfe
with Iustice, and to whom Iudgement
was as a robe & a crowne, who when
he knew not the cause, sought it out
diligently.
               
                   And for this purpose, a man of
truth keeps men of truth about him:
and with Dauid,
                  Psal. 101. 7. abandons all lyers
out of his houshold: whereas of a
Prince that hearkneth to lies, all his
seruants are Liers. And of such Iustice,
which is in truth and for truth,
I say (as of olde it was sayd) neither
the euening nor the morning star equalls
it in brightnesse.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
               
               
                   But withall, I must complaine as of
olde, that truth is fallen in the streets,

and vtterly perished from among
men,Isa. 54. 4. Iudgement failes and stands a
farre off, equity enters not. The common
trade of the times, being to
weaue lies in all cases, especially against
the true seruants of God. And
the common weaknesse of the times,
to receiue the slanders which are broached
and bruited by tongues set on
fire from hell: so that he that refraines
from cunning, makes himselfe a prey,
the Latin whereof was all that Lewis
the eleuenth would haue his sonne to
learne:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and is all the policy that most
study and practise. Insomuch that the
common by-words are, that when
men sweare by faith and truth, they
sweare by Idols that are not, names
they are and notions, things they are
not, nor substances: Iewels they are,
but such as vse them die beggers: honourable
Ladies and Mistresses they
are, but such as follow them close at
the heels, may haue their teeth dashed
out of their heads.
               
                  
                   Well, let deceiuers thus deceiue
themselues, let cunning heads and
glozing tongues make as much as they
will of Tiberius his Art, or the Diuells
rather, the father of the Art, of dissimulation.
In the end they shall proue
it to bee most pernicious to the Students
and Masters of it. Let the children
of truth iustifie their mother,
which hath the reward of honour in
her right hand, and of wealth in the
left. And if it should be attended with
hatred and crosses for a time, yet hee
that is Amen, the true witnesse, yea
truth it selfe, will reward them in the
end: when hee shall shut out with the
dogs, all such as loue and make lies;
with whose exhortation I close vp this
lincke, and knit with the following,
Buy the truth and sell it not, which hee
that meanes to doe must be
            
            
               A true hater of couetousnesse,
               Else will Salomons seuerall prouerbs
 meet in him.The fourth Character. Prou. 17. 4. The wicked giues heede
to the false lip, & the lier to a naughty

tongue. He taketh the gift out of the
bosome to wrest iudgement.Acceptatio muneris est preuaricatio ver
                        •
                     tatis Acceptation
of gifts prooue commonly preuarication
to the truth. It is impossible
to be a champion to Truth, and a slaue
to Mammon: but hee must loue the
one and hate the other. It is best therfore
to hate the worst, yea the worst of
all vices incident to Magistracy: the
root of all euill, which if it be not rooted
out of the Magistrates heart, it alone
will poyson all the three former
qualities required in him. Neither
strength, nor religion, nor loue of the
truth, shall bee able to preserue him
from enchantments of couetousnes.
               Which being an inordinate loue of 
money,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . an euill concupiscence of hauing
more then God hath alotted, or a
lawfull course affoordeth: is such a
kinde of Idolatry, as transformeth the
worshippers of this golden calfe into
Idolls themselues,Exod 
                        •
                     7. making them to
haue eyes that see not, eares that heare
not: only leauing them hands to handle

that which peruerteth the eyes of
the wise.Deut. 16. 19. It bores out their eyes, and
maketh them as blinde as euer was
Sampson and Zedekiah.
               
               
                   Eyes you know are tender things,
and small motes annoy them, euen
handfulls of barley and morsels of
bread make such men to transgresse:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
And a drams waight iniected, encline
the golden scoles of Iustice to which
side they please.
               
                   There is such a strange bewitching
power in Balaams deceiptfull wages,
that he that will admit them for Iustice,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
shall soone take them for iniustice:
if the right hand be full of bribes
the left hand must be full of mischiefe.
The Diuell as well as the Briber laieth
his hookes in this shrap, whereof hee
that is greedy, and will needs be rich,
falleth into his snare, and many other
noysome lusts,1 Tim. 6. which sincke men into
perdition, peirceth their soules with
sorrow, their names with reproach:
cause them to swerue from the truth,

and make shipwracke of a good conscience:
Euen the most precious
things are vile and cheap in his eyes:
to whom money is deare, he will not
sticke with Ahab to sell euen himselfe
to worke wickednesse for the compassing
of that this soule loueth and
longeth after.
               But thou oh man of God flie these 
things, and hate couetousnesse with a
perfect hatred. Hate it as Ammon did
Thamar, first thrust it out of thy heart,
and shut and locke the doore after it.
Secondly,Heb. 13. 5. let thy behauiour and conuersation
bee auerse and strange from
the loue of money.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Let all sordid
and filthy lucre be abhominable: all ill
gotten goods execrable; let them
stincke in thy nostrils, as ill as Vespasians
tribute of vrine.
               Shake thy lap of bribes with Nehemiah.
Consider as Bernard counsels 
                  Eugenius,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   How the people may grow
rich vnder thee, & not thou by them.
Remember the end of Balaams wages,

and of Iudas his bag. And wish with
Damianus rather to haue Gehazies lepry,
then his curse entailed to thee
and thy posterity, & inheritance after
thee: fretting thine estate as a canker
and moth, consuming your flesh as
fire, and crying in the eares of the
Lord of hosts for vengeance.
               
                   But what doe I making my selfe
ridiculous to this olde doting couetous
age of the world: this theme only
made the Pharisies laugh at Christ
his woes, because they were couetous:
And so doe they serue all our caueats
against couetousnesse, applauding
themselues and laughing in their
sleeues, when they behold their bags
in the chest, and their lands from off
their Turrets, saying to themselues,
What is a man but his wealth? What
is an office but the fees?
               
                   There is a text in Esay, that if Paul
had the preaching of it,Esay 33 14. hee would
make euery groping and griping Felix
to tremble, I meane such as the

Scripture termeth roaring Lions, ranging
Beares, Horse-leeches, Wolues,
deuouring all in the euening, and leauing
none till the morning: as well
Iudges that iudge for reward, and say
with shame, Bring you; such as the
Countrey calls Capon-Iustices: as also
such mercenary Lawyers, as sell
both their tongues and their silence,
their clients causes and their owne
consciences: who only keep life in the
law, so long as there is money in the
purse; and when this golden streame
ceaseth, the mill stands still, and the
case is altered: such extorting Officers
of Iustice, as inuent pullies and winches
for extraordinary fees, to the miserable
vndoing of poore suitors: such
false periured Sheriffs, Stewards of liberties
and their Deputies, as for money
falsifie their charges: such corrupted
Iurates and witnesses of the
post, which are as hammers and
swords, and sharp arrowes in their
brethrens hearts: such cheese-bayliffs

and lamb-bayliffs, as vex the
poore Countrey-men with vniust
summons to the Assises and Sessions,
with the rest of that Rabble.
               
                   These Muck-wormes of the world,
which like the Gentles breede of putrefaction,
& Beetles fed in the dung,
relishing nothing else but earthly
things: thinke there is no other godlinesse
but gaine, no happinesse but to
scrape and gather, to haue and to hold.
Let such consult shame to their houses:
let such make their offices as casting
nets for all fish that come: till
they get the Diuell and all: Let them
heap vp treasures of wickednesse and
treasures of wrath withall.
               
                   But where there is any feare of God
and loue of the truth, let Iohns counsell
preuaile with them, to bee content
with their due wages: Let Paul perswade
them, that godlinesse is gaine
with contentation: Salomon, that
Gods blessing maketh rich, and adds
no sorrow therewith: So shall they

follow Iethro's aduise the better, and
and prooue compleat Magistrates &
Officers: Men of courage, men of religion,
men of truth, hating couetousnesse.
               
               These are the foure Cardinall vertues 
of Magistrates, of which if all
were compounded, and were as eminent
for them as for their place: and
did (as the great Dictator of reason
speakes in his Politicks) as far exceede
the vulgar sort in those heroycall vertues,
as the statues of the gods, the statues
of men: then would people become
voluntary subiects, put the scepters
into their hands, and the law of
commanding and obeying become
easie, things thought irreparable
would easily be reformed.
            
            
               The third part.
               But before I come to make vse of 
what hath beene sayd, let mee, as the
third part of my text, and the distribution
of Magistracy requires, tell
you to whom all this hath beene spoken:
not to Iudges and Iustices of

peace onely, as I feare most haue imagined
in hearing it: but to all from the
highest and greatest, to the lowest and
least Instrument of Iustice, from the
Gouernour of the thousand, to the
Centurion, from him to the Tithingman
or Decinour. To the which ancient
diuision of the Iewish Commonwealth,
our platforme agrees in substance.
Their Sanedrim or Senate of
seuenty, to our Parliament, Counsell-Table,
Starr-chamber, Exchequer-chamber,
&c. Our Iustices of Assises
in their Circuit, and Iustices of peace
in their generall commission or dominion,
& High Sheriffs in their Shires,
answering to the Rulers of thousands.
               Our Iustices in their seuerall diuisions,
Iudges of hundred Courts and
Turnes to their Rulers of hundreds,
to whom I may adde high Constables
in their places, our Court-leets, and
Court-barons, to the rulers of fifties;
to whom I adde ordinary Constables
in their offices, our cheefe Pledges,

Tything-men or Deciners, to their rulers
of tens. Now all these Iethro
meanes, and speakes of euery one of
them in their station and degree, conceiuing
the Common-wealth, as an
instrument not well in tune, if but the
least of these strings be false or naught.
               Contrary to the common and dangerous 
opinion of the vulgar, who to
their owne iniury thinke and say, that
it matters not for petty Officers, Constables
and Bayliffs, &c. though they
be of the lees and dregs of men; nay,
they hold that for some offices, It is
pitty any honest men should come
into them. Alas, alas, the more subiect
to tentation & vice it is, the more
needfull it is that none other should
haue them.
               Oh but (say they) a good Iudge or 
Iustice may help all; they erre and are
deceiued; it is no one beame, though
neuer so bright, that enlightens all: It
is not the light and influence of the
fixed starres, though the greatest and

highest, but of the Sunne and Moone,
and the lowest and neerest orbs that
gouerne the world. It is the ground-winde,
not the rack-winde, that driues
mills and ships. It is in the Ciuill, as
in the Ecclesiasticall body: if Bishops
be neuer so learned, and the parishionall
Minister negligent, worldly,
proud, or blinde Sr. Iohns, the people
perish for want of vision.
               
               
                   What can the Superiour doe, if the
Inferiour informe not? what can the
eye doe, if the hand and foot be crooked
and vnseruiceable? yea, not only
if such as be organs of Iustice, such as
haue places of Iudicature: but if the
media and spectacles of the sense will
yeelde a false report, how shall the
common sense make a right iudgement?
If Pleaders and Attourneyes
will colour and gloze, if the Clarkes
and Pen-men make false records, may
not any of these disturb or peruert Iustice?
if the least finger or toe of this
body be distorted, I meane Iaylor or

Sargeant, or any other that should
execute Iustice, be remisse and slacke,
then must the Dutch-mans prouerb
bee verified, Looke what the bell is
without the clapper,Quod campana sene 
                        〈◊〉
                      & apud 
                        〈◊〉
                     . such are good
lawes and iudgements without due
execution.
               Thus we see in this curious clockwork
of Iustice, the least pin or wheele
amisse may distemper & disorder all:
but if care were had to frame all these
parts of the building according to the
plat-forme of this skilfull Architect,
what an absolute harmony of the
parts, what an exact perfection of the
whole; yea, what golden times should
we liue to see?
               Hearken ô yee mountaines and little 
hills,Application. you Rulers of thousands, you
Rulers of tens, you reuerend Sages of
the Lawes, you worshipfull Knights
and Gentlemen of the Countrey: yee
listen to this charge of Iethro: ye of the
meanest place of the common-welth,
weigh not things nor persons at the

common beame of custome and opinion,
but at the golden standart of
Gods Sanctuary, with these Goldsmiths
waights of my text: which if I
shall perswade you to doe, I feare that
wee must say with the Psalmist, that
sonnes of men Beni-Adam,
                  Psal. 62 9. yea the
cheefest men Beni-ish, to be layd vpon
the ballance, will bee found lies and
lighter then vanity: heere money will
not make the man, nor craft carry it
away. Euery Nabal of mount Carmel,
nor euery Achitophel may not bee admitted.
               
                   This text saith to euery timorous,
prophane, falsharted, couetous person,
as Samuel to Saul, God hath rent
thine office from thee: and bestowed
it on thy better: or as the Scripture of
Iudas, let another more worthy take
his place: if this order & rule of triall
might take place, how many would
bee turned out of commission? how
many would bee offici perdae? how
would benches and Shire-houses bee
thinned?
               
                  
As for this present, to the which 
God hath called me to speake (for if I
had called my selfe, I could not nor
durst not speake) giue me leaue without
offence, to speake that plainly and
openly, which I conceiue inwardly:
when I haue come into the Shirehouse,
sometimes to obserue the state
of it: it hath presented it selfe to my
view, not vnlike to that image of Daniel,
or picture in Horace, or table of
the Popes of Rome, which for memories
sake I reduce to these two Disticks

                     Ex auro caput est, argentea brachia, venter
                     Aeneus, admisto ferrea crura luto
                     Diuino capiti, ceruix humana, ferinus
                     Assuitur truncus Daemonijque pedes.
                  
               
               The head of golde. And with such 
honourable Iudges God hath vsually,
& for a long time blessed this circuit.
If I had euer heard other of these present,
I durst not giue titles, lest my
maker should condemne me: yet being
vnknowen to mee but by fame,
which hath spoken all good: I desire

you to prooue and waigh your selues
by Iethro's waights, and accordingly
to haue peace and approofe in your
owne consciences, before the Iudge
of all Iudges.
               
                   The shoulders of siluer. A worthy
Bench, yet mingled with some drosse,
and not so refined as I haue knowne
and seene it, like the skie in a cleere
euening, bespangled with bright stars.
Many such there bee at this present,
God be praised, religious and able Iustices,
and so many, as I beleeue few other
Benches are furnished withall,
yet in this siluer I feare some drosse,
some whose skill & ability the Countrey
doubts of, being conceiued to be
either so simple or so timorous, that
they dare meddle with none that dare
meddle with them: or else so popular
they will displease none. The Diuell
himselfe they say may keepe an Ale-house
vnder their nose. Others whose
religion they cal into question, at least
for the truth, and for the power of it:

vnlesse religion may stand with common
swearing, with drinking, with
familiarity with Papists & Recusants,
with vngouerned and vngodly families,
voyd of all exercises of religion,
fraught with spirits of the buttery,
Ruffians, Ale-house-hunters, and such
as are the Sin-tutours and Sin-leaders
to all the Country about them. I hope
there bee but few such, I could wish
there were none at all.
               The brest and belly of brasse, the 
strength of the Countrey, in which
rancke I account the great Inquest,
Iury-men and Constables, of which
number how few make a conscience
to present disorders according to
oath, or that know and regard the
bond of an oath?
               The legs and feet of iron and clay,
or mire. Indeed the very mire and dirt
of the Countrey, the Bayliffs, Stewards
of small liberties, Bum-Bayliffs,
Iaylours, &c. if Beelzebub wanted officers,
he needed no worse then some

of these: what mysteries haue they to
vex the poore Countrey-men with
false arrests? and by vertue of that
Statute tying euery Free holder of
forty shillings per annum, to attend the
Assises, but I list not to stirr this sediment
of the countrey too vnsauoury
to be raked vp in a sermon.
               
                   Oh that some Iehosophat would visit
and reforme, or that you Iudges in
these your dayes of visitations, would
redresse some part of these greeuances,
and reduce all to this Idaea of Iethro's,
which indeed would make an
Heauen vpon earth amongst vs. An
Vtopia I feare some will say, too good
to be true,Ob. obiecting to me as to Cato,
that hee not discerning the times hee
liued in, looked for Plato's Commonwealth
in the dreggs of Romulus. And
so that these Magistrates thus limbed
out, might be found in Moses golden
age of the world, but not in these lees
of time.
               
                   To which I answer,Answ. that if Iethro
                  
were now to giue aduice, hee would
double the force of it: If Dauids reason
bee true, it is now high time for
God to worke, for men haue destroyed
his Law: Was there euer more
neede of courage then now, when sin
is so audacious? of truth, when Esawisme?
of religion, when hypocrisie and
iniquity? of contentation, when the
loue of the world so abounds? The
onely way to repaire these ruines of
the dying world is to renew gouernment
to the primitiue beauty of it: the
face whereof I haue now shewed in
this excellent Mirrour or Looking-glasse:
so you goe not away, and forget
both the comelinesse and spots it
hath shewed you, but wash and bee
cleane, and such as it would haue you
to bee.
               There being nothing else remaining 
to your perfection, and the peace
of the Common-wealth, but this one
Item following in my Text, requiring
assiduity and diligence.
               
                  
Let them iudge the people at al times,The fourth part. &c.
               
                   A most needefull caueat in times
that loue ease and priuate employments,
with neglect of publique. Sitting
in the gate is perpetually needefull.
Diligence in hearing and ending
causes would preuent that greeuance
of delayes, which occasioned Iethro
his discourse. How doe you thinke it
would haue affected him, to haue seen
six or seuen I haue heard sixteene
sums set vpon one suit. These our
English delayes being (as Marnixius
complayned) worse then the Spanish
strappadoes.
               
                   And it is fit, though publique and
generall courts haue their Termes, yet
that particular audience of petty greeuances
should haue no vacation.
               
                   Many are the suits and controuersies,
many are the criminall offences
that neede continuall inspection. Let
him therefore that hath an office, attend
to his office with cheerefulnesse;
hee that hath no leisure to heare his

neighbours causes: Let him (as the
woman said to Philip) haue no leisure
to beare office. Cursed is he that doth
the work of the Lord negligently, and
with holdeth his hands there from.
               You Gentle-men complaine often 
of Idoll shepheards, dumb dogs, &c,
in the Ministery. But how many
such in the Magistracy? Some in commission,
that neuer sit on the Bench
but for fashion: Constables that are
but cyphers in their place. Forsooth
they will be no pragmaticall fellowes,
no busi-bodies to trouble the Countrey.
Is there no mean between busi-bodies
and tell-clockes, between factotum
and fay't neant.
               
               From this neglect comes that 
wrong and iniury to the Assises, that
such petty causes, trifling actions and
complaints trouble these graue and
reuerend personages, which a meane
Yeoman were Iudge fit enough to
end in a chaire at home: when the
whole Shire must be troubled to heare

and iudge of a curtesie made out of
the path, or a blow giuen vpon the
shoulder vpon occasion of a wager, or
such like bawble-trespasses which I
shame to mention. And to punish euery
petty larceny, euery small ryot
or disorder, which lighter controuersies
and faults, if particular Officers
would comprimize & redresse in their
Spheares, these greater Orbs should
not be troubled with them.
               
                  
                  Then indeed would that follow,
which Iethro assures Moses of in the
last part of my Text,
                  The fift part. 
                  ver. 23. If thou
do this thing (God so commanding thee)
then shalt thou & thy people endure, &
al this people shal go quietly to their place.
               
                   An admirable emolument of Magistracy
& sufficient reward of all the
paines of it: that they and the people
may go home in peace, sit vnder their
vines and fig-trees, follow their callings,
and that which is the cheefe
Iewell of all, may lead their liues in all
godlines and honesty. That the gold,

blew and purple silke might shine and
glister within the Tabernacle, the outside
was couered with red skins and
goats haire, such a shelter is Magistracy
to Gods Church and Religion.
Nebuchadnezzar was a great tree, and
euery particular Magistrate a little one
vnder whose boughs people build &
sing, and bring vp their young ones in
religious nurture, euen foster-fathers
as Ioseph in Aegypt. Such were the rich
& religious times vnder Dauid & Salomon,
& vnder such as are described,
Esa. 32. which whole chapter is worth
the reading, as a iust Commentary vpon
this poynt: setting foorth the felicity,
quietnesse, plenty, vertue and
piety of iust Gouernors, as are hiding
places from the winde, and refuges
from the tempest, riuers of waters to
to dry places, and as raine to the new
mowen grasse, &c.
               Such also were the times enioyed 
by the Church vnder Constantine, deciphered
as I take it, Reuel. 8. when

there was silence in the heauen about
halfe an houre, the golden vialls filled
with sweet odors, the prayers of the
Saints ascending as a pillar of smoke
vp to heauen.
               
                   Of these times see Panegyricall
Sermons, and Encomiasticall discourses
storied of olde,Euseb. lib. 10. and one of them at
large recorded by Eusebius, which
whole booke is nothing but an Elogium
of those peaceable dayes, wherein
the Church was edified & multiplied.
The Common-wealth being to the
Church, as the Elme to the Vine, or as
the garden to the Bees; the flourishing
of the one, the thriuing of the other;
and the disturbance of the one, the
disquiet of the other.
               
                   How can men either attend Gods
seruice or their owne worke, when
they are molested at home with drunkards,
barretors, quarrellous persons,
when hurried vp to London with suits.
As I haue knowen a Constable molested
with fiue or six actions, for an act

of Iustice, in punishing vice according
to his office. With what bitternesse
of spirit do men groane vnder delayed
and peruerted Iustice, when it is turned
into Hemlocke, and turnes them
out of their wits, some of them swouning
at the sight of their orders, as I
haue heard from credible eye-witnesses,
others ready to destroy themselues,
their aduersaries, yea and somtime
their Iudges.
               Oh the benefit of good Magistrates,
It is an vnknowen good, as the Country-man
in an ancient Poet, when hee
had met with all, feelingly cries out,
that hee had found that summum bonum,
which the Philosophers so much
sought after, hee now enioying more
sweetnesse of little, then of great reuenues
in troublous times. Surely, wee
Christians ought to prize it as the
meane of our greatest good, of our
peaceable frequenting of our Churches,
and our seruing of God. Marchants
make a higher vse, & are more

glad of a calme then common passengers:
so should wee Christians then
Heathens, by how much wee may
and ought to improoue it for richer
ends of Gods glory, and the saluation
of our soules.
               
                   Lord what manner of persons
ought wee to bee in all godlinesse and
honesty, which enioy such length and
latitude of Halcion dayes, as wee doe;
the tithe whereof, not onely former
dayes, but our neighbour Nations
would now be glad of.
               
                   God giue vs the vse and fruit of
them, continue and encrease them,
which will then bee, when this Text
shall bee most studied and practized.
Then (as Amos speakes) shall iudgement
flow as waters, and righteousnesse
run downe as a mighty torrent;
or as Dauid, Then shall the earth encrease,
all people shall praise God, and
God euen our God shall blesse vs, and
all the ends of the earth shall feare
him. And so I make Iethro's preface

my conclusion. I haue giuen you
counsell this day: Hearken to my
voyce, and the Lord God bee with
you all. Amen.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            To my louing Brother Mr.
SAMVEL WARD.
            BRother, if you meet with your Iethro's counsell
returned from beyond the seas, and as much
beyond your expectation preserued aliue, as his
sonne in law was against Pharaoh's Iniunction, meruell
as much as you will, but bee no more offended
then you haue cause. Ioab sinned wider on the other
hand in destroying Dauids Absolom, contrary
to his serious charge, yet Ioab was pardoned, and
yet no brother. I haue noted you hitherto inexorable
for your owne publishing of any thing of your
owne; whether out of iudgement, modesty, curiosity,
or melancholy, I iudge not: but when others
haue aduentured them with fruit and acceptance,
into the light, I haue seene you rest content with
the publique good The like leaue I haue taken,
expecting like successe, assuring you and my selfe
of the generall welcomnesse and vsefulnesse heerof

to all whom it concernes, which are the greatest
number of the land, euen so many as haue any reference
to Sessions and Assises, if not all sorts of
Christians. Onely I feare that the corruption of
our times is growne so grosse and Eglon-like, that
it doth not Ebud-like enough sharpen the poynts,
and send them home to the heft, that they may
reach to the quicke. I had my selfe added thereto a
proiect and perswasion for the redresse of many abuses
crept into offices and officers, hauing spent
so much time in the study of the law, and execution
of some offices, as made me weary of the errours I
saw, and heartily wish the reformation of them:
but fearing I haue learned too much bluntnesse &
plumpnesse of speech among the Lutherans, which
is here as prime a quality, as smoothnes with you,
as also loth to meddle out of mine orb, in my second
thoughts I suppressed it. And so wishing vnto
this, many diligent, conscionable and ingenuous
Readers and Appliers, and to them Gods blessing
and the fruit intended, I take my leaue. From Elbing
in Prusia.
            
            
               Your brother in the flesh, in the Lord, and
in the worke of the ministery.
NATH. WARD.
               
            
         
      
   