
      
         
            
            
            A
COAL FROM
THE ALTAR,
TO KINDLE THE
holy fire of Zeale.
            
            In a Sermon preached at a generall
Visitation at Ipswich.
            
            By SAMVELL WARD, Bach. of Diuinity.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
            AT LONDON,
Printed by H. L. for Samuell Macham; and
are to be sould at his Shop in Pauls-church-yard,
at the signe of the Bulhead.
1615.
         
         
            
            
            To my Reuerend friend, Mr. Samuel
Ward.
            
               Sir,
            
            your Sermon which I copied partly
from your mouth, and partly from your
notes, I haue aduentured into the light;
encouraged by the approbation, and earnest
intreaty of such, whose iudgements you
reuerence, and whose loue you embrace:
who also haue made bold heere and there
to varie somethings, not of anie great consequence,
if I can iudge. I was loth to
smoother such fire in my breast; but to vent
it, to enflame others. If you shall blame me,
I knowe others will thanke mee. What I
haue done is out of zeale, to God, and his
Church.
            
               Your affectionate friend,
Ambrose Wood.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A necessarie Aduertisement from the
Printer.
            CVrteous Reader, I thought meet to giue thee
notice, that one of the written sheets of this Sermon,
coming to our hands, both misplac't, and without
any directory either word, or Folio, to the next
ensuing; the Compositor could not but set it in the
same order (or rather, manner) wherein hee receiued
it: whereas we vnderstand since, it was meant, that all
the matter between the sixteenth line of the 51. page
and the second line of the 61. page, should haue followed
in the beginning of the 43. page, immediately
after these words, will not so moue as the meanest Orator.
Which I wish thee to note with thy penne.
         
         
            To amend the Faults of the Press,
read thus;
            In the Title page, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 9. l. 12. dung.
p. 41. l. 11 & 12. derision. p. 68. l. 16. veine.
         
         
            
            
            
               Reuel. 3. 19.
               Be zealous.
            
            
               THis watch-word of Christ,
if it be not now a word in
season, I knowe not when
euer it was, or will bee:
Would he now vouchsafe
to bestowe a Letter vpon his Church
here on earth; should hee need to alter
the tenour of this? which being the last,
to the last of the seuen Churches, why
may it not (saith an Ancient, vpon this
text) typifie the estate of the last Age
of his Churches? the coldnesse whereof
himselfe hath expresly foretold.
And if God should now send through
the earth such surueying angels as Zacharie
               Mat. 24. 12
               
mentions chapter 1; Could they
returne any other obseruation of their
trauailes then theirs; The whole world
lies in lukewarmnesse? which makes me
often in my thoughts proportion these
ends of time,1 King. 1. 1 to the like period of Dauids
age when no clothes were enow
to keepe heate in him. Faith I grant
is a more radicall, vitall, and necessary
grace; but yet not so wholly out of
Grace with the times, as poore Zeale;
which yet if by any meanes it might
once againe be reduced into fauour, and
practice, before Time sets, and bee no
more; I doubt not but Christ would
also yet once againe in this euening of
the world, come and Sup with vs; A
fauour including all other in it.
            
                My desire especially is, that this our
Iland might take it to it selfe, as well as
if it had by name bene directed to it;
what would it hurt vs to make an especiall
benefit and vse of it? Some of
our owne, haue so applied it; (whether
out of their iudgements, or affections,

I say not.) Learned Fulke maruells
if it were not by a Propheticall
spirit penned for vs: others (in their

                  •
               eare) more resolutely haue made it a
singular type of purpose for vs. Their
warrant I know not; especially if it bee
true which all trauellers tell you, That
they finde more zeale at home then abroad.
Wee are I grant in sundry respects equall
to Laodicea: Euen the very names
thereof, as well the first and oldest in
regard of the blessings of God, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
Gods Darling, as the latter in regard
of good Lawes and Ciuility, Laodicea,
How well do they become vs? As rich
as they, and that in the very same commodity
of woolles; Abounding as they
with many learned Zenoes, and bountifull
Hieroes: Parallel in all regards; I
would I could say lukewarmenesse excepted.
But I must bee a faithfull and
true witnesse, and yet this is all I haue
to say; It was, as I conceiue, Laodiceas
complexion and not her constitution,
her practice not her orders, personall

lukewarmenesse not legall, which
Christ strikes at. That fault I find in my
text, the same I finde in our common
Christians, whose spirituall condition
and state is too like the externall situation
of our Country, between the Torrid,
and the Frigid Zones; neither hot nor
cold: and so like Laodicea, that if wee
take not warning, or warming, we may
I feare in time come to be spued out of
Gods mouth.
            
                For this present assembly of Ministers,
could all the choyce & time in the
world haue better fitted me then mine
ordinarie Lot? If fire bee set vpon the
Beacons, will not the whole Countrey
soone be warned and enlightened?
            
                For my selfe also, me thinkes it will
better beseeme my yeares to heale,
then to teach my Ancients; to enkindle
their affections, then to enforme
their iudgements. And whereas Paul
bids Titus preach zeale with all authority,
though in mine owne name I
craue your patience, and audience, yet

in his name that is the first of the creatures,
and Amen, I counsell him that
hath an eare, to heare what the Spirit
saith to the Churches;

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Be zealous.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Coale from the Altar.
            
               Reuel. 3. 19.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : Be zealous.
            
            
               ZEale hath been little practised
lesse studied: this
heauenly fire hath euer
beene a stranger vppon
earth. Fewe in all ages
that haue felt the heat of it, fewer that
haue known the nature of it. A description
will rake it out of the embers of
obscurity: & it may be that many when
they shall knowe it better, will better
affect it.
            2 Zeale hath many counterfeits and
allies. There are many strange fires

which hauing sought to carry away the
credit of it, haue brought an ill name
vpon it: from these it would be distinguished.
            3 Zeale is euery where spoken against,
it hath many enemies and few friends:
the worlde can no more abide it, then
beasts can the elementary fire, the rebukes
of many haue fallen vpon it, the
diuell weaues cunning lyes to bring
downe the honour of it. Oh that wee
could raise and maintaine it, by setting
forth the deserued praises of it; and
challenge it from the false imputations
of such as hate it without a cause.
            4 Zeale hath in this our earthly
molde, litle fuell, much quench-cole; is
hardly fired, soon cooled. A good Christian
therefore would be glad to knowe
the Incentiues and preseruatiues of it,
which might enkindle it, enflame it,
feede it, and reuiue it when it is going
out.
            5 Zeale in the worlds opinion, is
as cōmon as fire on euery mans hearth,

no mans heart without zeale, if euery
man might be his owne iudge: If most
might be heard there is too much of it;
but the contrarie will appeare if the
right markes be taken, and the true rules
of triall and conuiction be obserued, and
the heart thereby examined.
            6 Zeale generally handled will break
as lightning in the aire and seize vpon
no subiect: Application must set it on
mens harts, & exhortation warme this
old and colde age of the world, chiefly
this temperate climate of our nation.
            
               First part.
               It was said of old, that zeale was an
Intention of loue: of late, that it is a compound
of loue and anger, or indignation.
               
               The Ancients aymed right, and shot
neere, if not somwhat with the shortest.
The moderne well discouered the vse
and exercise of more affections, then
loue, within the fadome and compasse
of zeale; but in helping that default,
went themselues somewhat wide, and

came not close to the marke: which I
ascribe not to any defect of eye-sight in
those sharpe sighted Eagles; but onely
to the want of fixed contemplation.
And to speake truth, I haue oft wondred
why poore Zeale, a vertue so high
in Gods books, could neuer be so much
beholding to mens writings as to obtaine
a iust treatise, which hath been the
lot of many particular vertues of inferiour
worth; a plaine signe of too much
vnder-value and neglect.
               He that shall stedfastly viewe it, shall
finde it not to be a degree or Intension
of loue, or any single affection (as the
Schools rather confined thē defined zeal)
neither yet any mixt affection (as the 
                     ••
                  
                  ter,
rather compounded then comprehended
the nature of it) but an hot temper,
higher degree or intension of them all.
As varnish is no one colour, but that
which giues glosse and lustre to all; So
the opposites of zeale, keye-coldnes and
luke-warmenesse, which by the lawe of
contraries must bee of the same nature,

are no affections, but seuerall tempers of
them all.
               
                  Paul warrants this description where
he speakes of the twelue Tribes.Act 26. 7 
                  They
serued God with intension or vehemency.
               
               The roote shewes the nature of the
branch. Zeale comes of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a word framed
of the very sound and hissing noise
which hot coales, or burning iron make
when they meete with their contrary.
In plaine English, zeale is nothing but
heate, from whence it is that zealous
men are oft in Scripture said to burne
in the spirit. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               He that doth moderately or remisly
affect any thing, may be stil'd Philemon a
louer: He that ernestly or extreamely,
Zelotes a zelot: who to all the obiects of
his affections, is excessiuely and passionately
disposed, his loue is euer feruent,
his desires eager, his delights rauishing,
his hopes longing, his hatred deadly,
his anger fierce, his griefe deepe, his
feare terrible. The Hebrewes expresse
these Intensions by doubling the word.
               
                  
This being the nature of zeale in generall,
Christian zeale of which wee desire
onely to speake, differs from carnall
and worldly, chiefly in the causes and
obiects.
               It is a spirituall heate wrought in the
heart of man by the holy Ghost, improouing
the good affections of loue,
ioy, hope, &c. for the best seruice and
furtherance of Gods glory, with all the
appurtenances thereof, his worde, his
house, his Saints and saluation of soules:
vsing the contrary of hatred, anger,
griefe, &c. as so many mastiues to fly
vpon the throat of Gods enemies, the
diuell, his Angels, sinne, the world with
the lusts thereof. By the vertue whereof
a Zealot may runne through all his affections,
and with Dauid, breath zeale
out of euery pipe, after this manner for
a taste;
               How doe I loue thy law (O Lord) more
then the hony or the hony combe,Psalm. more then
thousands of siluer and gold!Loue.
               
               Thine enemies I hate with a perfectHatred.
                  
hatred.
               Thy testimonies are my delight,Ioy. I reioyce
more in them, then they that finde great
spoyles, more then in my appointed food.
               Mine eyes gush out riuers of teares.Griefe. O
that my head were a fountaine of teares,
because they destroy thy law.
               Mine eyes are dimme with waiting:Hope.
how doe I long for thy saluation?
               Thy iudgements are terrible,Feare. I tremble
and quake, &c.
               Look what pitch of affection the naturall
man bestowes vpon his dearest darling,
what vnsatiable thirst the couetous
worlding vpon his Mammon, the ambitious
vpon his honour, the voluptuous
vpon his pleasure; the same the Christian
striueth in equall, yea, (if possible)
farre exceeding tearmes to conuert and
conferre vpon God and his worship.
               In briefe, to open a little creuise of
further light, and to giue a little glimpse
of heat: Zeal is to the soule, that which
the spirits are to the body; wine to the
spirits, putting vigour and agility into

them. Whence comes that elegant Antithesis
in the Scripture. Be not drunke
with wine wherein is excesse, but bee filled
with the spirit.
               
               Christ is said to lead his Spouse into
the wine cellar: which Simily Bernard
delighting oft to repeat,Ser. 41. in Cant. 49 in two or
three Sermons interprets of a speciall
measure of zeale inspired into his
Church. Thus (saith he) Christ led his
Disciples into the wine cellar on the day
of Pentecost; and filled them, and the
house with such zeal as they came forth
like Giants refreshed with wine, and seemed
to the people as men drunke withAct. 2
new wine.
               It is to the soule as wings to the foule:
this also is a Scripture embleme to picture
the Angels with wings, as in the
hāgings of the Temple, & in the visions
of the reuelatiō, in token of their ardent
and zealous execution of Gods will:
whence also they haue their name Seraphim;
he maketh his ministers a flame
of fire.Heb. 1. 7.
               
               
                  
To this fire and these wings, which
we in the Lords praier desire to imitate,
there is nothing in vs answerable but
our zeale; As wheeles to the chariot:
which makes vs not goe, but runne the
waies of Gods commandements, and
so runne that we may obtain. As sailes
to the ship, and wind to the sailes, to
which alludes the phrase so frequent in
Scripture, Plerophorie.
               
               As courage to the souldier, metall to
the horse, dust to the ground which
makes it bring forth much fruit, yee an
hundred fold: viuacity to all creatures.
To conclude this, this is that celestiall
fire which was shaddowed out vnto vs
by that poore element in comparison
and beggerly rudiment, the fire (I
meane) of such necessary vse in the law,
which rather then it should be wanting,
the Lord caused it to descend from heauen,
that it might cause the Sacrifices
to ascend thither again as a sweet incense
vnto the Lord without which no burnt
offering was acceptable.
            
            
               
               The second part.
               But now, as then, there are certaine
false fires, abhominable to God, odious
to men, dangerous to the Nadabs and
Abihues that meddle with them, bringing
thereby coales vpon their owne
heades, an ill sauour vpon all their seruices;
and not only so, but that which
is worse, an ill report and surmise euen
on those that offer the right fire, and
serue the Lord in spirit and truth: yet
for their sakes is the name of zeale blasphemed
all the day long.
               Against these, as then, so now seuere
caueats and cleare distinctions must bee
laid, lest such as haue not their senses exercised
to put a difference, mistake poisonfull
weedes for wholsome hearbes,
to their owne destruction; and for the
sake of the one, reuile the other to the
wrong of God and his Saints.
               It fares not otherwise with the soule
thē with the body: besides the natiue &
radicall heat, the principall instrument
of life, there are aguish and distempered

heats, the causes of sicknes and death.
               To discerne of those, requires some
skill and iudgement: yet a good Empirick,
a Christiā of experience, wil giue
a shrewd guesse at them, the easier and
the better if hee marke these following
signes and symptomes, common to all
the kindes of false zeale, here also following.
               First they are deeply sick of the pharisaicall 
humor,Oftentatiō. they loue to be seene of
men, and say with Iehu, Come and see how
zealous I am for the Lord of hosts: they
proclaime their almes with a trumpet,
paint their good deedes vpon Church
windowes, engraue their legacies vpon
tombes, haue their acts vppon record:
Thus, Comets blaze more then fixed
Starres. Aguish heates breed flushings,
& are more seen in the face, then natural
warmeth at the hart. Scholers count
hiding of Art the best Art: the godly
man studies by all meanes how to conceal
the one hand from the other, in doing
well; hiding of zeale is the best zeale.
               
                  
                   Secondly, of Ahabs disease exceeding
in externall humiliation, affected
gestures, passionate sighs, loudnesse of
voyce, odde attires & such like: These
know how to rend the garment, hang
the head with the bulrush, to whip and
launce their skinnes with Baals Priests;
and yet strangers to a wounded spirit:
not but that true and hearty zeale doth
lift vp the eyes, knock the breast, dance
before the Arke. Therefore this character
may deceiue the vnwary; Let
Ely take heed of iudging Hannaes spirit
rashly by the moouing of her lips: yet
hypocrites so vsually straine nature and
without a cause exceed, and that in publike,
and vppon the stage, that for the
most part, their actions and affections
are palpable: as Iesuites, Cappuchines, &c.
yea in many histrionicall Protestants:
Horse-coursers iades wil bound, curuet
and shew shew more tricks, then a hose
well mettled for the rode or cart.
               
                   Thirdly,Complementall. you may knowe them by
their diligence and curiosity in lighter

matters ioyned with omission and neglect
of greater, wise in circumstance, and
carelesse in substance, tithing mint, straining
at gnats, &c. In all cheape and easie
duties, prodigall: niggardly & slothfull
in the waighty things of the Lawe:
these haue at command good wordes,
countenance, yea teares from their eyes,
sooner then a farthing from their purse,
hauing this worlds goods, and see their
brother want; these sticke vp feathers
for the carcasse, beguiling the simple,
coozening the world, but chiefly themselues.
               Fourthly, these fires cannot keepe
themselues within their owne hearths,Pragmaticall.
                  
these spirites cannot keepe themselues
within their owne circles. True zeale
loues to keepe home, studieth to be quiet
in other mens Diocess: false zeale
loues to be gadding, is eagle eyd abroad,
and moule eyd at home: In stead of burning
bright and shining cleare, like brinish 
lights,Censorious. they sparkle & spet at others,
or like ill couched fireworks let fly on

all sides: onely out of their wisedome
they know how to spare Agag and the
great ones, and bee sure they anger not
their great Masters, and meddle with
their matches: whereas it is the property
of fire that comes from aboue to
spare the yeelding sheath, and melt the
resisting metall, to passe by the lower
roofes, and strike the towred pinacle, as
Nathan, Dauid, Elias, Ahab, Iohn, Herod,
Ionas, Niniuie, &c. Note also in all their
proceeding with others, in steede of
 wholsome seuerity (which rightly zealous
men neuer come vnto but by compulsion,Cruell.
and not without compassion
of the offender, weeping with Moses and
Samuel ouer the people, beeing sory
with the Emperour, that they knowe
how to write sentences of condemnation)
These delight in cruelty, the brand
of the Malignant Church; feede their
eyes with Massacres as the Queene
mother. No diet so pleasing to these rauening
wolues, as the warme blood of
the sheepe. They are they that cry fire

and fagot, away with them, not worthy
to liue, their very mercies are cruelty:
especially in their owne cause, they heat
the fornace seuen times hotter then in
Gods.
               Lastly, these Meteors and vapours 
haue no constant light,Variable and inconstant. or continued
heat (as the fixed starres euer like themselues)
but haue onely their aguish fits,
& lunatick moods; somtimes in aduersity
they are good vnder the rod as Pharaoh,
again in prosperity like the fat kine
of Bashan, ingratefull and forgetfull:
sometimes in prosperity when the sun
of peace shineth on them, & the fauourable
influence of great ones, they shoot
forth their blade with the corne on the
house top, running with the streame, &
sailing with the wind; sometimes their
zeale depends vpon the life of Iehoiada;
sometimes on the company of the Prophets:
commonly in the beginning they
blaze like straw fires, but in the end goe
out in smoake and smother; whereas in
their entrance into profession, they galloped

into shewes, and made some
girds at hand, they tire, giue in, and end
in the flesh, whereas all naturall motions
are swiftest toward their end.
               The vestall fires were perpetuall, and
the fire of the Altar neuer went out.
Spices and wefts of these euills may be
found in the sincerest Christians: but
they suffer not these dead flyes to ly and
putrefie in the precious boxes of true
zeale;Be not ouer iust hath 7. expositions. here. 2. or 3. more hereafter. of all these the preachers caueat
may be construed, Be not ouer iust, thogh
it may also admit other interpretations,
as after shall appeare.
               These are the speciall notes and symtomes
of strange fires: the kinds also are
many, & might be distributed into many
heads; but I will reduce them into
three which are known by their names.

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , counterfeit zeale, false fire.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , blind zeale, smoakie fire,
or fooles fire, ignis fatuus.
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , turbulent zeale, wild fire.
               The first, wanting truth and sincerity,
propounds sinister ends:
               
                  
The second, knowledge and discretion,
takes wrong waies.
               The third, loue and humility, exceeds
measure.
               The first abounds amongst subtile &
crafty professors, and is to be abhorred
and detected.
               The second amongst simple and deuout,
is to be pitied and directed.
               The third amongst passionate and affectionate,
and is to be moderated and
corrected.
               The first is the meere vizor of zeale,
looking asquint one way and tending
another; pretending God and his glory,
intending some priuate and sinister
end; first, either of honour and promotion,
as Iehu who marched furiously,
and his worde was the Lorde of hosts,
but his proiect was the kingdome.
               Secondly, at filthy lucre: as Demetrius,
and his followers, who cried great is
Diana of Ephesus; but meant her little
siluer shrines. It cannot bee denied, but
many such there were who helped to

pull downe the Abbies; not out of any
hatred to those vncleane cages, but
to reare their owne houses out of the
ruines, and spoyled copes to make cushions.
Iudas complained of superfluity,
but grieued it fell besides his bagge;
many, temporalities tithes and glebes,
vnlawful, because they are loth to forgo
them: If Iezabel proclaime a Fast, let
Naboth looke to his vineyard; If the Vsurer
and tradesman frequent sermons,
let the buyer and borrower looke to
themselues. It is too common a thing
to make zeale a lure and state, to drawe
customers; a bait of fraud, a net to entrap;
with malicious Doegs, to make it
a stalking horse for reuenge against
the Priest, thereby to discharge their
gall at Ministers and other Christians,
for the omission and cōmission of such
things, as them selues care not for; with
the Strumpet in the Prouerbs, to wipe
their mouthes, and frequent the Sacrifices,
that they may be free frō suspicion.
               All these euills, haue I seene vnder

the sunne-shine of the Gospell: but by
how much, zeale is more glorious then
common profession, by so much is dissembled
feruency more detestable then
vsuall hypocrisie; yea, no better then
diuelish villany & double iniquity: such
painted wals and whited sepulchers,
the Lord will breake downe. Let all
Timothies and Nathanaels learne to discry
them, and discard them: The cure
of this was deeply forelaid by Christ;
I counsell thee to buy gold tryed in the fire:
all is not gold that glistereth, an image
of faith breeds but a shew of zeale; many
seemed to trust in Christ, but Christ
would not trust them: but such faith as
will abide the fire, brings forth zeale
that will abide the touchstone.
               The second, is erronious or blinde
zeale, not according to knowledge
Rom. 10. I beare many deuout Papists
witnesse (though I feare the learnedst
of them be selfe condemned) that they
haue this zeale perswading themselues,
they doe God best seruice, when they

please the diuell most in their will-worship.
The same witnesse I beare many
Separatists (though I feare most of them
be sicke of selfe conceit ednesse, new fanglenesse,
and desire of mastership:) who
would not suspect such zeale, which
condemnes all reformed Churches, and
refuseth communion with such as they
themselues confesse to bee Christians,
and consequently such as haue communion
with Christ. It would grieue
a man indeede, to see zeale misplaced,
like metall in a blind horse; to see men
take such paines, and yet fall into the
pit. This made Paul to wish himselfe
Anathema, for the sake of such; and yet
the multitude and common people, often
thus; Is it possible but these men
haue the right? But alas, how should it
be otherwise when a blinde company
will follow a blinde sect-master; This
being one property of blinde zeale, a
fond admiration, and apish imitation of
some person, for some excellency they
see in him, which so dazles their eyes,

that they cannot discerne their errours
and infirmīties,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   which they oftner inherit
then their virtues; as appeares in
the Lutherans, & the Iewes, that would
sacrifice their children to Molech, in imitation
of Abraham: In these the diuell
becomes an Angel of light, and plaieth
that Dragon, Reuel. 12. pouring out
floudes of persecution against the
Church, causing deuour men and women,
to raise tragedies, breath out thretnings,
and persecute without measure;
then these the diuell hath no better souldiers:
but when their scales fall from
their eyes, and they come into Gods
tents; God hath none like vnto them.
The cure of this diuinely is forelaid by
Christ also, to buy eye-saule of him;
Angels haue eyes as well as wings to
guide their flight: when the shippe is
vnder saile, and hath the freshest way;
it hath most neede to looke to the sterage,
keepe the watch, haue an eye to
the Compasse, and land marks.
               The third kinde, is turbulent zeale,

called by Iames bitter zeale, a kinde of
wild-fire transporting men beyond all
bounds, and compasse of moderation;
proceeding sometimes of a weakenesse
of nature in men, that haue no stay of
their passion, like to Clockes whose
springs are broken, and Cities whose
walls are down. Zeale is a good seruant,
but an ill master: metall is dangerous in
a head-strong horse. And so the Poets
(which were the Heathens Prophets)
shadowed out the cure of this, in Mineruas
golden bridle, where with she menaged
her winged Pegasus. There is too
much of this bitter zeale, of this Hierapicra,
in all our books of controuersies:
but especially there hath been too much
in our domesticall warres; some sons
of Bichri haue blowen the trumpet of
contention, trumpets of anger; the
Churches of God should haue no such
custome: Oh that our Churches vnderstood
that saying.
               In quarrels of this nature Paul spends
his zeale, not in partaking but in parting

the tray, beating downe the weapons
on both sides: Who art thou that
iudgest? who art thou that condemnest
thy brother?Rom. 14. 10 as if he should say, The
matters are not Tanti, wee haue made
the diuell too much sport already; who
threw in these bones to set vs together
by the eares, whilst he lets-in the common
Enemie vpon vs. Charity, Charity,
is the builder of Churches: Strife about
trifles, hath wasted many famous
ones, and placed the temples of Mahomet,
where the golden candlesticke was
wont to stand. We pittie the former ages,
contending about leauened and
vnleauened bread: keeping of Easter,
fasting on Sundayes, &c. The future ages,
will do the like for vs. Oh that the
Lord would put into the hearts both of
the gouernours and parties to these
quarells, once to make an end of these
Midianitish warres; that wee might
ioyntly poure out the vials of our zeale,
vpon the throne of the beast.
               Thus haue you heard the errors and

counterfeits of zeale, through whose
sides, and vpon the backe of which,
diuerse of the malicious world vse to
beat those whom it hates, because their
workes are better then their owne;
iniuriously concluding, that all Zealots
are alike. Thus I haue heard our Marchants
complain, that the set vp blewes
haue made strangers loath the rich oaded
blewes, onely in request: this is an
old sophisme. Trew iudgement would
teach vs to conclude, that the best drugs
haue their adulterates; the most current
coynes their slippes; and that virtue
which so many hypocrites put on,
to grace themselues withall; is surely
some rare and excellent iewell.
            
            
               The third part.
               The true Zealote, whose feruency is
in the spirit, not in shew; in substance
not in circumstance; for God, not himselfe;
guided by the word, not with
humors; tempered with charity, not
with bitternesse: such a mans praise is

of God though not of men: such a mans
worth cannot bee set forth with the
tongues of men and Angels.
               Oh that I had so much zeale, as to
steep it in it owne liquor;Arguments of cōmendation. to set it forth
in it owne colours, that the Lord would
touch my tongue with a coale from his
Altar, that I might regaine the decaied
credit of it, with the sons of men.
               It is good to bee zealous in a good 
thing:From Gods excellency whom zeale onely becomes, vnworthily placed elsewhere. and is it not best, in the best? or
is there any better then God, or the
kingdome of heauen? Is it comly what
euer we do, to do it with all our might?
onely vncomely when wee serue God?
Is meane and mediocrity, in all excellent
Arts excluded, and onely to be admitted
in religion? Were it not better
to forbeare Poetry or Painting, then to
rime or daube? and were it not better,
to be of no religion then to be cold, or
lukewarme in any? Is it good to be earnest
for a friend, & cold for the Lord of
hosts? For whom dost thou reserue the
top of thy affections? for thy gold? for

thy Herodias, &c. O ye adulterers and
adulteresses, can ye offer God a baser indignity?
What ayleth the world? Is it
afraid thinke we, that God can haue too
much loue; who in regard of his owne
infinite beauty, and the beames hee
vouchsafeth to cast vpon vs, deserues
the best, yea all, and a thousand times
more then all? Ought not all the springs
and brookes of our affection, to run
into this maine? may not he iustly disdain,
that the least Riueret shold be drained
another way? that anything in the
world should be respected before him,
equalled with him, or loued out of him,
of whom, for whome, and through
whom are all things? who, or what
can bee sufficient for him our Maker
and Sauiour? In other obiects feare exceeds:
here no extasie is high enough.
               
                   Consider and reason thus with thy
selfe (O man) canst thou brook a sluggard
in thy worke,From his spirituall nature. if thou bee of any
spirit thy selfe? is not a slouthfull messenger
as vinegar to thy teeth, and as

smoake to thine eyes? Hast thou any
sharpnesse of wit, is not dulnesse tedious
vnto thee? And shall hee that is all
spirit (for whom the Angels are slow
and cold enough) take pleasure in thy
drowzie and heauy seruice? Doe men
choose the forwardest Deere in the
heard, and the liueliest Colt in the
droue? And is the backwardest man
fittest for God? Is not all his delight in
the quickest and cheerfullest giuers and
seruitors? Euen to Iudas he saith, That
thou doest doe quickely; so odious is
dulnesse vnto him: what else mooued
him to ordaine that the necke of the
consecrated Asse should bee broken,
rather then offered vppe in sacrifice;
doth God hate the Asse? or is it not
for the sake of the quality of the creature;
which hath euer among the heathens
beene an Hierogliphick of heauinesse
and tarditie?
               Thirdly, this zeale is so gratious a fauorite 
with God,Effects of zeale. that it graces with him
all the rest of his graces;Reuel. 12 Prayer if it be

feruent, preuaileth much: the zealous
witnesses had power to shut and open
heauen: by this, Israel wrastled with
God, ouercame, and was called a Prince
with God: this strengthened the hart of
Moses (as Aaron and Hur supported
his hands) till the Lord saide, Let me alone:
this made Cornelius his prayer
to come into heauen; whither our cold
sutes can no more ascend, then vapours
from the Still, vnlesse there be fire vnder
it: Repentance, a needfull and Primary
grace, which the Baptist so vrged:
but then we must bee zealous and
repent (as my text ioynes them) or
else no repentance pleaseth God; nor
are there fruites worthy repentance.
Almes and good deedes are sacrifices
pleasing to God; but without zeale, the
widowes mites are no better then the
rest; It is the cheerefull loose, that doubleth
the gift. Generally, as some mans
marke and name, furthereth the sale of
his commodity; so zeale inhanceth all
the graces of God. It pitties me for Laodicea
                  
that lost so much cost; had as many
virtues, did as many duties as other
Churches: but for want of this, Christ
could not sup with them. Furnish a Table
with the principallest fare, and daintiest
dishes that may be had; let them be
rosted & boiled to the halues, or stand
on the Table till they be lukewarme;
what wil the guests say? All that we can
doe is but the deed done,Opus operatū
                   vnlesse zeale
conferre grace.
               Fourthly, zeale is the richest euidence 
of faith, and the clearest demonstration
of the Spirit:Baptismus Plaminis & Pluminis. The Baptisme of water,
is but a cold proofe of a mans Christendome;
being common to all commers:
but if any be baptised with fire,
the same is sealed vp to the day of Redemption.
If any shall say, friend, what
dost thou professe a religion without it;
how can hee choose but bee strooke
dumbe? Can we suppose wormewood
without bitternesse, a man without reason?
then may wee imagine a religion,
and a Christian, without spirit and zeale.

The Iesuit saith, I am zealous; the Separatist,
I am zealous; their plea is
more probable, then the lukewarme
worldlings, that serue God without
life. If the colour be pale and wan, and
the motion insensible, the party is dead
or in a swoune; if good and swift, wee
make no question. The zealous Christian
is neuer to seeke for a proofe
of his saluation: what makes one Christian
differ from another in grace, as
starres doe in glory; but zeale? All beleeuers
haue a like precious faith: All
true Christians haue all graces in their
seedes; but the degrees of them are no
way better discerned then by zeale:
Men of place distinguish themselues, by
glistering pearles: A Christian of degrees
shines aboue other in zeale. Comparisons
I knowe are odious to the
world, that faine would haue all alike:
but the righteous is better then his
neighbour: All Christians are the excellent
of the earth, the Zelot surmounteth
them all, as Saul the people by the

head and shoulders; hee is euer striuing
to excell, and exceede others and himselfe.
               One of these is worth a thousand others,
one doth the worke of many:
which made him speake of Elisha in
the plurall number, The horsemen and
Chariots of Israel; besides his owne
worke, he winnes and procures others,
makes Proselytes. It is the nature of fire
to multiply, one coale kindles another:
his worke so shines that others come in
and glorifie God; maruelling and enquiring
what such forwardnesse should
meane, concluding with Nebuchadnezzar,
Surely the seruants of the most high
God.
               
               These are good Factors and Agents,
doing God as good seruice as Boutefewes
doe the Diuell, and Iesuites the
Pope, sparing no cost, nor labour; and
what they cannot doe themselues, they
doe by their friends, Who is on my side,
who? &c.
               
               As for lets and impediments, they

ouer-looke and ouer-leape them, as fire
passeth from one house to another; neither
is there any standing for any Gods
enemies before thē: they make hauock
of their owne and others corruptions.
If you will rightly conceiue of Peters
zeale in conuerting and confounding,
you must imagine (saith Chrysostome) a
man made all of fire walking in stubble.
All difficulties are but whetstones of
their fortitude. The sluggard saith,
There is a Lyon in the way; tell Samson &
Dauid so, they will the rather goe out to
meet them. Tell Nehemiah of Samballat,
hee answereth, Shall such a man as I
feare? Tell Caleb there are Anakims, and
he will say, Let vs goe vppe at once, &c.
Let Agabus put off his girdle and binde
Paul, let him be told in euery City, that
bonds await him, hee is not onely ready
for bonds, but for death; tell Iubentius,
he must lay downe his life, he is as
willing as to lay off his clothes: tell Luther
of enemies in Wormes, hee will goe
if all the tiles of the houses were diuels.

The Horse neighs at the trumpet; the
Leuiathan laughes at the speare. They
that meane to take the kingdome of
God by violence, prouide themselues
to goe through fire and water, carry
their liues in their hands, embrace faggots;
they say to father and mother, I
know you not to carnall Counsellers and
friendly enemies, Get you behind mee
Satan. Zeale is as strong as death, hot
as the coles of Iuniper; flouds of many
waters cannot quench it. Agar, Pro. 30.
speakes of foure things, stately in their
kinde; I will make bold to adde a fift,
comprehending and excelling them all;
namely, the zealous Christian, strong
and bold as the Lion; not turning his
head for any; as swift as the greihound
in the waies of Gods commandements;
in the race to heauen, as nimble as the
Goate climbing the steep and craggy
mountaines of pietie and vertue; A
victorious King, ouercoming the world
and his lusts: Salomon in all his royalty,
is not cloathed like one of these in his

fiery Chariot.
               To cut off the infinite praises of zeal,
let vs heare what honourable testimonies
and glorious rewards, it pleaseth
God to confer vpon it; Dauids ruddie
complexion and his skill in musicke,
made him amiable in the eyes of men:
but the zeale of his heart, stiled him a
man after Gods owne heart; and the
sweete singer of Israel. Abraham, that
could finde in his heart to sacrifice his
Isaack, was called the friend of God.
The same virtue denominated Iacob
a Prince with God. Elisha, The
Chariots and horsemen. Paul, A chosen
vessell, &c.
               Neither doth God put them off, with
names and empty fauours, but vpon
these he bestowes his graces: Dauid dedicateth
his Psalmes to him that excelled:
God in dispensing of fauours obserueth
the same rule, To him that ouercommeth
will I giue, &c. To him
that hath, shall be giuen. Husbandmen
cast their seede vppon the fertilest

ground, which returnes it with the
greatest interest: God giues most talents
to those that improoue them in
the best banke. Ioseph shall haue a party
coloured coate, of all kinde of graces
and blessings: And because hee knowes
this will purchase them hatred and enuy,
he takes them into speciall tuition;
if any will hurt his zealous witnesses,
there goeth out a fire out of their
mouthes,Reuel. 12 to deuoure their enemies. A
man were better anger all the witches
in the world then one of these. If God
bring any common iudgements, he sets
his Seale & Thau on their foreheads,Reuel. 7. 3 &
sprinkles their posts;Eze. 9. snatcheth Lot out
of the fire (who burned in zeale,Exod. 12 as Sodome
in lust) as men doe their plate
whiles they let the baser stuffe burne.
In fine, he taketh Enoch and Eliah in triumphant
Chariots vp to heauen, and
after their labours and toyles, setteth
them in speciall Thrones, to rest in glory;
The Apostles in their twelue, the
rest in their order, according to their

zeale. And though hee may well reckon
the best of these, vnprofitable seruants;
yet such congruity (not of merits,
but of fauour) it pleaseth him to
obserue in crowning his graces, that the
most zealous heere, are the most glorious
there.
               Who would not now wonder how
euer this royall vertue should haue
lost it grace with the world; how euer
any should admit a lowe thought of it?
But what? shall all the indignitie which
hell can cast vpon it, make it vile in our
eyes? or rather shall wee not reason
from the opposition as Tertullian did
of Nero: That religion which Nero so
persecutes, must needs be excellent.
               If zeale were not some admirable
good, the diuell and world would not
so hate it; yet lest silence should be
thought to baulke some vnanswerable
reasons, let vs see how they labour to
be mad with reason:1 Obiect. Let Festus bee the
speaker for the rest,Zeal is mad, and makes men mad. for he speakes what
all the rest thinke; you know his mad

obiection,Act. 26. 24 and Pauls sober answere in
that place,1 Cor. and the like, 2. Cor. 5. 13.
whether hee bee mad or sober it is for
God and you.
               This text bids vs be zealous and repent;
the word signifies be wise againe,
or returne to your wits. The prodigall
is said to come to himselfe, when he was
first heat with this fire. We may well
answer the world as old men do yong:
You thinke vs Christians to bee madde
that follow heauen so eagerly; but we
knowe you to be mad, that run a-madding
so after vanity.
               A Christian indeed is neuer right, till
he seeme to the world to be beside himselfe;
Christs owne kindred were afraid
of him.Act. 2 The Apostles are said to bee
full of newe wine; besides, with these
the world is madde:Act. 7 they runne vpon
Stephan like mad men; Nichodemus &
such as he, neuer offends them.
               You know also what Ahab laid to the
charge of Eliah;
                  2 Obiect. with the Apology hee
made for himselfe. This is a stale imputation

in all ages. Haman accused Mordechaie
and the Iewes of it.A makebate. The Apostles
are saide to bee troublers of the
whole earth. In the Primitiue Church,
all mutinies and contentions were laide
to the Martyrs.Tenterden steeple. True it is, where zeale is,
there is opposition, and so consequently
troubles: Christ sets this fire on earth,
not as an author, but by accident: The
theefe is the author of the fray, though
the true man strike neuer so many
blowes: but the Ahabs of the worlde,
trouble Israel; then, complain of Eliah:
The Papists will blowe vppe the state,
then, father it vpon the Puritanes. It is
not for any wise man, to beleeue the
tythe of the tales and slaunders, which
fly abroad of the zealous: Leud men
would fain strike at al goodnes through
their sides.
               You may remember also,3 Obiect. 
                  Eliabs vncharitable
censure of Dauid,
                  Proud. I know the
pride of thine heart. So doe all worldlings
measure others by their owne
length; if they see any forwardnesse in

the peaceablest spirit, they ascribe it either
to vaine glory, or couetousnesse;
the onely springs that set their wheeles
on going: but of this the knower of the
hearts must iudge betweene vs.
               When slaundering will not serue,4 Obiect. They keep no meane.
then fall they to glauering, cunningly
glancing at zeale, whiles they commend
the golden meane wherein vertue
consists. But Christians, take heed
none spoile you through such Philosophy;
or rather Sophistry: for true
Philosophy will tell you that the meane
wherein virtue is placed, is the middle
betwixt two kindes, and not degrees:
And it is but meane virtue that loues
the meane in their sense.
               Oh say they,5 Obiect. Vndiscreet. but some discretion
would doe well; It is true, but take
withall Caluins caueat to Melanchton:
That he affect not so the name of a moderate
man, and listen to such Syrens
songs, till he lose his zeale.
               I haue obserued, that which the
world miscalls discretion, to eate vppe

zeale, as that which they call policy,
doth wisdome. As Ioab stabbed Abner,
vnder a colour of friendshippe: Antichrist
vndermineth Christ, by pretending
to be his vicar. The feare of ouerdoing
makes most come too short; of
the two extremities, wee should most
feare lukewarmenesse: rather let your
milk boyle ouer then be raw.
               From glauering, they fall to scoffing;
yong Saints, will proue but old Diuels;
these hot-spurs will soone runne themselues
out of breath. But we say, such
were neuer right bred; such as prooue
falling starres, neuer were ought but
meteors; the other neuer loose light or
motion: spirituall motions may be violent
and perpetuall.
               When none of these wil take, they fal
to right downe rayling; these Puritans,
these singular fellowes, &c. vnfit for
all honest company. I hope the states
Puritan, and the common Puritan bee
two creatures. For with that staffe the
multitude beates all that are better then

selues, and lets fly at all that haue any
shew of goodnes. But with that which
most call Puritanisme, I desire to worship
God. For singularity, Christ calls
for it, and presseth & vrgeth it; What
singular thing doe you, or what odde
thing doe you? Shall Gods peculiar
people, doe nothing peculiar? The
world thinks it strange, wee runne not
with them into excesses, and do not as
most doe, that we might escape derisino.
Iudge you which of these men
shall please: I beleeue none shall euer
please Christ, till they appeare odde,
strange, and precise men, to the common
sort; and yet neede not bee ouer
iust neither. Let them that haue tender
eares, stop them against the charmes of
the world, and scornes of Michol, vnles
they were wiser: let him that hath a
right eare, heare what Christ saith to
the Churches, Be zealous.
               
            
            
               The fourth part.
               Yea,Incentiues. but by what means shall a Christian

attaine this fire, and maintaine it
when he hath gotten it.
               Say not in thine heart, What Prometheus
shall ascend into heauen and fetch
it thence; thou maist fetch it thence
by thine owne prayer: as did Elias, and
the Apostles, men of infirmities as
well as thy selfe; pray continually, and
instantly: the Lord that breathed first
thy soule into thee, will also breath on
thy soule: I speake not of miraculous
(which was but a type) but of ordinary
inspiration. Prayer and zeale are
as water and yce: mutually producing
each other: when it is once comne
downe vpon thine altar; though no water
can quench it, yet must it bee preserued
fresh, by ordinary fuell; especially,
the Priests lippes must keepe it
aliue.
               Sermons are bellowes ordained for
this purpose. The word read is of diuine
vse, but doth not with that motion
stirre these coales.
               Experience sheweth the best oration

will not so moue as the meanest Orator.
            
            
               The fift part.
               But heere me thinke I heare the lukewarme
worldling of our times,1 Obiect. fume
and chafe, and aske what needs all this
adoe for zeale, as if all Gods people
were not zealous enough.
               Such as thinke they are, or can bee
zealous enough,Answer. neede no other conuiction
to bee poore, blinde, naked,
wretched, and pittifull Laodiceans: Fire
is euer climing, and aspiring higher;
zeale is euer ayming at that which is before;
carried towards perfection; thinking
meanely of that which is past,
and already attained, condemning his
vnprofitable seruice, as Caluin in his last
Wil: this rule, tries full conceited Christians.
               What would you haue vs doe?2 Obiect we
professe, keepe our Church, hear Sermons
as Christians ought to doe.
               Affectionate friendship and seruice,Answer.
                  
is not onely for publicke shewe, and
pompe, vpon festiuall dayes, in Chambers
of Presence; but for domesticall,
ordinary, and priuate vse; to such holyday
and Church retainers, God may
well say, let vs haue some of this zeale at
home and apart.
               All affections are most passionate,
without a witnes. Such as whose families,
closets, fields, beds, walks, doe testifie
of their worship, as well as temples
& synagogues, are right seruitors: God
much respects their deuotions; and
they haue strong proofe of the power
of godlines.
               Wee would you should knowe,3 Obiect. that
wee are such as haue prayer saide or
read, in our families & houshoulds; or
or else wee say some to our selues at our
lying downe, and vprising; and more
then that, say you what you will, wee
holde more then needs.
               First, knowe,Answer. that zeale knowes no
such vnmannerly courses, as to slubber
ouer a few prayers, whiles you are

dressing and vndressing your selues, as
most doe, halfe a sleepe, halfe awake;
know further that such, as holde onely
a certaine stint of daily duties, as malt
horses their pase, or mille horses
their round, out of custome or forme,
are farre from that metall which is euer
putting forward, growing frō strength
to strength, and instant in duties, in
season, out of season: and this sayes
hard to lazie Christians.
               May not we go too farre on the right
hand?4 Obiect.
               
               It is true: but liberality baulkes,Answer. and
feares couetousnesse and niggardize,
more a great deale then prodigality; so
does zeale lukewarmenes and coldnes,
more then too much heat and forwardnesse;
the defect is more opposit and
dangerous to some virtues, then the excesse.
               Why?5 Obiect. are not some thinke you, too
straight laced, that dare not vse their
Christian liberty in some recreations?
sweare by small oathes, or lend money

for reasonable vse? hath not God left
many things indifferent, wherein some
shew themselues more nice, then wise?
               Zeale will cut off the right hand,Answer. if it
cause to offend, much more to pare the
nailes and superfluities; it consumes
the strongest, dearest, corruptions;
much more will it singe off such haire
and drosse as these: If ought be praise
worthy, it embraceth such things; if
any be doubtfull, carying shew of euill,
of ill report, it dares not meddle with
them; it feares that some of these are
as indifferent, as fornication was among
the heathen.
               There are but few such,6 Obiect. no not of the
better sort, as you speake of.
               Graunt there bee any,Answer. and zealous
emulation culleth the highest
examples. Such as meane to excell
in any Art, trauell to finde out the rarest
workemen, purchase the choycest
copies; hee that hath true zeale, will
striue to purge himselfe, as Christ is
pure.
               
                  
Will you haue vs runne before our
neighbours,7. Obiect. or liue without example,
or company?
               Cowards, and crauens,Answer. stand and
looke who goes first: souldiers of courage
will cast lots for the onset and
fore-ranke, for desperate seruices, and
single combats. Iades will not go without
the way be led.
               So wee may soone come to trouble,8 Obiect.
and danger enough.
               What danger can there bee, of an
honest, peaceable, religious forwardnesse?Answer.
               
               The slug or snaile, puts out the tender
horne to feele for lets in the way,
and puls them in when there is no cause;
so doe the fearfull that shall bee without:
but zeale either finds no dangers,
or makes them none; it neither feares
to doe well, or to reproue ill doers, let
whoso will be displeased.
               Some indeed care not whom they
offend,9 Obiect. they are so harsh and fiery, they
can beare with nothing.
               
                  
Will true christianity allowe vs to
beare with any sinne?Answer.
               
               Can tinne, or hot iron choose but
hisse againe, if cold water be cast on it?
can a righteous soule choose but vex it
selfe at open euill? Such Ostriches as
can digest oathes, profane and filthie
speeches, shew what metall they haue
for the Lord of hosts; who yet will be
ready enough to offer the challenge, or
stab, for the least disgrace to themselues,
or their mistresse: Phineas had rather,
if it were lawfull, fight in Gods quarrells
then his owne.
               All are not by nature of so hot dispositions,10 Obiect.
or so fiery-spirited, as others.
               If there be such a dull flegmaticke
creature as hath no life nor spirit inAnswer.
any thing he goes about, or whom nothing
will moue; hee may plead complexion,
and yet grace is aboue nature:
but the best way is; See euery man
cōpare his deuotion in matters of God,
with his spirits and metall in other affayres,
wherein his element or delight

lies, if the one equall not the other, the
fault is not in nature: the oldest man
hath memory enough for his gold, and
the coldest constitution heate enough
where it likes.
               Well,11 Obiect. our hearts may be as good as
the best though we cannot shew it.
               Fire cannot bee long smothered,Answer. it
will either find a vent, or goe out; zeale
will either finde word, or deede, to expresse
it selfe withall.
               All haue not the gift of vtterance.12 Obiect.
               
               Violent affections haue made the
dumbe to finde a tongue;Answer. If it be lowe
water the mill may stand, but aboundance
of heart will set the wheeles on
going. What earnest discourses will vnlearned
mariners make of their voiages?
huntsmen of their game, &c.
               All haue not ability and meanes:13 Obiect. many
haue great charges.
               Loue and zeale are munificent,Answer. make
money their seruant, not their master;
wheresoeuer the heart is enlarged, the
hand cannot bee straitned; where the

bowells are open, the purse is not shut.
Herod for his pleasure, cares not for
halfe his kingdome; what will not some
gentlemen giue for haukes and hounds?
not only the poor woman that spent the
rich ointment on Christ, the widow that
gaue all her substance, the conuerts that
sould all, and threw all at the feet of the
Apostles, but euen the bounty of the
superstitious Papists shall rise in iudgement
against such as professe a religion,
wil giue it good words, & countenance,
but be at no cost with it, and know a
cheaper way to saue charge withall.
               Al haue not so much leasure,14 Obiect. to spend
so much time and study, about matters
of religion, they haue somewhat els
to doe.
               There are indeede many vanities,Answer.
which distract and diuide the minde of
worldlings; but zeale counts one thing
needefull, to which it makes all other
veile and stand by. Is there any so good
an husband of his time, that will not
steale some houre for his pleasure; that

cannot spare his God and his soule
halfe an houre, morning and euening;
that bestowes not idly, as much time
as a Sermon or two would take vp in
the weeke? The soule I confesse hath
his satiety, as well as the body; but
why should wee sit on thornes, more
at a Sermon then at a Play; thinke the
Sabbaths longer then holidaies; but
for want of zeale? If thou beest not a
vaine and willing deceiuer of thy selfe,
and others; deale honestly and plainely
with thy soule, try thy selfe by these
few rules; and if thou iudgest thy selfe
to come short of them, amend and bee
zealous.
               
               After the sparkles once by these
meanes kindled, cherish and feed them
by reading the word: Let it dwell richly
in thy heart, excite thy dulnesse by
spirituall Hymnes. Loue-songs enflame
not lust, more, then the Song of
Songs doth zeale: Reade or sing the
119. Psalme; and if thou beest not zealous,
euery verse will checke thee in thy

throat: Meditation is another helpe,
approued by Isaacks, and Dauids practice:Doct. Hall.
An Art lately so taught, as I shall
neede onely, to point at the choise
theames, suiting and furthering this argument.
I need not go far to fetch this
fire: I may strike it out of euery word
of this Epistle to Laodicea. Behold the
Lord God, especially thy Lord Christ
in his glorious titles, and Maiestie; for
so hee beginnes his visions to Iohn;
and his Epistles to the Churches, exciting
their dull hearts. By such apparitions
did hee set on fire the heart of
Moses in the burning bush; and enflamed
Stephan, his first Martyre: answerable
and proportionable to which,
are our serious contemplations. Behold
him as one that seeth thee, and knoweth
thy works; the rowsing preface of all
these letters. Caesars eye made his souldiers
prodigall of their blood. The Atheist
thinks God takes as much notice
of him and his prayers, as he doth of
the humming of flies and bees; and

therefore, no maruell if his seruice be
formall and fashionable. The faithfull
Christian by faiths prospectiue sees him
at home, and heares him saying, Well
done thou good seruant; which maketh
him to work out his heart. Behold
him as the beginning of creatures, especially
of the newe creature. Oh! what
loue hath hee shewed thee in thy redemption?
out of what misery, into
what happinesse, by what a price, to
what end; but that thou shouldest be
zealous of good workes? Behold him
as the faithfull witnesse, that witnessed
himselfe for thee a good witnesse,
and here faithfully counsels thee to follow
his patterne. Behold him as a speedy
and royall rewarder of his followers.
Take thy selfe into paradise, represent
to thy selfe thy crowne, thy throne,
thy white robes; looke not on the
things that are seene, but on the farre
most excellent waight of glory,
look vpon these, and faint if thou canst.
Behold also hee is a consuming fire, a

zealous God, hating lukewarmenesse;
not onely destroying Sodom with fire
and brimstone, and prouiding Tophet
for his enemies; but awaking also his
drowzie seruants, by iudgements (as
Absolon Ioah by firing his corne) his
Israelites by fiery serpents: whom hee
loueth, hee chasteneth, and keepeth
them in the fornace of fiery tryalls, till
they come to their right temper. Hee
standeth and knocketh: if nothing will
arouze vs, a time will come, when heauen
and earth shall burne with fire, and
Christ shall come in flaming fire, to
render vengeance with fire vnquenchable.
We therefore, that know the terrour
of that day, what maner of persons
ought we to be?
               From God turne thine eyes vnto
man: set before thee the pillar, and
cloud of fiery examples, that haue
led vs the way into Canaan. Hee is but
a dull Iade, that will not follow: The
stories of the scriptures, the liues of
the fathers, the acts and monuments

of the Church, haue a speciall vertue for
this effect. The very pictures of the fires,
and Martyrs, cannot but warme thee.
If thou canst meet with any liuing examples,
followe them, as they followe
Christ, frequent their company: euen
Saul amongst the Prophets, will Prophecie.
No bangling hauke, but with a
high flier will mend her pitch: the
poorest good companion, will doe thee
some good; when Silas, came Paul
burnt in the spirit: a lesser sticke may
fire a billet; If thou findest none, let
the coldnesse of the times heate thee,
as frostes doe the fire; Let euery indignation
make thee zealous, as the
dunstery of the Monks, made Erasmus
studious: one way to be rich in times
of dearth, is to engrosse a rare commodity,
such as zeale is: now, if euery, they
haue destroyed thy lawe; It is now hie
time to be zealous.
               Consider and emulate the children
of this generation, to see how eager euery
Demas is for worldy promotion.

How did that worthy Bishop, disdain
to see an harlot, more curiously to adorne
her body vnto sinne and death,
then he could his soule vnto life euerlasting.
It angred Demosthenes to see a
Smith earelier at his Anuile, then hee
was at his Deske.
               When thou hast thus heat thy selfe,
take heede of catching cold againe, as
many haue done, and brought their
zeale to deaths doore.
               This fire may go out diuerse wayes:Zeales extinguishers.
first by substraction of fewell; if a man
forbeare his accustomed meales, will
not his naturall heat decay? The Leuites
that kept Gods watch in the Temple,
were charged expressely, morning
& euening, if not oftner, to look to the
lights and the fire. He that shall forget
(at the least) with the Curfeau-bell in
the euening to rake vppe his zeale by
prayer, and with the day-bell in the
morning to stirre vp & kindle the same,
if not oftner with Daniel; I cannot conceiue
how hee can possibly keepe fire in

his heart. Will God blesse such, as bid
him not so much as good-morrow and
good-euen?
               He that shall despise or neglect prophecie,
must he not needes quench the
spirit? haue I not marked glorious professors,
who for some farme sake, or other
commodities, haue flitted from Ierusalem
to Iericho; where the situation
was good, but the waters nought;
and their zeale hath perished, because
vision hath failed.
               Such as reade the Bible by fits vpon
rainy dayes, not eating the booke with
Iohn, but tasting onely with the tippe of
the tongue: Such as meditate by inatches,
neuer chewing the cud and digesting
their meat, they may happely get
a smackering for discourse and table-talke;
but not enough to keepe soule
& life together, much lesse for strength
and vigour. Such as forsake the best fellowship,
and waxe strange to holy assemblies,
(as now the manner of many
is) how can they but take cold? Can

one coale alone keep it selfe glowing?
               Though it goe not out for want of
matter, yet may it be put out by sundry
accidents; when it is newly kindled it
may be put out with scoffes and reproaches,
if Peter take not heed, and fence
himselfe well against them; but if once
throughly growne, such breath will but
spread and encrease it.
               It is possible fire may be oppressed
with too much wood, and heat suffocated
with too much nourishment: ouermuch
prayer, reading, and study, may
be a wearinesse both to flesh and spirit:
but it so rarely happeneth that I
neede not mention it; and yet the soule
hath it satiety. There be some such perchance,
ouer-nice men in this sense also,
who haue not learned that God
will haue them mercifull to themselues:
It is oftner smoothered for want of
vent and exercise. Let such as vse not,
and expresse not their zeale, bragge of
their good hearts; surely they haue
none such, or not like to haue them

such. If Nichodemus had not buried
Christ by day, wee might haue feared
his zeale had gone out, for all his comming
by night.
               Yet this is not so ordinary, as to extinguish
it by the quench-coale of sin;
grosse sinne euery man knowes will
waste the conscience, and make shippewracke
of zeale: but I say, the least
known euill vnrepented of, is as a thiefe
in the candle, or an obstruction in the
liuer. I feare Dauid serued God but reasonably,
till hee published his repentance;
he that steales his meate, though
pouerty tempt him, yet giueth thankes
but coldly: zeale and sinne, will soone
expell the one, or the other, out of their
subiect; can you imagine in the same
roofe, God and Beliall, the Arke and
Dagon? Lastly, and most commonly,
foraine heare will extract the inwarde,
and aduemicious heate consume the
naturall.
               The Sunne will put out the fire; and
so will the loue of the world, the loue

of the Father, they cannot stand together
in intense degrees, one cannot
serue both these masters, with such affection
as both would haue. Seldome
seest thou a man make haste to be rich,
and thriue in religion. Christs message
to Iohn holdes true, The poor are most
forward in receiuing and following the
Gospell: as thou louest thy zeale, beware
of resoluing to be rich, lest gaine
proue thy godlinesse; take heede of
ambitious aspiring, least Courts and
great places, prooue ill aires for zeal,
whither it is as easie to go zealous, as to
returne wise: Peter whiles he warmed
his hands, cooled his heart; Not that
greatnesse and zeale cannot agree, but
for that our weakenesse many times
seuers them. If thou beest willing to dy
poore in estate, thou maiest the more
easily liue rich in grace. Smyrna, the
poorest of the seuen Candlestickes, hath
the richest price vpon it.
               The diligent practice of these courses
will make easie the practice of this

counsell, Be zealous, &c.
               
            
            
               The sixt part.
               Which little round fire-ball comming
to hand, as Dauids small stone, by
ordinary lot, knowing the insufficiency
of my owne; I pray, that God with
his arme, would scatter it farre and
wide into those wide parts of the
world without the pale of Christendome,
which lie so frozen and benummed
in their Paganisme, that they feele
not the coldnesse of their religions; as
also in those regions, that being within
the Tropickes of the Church, haue
iust so much, and so little heate, as to
thinke they haue enough, and need no
more: Chiefly mine affections burne
within me for the good of mine owne
nation, for which I would I had but so
much zeale as truely to wish my selfe
Anathema, vpon condition it had heate
sutable to the light. For I must beare it
record, it hath knowledge, I would I
could say, according to zeale. But the

spirit knowing that which is spoken to
all, to bee in effect as spoken to none,
directs mee what I would speake to
Churches, to speake to particular Angels.
Now the principall in our Church,
vnder that Archangel of the couenant,
I most willingly acknowledge to bee
my Lorde the King, as an Angel of
light. And why not that very Angel,
who by his writing hath begunne to
poure out the fift viall vpon the throne
of the beast, darkened his kingdome,
caused them to gnaw their tongues for
griefe, and blaspheme for the smart of
their wounds; though as yet they will
not repent of their errours. The Lord
anoint him more and more, with this
oyle aboue all the Princes of the earth,
that from his head, it may run downe
vpon our skirts; make him shine in
zeale aboue all other starres, to the
warming & enlightening of this whole
Horizon; set him vp as a standard for
his people; cloath him with zeale, as
with a cloake, to recompence the fury

of the aduersaries, that hee may strike
the Aramites, not three but fiue times
till they be consumed; that he may put
the Ammonites vnder the iron sawes,
harrowes, axes, which haue prouoked
him as much, as euer they did Dauid,
2. Sam. 12. But yet as in the time of
the old Testament the custody of the
fire and light was the charge of the
Priests; so here I obserue Christ to lay
it vpon his Ministers, interpreting his
rule by his practice, Tell the Church,
Tell the Angel of the Church; honouring
that despised office, with that stately
stile; intimating the vnion betweene
people and Minister, that they should
be as one: what is spoken to the one, is
spoken to the other; not as some, that euer
make Clergie and Layty two members,
in diuision and opposition; neither
yet as some spirites that lay all leuell,
but implying a propriety, especially
in grace and zeale in the Ministers,
whom the preacher calls the Master of
the assemblies; that they should exceede

as farre the people, as Angels do
men, and that he will reckon with them
for the religion of the people, because
cold Priests make bold sinners; zealous
Iehoiada may make Iehoash the
King zealous, so long as he liues with
him. We therefore men and brethren,
or rather men and Angels, vpon whom
it lies to keepe life and heate in the deuotion
of the world, to consume the
drosse of vices and heresies, that haue
fallen into the sinke of our times; we
that are to make ready our people for
the second comming of Christ, is the
spirit of Ely thinke wee sufficient for
vs? what manner of persons ought wee
to be, burning in spirit, feruent in prayer,
thundring in preaching, shining in
life and conuersation? why is it then
my brethren (oh let my plainest rebukes,
be the fruites and signes of my
best loue to mine owne Tribe; let
them not be as breakings of the head,
but as precious balme to those
whose honour with the people, I preferre

to my life) why is it that some
of vs pray so rarely and so coldely in
priuate (the euills of our times will
not out but by frequent fasting and
feruent prayer) in publique so briefly,
so perfunctorily, and feebly, that wee
scarse haue any witnesses of what wee
saie? why are there yet remaining any
Mutes amongst vs? why are there any
tongues that dare speake against often
or zealous preaching? Doth not Paul
adiure vs before him that shall iudge the
elect Angels, that we preach instantly,
in season, and out of season? Reade we
the commentaries of that text, or let
the practice of Ancients expound it;
and tell mee if euer olde or new interpreted
that charge, of bare reading, of
quarterly, or monethly, yea, or of once
on the Saboath preaching onely, as if
that were fully sufficient, without endeauoring
or desiring any more? If
alwaies often preaching bee prating,
what meant the practice I say, not only
of Caluin, and Beza, but of Chrysostom,

Basil, Ambrose, with other of the Fathers,
preaching euery day in the week,
some of them twise in the weeke, none
of them so seldome, as such would bear
the world in hand. What meant sundry
ancient Councells, (the eleuenth of Tolet
in Spaine) yea euen of Trent it selfe,
to excite the torpor of the Bishoppes
of their times, as their Canons speake,
enioyning frequent preaching, calling
for more then almost any man is to
performe.
               But heere I may turne reproouing
into reioycing, that preaching
is growne in any better fashion and
grace with our times, by royall and
reuerend, both examples and countenance:
only I wish that euery Archippus
may fulfill his Ministery, be instant and
constant in preaching. Salomon the older,
and wiser hee grew, the more hee
taught the people, sharpened his goads,
and fastned his nailes; whereas many
amongst vs are so wise in their youth,
as to affect the foolishnes of preaching;

but in their dotage, Ease slayes the
foole; when the door is oyled, it leaues
creaking; they must then fall to make
much of themselues, till contrarie with
the Prophet they cry out, My fatnesse,
my fatnesse, my belly, my belly; so fauouring
their lungs, that they will bee
sure neuer to die of Dauids consumption
of zeale; let such preach, say they,
that want liuing: and if for shame they
preach at all, it must be rarely and easily,
for breaking of their winde, (my
meaning is not to taxe such, whom
God dismables by weakenes of body)
or such as recompense their rarity
with industry, as Perkins, &c. and yet
forsooth these thinke they may iustly
challenge, and weare the double honor
of countenance and maintenance; I
maruell with what right, or with what
face, so long as there remaineth express
Canon of Scripture, bequeathing it to
those, that toyle in word and doctrine.
Neither will zeale set vs on worke only
to preach, or to preach often to auoid

the infamy of bare readers; but
it will teach vs to preach painfully, and
that in the euidence and demonstration,
not so much of art, or nature,
as of the spirit and grace; regarding
onely, that the people know Christ and
him crucified; not caring whether they
knowe what wee haue read, how many
quotations our memory will carry leuell,
how roundly wee can vtter our
minde, in new minted wordes, in like
sounding, idle, vaine, and offensiue Paranomasies;
I blush to fall into the least
touch of that kinde: yet at once to
shew and reprooue that childish folly,
It is a view of vaine preaching, turning
sound preaching into a sound of preaching,
tickling mens eares, like a tinkling
cymbal, feeding them 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
spoyling the plaine song,
with descant and diuision: what is this
but to shew our owne leuitie and want
of true art; indeede affecting such a
dauncing, piperly and effeminate eloquence
(as Tully, Demosthenes, or any

Masculine Orator would scorne) instead
of that diuine powerfull deliuery,
which becommeth him, that speaks
the Oracles of God. If euer we mean
to doe any good, wee must exhort and
reprooue, with all vehemency and authority;
lifting vppe our voyce as a
trumpet, as the sonnes of thunder;
pearcing their cares, witnessing, striuing
and contending, according to our
gift whatsoeuer it bee, to manifest our
affections, that wee may worke vpon
the people; which all the art in the
world will not teach vs to doe: onely
zeale at the heart will naturally produce
it, without straining or affecting.
If God require the heart as well as the
head; why should wee not labour to
mooue the affections, as well as inform
the iudgement? there is a doctrinall, &
as som tearm it, a Doctorly kind of preaching,
which is admired of some that
vnderstand it not; of others that could
be content with the Masse againe, because
it was gentle, and had no teeth in

it. And such Sermons I haue sometimes
heard, for matter void of exception,
but so deliuered as if one were acting
a Part, or saying a lesson by heart.
It hath called to minde a song which
sometimes I haue met withall, excellently
composed, full of sweete ayre,
surely and truely sung; but with flat
and dead voyces without spirit, which
hath marred the musicke: Of such a
Sermon and preacher, the countrey
mans verdit did well, that said, this man
may be a great scholar, but hee wants
beetle and wedges to heaw our knotted
timber withall, our greene wood
will not burn vnless it be better blowen:
you shall sometimes see an excellent
horse of shape and colour, hauing many
of those marks Du Bartas describes
in Cains supposed horse; which yet
wanting metall hath beene of little
worth, and lesse vse. If there were no
other preachers then these, which hold
themselues the onely profound and
learned preachers, I muse what should

become of conuersion of soules, which
they that couet, must come with the
spirit of Elias, to turne the hearts of
the fathers to their children. I may in
trueth, and I hope with modestie speake
with the Preacher, that in obseruing I
haue obserued, and haue found that
diuerse great Clarkes haue had but little
fruit of their ministery; but hardly
any truely zealous man of God (though
of lesser gifts) but haue had much
comfort of their labours, in their owne
and bordering parishes, being in this
likened by Gregory, to the yron on
the Smiths anvile sparkling round
about. And if for this any bordering
neighbours, whose cold labours work
not the like successe, shall accuse them
of some kind (I know not what) of policie
in bewitching the people; they
may well reply, Behold our zealous affections
are our charmes, and zeale all
our witchcraft, as Latimer well answered
one that accused the people of partiality,
for not affecting him that preached

one of his printed sermons, that
he had indeed his Stick, but wanted
his Rosen; meaning his zealous manner
of preaching and liuing, without which
last, all the former will doe but little
good, if a good ensample of life accompany
not their doctrine, as lightening
doth thunder. For there are some
(I speake it with sorrow of heart) that
seem to haue fire in their preaching, but
cary water in their life; being notoriously
proud, couetous, or debauched, stained
with odious vices. Let vs heare
the summe of all. Doo we loue Christ
more then ordinary? would wee giue
proofe of our trebble loue to him? Let
vs then feede his flocke with a trebble
zeale, expressed in our prayer, preaching
and liuing: Let vs make it appear
to the consciences of all, that the top
of our ambition is Gods glory: and
that we preferre the winning of soules,
to the winning of the world.
               This title of Angels why may it not
also be extended to Magistrates, as well

as that higher stile, of Gods? Sure I am
that the scarlet robe of zeale would exceeding
well become them. Iethro maketh
it their prime and essentiall character;
God and Moses, their onely and
sole, in the charge and commission to
Iehoshua so oft repeated; Onely be of good
courage. And if Dauid were now to repen
his Psalme; I thinke hee might alter
the forme of his counsell, and say,
Be zealous yee Rulers and Iudges of the
world, and not wise and politicke: or rather
vnder the tearmes of wisdome, he
cōprehends indeed the zeal we call for,
the most now adayes being Gallioes,
wise onely for the matters of the common
wealth; not hauing a sparke of
that spirit which was in Phineas, Daniel,
and Nehemias &c. for the Lord of
hosts, or to his lawes and commandements;
as if God had made Magistrates
keepers onely of the second table, gouernours
of men, and not of Christians;
guardians onely of ciuill societies, and
not of his Church, and shepheards also

of his flocke. Are Idolatries, blasphemies,
profaning of Sabaoths, no sins?
Why then either haue not the lawes
force and strength enough in them (as
somtime we are answered when we cō
                  plain)
or why are they not executed for
the suppressing of these raigning sins? are
not all they punished with death in the
Scriptures, as well as breaches of the
second table. Blood I leaue to the malignant.
Church, and admire clemency
in rulers, as much as any; but yet I
know the profane dissolutenesse of the
times, requires a three stringed whip
of seuerity to purge our Augean stable
of the foule abuses, whipt often with
pennes and tongues, but spared by
them that beare the sword (a man may
say of many gouernours) altogether in
vaine for matters of religion. Are not
kings of the earth charged to rēder double
to the bloudy strumpet of Rome?
Why then doth the hurtfull pittie of
our times imbolden and increase their
numbers? Laodicea it selfe, I doubt not,

for matters of mine and thine, had (as
their name imports) good ciuill iustice
and iusticers; but what was God the
nearer for it? doth hee not threaten for
all that to spue them out of his mouth?
shall hee not curse those that doe his
work negligently, fearfully & partially?
Our times complaine of two speciall
canker-worms of iustice, which eate vp
zeale in Magistrates. The first, is couetousnesse,
which makes men of place to
transgresse for a morsell of bread; the
zeale of their owne houses, consumes
the zeale of Gods house: The building
of great houses, keeping of great houses,
& matching with great houses, raising
and leauing of great houses behinde
them; makes them so rauenous, that
they deuoure so much, as choakes all
their zeale; which would teach them
to shake their laps of bribes, and scorn
to accept gifts, though men would augment
them for the peruerting of iudgement.
The other is cowardise and fearfulnes:
which how vnfit, and base a quality

did Nehemiah thinke it for a man of
his place? no better then shynesse in a
fore-horse, whose eyes men fense on
both sides, that they may lead the way,
and goe without starting; vnto which,
zeale is answerable in Magistrates, causing
them onely to see him that is inuisible,
without casting a squint eye at
men; to sing to God onely of iudgement
and mercy, without runing their
songs to mans eare; to walke in the perfect
way without turning, either to the
right or left hand for fear or fauour. Oh
that there were such an heart in our leaders;
how easily would our people follow!
what a spring-tide of zeale should
wee haue, if the Sunne and Moone
would cast out a benigne aspect vpon
them! Doth it not flourish in all those
shires and townes, where the word and
sword doe iointly cherish it? In others
which are the greatest number, how
doth it languish and wane away, and
hang downe the head? where is it in diuerse
places of the land to be seene? I

had almost said in my haste and heate,
there is none that hath zeale, no not
one, there is no courage for the trueth;
but that I remember that Eliah was
checked for ouershooting himselfe in
his too short and quicke computation.
I hope the Lorde hath his fifties amongst
vs, though but thinne sowne in
comparison of the swarmes of professed
recusants, and Church-Papists, of
profane Atheists, key-cold worldlings,
and luke warme professors. The bodies
of our many seuerall congregations,
yea euen of the better sort, whereunto
haue they beene likened by our separated
aduersaries; but vnto the Prophet
Hosea his cake, halfe baked vpon the
hearth, hauing one side, that is the one
side to the world-ward in publike seruice,
scorched a little and browned ouer;
but the inside to Godward, in priuate,
and family duties, no better then
dough; many of them making indeede
some shew, as the out-landish fruites
that are plashed vpon our walles, but

wanting heate neuer come to maturitie.
If wee should make good their resemblances,
how then should we please the
stomacke of God? who hath indeede
brooked and borne vs a long time, I
doubt but wamblingly. How neare
were we going in 88. and in the powder
treason? Do we thinke he will euer
digest vs, in the temper wee are in?
which (to confesse the truth of the fashionable
Christian) what is it but a
state of neutrality, indifferency, or such
a mediocrity, as will iust serue the time,
satisfie law, or stand with reputation
of neighbours? beyond which, if any
step a little forward, do not the rest hunt
vpon the stop? If there hap to breake
out a sparkle of zeale in any one house
in a parish; is not the whole towne in
an vprore, as when the bells ring awke
euery man brings his bucket to the
quenching of this fire? If hell bee in an
alehouse, who cries out of it? and as for
our Sundayes Church seruice, which is
all that God gets at our hands; how

perfunctorily, and fashionably is it slubbered
ouer; how are his Sabaoths made
the voider and dung-hill for all refuse
businesse, diuided between the Church
and the alehouse, the may-pole commonly
beguiling the pulpit; what man
would not spue to see God thus worshipped?
This want of deuotion makes
the foule mouthed Papists to spet at vs:
this want of reformation, makes the
queasie stomacked Brownists cast them
selues out of our Church; and shall God
alwaies suffer the land to beare vs? But
behold, he stands at the door & knocks,
by treasons, by plagues, by the hammer
of dearths, discontents, fires, inundations,
especially by the word; his locks are
wet with waiting. Oh before he shake
off the dust of his feete against vs, and
turne to some other nation more worthie,
let vs open the doore, that he may
come in and sup with vs; if he loue vs,
he will purge vs, and scourevs, by one
chastisement or other; if hee haue no
pleasure in vs, he cannot but vnburden

his stomacke of vs; If all the land besides
should turne the deafe eare, yet let
me intreat and charge you of my flock
to heare his voyce, & be zealous. Since
my comming amongst you, I haue handled
some bookes of the olde Testament,
the Epistles to the Romanes, to
the Hebrewes, of Saint Iames, Peter, &
Iohn, out of them taught the doctrine of
the Law, of faith, loue, & good works:
now in the choyce of this Epistle of
Christ to Laodicea, my desire was to
boile vp the former to their iust temper:
in which worke I can willingly be
content to spend my strength, & daies,
if God see it fit. I cannot bee a better
sacrifice then to God, and for you, if
I waste my selfe, so you may haue light
and heat; what else is the end of my
life? God hath giuen you a name, your
zeale is gone abroad, and I hope you
haue many names among you; the Lord
increase their number and zeale. If but
one of vs this day, shall open this door
of his heart with Iehoshua, let others

choose, I and my house will serue the
Lord more zealously then heretofore;
neither I nor he shall haue lost our labours.
A liuely picture casts the eye vpon
euery one that comes near it: such is
the word with whom, & with which we
haue to do; Let him that is now cold,
grow colder and colder; but let him
that hath an eare, heare what hath been
said to the Churches; And bee zealous
and amend.
               The Lord giue vs not onely vnderstanding,
but zeale in all things: hee
Baptize vs with fire: hee breath on vs,
and inspire into vs the spirit of life and
power, &c. So shall we runne the waies
of his commandements.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   