
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH. Exemplified in the liuing Speeches of Dying Christians.
            
               By SAMVEL WARD Preacher of Ipswich.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes for Iohn Marriot and Iohn Grismand, and are to bee sold at their Shops in Saint Dunstons Church yard, and in Pauls Alley at the Signe of the Gunne. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS DEARE AND LOVING MOTHER.
            
               
                  I
                Honour Augustine much for honouring his Mother so much after her death, whose name and example had otherwise lyen in obscuritie. But I like better, and wish rather to follow the piety of Nazianzene, who gaue himselfe to the

performance of all Christian Offices to his louing Mother. God hath so blessed the former part of your life aboue the lot of most women, with two such able guides, as haue so stored you with Spirituall and Temporall furniture, that you neede not the ayde of any your Children. Neuerthelesse, Grace and Nature will bee ascending and expressing themselues, though in weake seruices. REVBEN
               
when hee found but a fewe Flowres, must bring them to his Mother LEAH. ESAV when hee takes Uenison, gratifies his aged Father withall. SAMPSON findes home by the way and presents of it to his parents. Heere is a Posie gathered out of olde and new Gardens; this sauory meate hath God brought to hand, heere is sweete out of the strong. Let your soule eate and blesse.

The vse and fruit of them I wish to euery beleeuer, especially in age and sickenesse: but the handsell and honor of them (if any be) to your selfe, whom the Law of God and Nature binds mee to honour aboue others. Long may you liue to blesse your Children with your daily Prayers, especially your sonnes in that worke which needes much watering. Yet euery good Christian in yeares cannot but desire to bee

forewarned against death approching, and that is the ayme of these endeuours. God prosper and blesse them as the former: and send mee my part in the benefit of these (as hee hath done of them) in the time of vse.
            
               Your Sonne in all dutie, desirous of the birth-right of your loue and blessing. SA: WARD.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH.
            
               THat which hath bin already spoken of the Life of Faith, is to the naturall man aboue all Faith. And yet if that bee all it can doe, then is all little better then nothing. Say it could fill the minde of man with all content, satiate

his life with all delight, and sweeten the bitternesse of all afflictions, yet if for all this, there lurke in his breast a secret and slauish feare of Death, the least peece of this leauen but in a corner of the pecke, is enough to sowre the whole lumpe of his ioyes: the least dram of this Coloquintida will marre the relish of all his sweetes: and make him crie out, There is death in the pot. And, Oh Death, how bitter is thy mention and memory?
            Aske Nature, and call to Philosophy, and see if they can affoord any ayd▪ must they not confesse themselues heere quite posed and plunged? hath not death set & foyled their whole army: for pouertie, shame; and sicknesse, and other such pettie Crosses, some poore cures, and lame shifts haue they found out: but when death comes

all their courage hath fayled, and all their rules haue left them in darke and desperate vncertainties. It is possible for Pharaoh with much a do to stand out the stormes of Haile, the swarme of Flies and Lice: but when once the crie of Death is in the houses, then is there no way but yeelding: his Enchaunters and Mountebancks could abide the crie of Frogs and other such vermine; but this Basiliske affrights them. Onely Faith takes it by the tayle, handles it, and turnes it into an harmlesse wand, yea into a rod budding with glory and immortalitie.
            Quartane agues are not so much the shame of Phisicke, as Death is of all naturall skill and valour. Death is Faiths euill. Faith onely professeth this Cure, vndertaketh and performeth it with the least touch of Christs hand: and that

as familiarly as the richest Balme doth the least cut of the finger. Faith turneth feares into hopes, sighings and groanings, into wishings and longings, shaking and trembling into leaping and clapping of hands.
            Alas, all troubles are but as PigmyesDr. Tayler. Tho. Hawkes. to this Gyant, who defies all the hoste of Infidels: holds them in bondage all the dayes of their liues: and makes their whole life no better then a liuing Death and dying life. Only Faith encounters this Gyant, singles him out for her chiefe prize, and grapples with him not as a match, but as with a vanquished vnderling: insulting ouer him as much as he doth ouer the sonnes of vnbeliefe: sets her foot vpon the necke of this King of feares, and so easily becomes Conquerour and Emperour of all pettie feares, which are therefore

onely fearefull, because they rend to Death; the last, the worst, the end and summe of all feared euils. Here, and here onely is the incomparable crowne of Faith: here only doth she euidently and eminently honour her followers, and difference them from all others with a noble liuery of true magnanimitie and alacritie.
            It is true, if wee had windowes into the breasts of men, a difference one might see in the inward bearing of aduersitie: but for the face and outside, both may seeme alike hardy, both may seeme alike resolute: But when it comes to the poynt of Death, then the speech, the behauiour, the countenance, palpably distinguish the dull patience perforce of the worldling from the cheerfull welcome of the Christian. Let Death put on her mildest vizards, come

in the habit of the greatest sicknes, to the stoutest Champion on his owne Downe bed, yet shall his heart tremble and his countenance waxe pale. Let her dresse her selfe like the cruellest Fury: Come with all her rackes, fires, strappadoes, wilde beasts, all her exquisite tortures: Faith will set a woman, or a childe to make sport with her, to dare and to tyre her, and her tormentors.
            Alas what doe they tell vs of their Socrates, their Cato, their Seneca, and a few such thinne examples which a breath will rehearse, a fewe lines containe their poore ragged handfull, to our Legions, whose names or number one may as soone reckon as the sand of the Sea shore: theirs a fewe choyce men of heroycall spirits trayned vp either in arts or armes: Our of the weakest sexes and sorts, onely

strong in the Faith: theirs either out of windy vaine-glory childishly reckoning of a short death and a long fame, or out of blockish ignorance venturing vpon Death as Children and mad men vpon dangers without feare or wit: Ours out of mature deliberation and firme beliefe in Christ: who hath drunke out of Deaths bitter Cup an eternall health to all mankind, taken the gall and poyson out of it, and made it a wholesome potion of immortalitie. Faith heere proclaimes her challenge and bids nature or arte out of all their Souldiers or Schollers produce any one, who hauing free option to liue or die, and that vpon equall tearmes haue embraced Death: Whereas infinite of hers haue bin offered life with promotions, and yet would not bee deliuered expecting a better resurrection.
            
               If any shall challenge these for Thrasonicall flourishes, or Carpet vaunts, I appeale and call to witnesse not the Cloud now, but the whole skye of witnesses, such I meane as haue dyed either in the Lord, or for the Lord, who in the very poynt and Article of Death haue liued, and expressed liuely testimonies of this their life, partly in their incredible sufferings, partly in their admirable sayings. For their Acts and Monuments if they had all been penned, all the world would not haue conteined their Histories: the very summes would swell to large Volumes. The valour of the Patients, the sauagenesse of the Persecutours, striuing together, till both exceeding nature and beleefe, bred wonder and astonishment in beholders and Readers. Christians haue shewed as glorious power in the faith of

Martyrdome as in the faith of Myracles. As for their last Speaches, and Apothegmes, pitie it is no better marke hath been taken, and memory preserued of them. The choyce and the prime I haue culled out of ancient Stories, and latter Martyrologies, English, Dutch, and French. The profite and pleasure hath paid me for the labour of collecting, and the like gaine (I hope) shall quit the cost of thy reading. Sweetly & briefly they comprise and couch in them the foundation, the marrow of large & manifold precepts, prescribed by the learned Diuines for preparation against Death. The Art of dyingBeza. Perbins. Hall. Byfield. well is easier learned by examples then by directions. These chalk the way more plainely, these encourage more heartily, these perswade more powerfully, these chide vnbeleefe with more authoritie: if

some worke not, others may: some will affect some, some another. Read them ouer to a sicke or to a dying Christian, if they quicken not, if they comfort not, it is because there is no life of Faith in them: if there be the least sparke, these will kindle it, cherish and maintaine it in the doore, in the valley, in the thought, in the act of Death.
         
         
            
            The Liuing Speeches of Dying Christians.
            
            
               PART. 1.
               OLd Simeons Swannes Song, Lord let thy seruant depart in peace, &c.
               
               The good Theefe, the first Confessor. Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome.
               
               
                  Steuen the first Martyr, Lord Iesus receiue my Spirit, forgiue them &c.
               
               
                  Peter the Apostle: None but Christ, Nothing but Christ.
               
               
                  Andrew the Apostle: Welcome Oh Christ longed and looked for. I am the Scholler of him that did hang on thee, long haue I coueted to embrace thee, in whom I am that I am.
               
               
                  Polycarpus to the Proconsull,

vrging him to deny Christ, I haue serued him 86 yeares, and hee hath not once hurt mee, and shall I now deny him?
               
               When hee should haue been tyed to the stake, he required to stand vntyed, saying: Let me alone (I pray you) for hee that gaue mee strength to come to this fire, will also giue me patience to abide in the same without your tying.
               
               Ignatius, I am the Wheat or Graine to be ground with the teeth of Beasts, that I may bee pure Bread for my Masters tooth; Let Fire, Rackes, Pulleyes, yea and all the Torments of Hell come on mee, so I may winne Christ.
               
               
                  Lucius to Vrbicius, a corrupt Iudge threaning death; I thanke you with all my heart, that free mee and release mee from wicked Gouernours, and send mee to my good God and louing Father, &c.
               
               
                  
                  Pothnius Bishop of Lyons to the President asking him in the midst of torments what that Christ was, answered, If thou wert worthy, thou shouldest know.
               
               Cyprian, God Almighty be blessed for this Gaole deliuery.
               
               
                  Ambrose to his Friends about him, I haue not so liued, that I am ashamed to liue longer, nor yet feare I Death, because I haue a good Lord.
               
               And the same to Calligon, Valentinians Eunuch threatning death, Well doe you that which becomes an Eunuch, I will suffer that which becomes a Bishop.
               
               Augustine, Boughes fall off Trees, and Stones out of Buildings, and why should it seeme strange that mortall men dye?
               
               Theodosius, I thank God more for that I haue beene a member of Christ, then an Emperour of the world.
               
               
                  Hilarion, Soule, get thee out, thou hast seuentie yeares serued Christ, and art thou now loath to dye, or afrayd of Death?
               
               Vincentius, Rage, and doe the worst that the spirit of malignity can set thee on worke to doe. Thou shalt see Gods Spirit strengthen the Tormented more then the Deuill can doe the Tormentor.
               
               Iubentius and Maximinus, Wee are ready to lay off the last Garment the Flesh.
               
               
                  Attalus answered to euery question, I am a Christian: being fired in an Iron Chaine, Behold, oh you Romans, this is to eat mans flesh, which you falsely obiect to vs Christians.
               
               
                  Basill to Valens his Viceroy, offering him respite, No, I shall bee the same to morrow; I haue nothing to lose but a few Bookes, and my body is now so crazy, that one blow will ende my torment.
               
               
                  
                  Gordius, To the Tyrant offering him promotion; Haue you any thing equall, or more worthy then the Kingdome of Heauen?
               
               
                  Babilas dying in Prison, willed his Chaines should be buried with him; Now (saith he) will God wipe away all teares, and now I shall walke with God in the land of the Liuing.
               
               
                  Barlaam, holding his hand in the flame ouer the Altar, sung that of the Psalmist: Thou teachest my hands to warre, and my fingers to fight.
               
               
                  Iulitta: Wee Women receiued not onely flesh from men, but are bone of bone, and therefore ought to be as strong and constant as men in Christs cause.
               
                  Amachus, Turne the other side also, Least raw flesh offend. The like Lawrence.
               
               
                  Symeones, Thus to dye a Christian, is to liue, yea the chiefe good

and best end of a man.
               
                  Marcus of Arethuse, hung vp in a basket, annoynted with hony, and so exposed to the stinging of Waspes, and Bees, to his persecutours that stood and beheld him; How am I aduaunced, despising you that are below on earth.
               
               
                  Pusices to Ananias an olde man trembling at Martyrdome: Shut thine eyes but a while, and thou shalt see Gods light.
               
               Bernard, Fense the heele voyd of Merite, with Prayer, that the Serpent may not finde where to fasten his teeth.
               
            
            
               The second part.
               EDWARD the 6. King of England, Bring me into thy Kingdom, free this Kingdome from Antichrist, and keepe thine Elect in it.
               
               
                  
                  Cranmer Archbishop: Thrusting his hand into the fire: Thou vnworthy hand (saith hee) shalt first burne, I will bee reuenged of thee for subscribing for feare of Death to that damned scrowle.
               
               
                  Latimer Bishop: To one that tempted him to recant, and would not tell him his name: Well (saith he) Christ hath named thee in that saying, Get thee behinde mee Sathan; And being vrged to abiure, I will (saith hee) good people, I once sayd in a Sermon in King Edwards time confidently, that Antichrist was for euer expelled England, but God hath shewed mee it was but carnall confidence.
               
               To Bishop Ridley, going before him to the Stake: Haue after as fast as I can follow: wee shall light such a candle by Gods grace in England this day, as I trust shall neuer hee put out againe.
               
               
                  To whom Bishop Ridley: Bee of good heart Brother, for God will either asswage the fury of the flame, or else strengthen vs to abide it.
               
               Bishop Hooper; to one that tendered a Pardon vpon recantation; If you loue my Soule away with it, if you loue my Soule away with it: one of the Commissioners prayed him to consider that life is sweet, and death is bitter; True (saith hee) but the death to come is more bitter, and the life to come more sweet; Oh Lord Christ I am hell, thou art Heauen, draw me to thee of thy mercy.
               
               
                  Iohn Rogers, to one that told him hee would change his note at the fire; If I should trust in my selfe, I should so doe, but I haue determined to dye, and God is able to inable me.
               
               Being awakened, and bidden to make haste to Execution, Then (saith hee) shall I not need to tye my poynts.
               
               
                  Iohn Philpot, I will pay my vowes in thee O Smithfield.
               
               Thomas Bilney: I know by sense and Phylosophie, that fire is hote and burning painfull, but by faith I know it shall onely waste the stubble of my bodie, and purge my spirit of it corruption.
               
               
                  Glouer to Augustine Brenner: He is come, He is come, meaning the Comforter Gods Spirit.
               
                  Iohn Bradford: embracing the Reeds and Fagots sayd; Strayte is the way, and narrow is the gate, and few that finde it. And speaking to his fellow Martyr: Bee of good comfort Brother, for wee shall haue a merrie Supper with the Lord this night; if there be any way to heauen on Horsebacke, or in fiery Chariots, this is it.
               
               Lawrence Saunders: I was in prison till I got into prison, and now (sayes he kissing the Stake) welcome
                  
                  the Crosse of Christ, welcome euerlasting life: my Sauiour began to mee in a bitter Cup, and shall I not pledge him?
               
               Iohn Lambert: None but Christ, none but Christ.
               
               
                  Baynam, Behold you Papists that looke for myracles, I feele no more paine in the fire, then if I were in a bed of Downe, it is as sweet to me as a bed of Roses.
               
               
                  Hugh Lauerocke comforting Iohn A Pryce his fellow-Martyr, said vnto him: Bee of good comfort my Brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physition, he will cure thee of all thy blindnesse, and me of my lamenesse this day.
               
               
                  William Hunter to his Mother, For a momentany payne I shall haue a crowne of life, & may not you be glad of that? To whom shee answered, I count my selfe happy that bare such a Champion for Christ: and thee as
                  
                  well bestowed as any childe that euer I bare.
               
               
                  Adam Damlip to his fellowprisoners, wondring at his cheerefull Supping and behauiour after the message of his execution: Why (quoth hee) thinke you I haue beene so long in the Marshallsea, and haue not learned to dye? And when they told him his quarters should bee hanged vp; then (said he) shall I need take no thought for buriall.
               
               
                  Priests wife to one offering her money, I am now going to a Countrey where money beares no Mastery: when sentence was read; Now haue I gotten that which many a day I haue sought for.
               
               
                  Kirby to Master Wingfield pittying him: Be at my burning, and you shall see, and say, there is a Souldier of Christ: I know fire, water, and sword are in his hands, that will not suffer them to seperate me from him.
               
               
                  Doctor Taylor; I shall this day deceiue the wormes in Hadley Church yard, and fetching a leape or two when hee came within two miles of Hadley, Now (saith hee) lacke I but two Stiles, and I am euen at my Fathers house.
               
               
                  Walter Mill vrged to recant at the Stake; I am no chaffe, but corne, I will abide Wind and Flayle, by Gods grace.
               
               Bishop Farrar, to a Knights Son bemoaning his death: If you see me stirre in the fire, trust not my doctrine; And so hee stood holding vp his stumps, till one Grauell strooke him downe with a staffe.
               
                  Rawlings to the Bishops: Rawlings you left mee, Rawlings you finde mee, and so by Gods grace I will dye.
               
               Iohn Ardley, If euery haire of my head were a man, it should suffer death in the Faith I now stand in.
                  
The like Agges Stanley, and William Sparrow.
               
               
                  Thomas Hawkes, being desired to giue a signe, whether the fire was tollerable to be borne, promised it to his friends: and after all expectation was past, hee lift vp his hands halfe burned, and being on a light fire, with great reioycing, striketh them three times together.
               
                  Lawrence Ghest to his wife meeting him with seauen children on her hand: Be not a blocke to me in the way, now I am in a good course, and neere the marke.
               
               The Lady Iane Grey requested by the Lieutenant of the Towre to write her Symbole in his book before her beheading, wrote this, Let the glassie condition of this life neuer deceiue thee, There is a time to bee borne, a time to die; But the day of death is better then the day of Birth.
               
               
                  
                  Alice Driuer, when the chain was about her necke: Heere is a goodly Necker chiefe, God be blessed for it.
               
               
                  Iohn Noyes kissing the stake: Blessed bee the time that euer I was borne for this day. To his fellow Martyrs; We shal not lose our liues in this Fire, but change them for a better, and for coales haue pearles, &c.
               
               Iulius Palmer: To them that haue the minde linked to the body, as a theeues foot to a payre of stockes, it is hard to dye indeed; but if one bee able to separate soule and body, then by the helpe of Gods spirit it is no more mastery for such a one, then for mee to drinke this Cup.
               
               
                  Elizabeth Folkes, embracing the Stake; Farewell all the world, Farewell Faith, Farewell Hope, and welcome Loue.
               
               
                  Roger Bernard, being threatned whipping, stocking, burning; answered, I am no better then my master
                  
                  Christ, and the Prophets, which your Fathers serued after such sort, and I for his names sake am content to suffer the like at your hands: so immediatly he was condemned, and carried to the fire.
               
                  Thomas Sampal, offred a pardon in the midst of the fire: Oh now I am thus far on my iourney, hinder me not to finish my race.
               
               
                  Latimer Bishop, when they were about to set fire to him, and Bishop Ridley, with an amiable countenance, said these words: God is faithfull which doth not suffer vs to be tempted aboue our strength.
               
               Bishop Ridley to Mistris Irish the Keepers wife, and other friends at Supper, I pray you be at my Wedding tomorrow, (at which wordes they weeping) I perceiue you are not so much my friends as I tooke you to be.
               
               
                  Tankerfield, when hee had put one Legg into the fire. The Flesh

shrinkes and sayes, Thou foole, wilt thou burne and needest not? The spirit sayes, Hell fire is sharper, and wilt thou aduenture that? The flesh saies, Wilt thou leaue thy Friends? The Spirit answers, Christ and his Saints society is better. The flesh saies, Wilt thou shorten thy life? The Spirit saies, It's nothing to an eternall life.
               
               Ioyce Lewis, When I beholde the ouglesome face of Death, I am afrayd, but when I consider Christes amiable Countenance, I take heart againe.
               
            
            
               The third part.
               IOHN HVS to a Countreyman that threwe a Faggot at his head: Oh holy Simplicitie, God send thee better light. You roste the Goose now, but a Swanne shall come after mee, and hee shall escape your Fire;
                  
                  Hus a Goose in the Bohemian language, and Luther a Swan.
               
                  Hierom of Prague, Make the fire in my sight, for if I had feared it, I had neuer come hither: while it was making, he sung two Psalmes.
               
                  Anonymus on his death-bed, Now Flegme doe thy dutie, and stop thou my vitall Artery. Now Death doe me that friendly office to rid me of paine, and hasten mee to happinesse: To a Friend of his that willed him to haue his thoughts on heauen: I am there already.
               
               
                  Claudius Monerius being cauilled at by the Friers for eating a breakfast before his execution. This I do that the flesh may answere the readines of the Spirit.
               
               
                  Michaela Caignoela, a noble Matron, seeing her Iudges look out of the windowes, said to her fellow-Martyrs: These stay to suffer the torment of their Consciences, and are reserued
                  
                  to iudgement, but wee are going to glory and happinesse. And to certaine poore women weeping, and crying, Oh Madam, wee shall neuer now haue more Almes, Yes hold you (saith shee) yet once more; and plucked off her Slippers, and such other of her apparell, as shee could with modestie spare from the fire.
               
                  Iames Delos, to Monkes that called him proud Heretike; Alas, here I get nothing but shame, I expect indeed preferment hereafter.
               
               
                  Madam la Glee, to one Chavique, that vpbraided her for denying the Faith; Your cursed faith is not worthy the name of Faith; she put on her Bracelets, For I goe (said she) to my Spouse.
               
               
                  Marlorat to friends that called him deceiuer; If I haue seduced any, God hath seduced me, who cannot lye.
               
               Castilia Rupea, Though you
                  
                  throw my body downe of this steepe hill, yet will my soule mount vpwards againe; your blasphemies more offend my minde, then your torments doe my body.
               
               
                  Christopher Marshall of Antwerpe, I was from eternall a sheepe destined to the slaughter, and now I go to the Shambles, Gold must bee tried in the fire.
               
               
                  Vidus Bressius, If Gods Spirit saith true, I shall straight rest from my labours, my soule is euen taking her wings to slie to her resting place.
               The Duke of Wittemberg and Luneburgh, Many haue beene mine errours and defects in Gouernment, Lord pardon and couer all in Christ.
               
               Picus Mirandula, If Christes Death and our owne were euer in eye, how could wee sinne? Death is welcome, not as an end of trouble, but of sinne.
               
               
                  Martin Luther, Thee Oh Christ haue I taught, thee haue I trusted, thee haue I loued, into thy handes I commend my spirit.
               
               
                  O ecolampadius to one asking if the light offended him not, I haue light enough here, laying his hand on his breast; And to the Ministers about him, Let the light of your liues shine as well as your Doctrine.
               
               Francisco Varlute, Paul and Peter were more honourable members of Christ then I, but I am a member; they had more store of grace then I, but I haue my measure, and therfore sure of my glory.
               
               Peter Berger, I see the Heauens open to receiue my Spirit; And beholding the multitude at the stake, Great is the Haruest, Lord send Labourers.
               
               
                  Iohn Mallot a Souldior; Often haue wee hazarded our liues for the Emperour Charles the fifth, and
                  
                  shall wee now shrinke to dye for the King of Kings? Let vs follow our Captaine.
               
               
                  Iohn Fillula to his fellowes: By these Ladders we ascend the heauens, now begin wee to trample vnder seet, Sinne, the World, the Flesh, and the Deuill.
               
               
                  Thomas Calberg, to the Fryers, willing him to repent at the last howre: I beleeue that I am one of those Workemen in Christs Vineyard, and shall presently receiue my penny.
               
               
                  Robert Ogners, Sonne to his Father and Mother at the stake with him: Beholde millions of Angells about vs, and the Heauens open to receiue vs. To a Fryer that rayled, Thy Cursings are Blessings: And to a Noble man that offered him Life and Promotion: Doe you thinke mee such a foole, that I would change eternall things for
                  
                  temporary: To the people, We suffer as Christians, not as Theeues or Murderers.
               
               
                  Constantine being carried with other Martyrs in a Dungcart to the place of Execution: Well (saith he) yet are we a precious odour, and sweet sauour to God in Christ.
               
               
                  Fran: Sanromanus a Spaniard: Worke your pleasures on my bodie, which you haue in Chaynes your Captiue: but my soule is euen already in heauen through Faith and Hope, and vpon that Caesar himselfe hath no power.
               
               
                  Ioan the Marshals wife of France to her Husband at the Stake with her: Bee of good cheere, our Wedding was but a shadow, an earnest and Contract of that solemne and blessed Marriage, which the Lambe will now consummate.
               
               Anne Audebert of Orleance: Blessed bee God for this wedding girdle
                  
(meaning the Chaine) My first Marriage was on the Lordes day, and now my second to my Spouse and Lord CHRIST shall bee on the same.
               
               
                  Iohn Bruger, to a Fryer offering him a wooden crosse at the Stake: No (saith hee) I haue another true Crosse imposed by Christ on me, which now I will take vp: I worship not the worke of mans hands, but the Sonne of God, I am content with him for my onely Aduocate.
               
               Martin Hyperius, Oh what a difference there is betwixt this and eternall fire! who would shun this to leape into that?
               
               
                  Augustine of Hannouia to a Noble man, perswading him to haue a care of his soule; So I will (saith he) for I presently will lay downe my body to saue my Conscience whole.
               
               
                  Faninus an Italian kissed the Apparitour that brought him word

of his Execution; To one reminding him of his Children; I haue left them to an Able and Faithfull Guardian: To his friends weeping, That is well done, that you weepe for ioy with mee: And to one obiecting Christes agony and sadnesse to his cheerefulnesse: Yea (saith hee) Christ was sad, that I might be merry; He had my sinnes, and I haue his merit and righteousnesse: And to the Fryers offering him a woodden Crucifix, Christ needes not the helpe of this piece to imprint him in my minde and heart, where hee hath his habitation.
               
               George Carpenter, All Bauaria is not so deare to mee as my wife and children, yet for Christes sake I will forsake them cheerfully.
               
               
                  Adam Wallacke, a Scot, to a tempting Fryer, If an Angel should say that which thou doest, I would not listen to him: is the Fire ready?
                  
                  I am ready; Let no man be offended, no Disciple is greater then his Master.
               
               
                  Iohn Burgon to his Iudges asking him, if hee would appeale to the high Court: Is it not enough that your handes are polluted with our Blood, but you will make more guiltie of it?
               
               
                  Fredericke Anuill of Bearne, to the Fryers that willed him to call on the Virgin Mary; three times repeated, Thine O Lord is the Kingdome, thine is the power and glory for euer and euer; Let's fight, Let's fight. Auaunt Sathan, Auaunt.
               
               
                  Godfrey Varal of Piedmont; Hangman doe thine office, my death will be fruitfull to my selfe and others.
               
               
                  Halewine of Antwerp, and Harman of Amsterdam, to the Markgraue of Antwerpe, offering mittigation of Torments vpon abiuration, Wee are resolued these Momentany
                  
                  afflictions are not worthy that exceeding weight of glory that shalbe reuealed. Peter and Nicholas Thiesse
                     •
                   
                  brethren, vsed the like speech.
               
               
                  Annas Burgius in the middest of his torments: Lord forsake mee not, lest I forsake thee.
               
               
                  Peter Clarke with the root of hi Tongue plucked out, pronounced audibly (to shew that none euer wanted a tongue to praise God) Blessed be the name of God, as of old Romanus the Martyr, mentioned in Prudentius.
               
               
                  Godfrey de Hammele, to one that called him Heretique, No heretique but an vnprofitable seruant, yet willing to die for his Lord, and reckoning this death no death but a life.
               
               Bucer, No man by talke shall withdraw my mind from Christ crucified, from heauen, & my speedy departure, vpon which my soule is fixed. When

one aduised him to arme himselfe against Sathans temptations; Hee hath nothing to doe with mee: God forbid but now my soule should be sure of sweet consolation.
               
               
                  Tremelius, a Christian Iew, Let Christ liue, and Barrabas perish.
               
               
                  Ferdinand Emperour: If mine Ancestors and Predecessors had not dyed, how should I haue beene Emperour? I must that others may succeed mee.
               
               
                  Frederick the third Elect. Palat. to his friends about him, wishing him recouery, I haue liued enough to you, let mee now liue to my selfe, and with my Lord Christ.
               
               Leonard Caesar: Oh Lord doe thou suffer with me, Lord support me and saue me.
               
               
                  Windelmuta, to one that told her shee had not yet tasted how bitter Death was: No (said shee) neither euer shall I, for so much hath Christ
                  
                  promised to all that keepe his word, neither will I forsake him for sweete life, or bitter death.
               
               Henry Voes, If I had ten heads, they should all off for Christ. God forbid I should reioyce in any thing saue in his Crosse.
               
               The Minister of Brisgo, This skinne which scarce cleaues to my bones, I must shortly haue layde off by necessitie, how much more willingly now for my Sauiour Christ.
               
                  Adolphus Clarebachius: I beleeue there is not a merrier heart in the world at this instant, then mine is: Behold, you shall see mee dye by that Faith I haue liued.
               
                  Alexander Cane: when a fooles Cappe was put on his head: Can I haue a greater Honour done me, then to bee serued as my Lord CHRIST before Herod? Lord,

                  seeing my Persecutors haue no mercy, haue thou mercy on mee, and receiue my soule.
               
               Almondus a Via, My body dyes, my Spirit liues. Gods Kingdome abides euer. God hath now giuen mee the accomplishment of all my desires.
               
               
                  Giles Tilman, vrged to know what hee beleeued of Purgatory. Purgatorie and Hell I leaue to you, but my Hope is directly to goe into Paradise: Neither feare I this great pyle of Wood, whereof some might haue been spared to warme the poore, but will passe through it purged for my Sauiour.
               
               Peter Bruse: I thanke God, my broken legge suffered mee not to flye this Martyrdome.
               
               
                  Marion the wife of Adrian, seeing the Coffin hooped with Iron, wherein shee was to bee buryed aliue. Haue you prouided this
                  
                  Pasty-crust to bake my flesh in.
               
               Lewis Paschalis: Its a small matter to die once for Christ, if it might be, I could wish I might die a thousand deaths for him.
               
               Iohn Buisson: I shall now haue a double Gaole deliuery; one out of my sinnefull flesh, another from the loathsome Dungeon I haue long lyen in.
               
               
                  Hugh Stallour to Iohn Pike his fellow Martyr; Yet a little while, and wee shall see one another before the Throne, and face of God.
               
               
                  Levine de Blehere, To his friends that offered to rescue him by tumult: Hinder not the Magistrates worke, nor my happinesse: Father, thou soresawest this Sacrifice from eternall: now accept of it, I pray thee.
               
               Christopher Fabrianus: First bitter, then sweet; first battell, the victory when I am dead; euery drop of
                  
                  my bloud shall preach Christ, and set foorth his praise.
               
               Francisce Soet: You depriue me of this life, and promote mee to a better, which is, as if you should rob mee of Counters, and furnish me with Gold.
               
               Guy de Bres: The ringing of my Chaine haue beene sweet Musicke in mine eares: my Prison an excellent Schoole, wherein Gods spirit hath bin my Teacher: all my former Discourses were as a blinde mans of colours, in comparison of my present feeling. Oh what a precious Comforter is a good Conscience.
               
               
                  Dionysius Peloquine, To the Inquisitour telling him, his life was now in his owne handes. Then said hee, It were in an ill keeping. Christes Schoole hath taught mee to saue it by loosing it, and not by the gaine of a few dayes, or yeares, to lose Eternitie.
               
               
                  
                  Lewis Marsake Knight, seeing his other brethren goe with Halters about their necks, which they offered not him because of his dignity; Why I pray you (quoth hee) deny me not the Badge and ornament of so excellent an order, is not my cause the same with theirs? which obtayning, hee marched valiantly to the Stake with them.
               
                  Symon Laloeus to one Siluester his Executioner; Neuer saw I man in all my life whose comming was more welcome to mee then thine. So cheerfull was his death, that Syluester amazed at it, left his office, became a Conuert and a Christian himselfe, went to Geneua for further instruction in the Gospell.
               
                  Kilian a Dutch Schoolemaster, to such as asked him if hee loued not his wife and children, Yes (said hee) if all the world were golde, and were mine to dispose of, I would giue it
                  
                  to liue with them, though it were but in prison; yet my soule and Christ are dearer to me then all.
               
               Giles Verdict: Out of my Ashes shall rise innumerable Christians, which Prophecy, God so verified by the effect, that it grewe a byword after his death, That his ashes flewe abroad all the Countrey.
               
                  Anthony Verdict brother to the former, condemned to bee eaten with Beastes, to preuent the like Prouerbe: sayd to his Father, Oh  Father, how hath God enabled you, to haue two Sonnes honoured with Martyrdome.
               
               
                  Iohn Barbevill, to Fryers that called him ignorant Asse: Well, admit I were so, yet shall my Bloud witnesse against such Balaams as you bee.
               
               
                  Francisce Coluer, to his two Sons massacred together with himselfe:

                  Sheepe wee are for the slaughter; this is no new thing, let vs follow millions of Martyrs through temporall death, to eternall life.
               
               By all these which are but an handfull of Christs Campe Royall, it sufficiently appeares they had their Faith fresh and liuely in the face of this graund enemy, and by Vertue of their Faith, their Spirits, Wits, and Tongues, vntroubled, vndismayed; insomuch that an auncient witnesse of the Christian Bishops, that they did more ambitiously desire the glory of Martyrdome, then others did Praelacies and Preferments. And a late mortall enemie of theirs, bade a vengeance on them, for hee thought they tooke delight in burning. What then shall wee gaine by them? I remember Master Rough a Minister, comming

from the burning of one Austo, in Smithfield, being asked by Master Farrar of Halifax, where he had beene, made answere, There where I would not but haue been, for one of my eyes, and would you knowe where? Forsooth I haue beene to learne the way: which soone after hee made good, by following him in the same place, in the same kinde of death. Now if one President made him so good a Scholler: What dullards and non-proficients are we? if such a cloud of examples work not in vs a cheerefull abilitie to expect and encounter the same aduersary, so often foyled before our eyes. Yet least any should complaine, that examples without Rules, are but a dumbe and lame helpe: I will annexe vnto them a payre of Funerall Sermons, opening a couple of Seales

reuealed to Iohn in his second vision: The first, affording vs sundry Meditations of Death and Hell; The second, of Heauen, & the happinesse of such as dye in the Lord, and rest vnder the Altar.
               The vse of them I chiefly dedicate and commend to old sick persons, such especially, as die of lingring diseases, affoording them leisure to peruse such themes, though I forbid none, but to all I say, Come and see.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF FAITH in DEATH.
            
               
                  REVEL. 6. 7. 8.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Come and see.
                     And behold a pale horse, and his name that sate on him was Death, and Hell followed after him, and power was giuen vnto them, &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                     COme and see. Were it some stately, some pleasing, yea or but some vaine sight such as Mordecay riding on the kings Horse in pompe with the Royall Furniture: or but a company of Players, riding through a Market,

A Drum, a Trumpet, or the least call would serue the turne, to draw vs out to the sight: But these being serious, yea to nature somwhat hideous and odious Voyces, like vnto Thunders, are giuen to the beasts to call beholders. The Cryer in the Wildernesse is willed to cry this Theme aloud in the deafe eares of men. A Boanerges with all the vehemency and contention of his voyce and affections, will bee too little, vnlesse God boare the eares, open the eyes, and perswade the hearts of men to Come and see. Yet is it but our folly to be so shye of this sight, for though it bee sad, yet is it of all the sights vnder the Sunne the most necessary, the most profitable; Though we turne away our faces and close our eyes, yet see it wee must, and see it wee shall, neuer the lesse, neuer the sooner, neuer the later.

Nay, the truth is, see it wee neuer shall, but with closed eyes. Thou tender faint-hearted man or woman that art so loath to meete with a Corps or Beere, to see a skull, or any thing that minds thee of Death, shalt thou by this meanes protract or escape thy Death? No, let mee tell thee praeuision is the best preuention, and praemonition the best praemunition. That which is commonly receiued of the Basiliske, is here no conceited Story, but a serious truth. He that sees it before he be seene of it, may auoyd the deadly poyson of it. Hee that sees it before it comes, shall not see it when it comes. Hee that mannageth an horse at an armed stake, fits him to rush into the maine Battell without feare. And wouldest thou with Ioseph of Arimathaea, walke euery day a turne or two with

Death in thy Garden, and well foreacquaint thy selfe therewithall, thou shouldest haue, if not Enochs, yet euery true beleeuers Priuiledge, not to see Death, not to taste of Death, viz. in that ougly forme, distastfull manner, which other the sonnes of Adam do, who because they will not see the face of it, must feele the sting of it. To dye well and cheerfully, is too busie a worke to be well done ex tempore. The Foundation of Death must bee layde in life. Hee that meanes, and desires to dye well, must dye daily. Hee that would ende his dayes well, must spend them well, the one will helpe the other. The thoughts of thy end as the trayne of the Foule and Rudder of a Shipp will guide thy life, and a good Life will leade thee to a peaceable end, that thou shalt neither shame or feare to

dye. In a word, Platoes Phylosophy in this, is true Diuinitie: that the best meane, and whole summe of a wise mans life, is the Commentation of Death, not euery fleet and flitting flash, but frequent and fixed contemplations. Death is the knownest and vnknownest thing in the world: that of which men haue the most thoughts and fewest Meditations. Be therefore perswaded to Come and see: that is, come that thou mayest see. Come from other obiects, infinite and vaine spectacles, with which the eye is neuer glutted. Drawe neere and close to this that thou mayest see it throughly. Wipe off the Clay, Spittle, and Scales of thine eyes, that thou mayest cleerly behold the nature, quality, and consequents of Death. No mortall wight but hath some blushes of mortality, such as go and come,

but if they would suffer them to lodge in their mindes, they must needes stirre some affection, and leaue some impression in the memory, and produce some effects in their liues. Socrates had a gift that hee could fasten his eyes many howers on one obiect without change or wearinesse: Halfe so stayed a thought of ones mortalitie, might bring a man to immortalitie. It is not beautie seene, but looked on that wounds. I meet with a Story of one that gaue a young Prodigall a Ring with a Deaths head, with this condition, that he should one houre daily for seauen dayes together looke and thinke vpon it: which bred a strange alteration in his life, like that of Thesposius in Plutarke, or that more remarkable, of Waldus the rich Merchant in Lyons, who seeing one drop downe dead in

the streets before him, went home, repented, changed his life, studied the Scripture, and became a worthy Preacher, Father, and Founder of the Christians called Waldenses, or poore men of Lyons. In Conference and Confessions many one hath acknowledged to my selfe the like: some that by dangerous sicknesse of their own, others that by feare of infection in times of the Plague, and generall Visitation, others by the death of friends, as by shafts that haue fallen neere them, haue beene awakened, affrighted, and occasioned to thinke deeply on their ends, to prouide against their ends, to attend the Word, which hath proued the meane of their conuersion and saluation. And this I thinke should bee enough to perswade young and olde, one and other to Come and see.
               
               
                  But what now are we come out to see?
               Behold, First the Seale opened.
               Secondly, the Horse issuing out.
               Thirdly, the Colour of the Horse.
               Fourthly, the Rider and his Followers. Death and Hell.
               
               This horse is vnder seale. Seales wee vse commonly to confirme and conceale, to make things sure and to keepe things secret. And thus death as all Gods iudgements are said to bee sealed. Iob. 35. and that with a firmer seale then of the Medes and Persians: In which sence this Horse Zach. 4. issueth from betweene two brasen mountaines, that is Gods ineuitable, vnalterable Decree: hee rusheth not out, rangeth not abroad at the will of man or Satan, at hap or by blinde Destiny, but at the pleasure and by the appoyntment of the great

Master of these Gods horses, Iesus Christ, one of whose chiefe royalties is to keepe the locke and key of Death and Hell, Reuel. 1. else would he be euer trampling vnder feete the sonnes of men. Looke how naturally, and continually the Sea would ouerwhelme the whole Earth, if the waues were not bounded by prouidence: So would this horse ouercome the Inhabitants of it, were hee not tyed short, and restrained by his, and our Lord. You see him heere limited to the fourth part of the Earth, else had not one been left aliue: For all are sentenced, and haue deserued to dye, and it's fauour that all dye not. In a word, men dye not by chance, course of Nature, influence of Starres, but then, and therefore because it is appointed. A million of Aethiopians perish in one day, in one battell,

2. Corinth. 14. not because all were borne vnder one aspect of Planets, but because such a slaughter was sealed of God. And though there be one way in, and twenty out of the world, yet all falls out as God determines and disposeth. That Christian which beleeues this, though hee may desire Dauids Arithmeticke to number his dayes aright, that is, to know the breuity of them: yet will hee neuer study the blacke and senselesse Art of calculating his birth and death. None but fooles are curious and inquisitiue to know that, which is vnder Gods priuy Signet. We are all as Souldiers sent to Sea with Commission vnder seale, not to be opened till wee come to such and such a point. To guesse and conclude, we shall dye at such an age, in such a Climaterical yeere, what is it but to make a league with

Death, not vnlike to that frenzie Merchant that would make and strike vp matches of hundreds and thousands with parties absent as if they were present. A fond itching humour, and such as would for the most part (what euer wee thinke) doe vs hurt rather then good, if the day and houre were far off, it would breede securitie: if neere hand horror. Sicknesses are sufficient summons and warnings. Marke such as sentenced by Iudges and Physitians fore-know their death, yet without speciall grace fore-fit themselues neuer the more carefully. Some deaths indeede (as some Clockes giue warning before they strike) which symptomes and signes infallible: and so extraordinarily God giues to some Moses and Hezekiahs a presage, and hearts to prepare: but generall God hath seene

this the best for vs, that it should be for the generall most certaine, for the perticular most vncertaine, to him sealed, to vs concealed: of which hee would haue vs make these vses.
               First, for our bodily health not to bee too carefull, nor too carelesse: with all our Physicall dyet and miserable anxietie, wee cannot adde one cubite to the length of our dayes, or measure of our health. Wee are all sealed vp no otherwise then the measure of our wealth, of our crosses and blessings, for the hauing or auoyding of which: the meanes wee must vse without carking care, or cowardly feare, cheerefully relying on Christ, the Lord Keeper of the Seale, not wittingly and desperately preuenting that sealed date by surfeits of toyle or pleasure, by wilfull neglect of dyet, contempt

of Physicke, by griefe or by melancholy: nay, not by haste to glory with Cleombrotus the Heathen, or with hastie selfe-murthering Christians, such as Augustines times were full off: but with Iob patiently all the dayes of our life, during the terme of our sealed lease, till the very day and date expire, and appointed time of dismission, and dissolution come.
               And secondly for our soules prouision, not to do as most that haue set dayes of truce and peace, and in which they hang vp their Armour a rusting, and their Beakons vnwatched: but as people that liue in perpetuall hazard of war, haue all things in a daily readinesse for seruice at halfe an howres warning, vpon the least Alarum: Who would liue one howre in infidelitie or irrepentance, least in that hee bee taken napping as the

foolish Virgins, and that rich foole that reckoned of many yeares, and had not one night to continue. Grant it were enough to repent and belieue the last day of life, yet how can a man be sure to doe that, vnlesse he doe it euery day: considering that euery day may for ought he knowes, be the last. The seale may be opened in a day and houre one least thinkes of it, as it is to most that dye.
               Lastly, when euer this Horse comes to fetch away vs, or any of ours children or friends: A beleeuer stamps not, and rages not, as mad Marshall Birom: murmures not, repincs not as the wild Irish men without hope: expostulates not with Destenie, as Alexander for his Hephestion: but with Aaron, layes his hand on his heart and mouth for his sonnes suddaine Death, knowing what God hath

sealed, shall be and must bee. If the Dreames of a blind fatall necessity could quiet Heathens, how much more should a Christian be chearfull at the disposall of a wise and louing keeper of the Seale. A minute sooner or later it shall not be, then hee hath fore-seene and foresealed for thy especiall good, who hath times, and seasons, and seales in his ordination. Worthy was the speech and resolution of an vnderstanding Diuine. If Christ hath the key and seale of Death, then a figge for Death. This though it be an ordinary notion, yet well digested, it is a singular stay to a beleeuer.
               The Seale being thus opened, Come and see the Creature that issues forth. Behold an Horse, a fierce a strong, a warlike, a speedy Creature so described by God himself, Iob 39.
               
                  Looke therefore how easily Iehu stamped Iezabell into peeces: and Tamberlaine his Troupes of Horse the Turkish Foot-men, or as the sturdie Steede dashes out the little Whappets braines, so easily doth Death with the least kicke and spurne of his Heele the haylest Complexion, the stoutest Constitution, tryumphing like an Emperour ouer all sorts of people, treading in the neckes of Kings and Princes, as Iosua ouer them in Cane insulting in the tearmes of Rabshakeh, Where is Hamath? the2. Kings 19. 15. Ezek. 32. Kings of Arphad, Iuah, and Sepharuaim? Elam, Meshech, and Tubal, whose feare was vpon the liuing, are they not descended into the graue? made their bedds in the slimy valley, and layd their Swordes vnder their heads? Where is Goliah with his brazen

Bootes? Hath wisedome deliuered, Strength rescued, or wealth ransomed any out of my fingers? For all their Confidence, haue they not gone to the King of Feare? How can it bee otherwise, seeing Death comes as an armed Horseman, vpon naked Footmen: no encountering, no resistance, no running away, no euasion by flight. This winged Pegasus, postes and speeds after men, easily giues them Law, fetches them vp againe, gallops and swallowes the ground he goes, sets out after euery man as soone as he comes into the world, and playes with him, as the Cat with the Mouse, as the Grey hound with the Badger, somtimes hee followes faire and a farre off, lingers aloofe and out of sight: anon hee spurres after, and by and by is at the heeles in some sicknesse, and then it may bee giues

vs some breath againe, but in the end ouertakes vs, and is vpon vs with a Ierke, as the snare ouer the Fish, or the Foule. Absolom could not outride him: Pharaohs Chariot wheeles fell off in this chase. Ionathan and Saul, swift as the Egles, strong as the Lyon, yet how were they slaine with the mighty? What then is the course the Christian takes? He neither foolishly thinkes to resist, or escape, nor yet cowardly swounds, or crauenly yeelds: but as a valiant Footman that espies an Horseman pursue him in a Champion, stayes not till he come vpon him, but addresseth himselfe for the encounter: so does a Christian in his best health and prosperity, put on his armour, get him the Helmet of Saluation, the Shield of Faith, and learneth the vse of them betimes, before he be vnapt to it in sicknesse or age

As the Parthians teach their verie Children to handle the Bow, the Scythians the Dart, the Germans the Speare: and so it comes to passe, that belieuers are not surprized, as worldlings often are, with milke but in their breasts, without Oyle in their Lamps, & all in vaine then fondly cry out to this Horseman to stay his stroake. As the rich Foole Gregorie relates of, who entreated Death to stay till the next morning, Truce but til to morrow, and I will bee ready for thee. A Christian wisely considereth, that hee hath no morrow, and therefore while it is called to day, is ready for this Horse, who neuer sets any certaine day of his comming.
               Behold also the colour of this Horse 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the color of the withering leafe, pale and wan: Symbolizing and noting the effect hee

hath first vpon the liuing, whom hee appalles, as hee did Baltashar, whome all his Concubines and Courtiers could not cheere, nor all his wine in the bowles of the Temple fetch colour into his countenaunce. See wee not often Prisoners at the Barre wanne away, and dye as white as a cloth at the Sentence of death pronounced on them. Many gulls and gallants we may heare sometimes flight off Death with a iest, when they think it out of hearing, and some wish it and call for it, as Gaal for Abimelech, but when it comes in good earnest, they are not able to looke it in the face, with the bloud in their cheeks. Some foolishly set a face on the matter, on their deathbeds, lest neighbours should censure when they are gone for Cowards: hypocritically paynting their faces as Iezabel did, affronting

                  Iehu out of the windowe, God knowes with a cold heart, & if her paint had bin off, a pale face should one haue seen vnderneth it. Wheras Christians hauing a good measure of faith to warme them at the hart, change not their countenance nor haue their colour any whit abated, but as is recorded of Mistris Ioyce Lewis at the stake, and sundry other Christians, euen of the fearfullest by nature and sex, looked as fresh and cheerely at the houre of death, as at their mariage.
               A second effect of this pale horse is after death, bereauing the bodies of all bloud and colour, making them liuelesse & wan carkases, and so layes them a rotting and mouldring among the wormes their sisters, till the fashion of them be vtterly altred, the beauty consumed, and shape turned into rottennesse. Oh how grieuous is this to such

                  Absaloms, Iezabels, and Rosamonds, haue set much by their painted sheathes and pampered Carkases, whose belly is their God, and yet their end must be corruption. Dust they were, and to dust they must returne. Fauour is deceitfull, and beautie is vanity, when the pale Horse comes, there is no remedy. Here only Faith hath an Antidote comforting her selfe with these sayings: This base and vile bodie of mine must bee thus serued, that it may bee transfigured and made conformable to the glorious Standart Christs body, more glorious then the Sunne in his brightest hew. It must thus bee sowne in pale ignomy, that it may rise in glorious beautie. VVhat if I lose a little Vermillion red mixture of Fleame and Sanguine, shall I not recouer a radiant resplendant lustre? Can the Alchimist with

his Art, cause a dry withered floure to shew it selfe againe for a space, in it naturall verdant shape and colour: and cannot God that made mee first of Clay, and that Clay of nothing, reduce and refine the same after it hath beene in the Earth? as the Chynois doe the materialls of their curious dishes for many scores of yeares, that when it is throughly deficate, their posteritie may temper and frame some vessell of excellent seruice withall. Certainly my Redeemer liueth, and with these eyes I shall see him, as hee is most admirable to behold, and my selfe like vnto him in my degree. Ten thousand times more comely, then is heere possibly for to imagine, the most personable Creature that euer the Sunne saw: when the body shall bee enriched with those excellent Dowries of Impassibilitie, Claritie,

Subtiltie, Agilitie.
               Oh, but heeres yet a more fearefull Spectacle behind, then all that hath yet come in sight. Hell, euen Hell it selfe in the worst sense, not the graue of the body, but of the soule. For Iohn sees here principally the Iudgement of the wicked, that were slaine for the contempt of the Gospell, by the pale Horse, for not yeelding to the White and his crowned Rider. And their wofull state is heere opposed to the happy condition of the Martyrs vnder the Altar.
               Well then, behold also, euen Hell the Page and follower of Death, attending him where euer hee goes among the wicked sort. Whence it is that they are so often coupled in this Booke, Death and Hell. Looke as the Foxes wayt vpon Lyons, Carrion Crowes vpon armies, Gaolers or

Serieants for a prey: so diligently does the deuill on death for a booty. No fowler does more cunningly stalk behind the Horse, or creep behinde brakes and hedges, to get his ayme at the shye Fowles. No Serieant hides his Mase, no Angler his hooke more warily: knowing that else Hel should neuer swallow so many.
               Alacke, alacke, we silly Fish see one another caught, and ierk't out of the Pond, but see not the fire and Frying panne into which they come. In this consists the Deuils chiefest policie, and our grossest simplicity, and euen this is the cause of our sottish and foolish liuing and dying.
               Oh that my head were a Fountaine of teares, to weepe for, and bewayle the stupiditie, yea the desperate madnesse of infinite sorts of people that rush vpon

Death, and chop into Hell blindling. How bruitish and beastly are the preaemises and conclusion of the Epicure and his brood, Let vs eate and drinke▪ for to morrow we shall dye? Who knowes whether the soule of the beast descend, and mans ascend, who euer saw the one goe downeward and the other vpward, and then what matter if the life of the one differ not from the other? What need a man care whether hee bee a Sadduces Swine, an Epicures Horse, or himselfe? The one many times hath lesse care, and more pleasure then the other, if Death be the last line, the full point, and finall cessation of the Creature. These 
                     •
                  ruits thanke Phylosophie that 
                     〈◊〉
                   taught them not to feare any such Hobgoblins spirits, or old Wines tales, as Hell. But such Phylosophie Socrates, Plato,
                  
and the wiser sort euen of the Heathen haue hissed out of Schooles as belluine. Yea, the most sauage and vnlittered peoplè, the lesse soiled with Art, the more confidently doe they out of Natures instinct, and diuine impression, conclude of an eternall place of well and ill being after death for the soules of men. But these Monsters wilfully shut their eyes, deface and obliterate these stamps, and principles of nature, and so dance hood-winke into perdition. Miserable it is to see how boldly and blindly they thinke and venture on Death: Theramenes, he writes Bookes in praise of Death, as the end of all calamities. Augustus, hee dyes in a iest, calling for a Plaudite. Tiberius 
                  
                     •
                  n dissimulation. Diogines hearing Antisthenes cry out in his paines, Who shall ease mee? offers him a 
                     •
                  nife to dispatch himselfe withal.

                  Caninus called to execution, bids his Fellow remember hee had the best of the Game. The Earle of Kildare seeing his Writ of Death brought in when hee was at shouelboard, throwes his cast, with this in his mouth: Whatsoeuer that is, this is for a huddle. Little list would these blind bayards haue for such idle mirth, if their eyes were opened to see this follower of Death. How pittifull is the frenzie of those braue Spirits, as they deeme and terme themselues (as much as they scorne pittie) our Duellists I meane, who as if they neuer had heard of Hell, are as Prodigall of their liues, as Cockes or Dogs are of theirs, powring them out vpon euerie drunken quarrell. I pittie not the losse or misse of such, good for little but to se
                     •
                   in the front of a Battell, or t
                     •
                  
                  
stop breaches and Canons withal: but I pitty the losse of their soules, who serue themselues, as the Iesuite in Lancashire, followed by one that found his Gloue, with a desire to restore it to him: but pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience, leapes ouer an Hedge, plunges into a Marlepit behind it, vnseene and vnthought of, wherein he was drowned. I maruell not, that they feare not a Rapier, or Pistoll, Who would not chuse it before a lingring and paineful sicknesse? Were it not for the afterclaps of Death? No Coward need feare the encounter of it alone in a single combat. But Death hath a Second, a Page tenne times more dreadful then himself, with whom we haue to begin, when we haue done with Death, which is but the beginning of sorrowes. Death is pale, but his follower is a blacke

Fellow, a terrible monster neuer enough feared. In which respect, how lamentable also is the blindnesse of all selfe-murderers, who make Death the remedie of euery griefe, and cure of euery violent passion: If they finde themselues inwardly vexed, or perplexed in Conscience, they seeke Death as a present ease; not considering how they leape out of the smoake into the flame, out of the flame into the fire, out of a curable momentany disturbance, into an endlesse inrecouerable woe, (without the extraordinary mercy of God) to which vsually the Deuill speeds them, that hee might get them into his clutches, and so passe out of doubt, all meanes of preuention and euasion by Faith and Repentance.
               Oh senseles Achitophell, how did thy wisedome fayle and befoole

thee, when thou settest thine house in order, and disposest of thy goods, forgettest thy soule, hangest thy selfe, which durst thou, or wouldest thou haue done, had but one belieuing thought of an eternall fire come into thy head? How blockish is the manner of dying of many a Naball, who strucken with the feare of Death and Hell, become as insensate as stocks and stones, haue no mind nor power to thinke of one thing or other: Cannot abide to heare any mention of the danger of that which they feare, whose senses the Deuill bewitches and benumms, lest they should see and auoyde: such was Lewes the eleuenth, who straightlie charged his Seruants, that when they sawe him sicke, they should neuer once dare to name that bitter word Death in his eares. So doe Cowards

and Crauens shut their eyes, and chuse rather to feele blowes, then to see and shunne them. Little better is the common course that most people take. Scared some are with a confused, and preposterous feare of Death, and flashes of Hell in their Consciences, and yet take no course to get pardon and Faith in CHRIST: but either taking it to bee some melancholly humour, send for merry companions to driue it away: or being giuen vp to hardnesse of heart and impenitencie, wilfully shake off all thoughts of repentance, shut their eyes and eares against all good aduise, and desperately put all at aduentures, and chop into the iawes of that roaring Lyon. Some of them ridiculously fearing Death, they knowe not why, more for the pangs of it (which often are lesse then of the Tooth-ake) then

for the Hell following: like fooles that feare the thunder Cracke, and not the Bolt; the Report of the Peece, and not the Bullet; the Serieants arrest, and not the Gaolers Imprisonment: Labour to escape Death which they cannot, and Hell which they might. Others of them scarred with some terrible apparisions, affrighted, as Cardinall Crescentius a little before his death, with a blacke Dog in his Chamber. A Presage and Preludium of Hell approaching: they crie out they are damned, the Deuill, the Deuill, doe they not see him, &c. And so Spira-like, desperately and disconsolately depart in hellish horrour. Other of them a little wiser, and yet little the better for it, admit a colde thought or two, and it may bee a little parley about the matter, but when they haue fetched a sigh or

put all vpon a Lord haue mercie on them: trust it shall goe as well with them as with others, euen as God will haue it: and thinke they doe much if they send to a Minister to pray with them or for them: neuer giuing all diligence to make their saluation sure, and to escape so great a condemnation.
               Oh if wee could consider how fearefully such finde themselues deluded, when their soules awake, worse then Ionas in the▪ Tempest, euen in a gulfe of fire and brimstone. How would it awaken and arouse vs to fore-see Death and Hell in their shapes, and to fore-appoint our selues throughlie, not against the first Death which wee cannot, but against the second wee may, if we get our part in the first resurrection.
               
                  This Text, mee thinkes speakes to euery sicke man bound on his bedde with the Cords of Death, as Dalilath to Sampson: vp and arise, for the Philistims are at hand: Death is at the doore, and behind the doore, the Fiends waight to fetch away thy soule. Bellarmine is of opinion, that one glympse of Hell were enough to make a man not only turne Christian and sober, but Anchorite and Monke, to liue after the strictest rule that can be. I am of beliefe, that Gods spirit cooperating a thorow meditation of it, might be a meane to keep one from it. For a man to wish to haue a sight of it, or that one might come thence & make report of the vntolerable and vnutterable paines of it is superfluous, superstitious: & if it should be granted, yet being not Gods ordinance and allowance, it might goe without his

blessing, and doe one no good. Thy best course is well to ponder what wee that are Gods Ministers report of it, out of Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles descriptions. And if God meane thee any good, our warning may doe thee some good. Popish writers are too bold in making Maps of Heauen and Hell, as if they had surueyed them and their regions, and inhabitants: but most I thinke are one the other hand to breefe and summarie in their meditations and writings. To paint it in it owne natiue colours is impossible, or by any contemplation to comprehend the horror of it. Shaddowes and parables the Scripture vseth, by which thou mayest and oughtest to helpe thy coniectures, and to worke on thy affections withall, after this or the like manner.
               
                  Heere God hath allowed thee on his earth a pleasant habitation, commodiously situate in a good Ayre, richly decked with furniture, compassed with delightfull Gardens, Orchards and Fieldes, where thou hast liberty to walke and ride at thy pleasure: How would it trouble thee to thinke of being layd vp all thy life in some streight and loathsome prison, by this consideration how ill thou wilt brooke to be cast into a dolefull disconsolate Dungeon, to lye in vtter darkenesse, blacknesse of darkenesse in eternall chaines, in little ease for euer.
               Heere a great part of thy contentment, is to liue among good Neighbours, with a louing wife, with cheerefull companions: and loath thou art at any time to bee long in the house of mourning, to bee among melancholy malecontented,

complayning feeble or brawling people in Hospitals, or Bridwels, or Bedlams. How will then thine eares indure to be tyred with continuall howling, scritching and gnashing of teeth, to liue among Dogges, Enchanters, vncleane Birds, reprobate Spirits, worse then so many Toades, Tygers, or Serpents.
               Here if thy Father should in displeasure bid get thee out of sight, or thy Prince banish thee his court and presence, as Dauid did Absolon, for some offence, thou wouldest take it heauily: how shall thine eares tingle to heare God say, depart out of my presence, Goe thou cursed into the lake prepared for the Diuell and his Angels.
               Here thou shrinkest to thinke of the gout, collick, stone, or strangurian, shiuerest to heare of the strappado, the racke, or the Lawne, how

then wilt thou beare vniuersal tortures in all the parts of thy body, exquisite anguish and paines, such as of which the pangs of childbirth, burnings of materiall fire and brim stone, gnawings of chestwormes; drinkes of Gall and Wormwood are but shaddowes; and to which they are all but sports and fleabitings, euen to the torments thy body shall suffer for it sinnes against the Creator.
               But hast thou euer here in this world tasted of a troubled spirit, of the griefe and feares of a wounded Conscience possessed with bitter things: strucken and pierced with the venom of Gods arrowes, feares of the Almighty: by these thou mayst make the best gesse how it wil fare with thy soule when God shall powre al the vials of his wrath into a vessell of his fury, and vexe the soule in his sore

displeasure, scourge thee with the rods of scorpions, make thee drunk with the gall of Aspes and Cockatrices, make thy mind heauy vnto the death, holding it euer in those Agonies, which made his owne Sonne sweate cloddes of water and blood. Oh how fearefull a thing is it to fall into the handes of God, who is a consuming fire. Thinke of it whiles there is hope, you that forget God, Heauen, and Hell, least you come there where there is no redemption, no hope of ease or end, which is that that makes Hell, Hell indeed: For if all these paines might haue an end, were it after million and millions of yeares, as many as there bee sands in the Sea shore, yet mightest thou nourish some miserable comfort of a release in the long runne: But this night hath no day, this Ague no intermission,

his death no death to end it withal.
               Here thou wouldest be loath to lye on the Racke from morning to night, to be wroung with the Collick for a few dayes or hours, to be haunted with a Quartan from Michael to Easter: Oh then adde eternity to insupportable torments, and let thine eares tingle, and thine hart melt to think of it. Were it not for hope in small pressures, wee say heart would burst: Oh then this word euer and euer, if thou couldest duly belieue and consider it, how would it breake that hard heart of thine, which knowes not how to repent, nor cares to preuent the wrath to come.
               What thinkest thou, are these things tales and fables, is Hell but a name and word, a scarbug for to keepe fooles in awe? Hath not God, thinkest thou, a day of reckoning, a prison and power to punish

Rebels and Traitors, or are not his punishments like to his Iustice, infinite and eternall? Know these things to be as true as God is truth, saue that they are short of the truth it selfe. Why dost thou not then take thy soule apart, and ruminate of these things by thy selfe, iudging thy selfe here, that thou mayst not bee condemned in the world to come. Art thou afraid of a melancholy fit, and fearest thou not this gulfe, and whirlpoole, and sorrow? Art thou not loath to bee tormented before thy time, and fearest not to bee tormented time without end. I wonder how the soules of wicked men and vnbelieuers goe not out of their bodies, as the Diuels out of demoniaks, rending, raging, tearing and foaming. I wonder how any can dye in their wits, that die not in the faith of our Lord Christ. Verily if these things

moue thee not, thou art in a worse plight then Foelix and Baltashar; yea, the verie Diuels themselues, who belieue them; yea, quake and tremble to thinke of them. How faine would I snatch thy soule out of this fire? Vndoubtedlie know, that if this warning doe thee no good, it is because thou art of old, iustlie ordained to perish in thy impenetency, and to bee a fire-brand in these euerlasting flames. Now on the contrarie, if thou beest a vessell of mercie and honour, it will doe thee no hurt, but driue thee to Christ, in whom there is no condemnation: who onelie is perfectlie able to saue and deliuer thee out of this Lake. If thou be est alreadie in him, it will cause thee to reioyce in thy Lord and Sauiour, who hath deliuered thee from the feare of two such enemies that

now thou mayst with the Ostrich in Iob despise the horse and his rider, and triumph by Faith ouer Hell and Death: O Death where is thy sting! Oh Hell where is thy victorie! Death is to men as he comes attended: To Diues he comes followed with Diuells, to carrie his soule to Hell: To Lazarus with troopes of Angels to conuey him to Abrahams bosome. So that we may in earnest say, that Death is the Atheists feare, and the Christians desire. Diogines could iestingly call it, The Rich mans enemie, and the Poore mans friend. This, this is that which makes death so easie, so familiar and dreadlesse to a belieuer; he sees Death indeede, but Death is not Death without Hell follow him: and Hell he sees not, but onely as escaped and vanquished, and therefore is said not to see Death. Now (sayes the belieuer)

comes death and the Prince of this world with him, but he hath no part in mee: all the bitternesse and teares of death lye in the feare of Hell, which, thanks be to Christ hath nothing to do with me, nor I with it, and therefore I taste not of death: now comes Gods Sergeant pale death, whom I know I cannot auoyde: but this I know, he comes not to arrest me to carry me to prison, but only to inuite me to a feast, attend and conuey me thither. Let such feare him as are in debt and danger, mine are all discharged and cancelled: he comes with his horse to take vp me behind him, and to fetch me to my fathers ioyes, to a Paradice as full of pleasures, as he carries the wicked to a prison full of paines. Pharaohs Baker and Butler were sent for out of prison, the one to promotion, the other to execution: hee that had the ill

Dreame, expected the Messenger with horror, the other longed for him with comfort. The latter is my case, therefore though I be reasonably wel in this world, as a child at board, yet home is home, therefore will I waite till this pale horse comes, and bid him heartily welcome: and with him the Angels of my Father, who haue a charge to lay my body in a bed of rest, and to bestow my soule vnder the Altar, as it followes in the next seale, which is so pleasing a vision, that we neede no voice or preface, such as we had in the former, inuiting vs to Come and see: the very excellency of the obiect it self is of force enough to draw, and hold the eies of our minds vnto it.
            
            
               
               The second Sermon.
               
                  VERSE 9.
                  And when hee had opened the first Seale, I saw vnder the Altar the Soules, &c.
               
               
                  WHen Death hath bin viewed in the palest, and Hell in the blackest colors that may be, yet if wee haue Faith enough to see Soules in their White roabes vnder the Altar▪ there is comfort enough against the horror of both; enough to enable the belieuer to despise and trample ouer them 
                     •
                  ooth. In the opening of this fifth Seale, I hope to finde more sollid

Antidotes, more liuely Cordialls, against the feare of Death, then in all the dead and drie precepts of Bellarmines doting Art of dying. For this part of the vision was shewed Iohn of purpose to sweeten the harshnesse of the former: that his spirit grieued and amazed with the sight of the calamities and mortalitie vnder the persecuting Butchers, rather then Emperours, might yet be relieued and refreshed with a sight of the blessed estate of such as died either in, or for the Lord.
               Wherein was proposed to his sight, and to our consideration these seuerals. First, the immortall subsistence of soules after their seperation from the body. Secondly, their sure and secure condition vnder the Altar. Thirdly, their dignity and felicitie clothed with white robes. Fourthly, their compleate

happinesse at the last day, when the number of their bretheren shall be accomplished.
               Of all these, Christ meant Iohn should take notice, and al beleeuers by his testimony to their full consolation.
               First, Iohn being in the spirit could see spirits, men indeed clad in flesh, can hardly imagine how a soule can haue existence out of the flesh. Eagles can see that which Owles cannot: so is that visible and credible to a spirituall man, which to a naturall is inuisible, incredible. And yet euen natures dimme eyes haue beene cleere enough to see this truth. Nature I say, pure and meere nature, not only the Platonists and other learned ones, who resolutely concluded it, and aptly resembled it, to the distinct being of the waggoner after the breaking of the Coach:

the swimming out of the Mariner in the wreake of the ship, the creeping of the snayle out of the shell, the worme out of the case: not vnto the learned Grecians, and ciuilized Romans: But euen the rudest Scythians and vnlettered Sauages; yea, though there bee many Languages, and sundrie Dialects in the world, yet is, and hath this euer been the common voyce of them all, That soules die not with the body. And howeuer the bodies resurrection hath to them been a Problem and Paradoxe, yet is the soules eternitie an inbred instinct sucked from natures breast; or rather an indelible principle stamped in the soules of men by the finger of God. And indeed, to right reason, what difficulty or absurditie is there in it. What lets mee to conceiue a being of it in the Ayre, in the Heauen, or in any other

place as well as in the compasse of my body, is not one substance as capable of it as another? Can it liue in the one, and not in another?
               Hath it not, euen whiles it is in the bodie, thoughts, motiues, passions by it selfe, of it owne different from the body, many crosse and contrarie to the disposition of the body, chearefull ones when that is in paine or melancholie: Cholericke ones when that is flegmaticke. Doth it waite vpon the body for ioy, sorrow, anger, and the like? doth it not more often begin vnto it? Not to speake of Martyres innumerable, who haue beene exceedingly pleasant in the middest of torments, as if they had beene spirits without flesh. How many auncient stories and dailie examples haue wee of chereful minds in distempered,

pained, languishing dying bodies? Reason will then conclude, that the Soule may well be, and be sensible after death without the body, which euen in the body can bee wel, when that is ill, cheerely when that is hurt, or sicke, grieued and troubled when that is in perfect temper and health. And on the contrary, small reason haue wee to thinke it sleepes out of the bodie, which neuer slumbers in the body, or that it is seazed by death out of the body, which neuer was ouercome by sleep, which is but deaths Image, and younger brother in the body, but euer was working and discoursing in the deepest and deadest sleepes of the body.
               Besides, is it likely God would enrich it with such noble and diuine dowries to bee salt onely to the bodie, to exhale with it as Bruits doe. The admirable inuention

of Arts, Letters, Engines, the strange fore-casts, prospects and presages of the vnderstanding part, the infinite lodgings, the firme reteinings of the memorie, doe they not argue an immortalitie: Doe men ingraue curiously in Snow, Yce, or transient stuffe?
               What meanes the great anxietie of men about their suruiuing name, if the minde perished with the bodie, if Death were the cessation of the man, and destruction of the whole substance. What should nature care for an ayery accident without a subiect, whereof no part of him should be sensible.
               What meanes the very feare of Death, if that were the end of all feares, and cares, and sorrowes, if nothing remained sensible, and capable of any

thing to bee feared.
               Lastly, the fresh vigor, the vnimpayred abilitie, that nimble agilitie of the minde in sicknesse; yea, manie times the freer vse of the faculties of it in the confines, yea, in the act and Article of Death, then in former health, doe they not tell the body, the soule meanes not to fall with the carkase (which hath the name of falling) lyes not a dying with it, but errects it selfe, meanes onely to leaue it as an Inhabitant doth a ruinous House, or as a Musition layes downe a Lute whose strings are broken, a Carpenter a worne instrument vnfit any longer for seruice and imploiment: and as a Guest makes haste out of his Inne, to his long home and place of abode.
               Loath I am to mingle Philosophicall Cordialls with Diuine,

as water with wine, least my Consolations should bee flash and dilute: yet, euen these and such like arguments haue taught all Phylosophie (the brutish schoole of the Epicure excepted) to see and acknowledge that the soule is not a vapour, but a spirit, not an accident, but a substance, and elder and more excellent sister to the body immixt and seperable; a guest that dyes not with it, but diuerts out of it, intending to reuisite and reunite it againe vnto it▪ selfe. But Diuinitie certainely knowes all this to bee most certaine that it is a particle of diuine breath, inbreathed into the redde lome at the first, not arising out of it, but infused from heauen into it, and therefore may as wel exist without the clay after it, as it did before it: and when the dust returnes to

the dust, heauen goes to heauen, both to their originals, the soule first, because first and principall in euery action, the body after as an accessary and second, and so the day of death to the body, is the birth day of eternity to the soule.
               This vndying, and euer-liuing condition of the soule, throughly rowled in the minde, firmely embraced, and vndoubtedly apprehended by Faith, workes admirable effects as in life, so in the approach of death. Seneca that saw it but through Clouds, cranies and creuises with yfs, and ands, yet professeth that when hee thought but a little of it, and some pleasant dreames of it, he loathed himselfe and all his trifling gratnes. But most diuinely, and resoluedly▪ 
                  Iulius Palmer: He that hath his soule linked and tyed to the body, as a thiefes feete to a Clogge with

guyues and fetters, no maruell hee knowes not how to dye, is loath to endure a Diuision: but he that vseth, and can by Faith separate the spirit from the body, to him it is to drinke this: and with that drinkes off a Cup of Wine in his hand, and within a while after, as cheerefully drinks of Deaths cup in the sight of the same Witnesses. Euen Socrates himselfe sweetened his Cup of poyson, with this discourse of the soules immortalitie, to the amazement of the beholders. Such Soules indeede as place all their felicitie to bee in a full fedde, and well complexioned body, and to partake of the senses corporeall delights, hath not accustomed it selfe to it owne retyred delights of obstracted meditations, knowes not how to bee merry without a play-fellow, no maruell though it bee as loath

to part with the body, as a crooked deformed body to part with rich robes and gorgeous apparell, which were it onely ornaments. But such noble and regenerate spirits as know their owne Dowries, haue inured themselues to sublimate contemplations, and to haue their conuersation in Heauen, whiles they were in the body: such I say, though they do not Cynically reuile the body as a Clog, a prison, a lumpe of myre, &c. but know it to bee the Temple of the Holy Ghost, yet are they willing, yea and sigh to be vncloathed, to sowe it a while in the earth, being a dark and thick lanterne, hindering the cleare sight of it, till they may reassume it clarified, a spirituall, an Angelified body made apt and obsequious to all diuine seruices, to Celestiall Offices without wearinesse, intermission, and such like

vanitie, which here it is subiect vnto: as willing as Dauid to lay aside Sauls cumbersome Armour, and to betake him to such as hee could better weeld and command at pleasure.
               This is the first and lowest helpe Faith hath to comfort the soule withall in the approach of Death; when the strong men buckle, the Keepers of the house faile, they waxe dimme that looke out at the windowes, when the whole outward man decayes: that the inner man ages not, faints not, languisheth not, but rather lifts vp the head, is more fresh then formerly, and excepts to bee vnburdened, and to bee at libertie, freed from Corporeall tedious vnpleasing workes of sleeping, eating, drinking, and other meaner drudgery, that it may once come to higher and more spirituall imployments

better suiting with it natiue condition: euen as the Lyon longeth to bee out of the grate, and the Eagle out of the cage, that they may haue their free scope and fuller libertie.
               
                  Vnder the Altar.
                  Now if this much reuiued Iohn (as no doubt it did) to see the Soules continuance after Death, how much more to see their safety and rest vnder the Altar: that is vnder Christs protection & custody, vnder the shadow of his wings. Who makes them gratefull to his Father, couers them from his wrath, safeguards them from all molestation, procures them absolute quiet and security. The phrase alluding to the Altar in the Tabernacle, which gaue the Offerings grace and acceptation: and partly

to the safety of such as fled from the Auenger to the Altar. Christ is our Altar, and all the Soules of such as dye in his Faith, are as Stephan bequeathed to him: hee presents them to his Father, shelters them from accusation and condemnation, gathers them as the Henne her Chickens vnder his wings, being fully able to keepe what is committed to him from all disquiet. Hee that could keepe the three young men in the Furnace with whom he walked, yea their very garments from the violence of fire: The Israelites and their apparell in the wilderness: Ionas in the Whales belly: how much more easily now hee sits at the hand of his Father in Maiestie and Glorie, can hee defend saued and glorified soules from all Externall and Internall Annoyance, and settle them in

absolute peace with him in his Paradise, according to his frequent promise to such as ouercome, they shall sit with me vpon thrones.
                  
               
               
                  And long white Robes were giuen vnto euery one.
                  If Iohn had seene soules at rest, though in poore and meane condition, yet were a corner of an house with peace to bee preferred to a wide Pallace with disquiet: A poore dyet with greene Herbes with quiet, to a feast with stalled oxen, and crammed fowles, sauced with bitter contention. But behold, he sees not naked, beggerly, ragged soules, but adorned with white Robes; that is, endowed now, and glorified with perfect righteousnesse, puritie, clarity, digtie, and festiuitie: of all which white apparell hath euer been an

Emblem and Symbole in Diuine and Humane Herauldry, a cloathing of Princes in their great solemnities of Coronation, triumphs and ouations, saies Eusebius: so was Herod arrayed in cloath of siluer, with which the Sunne beames meeting, made such a glister, as amazed the people that styled him a God: so sayes Tertullian, were they woont to dignifie Seruants at their Manumissions with white Apparell, in token of their new libertie and preferment. At feasts great persons were wont to change their guests ordinary clothes with a white Synthesis, a colour fit to expresse alacritie. Christians, the whole Easter weeke wore white apparell. All the graces the soules had heere in this their infancy of Regeneration, were but stayned and polluted clouts: their knowledge darke and obscured with ignorance,

their memories clouded with obliuion, their wills and affections tempested with mutinies and perturbations, their habits of holines and charity, sullid with defects and infirmities, their delights duske and particoloured & spotted with mixture of sorrow: all their apparell blacke & sad russet at the least; but there purer then the Christall, whiter then the Snowe, or then Fullers earth is able to make them. The Lillyes, and Salomon in all their Royaltie not like vnto the meanest of them. Call vs no more Marah, may they say, but Naomi. For fulnesse of beautie is conferred vpon them, God becomming fulnesse of claritie and light vnto the vnderstanding, without errour or darknesse, continuation of Eternitie to the memory without forgetfulnesse, multitude of Peace to the Will and Affections

without disturbance or disorder: the superiour part of the Soule, pleasing it selfe in the blessed vision of God, and the inferior satiate with the fruition of riuers of pleasures, & variety of monthly fruits. All this ioy increased by the aemenity and magnificence of the place being Gods Palace, built and prepared for eternitie, for the honour of his Maiestie, and habitation of his Saints, all shining like precious Iasper: enchanted by the full quire of Angels and communion of holy men, excellent when they were on earth, now perfected in their vertues, and freed from frailties, neuer mourning, but euer singing and lauding their Creator with Alleluiahs without defatigation or satietie: all this made vp and consummate by the addition not of a number of yeares, but of eternitie vncountable, vnalterable: incomprehensible.

What are the chiefe miseries of this life, but the sordid apparell of the Soule, the blacke thoughts, the speckled phantasies, darke obliuion, royled, soyled affections, all the habite of it squalid, iagged, and tattered. Now then was Ioseph loath to change his prison-ragges, or Hester her olde and meane Cloathes with stately and royall array? Promise a Childe a new Satin suit, and see whether hee will not long for it, and call for it; see whether hee will crie when you bid him lay off his Russets? Whence is it then that men dye so dully, so vnwillingly, so heauily? or whence can it bee, but because they doe not liuely and certainely beleeue, and expect these white Robes for their soules. When the beautie of a mans minde is heere obfuscate and defaced with melancholly Tentations, and opake

Imaginations, with yellow choller, with pallid feare, with ruddy shame, with sable dispaire; oh what would he giue for a candid calme, and serene state of his mind? and when againe it pleaseth God to affoord him sunshine holidayes of ioy and tranquilitie, wherein his mind is clad, and decked with golden, siluer, and precious ornaments of peace, meekenesse, temperance, patience, Oh what an Heauen would he thinke hee had heere on earth, if all his daies were but such dayes! whereas this a Christian may well assure himselfe of, that what euer grace doth here prepare and begin, there glory will absolue & perpetuate for matter of sanctity, purity, & alacrity of the mind, typified in these white robes: yea further for matter of dignitie and tryumph, which then shall be most compleat, where they shall see

Christ at that day come in the glory of the Father with millions of his Angels descending & bringing down his heauenly Ierusalem, meeting them halfe way in the clouds, and there auenging them of their enemies, sitting with them as assessors vpon thrones, to iudge the Angels, & the world of wicked ones, & such as haue insulted ouer them on the earth, in which they shall then without any malignity of enuy, anger, or appetite of reuenge, take amirable and vnspeakeable content and comfort, yea reck on it as the accomplishment of their inchoate glory, for which they are here said to long for, & groane vnder the Altar, till the number of all their brethren being consummate, God shal openly acquit & applaud them, condemne and confound their opposites. These, these are the only, stately, and Kingly dignities:

the meditations whereof are onlyable to beget and foster true heroical & Christian resolutions against the feare of Death and Hell, otherwise vnuanquished. To conclude then, to the man that would both in health and sicknesse nourish euer in his breast vndaunted and more then conquering thoughts of these two enemies, instead of Bellarmines many friuolous and tedious rules: I prescribe but these two practises of Faith. The first is to worke in his minde a setled and vndoubted certaintie: and the second a liuely and frequent representation of them.
                  Were heauen nothing else but an hauen of rest, wee know how welcome the one is to a Sea-sick weather-beaten traueller, and may by that guesse how desireable the other should be to a soule that long hath beene tossed in the waues of

this world, sicke of owne sinfull imaginations, & tyred with externall tentations. The happiest soule that euer hath sayled ouer this Euripus, in the best ship, in the healthfullest body that euer was, neuer had so calme a passage, but that it hath had cause enough often to wish it selfe on shoare. What with selfe groaning phantasies, and iniected temptations, how little respit or rest is here to be found? Is there any Palace or Tower here so high or strong, that can keepe diseases from the body: how much lesse cares, sorrows, feares, and Sathans assaults from the Soule? Were there but such an Iland, as some haue dreamed of heere on earth, that might free our bodies or mindes from disquiet, but for the space of the moment of this life, how would people couet to dwell in it? In the times of the late

warres in Netherlands, how did the Boares forsake their Farmes, and flye into walled Cities for securitie from dangers? What violence then should our heauenly Ierusalem suffer of our wishes and desires? were it but for the sweet and amiable name of peace whereof it is denominated, hauing indeed the God of Peace for the King and Keeper of it: Wals many Cubits high, into which no Zenacherib can shoote an arrow, nor the Dragon Beast, nor the false Prophet to seduce or to accuse: strong gates and barres excluding all enemies and annoyances, and so affording perfect tranquility to all the Inhabitants, out of which they insult ten times more saferly, then the Iebusites ouer the blinde and lame, ouer the pale horse and his riders, Death and Hell. Consider and compare a little the simplicitie

of the worldling with the wisdom of the Christian, the happy stabilitie of the one, with the wofull vncertaintie of the other at the time of their departure. Euen Foxes and Hares, and other such vermine fore-acquaint themselues with Muses, Thickes and Burroes, into which when they are chased and hunted, they may repaire for safety: but these fooles while they liue in health and prosperity, neuer thinke of the euill day, and when away they see they must goe, how vnshystable are they? Some of the meaner sort, they take care for their winding-sheet: or if richer, for a marble or painted sepulchre, which yet cannot preserue their bodies or names from putrifaction: the superstitious sort to bee buryed in a Fryers Cowle, or vnder an Alter of stone: the desperater sort, wishing the Mountaines

might couer them from the wrath of the Lambe. An harbour or receptacle for their soules they neuer thinke of; whence it is that they are as loath to haue them turned out of their bodies, as Hagar and Ismael to be out of doores, and exposed to misery and dangers; or rather as Cain, to be cast as a Vagabond out of Gods presence, fearing lest euery one that met him next, should cut his throat for a cursed Caitiffe. And indeed what else can they looke for, but instantly to bee deuoured of the roaring Lyon, that waites at the doore of Death, to fetch away their soules into the place where there is no night nor day. Onely the wise beleuer, he hath prouided a Sanctuary, or Citie of refuge against time of danger, hath learned wisdome of the Conies, who though a little nation, yet wise and forecasting,

haue their refuge in the Rocks. Christ is the beleeuers Rocke, and his strong Tower, his Altar, and therfore he feares not what Death can doe vnto him. Christ hath assured him on his word, that hee shall haue all, teares wiped away, and the Spirit secured him that he shall rest from his labors. In which regard he is so farre from lingring and hankering after a continuance in this Baca of teares, this wildernes of feares, that he studies rather to enter into this rest, Cries out with Dauid, Wo is me that I dwell in, Meshek and Kedar, when I think of peace, there is warre at hand: With Ieremy, Woe is mee that I dwell with a contentious people. With Elias, I am weary of my life, an end good Lord. Or with blessed Simeon, Now Lord let thy seruant depart in peace, into that land of peace; heere I haue seene that

there is no peace to bee had: all here is vanity & vexation of spirit. For a minute of peace, moneths of vanity, for a dram of hony, pounds of aloes and gall. Soules here find no resting place for the soles of their feete, till they come to the mount Ararat, whither their works follow them, where their sorrowes leaue them. And so conclude with Vidus Bressius, Oh that my soule had I the wings of the Doue to flie and make haste to that mountain of God, and hill of tranquilitie and eternitie. Thus th'one dies howling, the other singing, because the one knowes he changeth for the better, the other for the worse: the one takes Death for a gulfe of sorrow, the other for a port of libertie and ease: the one because he is stript for a scourging; the other because hee layes off his clothes to go to bed after his toile.
                  
                     If Queene Elizabeth whiles she was a prisoner in her sisters dayes could haue been fully assured, and had clearely foreseene her owne long; glorious, and prosperous reigne ensuing, would she haue wished her selfe a Milke-maid for the present? No, it had bin impossible. All our feares & doubts arise from infidelitie and the vncertaintie, or else from the deadnesse and dulnesse of our hopes. To put life into which, there can bee no better, no other help, then first to ground and root our Faith in Christ through the word and spirit: And then of ten to be setting before our eyes a state & condition happy aboue all that Cities, Kingdoms, Crownes, Pearles, and Iewels, Marriages, Feasts, and all other Metaphors and Parables of Scripture doe but shaddow out vnto vs. Which supereminent and super aboundant

felicity, Paul that had been an eye witnes, not able to describe, much lesse to amplifie, summes it vp, An exceeding exceeding eternall weight of Glory.
                  
                  A superlatiue transcēdent phrase such as is not to be found in all the Rhetoricke of the Heathens, because they neuer wrote of such a Theame, nor with such a Spirit. If any of vs had but halfe the strength of Pauls Faith, or life of his hope, or chearefull fore-imaginations, which he had of this felicitie, woe could not but haue the same desires, and longings for our dissolution and fruition of them. If we throughly beleeued and remembred this to bee the state of our selues and dead friends, would we▪ or could we so feare for our selues, or mourne for them in Blackes, whiles they are in whites, as Iacob for Ioseph, thinking him deuoured

by some euill beast, when he was Lording it in Aegypt. No verily, but thinke of it, and looke for it we would with the same affections that Children do for their playes, Prentises their freedome, Spouses their mariage, Labourers their wages, Husbandmen their Haruest, Heyres their Inheritance, Princes their Kingdomes. Mongst many thousands, I chuse to instance and end with Monicah and Augustines examples▪ the mother vsing this speech to her sonne; All that I haue desired to liue to see, is that which I now see: thee my sonne a Christian. And now what doe I any longer in this base and impure world? And hee of his mother: What cause haue I to mourne for a mother, of whose happinesse I may be so well assured.
                  
                     When I awake, I shall be satisfied.
                  
                  
                     Write, O Christ, these Meditations in our hearts, imprint these Patternes so fast in our memories, that wee may all the dayes of our liues haue frequent fore-thoughts of our appointed change, chiefely in that last and solemne day of our death, when the Prince of this world will be busie, and wee shall be weake, let thy Comforter then bring them to minde, that by faith we may ouercome, and hauing the Arke of thy Couenant in eye, cheerefully passe through the waters of Iorden, and so take possession of that land which flowes with all varietie of delights, without either end or sacietie: euen so Come Lord Iesus, come quickly.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   