
      
         
            
            
            ALBIONS England. Or Historicall Map of the same Island: prosecuted from the liues, Actes, and Labors of Saturne, Iupiter, Hercules, and AEneas: Originalles of the Brutons, and English-men, and Occasion of the Brutons their first aryuall in Albion. Continuing the same Historie vnto the Tribute to the Romaines, Entrie of the Saxones, Inuasion by the Danes, and Conquest by the Normaines.
            With Historicall Intermixtures, Inuention, and Varietie: proffitably, briefly, and pleasantly, performed in Verse and Prose by William Warner.
            
            Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Thomas Cadman, dwelling at the great North-doore of S. Paules Church at the signe of the Byble.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honorable, my very good Lord and Maister: Henrie Carey, Barron of Hunsdon: Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter: Lord Chamberlane of her Maiesties most Honorable Houshold: Lord Gouernour of Barwicke: Lord Warden of the East Marches for and anempst Scotland: Lord Lieftennant of Suffolke and Norfolke: Captaine of her Maiesties Gentlemen Pensioners: and one of her Highnes most Honorable Priuie Councell.
            
               
                  THis our whole Iland, aunchiantly called Brutaine, but more anchiantly Albion, presently contaynyng two Kingdomes, ENGLAND, and SCOTLAND, is cause (right Honorable) that to distinguish the former, whose only Occurrants J abridge, from the other, remote from our Historie, I intitell this my Booke ALBIONS ENGLAND. A Subiect, in troth (if self conceit worke not a partiall Iudge) worthie your Honorable Patronage: Howbeit

basely passed vnder so badd an Aucthor. But for great Parsonages gratfully to intertaine the good willes of bad workmen, is answerable to themselues, and animating to feeble Artistes. I therefore secure of your Honors Clemencie, and herein not vnlike to Phaoton, who at the first did fearfully admier euen the Pallas of Phoebus, but anon feareles aduenture euen the presence of Phoebus, hauing dedicated a former Booke, to him that from your Honor deriueth his Birth, now secondly present the like to your Lordshippe: with so much the lesse doubt, and so much to more duetie, by how much the more J esteeme this my latter labour of more valewe, and (omitting your high Tytelles) J owe, and your Lordship expecteth espetiall duetie at the hands of your Seruaunt. And thus (right Honorable) hoping better then J can performe, and yet fearing lesser then J may offend, desirous to please, despret of praise, and destitute of a better Present, J make tender only of good will, more J haue not, for your Honors good worde, lesse J hope not.
            
               
                  Your Lordships most duetifull and humble Seruant, W. Warner.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               WEll knowe I, that Pearles low-prised in India are precious in England: that euen Homer was slightly aucthorised in Greece, but singularly admyred elswheare: and that, for the most part, the best Authors find at home their worst Auditors▪ how beit whatsoeuer Writor is most famous, the same is therefore indebted to his natiue Language: Neither preferre I aboue three speeches before ours, for more sententious. Onely this error may be thought hatching in our English, that to runne on the Letter, we often runne from the Matter: and being ouer prodigall in Similies, wee become lesse profitable in Sentences, and more prolixtious to Sence.
            Written haue I alreadie in Prose, allowed of some: and now (friendly Reader) offer I Verse and Prose, attending thine indifferent Censure. In which, if grosely I fayle (as not greatly I so feare) in Veritie, Breuitie, Inuention, and Varietie, profitable, patheticall, pithie, and pleasant, so farre of shall I be from being oppynionat of myne owne labours, that my selfe will also subscribe, to prescribe the same for obsurd and erronious. But in vayne is it either to intreat or feare the curtious or captious: the one will not cauell, nor the other be reconscyled.
            My labor is past, and your liking to come: and thinges hardly founded, may easely be confounded: Arrogancie is Lynx-eyed into aduantage: Enuie capiable of the least error: and inconsiderat and selfe conceipted Readers, to detract from other mens Trauailes, deale as did sacraligious Denys in the Heathen Temples, who to stripp the Idolles of their golden Ornaments, alledging the same

for Sommer to hot, and for Winter to colde, so inriched himself, and robbed the Sainct. But such are good minds, and the Contraries of these men in reading of Bookes, as were the Paganes in reuerencing their Gods, sacrafising as deuoutly to a woodden Jupiter, as to a golden Jupiter: to an Oxe, a Cat, or vnreuerent Pryapus, as to the Sunne, the Starres, or amiable Venus: deuotion and discretion being euermore senceles in ditraction. Of the latter sorte therfore I craue pardon, presupposing their patience, to the former, presupposing impatience, I offer pardon: resting to either, and to you all, in good will such as I should:
            
               Yours. W. W.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ALBIONS ENGLAND. ¶ The first Booke of ALBIONS England.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
               
                  
                     I Tell of things done long agoe, of manie thinges in few:
                  And chieflie of this Elyme of ours, the Accidents pursue.
                  Thou high Director of the same assist my Artlesse pen,
                  To write the gests of Brutons stoute, and acts of Englishmen.
                  When arked Noah, and seuen with him the emptie worldes remain,
                  Had left the instrumentall meane that landed them againe:
                  And that both man and beast, and all did multiplie with store,
                  To Asia Sem, to Affricke Cham, to Europe Iapheth bore
                  Their Families. Thus triple wise the worlde deuided was:
                  one language common vnto all: vntill it came to passe
                  That Nembroth sonne to Chus, the sonne of Cham, olde Noah his sonne,
                  In Chaldia (neuer seene vefore) an Empire had begunne·
                  As hée and his audatious crewe the Tower of Babell reare,
                  Pretending it should checke the cloudes, so to auoide the feare
                  Of following flooddes, the Creator of creatures beheld
                  The climing tops of cloud-high Towers, and more to bée fulfilde.
                  To cut of which ambitious plot, and quash their proude intent
                  Amongst a worlde of people there hee sundrie spéeches sent,
                  So that, vnable to conferre about the worke they went,
                  The Tower was left vnfinished: and euerie man withdrewe
                  Himselfe apart, to ioine with those whose language best hée knew:
                  And thus confused tongues at first to euerie nation grewe.
                  
                     THE Babylonian Saturne though his buildings speede was bad,
                  Yet found the meanes that vnder him hée manie nations had.
                  Hée was the first that rul'd as king, or forraine landes subdude,
                  Or went about into the right of others to intrude:
                  Ere this aspiring mindes did sléepe, and wealth was not pursude.
                  His sonne Ioue Belus after him succeeded: hée puruaide
                  For dreadfull warres, but aw
                        •
                     esse death his dreadfull purpose staide,
                  Then Ninus prosecutes the warres preuented Belus sought,
                  And filde the wronged world with armes, and to subiection brought
                  Much people, yet not capable of such his nouile fight,
                  From Caldia to Assyrea he translates the Empier quite:
                  And caused fire on horses backs before him euer borne
                  To be adorned for a God. Thus out of vse was worne
                  In Caldia and Assyria to the honour rightly due
                  To high Iehoua, God indéed. Idolatrie thus grewe
                  From Ninus first: he first of al a Monarchie did frame,
                  And built in fomous Niniuie, that bore the builders name.
                  His warlike wife Simeramis, her husband being dead,
                  And sonne in nonage, faining him she ruled in his stéede:
                  Delating in a males attire the Empire newe begonne:
                  The which, his yeares admitting it, she yealded to her sonne.
                  Thus Cham his broode did borgon first and held the world in awe:
                  But Iapheths Line to Iabans land from Assur doth me drawe.
               
               
                  Much praise is spoke of Thessalie and Pegasus his springs,
                  and how the nimphes of Moena in Tempe did great things,
                  And how that Cecrops and his seede did honour Athens so,
                  As that from thence are said the Springs of Sciences to flowe.
                  Not onlie artes but Cheualrie from Greece deri
                        •
                     e we may:
                  Whereof (omitting manie things) my muse alonlie say
                  How Saturne, Ioue, and Hercules did fill the world with 
                        •
                     auie
                  Of iustice, prowesse, and how they both men and Monsters tame:
                  And so from these deriue the meane how Brute to Albion came.
                  In Create did florish in those daies (the first that florisht so)
                  
                     Vranos: he in wealth and wit all others did out-goe.
                  This took to Wife (not then forbode) his Sister Vesta faire,
                  
                     The croked Titan did to him an comelie Saturne baer.
                  The elder of deformities in making and for minde▪
                  
                  with Parents and the people too, did lesser liking finde:
                  The younger by the contraries gaue hansel in his prime
                  Of manie vertues, honouring their Owners 
                        •
                     lder time.
                  Away slips age: death spareth none: Vranos leaues the stage:
                  His bodie (now depriu'd of pomp) inter
                        •
                     d the wormes doe gage.
                  Well may a rich mans Hearse want teares, but heires he shal not misse,
                  To whom that he is dead at length no little ioy it is.
                  This errour notwithstanding did Vranos Sonnes lament:
                  Yet scarce the Fathers Ghost from graue to heauen or hell was sent,
                  But that his heires did fall at ods about the vacant Raine:
                  and Titan chafes disabled then the Scepter to sustaine.
                  Ech eye did follow Saturns forme, ech heart applaudes his fame,
                  and to conclude, with whole consent he winnes away the game.
                  Yet for because the Birth-right should inure to Titan stil,
                  In Mars his Church did Saturne vow his Issues Males to kill.
                  Not meanely glad was Saturne then his head possest of Crowne,
                  When, of his building, hee was Lord of manie a peopled Towne,
                  He giueth lawes, his lawes are kept, he 
                        •
                     ids, and all obey,
                  and equallie beloud and feard he wealds a kinglie sway:
                  He teacheth men (vntaught before) to eare the lustie land:
                  and how to pearse the pathlesse aire with shaft from Bow-mans hand:
                  God D
                           •
                        s did quaile to sée his gold so fast conuaid from hell
                  & fishes quakt 
                        〈…〉
                      amidst their floods did dwel
                  Who loues not 
                        〈…〉
                      did not the king of Creat excel?
                  But what auaile or Townes, or Lawes, or what doe Subiects moue?
                  Sheaues, Shafts, or Ships▪ or Gold, or all? king Saturne is in loue.
                  He loues, and is beloud again
                        •
                     
                     ▪ yet so might not suffice,
                  In former vow to Titan made his paine of pleasure lies:
                  But no man from the Monarke Lou
                           •
                        
                      by wealth or weapon flies.
                  
                     Cybella, faire Cybella is espoused to her brother:
                  and as doe Venus killing Birds so loue they one another.
                  In Coiture she doth conceaue: 
                        〈◊〉
                      sonne is borne, and slaine:
                  And Saturne of the hansell hard doth malconsent remaine.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  THE Son had compast all the Signes, & Cybell brought to light
               Her second Bréed, a smiling boy, & Iupiter he hight:
               Together with the Quéene of Gods (so Iunos stile wée wright.)
               The infant smiled at his birth: but Cybell (ioy bereft)
               And Vesta, whom Vranos had an heauie widdow left,
               Did both lament: for Saturne wild the new-borne Babe should die,
               Both to acquit him of his vow, and frustrate Destinie.
               For at the Oracle he had, his wife a sonne should beare,
               That should expell him from his Realme: his vow therefore and feare
               Did hasten on (vnwillinglie) the slaughter of his sonne:
               For which (his sorrowes graunting spéech) his mone he thus begunne.
               And want not stately crownes their cares? With pomp haue Princes paine?
               Ah, die he must, & die he shal, els may not Saturne raine.
               Yet, might a Septers want suffice, I gladlie would resigne:
               But sworne by Stix and wreakfull Mars at periuries repine.
               Then far be it that they repine, least I too late repent:
               It doubles sinne, if sinne by sinne we practise to preuent.
               From this time foorth, Melancholy, for Sirname Saturne had:
               No mirth could wrest from him a smile, ech smile would make him sad.
               His seruants feare his solome fits, when if they ought recite.
               Hée either answeres not at all, or from the matter quite.
               Unpeopled roomes and pathlesse wayes did fit his humour best:
               And then he sighes, and sheadeth teares when all things els did rest.
               Who so could cite a Tragedie was formost in his credde:
               For, balking pleasant companie, on sorowes did hee feede.
               Death likes him, that mislikes himselfe, in gesture robes and all
               Hée shewes himselfe like to himelfe▪ and hence it doth befall
               That men to Melancholie giuen we Saturnists doe 
                     •
                  all.
               His wife and Sister kissing oft her Nephewe and her sonne,
               (For shée his Aunt and Mother was) with Vesta seeke to shunne
               
                  The voted fathers deadlie doome: to kill so sweet a childe
               Their eies and verie soules abhorre: who (nothing so vnmilde)
               doe wéeping kisse his laughing mouth, in minde the Babe to saue:
               Howbeit feare of Saturns wroth contrarie councell gaue.
               But when in hast the Babe his heart was sent for by and by,
               So Saturne wild, so Cybell must, and Vesta not denie▪
               
               It was a woe to heare their woe, and death to see them die.
               Unhollowed wretch, then Cybell said, in wombe why did I beare
               This double Burthen? happie Twins, saue that my Twins they are.
               So that my teeming with these throwes had ending well were I:
               Or woulde I might not giue them life, that liuing foorthwith dye.
               Thy Scepter (Saturne) is not worth perfourmance of thy vowe:
               Thy conscience doth a scruple holde that Goddes nor men alowe.
               From Gods, from men, from brutish beastes, from nature nought doth gro
               But fosters what it bringeth foorth: thou onlie doest not so.
               Thy sonnes alone for slaughters serue, and I meane while their mother
               Am Saturnes wife, lesse proude of it then that he is my brother.
               Unhappie Cybell borne to beare, and therefore borne to woe,
               And fruitlesse fertill to a man that soweth not to moe.
               Nowe teares had drowned further speech, till shee as one bestrought
               Did crie that with a knife the Babe should to her bed be brought:
               My selfe (quoth shée) will bée his death, with whom my selfe will die:
               For so may Saturne saue and shunne his vow and destenie.
               But it did Vesta contermaund: yet Saturns will must stande,
               For Ioue must die, or they not liue. A Damsell there at hand
               Was then enforst to that charge. Thrice toucht her knife his Skinne,
               But thrice his smiles did cause her teares: shée fourthlie did beginne:
               And fourthlie ended as before. Betide me death or life,
               Liue still (at least for mee) shée saide: and casting downe the knife,
               Shée kist that swéete and pretie mouth that laughed on her lippes▪
               
               And brings him backe to Cybels bed. Her heart, reuiued, skips,
               Reuiuing life where reckned death had wrought repentant teares.
               The father fronted with a guile, at length the damsell beares
               The infant vnto Oson towne: and in her Ladies name,
               Intreats Melissus daughters twaine to nourish vp the same.
               Up to mountaine beare they him, and in a secret Caue
               
                  A mountaine Goat did giue him milke, and so his life they saue.
               His Nourses, sounding Simbals once to drowne the Infants crie.
               A manie Bées (the Muses birdes) into the Caue did flie,
               Where making Honnie, Saturnes sonne did long time liue thereby.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  
                     IT doth remain of Iupiter, as bow (but then a lad)
                  From Epire to Pelasgis him the Lordes Epyrotes had,
                  To fetch their pledge Lycaon hild, when time of truse had end:
                  
                     Lycaon faining to consent, that did not so intend,
                  Next day as though hee woulde dismisse the Legates with estate,
                  Did make to them a solemne feast: when hauing slaine of late
                  His noble pledge, he brings his limmes and setteth them before
                  His Countrimen to feed vpon in saused dishes store.
                  The Strangers and his Subiects too abhorring such a sight,
                  Sit gazing ech in others face, bereft of speech and sprite:
                  Untill that lustie Iupiter, a Stripling to behold,
                  Did take the limbes dismembred so, and with a courage bold
                  Did shew them through Pelasgis stréetes, declaring by the way
                  The murder of their blooddie king: which did so much dismay
                  The Citizens, that euen they detesting such vnright,
                  Did rise in armes against their king: where youthfull Ioue did fight
                  So valiantlie, that by his force Lyacon tooke his flight.
                  And after did by Roberies, by blood, and Rapines liue:
                  For which to him a Wooluish shape the Poets aptlie giue.
               
               
                  IN Fpyre and Pelasgis thus Ioue first his honour wonne:
                  But greater things vntouched are by this same Worthie donne.
                  And partlie, in the monstrous warre that Titan and his Crue
                  Did hold with Saturne, when by search of Issues males he knewe
                  The which his brother had aliue, against their Couenant made:
                  When, T
                           •
                        tan Uictor, fast in hold was vanquisht Saturne laid,
                  Together with his wife and friends: where sorrow much they past,
                  
                     Till Iupiter did vnderstand his parentage at last.
                  He therefore landing toke in Create, with well prouided men:
                  And slewe his vncle Titan, and the Giant Tiphan then,
                  With most part of the Titanoies, and sets his father free:
                  By meanes whereof they reconcile, and wel a while agree.
               
               
                  NOt brooking then Apollos fault, in that he entertaind
                  The Remnant of the Titanoies, that after warres remainde,
                  
                     Apollo was by Iupiter inforced for to flie
                  His kingdome Paphos, and to liue exilde in Thessalie:
                  Where loue, but chieflie penurie, constrained him to kéepe
                  (Untill he was restored home) the king Admetus shéepe.
                  And for his Sonne disdainfullie enuied Ioue his praise
                  
                     Ioue was the same Phisitions death, that dead to life could raise:
                  Whose fame grewe thus. As Asculap an heardsman did espie,
                  That did with easie fight inforce a Basalique to flie.
                  (Albeit naturally that beast doth murther with the eie.)
                  
                     Apollos sonne perceauing him with Garland on his head,
                  Imagins (as it was in déed) some hearbe such vertue bred:
                  And for a profe he caused him to cast the wreath away,
                  When strait the beast her onelie eies the sillie man did slay.
                  Then Asculap him selfe did take the wreath, and puts it on,
                  And by that meanes he ouercame the Basalique anon.
                  In hearbs that déeper force is hid then Science may containe
                  I finde, said he, an hearb by hearb into his mouth did straine
                  That lay for dead, an hearb at last reuiuing him again.
                  Henceforth, mē thought him more thē man, when by his wondrous skil
                  He rendred life to many like, so winning great good will.
                  But as he waxed famous thus, he famous waxed proud,
                  Disdaining all, yea Ioue him selfe for Peere he disaloud.
                  Untill that Saturns angrie sonne reuenged it by death:
                  Correcting iustly each abuse, as Rector on the Earth.
                  THe Sonnes renound thus added grace vnto the Fathers name,
                  But shadowes wait on substances, and enuie followes fame.
                  Euen Saturne, pompous Saturne, ridde by Iupiter of Foes
                  And feare of Titan, did renewe his superstitious woes
                  
                     As touching former Oracle: and hastis sommons sent
                  Throughout his Realme to muster men, in purpose to preuent
                  By death of Ioue his destenie. The men of Create repinde
                  To put on armour to his ill whom they had found so kind:
                  But will they nill they so they must, for so their king assign
                        •
                     .
                  And Saturne with his armed troupes into Arcadia went,
                  Where Iupiter, forewarned of his fathers ill intent,
                  Intreated peace, to him denide: so that perforce he must
                  Defend him from his froward Sier, or rather foe vniust.
                  There might yee see king Saturne fight like to a Lion wood,
                  Whilst Iupiter did beare his blowes, and spares his fathers blood:
                  and him that foo-like would him sley, he friendlie did defend,
                  Desiring Saturne to retire, till wordes were to no end.
                  The wilfull man pursuing blood, Ioue ceaseth to persuade,
                  And rushing in amongst his foes so hot a skirmish
                        •
                     made,
                  That euerie blow sets blood on broch, and so in little space,
                  Euen he who late he did intreate, is followed now in chace
                  By Arcas and his companie: for Ioue refraind the flight,
                  Because against his countrimen hée had no will to fight.
                  Whilst lucklesse Saturn did escape by flight and fortune then,
                  And wandred long in vnquoth Seas, depriude of wealth and men,
                  Uictorious Iupiter was crownde with glorie king of Create:
                  And Saturne now ariude at Troy, for succour did intreate.
                  
                     Ganymaedes, king Trois sonne was sent in Saturns aid:
                  A worthie knight, and valiant warre to Iupiter he made.
                  But hée and his were chased back euen to their Citie walles,
                  For who so stood with Iupiter, by Iupiter he falles.
                  And there the Troyan Paragon Ganymides was taine,
                  Twixt whom and Iupiter thencefoorth sound friendship did remaine.
                  Then Saturne did the second time to Seas with shame retire,
                  And neuer after durst by warre against his sonne conspire:
                  But sayling into lower Realmes, in Italie did dwell:
                  And hereof it is said his sonne did chase him into hell.
               
               
                  MEane while, lesse ioyous of his fame then ielous of his freakes,
                  Her wrong Quéene Iuno on the Truls of Iupiter she wreakes.
                  
                     Which was the cause that all too late, he purposing returne
                  To rescue Danae (in whose loue he amorouslie did burne)
                  Was cast by stormes into the Seas, that foorthwith tooke the name
                  of him whom for his Piracies Ioue vanquisht in the same.
                  Yee might haue seene AEgaeon there with wreakfull wroth inflam
                        •
                     
                  
                  At sight of Ioue, at whose decay he long in vaine had aimd.
                  And how that Ioue had now the worst, and in a trise againe
                  The Gyant with his twise thrée Barkes in hassard to be taine.
                  The Centaures shew them valerous, so did Ixeon stout,
                  and braue Ganymaedes did deale his balefull dole about:
                  But when couragious Iupiter had beaten to the ground
                  
                     AEgaeon, and in selfesame Chaines wherein he often bound
                  The harmelesse soules that crost those Seas himselfe in fetters lay,
                  Yée might haue said, and truly said, that then did end the fraie.
                  So manie were his high exploits, whereof such wonder bread,
                  That for the same the Heathen folke doe deifie him dead.
                  Which since they are so manifold, I many ouerpasse:
                  And though Amphitruo blush to heare how he deceiued was,
                  And that Alcmena pinch my tongue, possest with bashfull shame,
                  Yea though that Iupiter himself my lauish tongue shall blame,
                  Yet since that iealous Iuno knowes alreadie of the same,
                  I dare not tell how Iupiter so cunninglie beguild
                  his loue Alcmena, that by him she traueld great with child
                  Of Hercules: whose famous acts I orderlie shall tell,
                  Whereof the first, but not the least, in Cradle-time be fell.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  
                     QUéene Iuno, not a little wroth against her husbands crime
                  By whom shee was a Cockqueane made, did therefore at the time
                  In which Alcmena cride for helpe to bryng her fruite to light,
                  Thrée nights and dayes inchaunt her throwes: and (of a Diuelish spight)
                  
                     Intended both the Ladies death, and that wherewith shée went:
                  Till Galinthis vnwitching her did Iunos spells preuent.
                  Howbeit cankered Iuno still pursuing her intent,
                  Two poisned Serpents got by charmes into the chamber brought
                  Where Hercules in cradle laie, and thinking to haue wrought
                  A Tragedie, did let them lose: who smelling out their praie,
                  skaerd Hercules his brother that in selfe same cradle lay.
                  But Hercules, as Children vse with little whelpes to play,
                  Did dallie childishlie with them, and no whit did dismay:
                  Untill at last his tender flesh did feele their smarting stings,
                  And then displeasd betwixt his handes the Snakes to death hée wrings.
                  
                     Amphrituo an the Thebans all of this same wonder tell:
                  And yeeres permitting Hercules did with Euristeus dwell.
                  This King by spightfull Iunos meanes, did set him taske on task,
                  But Hercules perfourmed more then both of them could aske.
                  Yea, yet a good Lad, for Actiuenes the world did lack his like,
                  To Wrestle, Ride, Run, Caste, or Shoote, to Swim, Shift, or Strike,
                  As witnes (his inuention first) those solemne actiue Plaios.
                  That were on Mount Olimpus tride, where he had pricke and praise.
                  For which his Nouell, and himselfe, in those not hauing Péeres,
                  The Graecians by th'Olimpides kept reckoning of their yéeres.
               
               
                  KIng Atlas daughters in the Isles of Hesperae did holde
                  A manie Sheepe: and Poets faine their fléeces were of Golde:
                  (For rarenes then of Shéepe and Wooll in figures so they saw)
                  
                     Euristeus pricks his Pople on this nouile Prize to gaine.
                  The Greekes applie their sweating Oares, and sailing doe persist
                  Until they reach the wished shoare: where readie to resist
                  their entrance to the closed Isles an armed Giant stayd,
                  Whose grim aspectes at first approch made Hercules afraide.
                  Now buckle they, and boysterous bloes they giue and take among.
                  A cruell sight, But Hercules had victorie ere long.
                  The Giant slaine, Philoctes tooke the vanquisher in hand:
                  An harder taske had Hercules then pausing now to stand.
                  Most dreadfull was their doubtfull fight, both lay about them round,
                  
                     Philoctes held the harder fight by kéeping higher ground.
                  
                     The Sonne of Ioue perceauing well that prowesse not auail'd,
                  Did faine to faint: the other thought that he in deed had quaild,
                  And left th'aduantage of his ground, and fearcely smites his Foe:
                  But Hercules, whose pollecie was to contriue it so,
                  Renuing fight most eagerlye, so strikes, and strikes againe,
                  That to enduer the doubled force his valiant Foe had paine.
                  Who, yealding to his Uictors will, did finde in him such grace,
                  As Hercules did thenceforth vse his friendship in each place.
                  
                     Hesperides, the goodly Nimphes, their Kéepers chaunce lament:
                  But Hercules did comfort them, and cure their discontent:
                  And shipping thē of Rammes & Ewes a parcel, thence he went.
               
               
                  IN coasting back by new-built Troy, he sawe a moneful sort
                  of people, clustering round about their yet vnconquered Port.
                  He musing much, and striking Saile, did boldlie aske wherefore
                  They made such dole: Laomidon then standing on the Shoare
                  Did tell the cause: the cause was thus. Laomedon ere than
                  To reare the statelie walles of Troy (a costly worke) beganne,
                  And wanting pay to finish vp the worke he had begonne,
                  Of Neptunes and of Phoebus Priests (the Goddes of Sea and Sonne)
                  He borowed money, promising repaiment of the same
                  by certaine time which therevnto he did expresly name.
                  The walles are built, the time is come, the Priests their money craue,
                  
                     Laomedon forswares the debt, and naughtie language gaue.
                  Forthwith the Sea (the Deuill then did many wonders showe)
                  Began to swell, and much of Troy with violence ouerfloe:
                  And therevpon the swealtie Sun (the wastfull Sea retierd)
                  So vehementlie did shine vpon the Oesie plasshes myerd,
                  That thereof noisome vapours rose, and of those vapours spread
                  Such plagues, as scarce the liuing might giue burial to the dad.
                  Repentant then, their wrethed king to holy Delphos goes.
                  Where at the Oracle he knew his wrongs to cause suc wees:
                  And how the Godds of Sun and Seas, offended doe require
                  Each month a Uirgin, to appease a seaish Monsters ire:
                  Wherefore to saue their common weale, the Troyans did agrée
                  One Uirgin, as her Lot did light, should pay that monthlie fée.
                  
                     Now after manie murdred Maids (for monthlie at one day,
                  The fearefull Monster at the Port expects his wonted pray)
                  The lot fell to Hesione the daughter of the king,
                  whom to the Port to be deuourd with teares the Troyans bring.
                  When Hercules thus vnderstood the hard occasion why
                  The guiltles Ladie should haue died, he purposing to trie
                  his valiantnes, (for what was it that Hercules would flie)
                  Did aske the king what gift should gro to him that should both free
                  His daughter, and his kingdome of that monthly blooddie fee.
                  The king, whom now at doubted hope of profered helpe made glad,
                  made promise of two milk-white Steedes as chiefest gemmes he had.
                  Braue Hercules, whose ventrous heart did only hunt for fame,
                  Accepts th'assumpsit, and prepares the fiend like fish to tame.
                  Anone the dreadfull Diuell driues the Sea before his brest,
                  and spitting mightie waues abrode, disgorgde from monstrous chest,
                  Liftst vp his vglie head aboue the toubled waues to catch
                  The trembling Ladie, for which pray his yaning iawes did watch.
                  But he, whose strength exceeded sense, with yron Club in fist.
                  Did bootelesse long with brusing wait the boistrous Whale resist:
                  The greater strokes, the fiercer was the Monsters awlesse fight:
                  So that the Greekes and Troyans all misdoubt their dreadlesse knight.
                  Still Hercules did lay on load, and hild the fight so long,
                  That in the end the Sea retired, and left the fish among
                  The bared sandes: and so for want of water, not of strength,
                  Good fortune honours Hercules with victorie at length.
                  Now when the king, his Troyans, and the Grecians had behild
                  The substance of the vglie Shape, euen dreadfull being kild,
                  they bring the Champion to the towne with triumphes, giftes, & praise:
                  And who but hee belou'd in Troy, whiles that in Troy he staies▪
                  
                  Alone the king (a man no doubt predestinate to ill)
                  Obseruing how his Subiects bore to Hercules good will,
                  and fearing least their loue to him might turne himselfe to hate,
                  And seeing now himselfe and land in prosperous estate,
                  vnfriendlie did exclude his friend from out his cittie strong,
                  Whilst with his Greekes he hunts abrode, mistrustlesse of such wrong:
                  and when the Champion and his men did from their sport returne,
                  
                     Not onelie did gain-say in Troy that longer they soiourn
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  But also (impudent in guiles) withhild the Corsers twaine,
                  Which Hercules so dearely wonne, in hassard to be slaine.
                  
                     Alcmenas sonne abashed then to finde so lewd a meede,
                  In lewe of well deserued loue, was chollericke in deed:
                  and made a vow (if life gaue leaue) he would such vengeance take
                  on Troy, that euen the stones thereof for dread of him should quake,
                  and that the liuing Troyans then should say, and iustly say,
                  That they were happie whom the plague and Monster made away:
                  and threatning so the trothlesse king did leaue the hated Port,
                  And shortly did ariue at Thaebes, and feasts in Creons Court.
               
               
                  THence brought he war, and wrack to Troy, & in his armie kinges:
                  And by the way Larnessas walles vnto the ground he flings,
                  And setteth Tenedos on fire, whose fearefull flames espide,
                  gaue Sommance vnto carelesse Troy for worser to prouide.
                  Before the Greekes had reached Troy the Troyans by the way
                  did bid them battaile: manie men on either part decay:
                  The sounding armours cracke with blowes, whilst pearcing arrowes flie,
                  This lieth dead, that fame is maimd, and more at point to die.
                  Heads, armes, and armour flie about, and bodies swimme in blood,
                  and fresh supplies did fall with them on whom they fighting stood.
                  But Hercules, aboue the rest, bestird himselfe so well,
                  That still before his balefull Club by Shoks the Troyans fell.
                  Who, fainting now, seeke to retyre into their fensiue Towne:
                  where Hercules their Porter was, and rudely knocks them downe.
                  Thus wonne be Troy, and sacked Troy, and Chanels flowed blood,
                  Nor did hee breath whilst anie part of all the Citie stood,
                  Saue statelie 
                        
                           ••
                        ion: in the same a manie Ladies were,
                  Whose piteous teares wrought Hercules that onlie place to spare.
                  As for the false Laomedon he secretlie was fled,
                  And valiant Pryamus his sonne to Greece was captiue led.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  
                     AT home returnd, Quéene Iuno craues his companie at Creat,
                  
                  Whom, there arriud, with hartlesse ioy his Stepdame did intreat.
                  What? hearest thou not my sonne (quoth she) how Argiue folke complaine
                  Of Lions thrée, that in their fieldes both men and heards haue slaine?
                  And this she said, as knowing him to seeke such hard affaires.
                  To win him to which desperate fight no Corse nor cost he spares.
                  When this was said, enough was said, and halfe was yet behind
                  When Hercules did vow redresse, and Iuno had her minde.
                  He ioyes to heare of that exploit, such was his ventrous heart,
                  And thanking Iuno for her newes did so from thence depart.
                  
                     Philoctes now and Hercules in Nemea Forest be,
                  Long seeking what they could not finde, till crying from a tree
                  an Heards-man said, friends shift away, or els come vp to me:
                  Least that those cruel Lions thrée now ranging in this wood,
                  which haue deuourd those Heards I had, and with my Manies blood
                  Imbrud their fierce deuouring chappes, and forced me to clime
                  This Trée, where I (vnhappie man) on leaues haue fed long time,
                  may, all too soone, with tearing teeth destroy you in like case,
                  The quaking Heards-man scarce had said thus much, when as a pa
                        ••
                     
                  
                  from out a Thick the Lions thrée on Hercules did runne,
                  
                     Philoctes, trustlesse of his Prowse, by climing did then shunne.
                  And now the Rampant Lions great, whose onelie view would quaile
                  An hundred knights, though armed well, did Hercules assaile.
                  And sometimes with their churlish téeth and pinching pawes againe
                  So greeuously indanger him, that neere he faints with paine.
                  Howbeit (glorie checking griefe) he twaine had now dispatcht:
                  The third, and dreadfulst of the three, though many a blow he catcht,
                  yet neither Club nor Sword had force to harme his hardned Hyed
                  Untill that (weapons laid apart) by strangling handes he died.
                  Not Hercules himselfe conceaude more ioy of this successe
                  Then did Philoctes, who erewhile did hope of nothing lesse.
                  
                     The Paster, poore Meloreus, like as Hercules he him wild
                  Uncaest the Lions, fearing long to touch them being kild▪
                  
                  And in his Cottage to the knights a Countrie feast he hild,
                  The Argiues, hearing of this déed, with Triumphes him intreat,
                  And offer all: but leauing all he doth returne to Create.
                  
                  Whom golzing Iuno, gainst her mind, with cost did intertaine,
                  and with a tonge repugnant quite to her malicious vaine
                  Commends his déeds, whē rather she did wish he had béen slain.
                  and therefore with an harder taske his labour did renew:
                  But what was it that manhood might, and he would not pursue?
               
               
                  IN Egypt was a greeuous drought: the cause therof vnknowen:
                  which to redres, their Diuelish Gods an Oracle had showen.
                  Doe offer vp strange blood, they bid, and so auart our ire,
                  
                     Busiris prone before to blood, had now his hearts desire:
                  No sooner Stranger toucht the shoare, but them the barbarous king
                  To frie in flames before his Gods for Sacrifice doth bring.
                  Yea custome added worse to yll, his Subiect and his friend
                  (when Strangers misse) supplie the flames: his murthers had no end.
                  Howbeit, with these Butcheries the drought did still remaine:
                  For in Busiris was the blood that should redéeme the raine.
                  The Gods did meane (which they not minde) that lewd Busiris he
                  an Alien borne, that Stranger was, who dead, no drought should be.
                  A Noble man of Iunos kin Busiris late had slaine,
                  For losse of whom the craftie Quéene did often sorrowes faine.
                  Cease (Madame) saith Hercules, not long the time shalbe,
                  But I his tyrannie shall end, els they giue end to me.
                  Her sorrowes did not tith her icy, when he had giuen consent
                  To vndertake that deathfull taske: for death was it she meant.
                  Now Hercules in Egypt méetes Busiris and his Crew,
                  When sodainlie with maine assault on him the Giant flew:
                  Supposing to haue dealt with him▪ as he had done before
                  with other Strangers: Hercules alonelie, and no more
                  to take his part, with skathfull strokes bestird his Club so well,
                  In battering of the Tyrants bones, that strengthlesse downe he fell.
                  Then did he kill and chase away his lewd and cruel traine,
                  
                     Till hearing of no further foe, hée commeth backe againe:
                  and taketh vp the wretched king, that cryeth out for aide:
                  And on the Altar, where himselfe had Strangers often laid,
                  Himself was made a Sacrifice: and as his blood did staine
                  the Altar, euen at the same time there fell a ioyfull raine.
                  With ended drought, and Tyrants death, a common ioy befell:
                  And all in Mimphis intertaine the vnknowne Champion well:
                  From thence returning backe to Thaebes hee there awhile did dwell.
               
               
                  King Creons daughter Megara, at Thaebes he did espouse:
                  To coūtināce their wedding feast did wāt nor knights, nor prowse.
                  Which triumphes ended, when the knights should thence depart away,
                  
                     Pirithous to his wedding bids them all: and names the day
                  Wherein to meete at Thessalie: to which did all consent,
                  and at the time concluded of at Thessalie conuent.
                  Amidst their chéere, the solemne feast the Centaures did disquyet:
                  Whom by no meanes, the nobles there the patience might intreate:
                  For they an hundred Giants strong, with drinking whitteled well,
                  amongst their cups, from wordes to blowes, and worser dealings fell:
                  And (too outragious at the last, fierce Eurytis their Guide)▪
                  
                  Unreurentlie they rauish thence Hippodame the Bride.
                  But Hercules not brooking it, to arme himselfe begonne,
                  and all alone in rescue of the rapted Bride did rome.
                  By this time did Ixeons Seed stand still in battaile raie,
                  When he, but one against them all, began a blooddie fraie.
                  Ech arrow that with aiming hand from sturdie bow he sent,
                  Did answere by the death of one, the Sender his intent.
                  Whilst Hercules with deadlie bow had store of Centaures slaine,
                  and, wanting arrowes, with their blood his valiant Club did staine,
                  The Bridegrome and the other knights came to the ceasing fight,
                  When all were foyld, excepting twelue that saue their liues by flight.
                  Alonely Lycus yeelded him a prisoner, and liues:
                  And liuing vnto Hercules much after sorowe giues:
                  But Nessus, that escaped then, in time him worser greeues.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  
                     THE glory of this high attepmt, and sauing of the Bride,
                  They all ascribe to Hercules: and whilst they here abide▪
                  
                  To exercise his Piracies as Pluto king of Hell,
                  (Such was the lewdnes of his life, and place where he die dwell
                  That hee and it were titeled so) lay houering neere the shore,
                  And saw the folke of Cicilie their Gods with rights adore:
                  This rouing king, with armed Guardes of his disordered Crew
                  did come a lande, to make their Pray: but (for to outward view)
                  They faine deuotion, none suspect the ill that did ensue.
                  Anon a wreathing Garlands sweet hard at her mothers side
                  King Pluto saw Proserpine: and liking whom he spide:
                  Concluding with his companie how to conuay her thence,
                  Betwixt his boistrous armes he tooke the faire and fearefull wench:
                  and doe what the Cicilians might he setteth her a boord:
                  and to his giltie Sailes the Aire did gentle Gaeles afoord.
                  A number eyes in Cicelie for her did weep, in vaine:
                  For her, her mother Ceres and her Loues-mate did complaine,
                  Her selfe (swéet Ladie) of her moane did finde no meane God wot
                  Though Dis to please did say and giue what might be said or got.
                  Imbarked then, with him his Harpe did woful Orpheus take,
                  and to Molossa Plutos Realme with speedie Sailes did make.
                  Where he, vnknowne, at gate of Hell did harp such Musicke sweete,
                  as lump
                        •
                     sh Cerberus could not but shake his monstrous feete:
                  His foule and warpt ill fauoured face, or 
                        •
                     huge with cole-black haires,
                  his Horslike teeth, his 
                        •
                     olling lips, his Doglike hanging cares,
                  His hooked nose, his skowling eyes, his filthie knotted Beard,
                  and what not in his vglie shape? But presentlie appeard
                  More milder than his common moode, and lesser to be feard.
                  This hellish Porter deeming that such musicke would delight
                  his weeping Mistris did conuay the harper to her sight.
                  Where Pulto swore by dreadfull Stix if Orpheus bid by play
                  
                     But make her laugh, what so he askt he should receiue for pay.
                  Anon such heauenly Harmony on skilful Harpe he plaid,
                  That shée her husbands musicke knewe, and ioyfull was shée made,
                  And Orpheus did a watch-word giue, and she to laugh began:
                  And for reward to haue from thence his wife he asked than.
                  Although it galled Plutoes soule his swéet hart to forgoe,
                  Yet for to quit him of his oath he yeelds it shall be so:
                  With this condition, that before they fully passed Hell,
                  He should not backwards looke on her, what chaunce so'ere befell.
                  Now as they passe through blinde biwaies, he fearing least per chaunce
                  she err or lag returnes a looke: and who should marke that glance
                  but Cerberus, that purposelie for such aduantage waites:
                  Who stil detaining her, did shut her Husband out the gates.
                  When Ceres heard of this mischaunce, she Cicil leaues anon,
                  And knowing all the Knightes of Grece to Thessalie were gone,
                  Shée thether goes in hope of helpe: where presently she meetes
                  with Thaeseus and Pirithous, whose salutings shee regreetes
                  they wondring what the noble Quéene of Cicill there should make:
                  Become inquisitiue thereof: to whome sad Ceres spake
                  first of Proserpine her gréef, and then of Plutoes guile:
                  For her shée weepes, of him shée railes, and moueth them meane while,
                  The mother of false Dis his rape had more behinde vnsaid,
                  When AEgeus and Ixions Sonnes did iointly offer aide.
                  About the desart partes of Greece there is a valley lowe,
                  To which the roaring waters fall that from the Mountaines fl
                        •
                     e:
                  So Rockes ouershadowe it that scarce a man may viewe
                  the open ayre: no Sun shines there. Amidst this darksome Mewe
                  doth stand a Cittie, to the same belongs one onely Gate,
                  But one at once may come thereto the entrance is so straite,
                  Cut out the rough maine stonie Rocke: this Citie did belong
                  to Pluto, and because that he was euer doeing wrong,
                  And kept a Théeuish Rabell that in mischiefes did excell,
                  His Citizens were Diuels said, and Cittie named Hell.
                  When to this Citties ruthlesse gate were come the friendly Knights,
                  Fierce Cerberus did rouse him selfe, and scarcely barking bites:
                  He thought the worlde had lackt the man that thether durst repaire:
                  
                     And troth to say, not one till then to do the like did dare.
                  Now fiery sparkes from thundring strokes in darke did giue them light,
                  And Ceres Champions valiantlie maintaine their ventrous fight.
                  But stout Pirithous, too too bold, a deadlie wound he catcht:
                  And Theseus, though Combattan-like he long the Helhound matcht,
                  Yet with his fellowe had he falne, who flying feares to cope.
                  Expecting nothing lesse then life, but hap exceeded hope.
                  For Hercules at Thessalie did feare so hard euent:
                  Whence lanching out, he made in showe as if to Thaebes he went
                  But with Philoctes all his traine and Licus home he sent.
                  And he himselfe to aide his friends did to Molossa goe,
                  Where like as did his minde presage, he found it very so.
                  For euen as currish Cerberus with gorie bloes did chace
                  the wounded and the wearie Knight, came Hercules in place.
                  An vnexpected happie sight to Theseus at that tide:
                  Whome Cerberus forsaking then at Hercules he flide:
                  Upbraiding him with threatning words, and like him selfe did raue,
                  And reacht him many a crabbed rap with his presumtious Glaue.
                  The Danter then of Trespasses perceauing Theseus drie
                  his gréeuous wounds, and at his féet Pirithous dead to lie,
                  Desirous to reuenge them both laies lustie lode about,
                  And with his still victorious Club did Cerberus so cloute,
                  That, quite dismaid at such a match, he réeling to the ground,
                  Did send from out his Doggish throat a loud and diuelish sound:
                  But when the victor suer enough the vanquished had bound,
                  He leauing Theseus weake without into the Cittie went:
                  Whereas he found the wicked King, and Citizens that spent
                  their frutelesse time in vices foule, and dealings most vniust,
                  As those that in their Porters strength reposed all their trust.
                  With these did Hercules play Rex, and leauing Dis for dead,
                  Not one escapes his deadly hand that dares to shewe his head.
                  Whole thousandes then did breath their last, and who had séene ye sight,
                  Might wel haue said it Hel indéed: for euery thing out-right,
                  Besides that sullen Mewe it selfe, did giue a figure plaine
                  of selfe same Hell, where damned Soules abide in endlesse paine.
                  Saue howlings out and shuddering feare can nought to eare or sight,
                  
                     With gréeuous gro
                        •
                     es of dying Ghosts: & so much more their spight,
                  By how much more he found them then in pleasures and delight.
                  This horror hanging. Hercules in buskling vp and downe
                  In Plutoes Pallace▪ to her ioy Proserpine he found:
                  And tolde her of enlargement thence. And then in harrowed Hell
                  (Pyrithous buried) he, nor she,, nor Theseus longer dwell.
                  But waying Anker with the Quéene of Cicels Daughter went
                  To Thessalie: where present gréefes pretended ioyes preuent,
                  For, hearing of Pyrithous death, not one but did lament.
                  
                     Hippodame (a widowe nowe) especially bewailes
                  Her ouer-hardie Husbands death. But wéeping lesse preuailes
                  Then doth Reuenge: for Hercules vnto her dome commits
                  Her greefes Contriuer, Cerberus, almost besides his witts
                  For feare of death his due desert: whome causing' to be 
                        •
                     ound
                  both hands and féet, and to be drag'd along the ragged ground,
                  A knauish Skull of Boyes and Girls did pelt at him with stones,
                  And laying on with staues and whippes did breake both flesh & bones.
               
               
                  WHen Hercules should passe to Hell as hath before ben said,
                  And that Philoctes of his men he had Lieftenant made,
                  And as Philoctes with his charge on Seas to Thaebes did passe,
                  He met Androdamus: the King of Calcedon he was.
                  
                     Androdamus, not knoweing yet his Cosen there inthralde,
                  (For Lycus was his Cosen) to the Thaebane Pilots calde
                  To Ken of whence and where they would. But ere the Thaebans might
                  Giue answere, Lycus clog'd with chaines on hatches stode vpright
                  And cride, Androdamus beholde and succour me thy friend,
                  That shamefully, vnles thou helpe, am like my life to end.
                  I Captiue am to Hercules, and thus to Thaebes must goe:
                  Giue aide therefore. Androdamus deferres not doing so,
                  But setteth on Philoctes, that himselfe and shippe defendes
                  And part of Calcedons he slewe, and part to Sea he sendes:
                  But where the n
                        ••
                     er tripold there for them the Battell ends
                  When Lycus was discharg'd of bands, and stout Philoctes bound,
                  He tolde what skath the Centaures late in Thessalie had found.
                  Amongst the slaine he named some allied to the King:
                  
                     For which the sauage▪ Tyrant swore reuenge on Thaebes to bring:
                  And sailing thence preuailed there by comming vnawares.
                  And putteth all to sacke and sword, nor olde nor yong he spares.
                  He slaieth Creon, and in holde fair Megara was cast:
                  And leauing Lycus King in Thaebes, from Thaebes the Tirant past.
                  Whilst Lycus thus did Lord it there, the error of his 
                        •
                     ie
                  Did vexe his heart: but Megara his lu
                        •
                     t did chastly flie.
                  And Hercules by now had newes how things at Thaebes fell out,
                  And how that Lycus there was Lord, and none for him durst route.
                  Disguised then he thether comes and to the Pallace went:
                  Whome, when the Porters would haue staide, his raggs he of did rent,
                  And showes himselfe like to him selfe, no blee in vaine he spent
                  that sets not breath or blood abroch. This vprore Lycus heard,
                  And thinking that some priuate Fray had falne amongst his Garde,
                  Presuming that his presence would appease the growing heat,
                  Did cast his haughtie armes abroad, as who would say be quiet,
                  Or here am I that can aswel commaund it as intreat,
                  Which Hercules so sodenlie chopt off that (yet vnmist)
                  He thinking to haue vsed Armes, was armeles ere he wist.
                  Then Hercules, our Hercules is come all Thaebes it cride,
                  Now shake we of our seruile Yoke & followe him our Guide:
                  And so they did, till none were left to holde on Licus side.
                  The Medley ended, Hercules did bring the Centaure bound
                  To Prison: whereas Megara in miserie he found:
                  For Licus, spéedles in his lust, against her so had frownde.
                  Yea (more reuengefull) séeing her imbraced by his Foe,
                  And hoping nothing lesse then life to vex them ere he goe
                  He saide: thou dootest ouermuch to entertaine that Whore,
                  The falsest Ladie vnder heauen, for let me liue no more,
                  If Megera (I speake by profe) imbraced so of thee:
                  Hath not offended diuers waies, and common ben to me.
                  Then Hercules supposing that his spéeches had ben true 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Sweapt of the lying Centaurs head, and that in chol
                        ••
                      slewe
                  (To credulent) his guiltlesse wife: but dead, her 
                        ••
                     ath did ru
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     FOr losse of her, and slaughtered friends, he vexed at the heart
                  did then from Thaebes (an heauie man) to Forrain lands depart,
                  Distressed in the Troian Rhode he succour sought for pay:
                  To which (his peoples triple plague) Laomedon said nay:
                  And to prouide their second scourge saild Hercules away.
                  And comming backe with Iasons Prize from Calchos he complaines
                  of churlish king Laomedon, and so an Armie gaines.
                  At Troy the Greekish Péeres and he did land their armed men:
                  Whom to resist Laomedon did range his Battailes then.
                  The Troians they bestird them well, the Grecians stood not still,
                  
                     Laomedon fights valiantlie, and manie a Greeke did kill.
                  Till Hercules (disgesting ill to see his Foe pursue
                  such good successe) encounters him, whom easilie he slue.
                  And hauing slaine the traiterous king he ceaseth not to die▪
                  
                  his Thaebane Club in Phrigian blood, till all began to flie.
                  But with the Troians, Telamon, and Hercules both twaine,
                  And by their valour all the Greekes the gates and Cittie gaine:
                  And kill who so of Troy they caught, and raced to the ground
                  the Citie, whilst that house by house, or stone on stone they found:
                  And ventrous Telamon, for that he entred first the gate,
                  For Prize had faire Hesione, of Troy the latest fate.
                  For Priamus to quit her Rape, long after sent his Sonne
                  To rauish Hellen from the Greekes. So thirdlie warre begonne:
                  
                     Hesione the cause to Troy, and Hellen to the Greekes,
                  
                  And all did worke that Troian Brute the Albions Climate seekes.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE ALBIONS ENGLAND.
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  
                     THE twise sackt Towne the Grecians then did meerilie forsake,
                  And Hercules for new affaires, did lande in Egypt take.
                  There in a Porte hée did espie a Fleete of Shippes from farre.
                  Well fraught with men, Munition, and what pertaines to warre.
                  When Affer (he chiefe Captaine was of that same Fléete) did spie
                  the Ensignes of the famous Greeke, he knew them by and by:
                  And entertaining on his knees the Owner of the sam
                        •
                     ,
                  Reioyced to behold the man so honoured by fame.
                  With Affer sailed Hercules to Libia, to put downe
                  the Gyant king Antaeus, that had aided to the crowne
                  of Egypt gainst th'Egiptians willes Busiris latelie slaine
                  by Hercules, in whose conduct they doubt not to obtaine,
                  And taking land in Libia now, and hauing in their sight
                  the threatned Citie of the Foe, his Tents did Affer pight,
                  And girts it with a sodaine Siedge. The Giant then did shake
                  his hideous head, and vow'd reuenge, yea sharpe reuenge to take.
                  But issuing out his Citie gates hee found the Foe so hot,
                  That, notwithstanding such his bragges, the worst Antaeus got:
                  For Hercules did canuase so his carkas, that at length
                  hée did retire himselfe and men, as trustlesse of his strength.
                  His Libions slaine, and hée not sound, Antaeus Truse did craue:
                  For graunt whereof vnto his Foes meane time he victuals gaue:
                  And whilst the Month of Truse did last the Giant, brused sore,
                  Did heale his wounds, and to his part sollicites aiders more,
                  
                     Meane while the Greeke to Mauritan did passe vnknowne of all,
                  and there in king Antaeus aide he found supplies not small:
                  And for he looked souldier-like they brought him to the king,
                  who offered pay
                        •
                      not so (quoth he) I meane another thing,
                  Discharge these Bands, or els I will discharge thee of thy breath,
                  That all alone to thée and thine oppos
                        •
                      me to the death.
                  When Atlas knew him Hercules, that conquered of late
                  The Iland which his daughters held, and brought to latest fate
                  His Giant that defended them, and captiuated then
                  His friend Philoctes, he twixt feare and fiercenesse waxed wanne.
                  And looke how fast the ratling haile vpon an house doth fall,
                  So fast they lay on Hercules, that holdeth wag gainst all.
                  and as the Smith with Hammer beats his forged Mettall, so
                  he 
                        •
                     ubs his Club about their pates and fleas them on a roe.
                  And whilst (not daring to looke downe) by heaps on him they flie,
                  Some stumbling on the bodies dead are smoldred so and die:
                  Some sliding in the slipperie blood, wherewith the place did swimme,
                  were strangled so: some others whilst disorderedly at him
                  They freat and soyne, are crowded on by those that hindmost be,
                  and with their weapons spoile themselues and fellowes two or three:
                  Some others with the wounding points of broken weapons die:
                  and others daring with their Foe their bootles force to trie,
                  were in a moment slaine by him: and thus in little space,
                  Without Resistants Hercules had Lordship of the place.
                  And maugre swords or studied Starres brought Atlas to the Seas,
                  whereas Philoctes did in time his pensiuenes appease:
                  And to his friend comemnds the Foe for bountie, which at last
                  himselfe did finde: and when as time his griefe had ouerpast,
                  The same that for Astrologie the Skies Support was said,
                  In such his Science Hercules a perfect Artist made.
                  The Month of Truse by this had end, and Hercules returnes
                  To Affer, that incamped at the Lybian walles soiournes,
                  A second battell then begonne. Antaeus like a Baer
                  Bes
                        ••
                     es himselfe amongst his Foes: whilst Hercules did faer
                  as roughlie with contrarie blooes, till none to fight did daer.
                  But humblie all submitting them selues subdued by his might:
                  
                     He gaue them grace, and staied ther to doe them law and right.
                  Meane time Anteus, lately fled, returnes from Mauritain,
                  
                  And with a mightie Troupe of Moores renewed fight againe.
                  And all the Fieldes with Carcases of mangled men were filde,
                  And nombers failed to the Moores that Hercules then kild.
                  But when Anteus saw his men to lessen more and more,
                  Resoluing or to win the Spurres or lose him selfe therefore,
                  He makes a blodie path vntill the Thaebane he espide,
                  And finding him, bestowe on me thy blowes the Giant cried,
                  That am both able to enduer and to repay the same,
                  A Flie is not an Eagles praie, nor Mouse a Lions game.
                  My death might countenance thy deedes (if that it so would be)
                  But make account that I anon will triumph ouer thee.
                  In saying which hee smites his Foe, perfourming wondrous might:
                  And bodie vnto bodie they with equal dammage fight.
                  But Hercules disdaining that so long Antaeus standes
                  with him in combat, griping him betwixt his angrie handes,
                  Did crush his Carkasse in the aire that life did leaue him so:
                  And thus did reape a Monarchie, and rid a mightie Foe.
                  Then Hercules (Antaeus dead) with ease he ouercame
                  all Libea, with the Prouinces & Kingdomes of the same:
                  And maketh Affer King of al that beares the doers name.
               
               
                  IN expedition of which warre when Hercules would dwell
                  no longer time, but purposed to bid his friends farew
                        •
                     ll,
                  A warlike Wench, an Amazon, salutes him by his name,
                  And said knowe Hercules (if it thou knowest not by fame)
                  how that the Scythian Ladies, late e
                        •
                     peld their natiue Land
                  by King of Egipt, haue contriu'd amongst themselues a bande,
                  And with the same haue conquered all Asia, Egipt, and
                  all Capadocia. Now that for we Uictors vnderstand
                  the Africanes are our Allies, and minding to procéed
                  In further conquests, tendring them, thus is therefore decréed:
                  That you two Champions shall elect, and they will also send
                  two Ladies, that for victorie shall with your Knights contend.
                  And if your Champions vanquish ours, then we wil tribute pay:
                  
                     And if that ours doe vanquish yours, then you shall vs obay.
                  But hope not so, more profite giues our bountie then our blowes,
                  And vninforced tribute may procure you friendlie Foes:
                  Then Hercules, admiring much the Chalengers, did yeeld
                  two aduerse Knights the morrow next shoulde méet them in the field.
                  And mounted well on Corsers twaine next light by dawne of day
                  Into the Liestes came Hercules and Theseus. Mid the way
                  vpon a brace of milke white Séedes the two Viragoes méete
                  the Knights: and each the other did with ciuill Congies gréete.
                  Then either parte retiring backe began to make their race,
                  And coutching well their valiant Speares did run a wondrous pace.
                  With Menalippe Hercules the sight did vndertake,
                  And Theseus with Hippolite did his Encounter make.
                  They méeting, either part both horse and load to ground were cast,
                  Whereat the Africanes did muse and Scythians weare agast.
                  Unhorsed thus, disdainfully each Knight defendant tooke it:
                  And either Ladie so disgrac'd as scornefullie did brooke it.
                  Then settle they to handy Armes, the which was long and fierce,
                  And with their cutting weapons did both Helms and Harnes pierce.
                  But Hercules, though neuer matcht so hardlie in his life,
                  Disarmes at length his Scithian Task, and ended was their strife,
                  But Theseus with his Combattesse in doubtfull battell fights,
                  Till, blushing at the Maidens blowes, he checks his mending sprits.
                  And laid so hardlie to her charge, not able to sustaine
                  his fresh-got force, that he also the second Prize did gaine.
                  
                     Antiope, a third vnto those warlike Sisters twaine,
                  Beholding how sinisterly the double fight had past,
                  Makes sorrow, whilst the Africanes reioise for it as fast,
                  The Scythians to the Africanes did Homage then, and pray
                  their Ladies might be raunsomed. Which sute did Theseus stay,
                  For he through Lance, his Foe through loue went Uanquisher away.
                  And ther-fore when th'Athenian Knight and Amazon were matcht
                  in mariage, Menelippe then from Durance was dispacht.
                  And Hercules: (then which to him no greater Prize could be)
                  had Quéene Antiope her Bealt and Armour for his f
                        •
                     e,
                  And sets the Dames of Thermodon from other ransome free.
                  
                     And Theseus with Hippolite at Athens landing takes,
                  And Hercules to Calidon a Desmal
                        •
                      vsage makes.
               
               
                  THere did King Oeneus bounteously receaue so great a Guest:
                  Where scarcely had he any time from p
                        •
                     ssed toiles to rest,
                  But that proud Achelous sent Ambassidors to knowe
                  If that King Oeneus on him his daughter would bestowe,
                  If not to threaten wreakfull warres: which much abasht the King,
                  Till Hercules, who then was come about the selfe same thing,
                  (For loue to Deianira both Compettitors did bring)
                  Expelled feare by offring aide to backe him from the Foe:
                  By meanes whereof vnsatisfide away the Legats goe.
                  The Tyrant Achelous then, with all Epirus force
                  inuades the bounds of Calidon, and spoile without remorse.
                  But Hercules he leading forth his Armie got the day,
                  And well was he amongst his Foes that fastest ran away.
                  They & their King, with hard escape, inmure them selues at length
                  within a Castle néere the Sea, a Hold of wondrous strength,
                  The Thaebans then as resolute to spoile both Foe and Fort,
                  Did burne his Foes forsaken shippes left riding in the Porte:
                  And with a fewe beset the Holde. When Achelous he
                  so slender watch about the walles of Enemies did see,
                  He scorned that so weake a siedge should pen him vp so straight,
                  He hauing ten for one of them, did issue out the Gate
                  against the Greekes, that willinglie his comming did awaite.
                  Espying Hercules, he cride, lo yond same diuell is he
                  that droue vs out of Calidon: who so of mine he be
                  that slaieth him, shall be inritcht with great rewards by me.
                  But he that made s
                        •
                     ch offers large, did offer them in vaine:
                  For when his men sawe Hercules approching them amaine
                  With fierie eies, and angrie lookes, and dreadful Club insist,
                  They thought it needles to assaile, and booteles to resiste.
                  And euery man retired back into the holde againe,
                  Where many daies, attemting slight, they cowardly remaine.
                  From warre at length they fell to wiles. There lay vpon the shoare
                  a broken Hoy, that had not brookt the Seas of long before:
                  
                     The Mast they boring full of holes, in euerie hole did sticke
                  a burning Torch, and lancht it out in night when cloudes were thick.
                  No sooner was the firie keele a floot vpon the waues,
                  And that the Greekes espied it, but ech man rashlie craues
                  the viewing of so strange a sight. Their Captaine that did smell
                  the presupposed Stratagem, did rainge his armie well,
                  And marching neere the guilefull light, did finde ambushments there,
                  That playing on aduantage thus (preuented though) appeare.
                  Occasion hapning, Hercules would not admit the same,
                  But tooke them as he found them now, and fights it out by aime.
                  When Achelous he behild his guild by guile to faile,
                  Well might he chafe, be harder chaunce his courage might not quaile.
                  For looke how fierce and boistrouslie a chafed Bull doth fight,
                  So Acheleus lustilie on either side did smite:
                  And by his only prowse then a manie knights were slaine,
                  Whilst Hercules with like successe his Opposits did paine.
                  And now, by chance, amidst the brunt the valiant Woers twaine
                  doe single, and togethers tug, and as two Lions strong
                  ech one desiring others blood did hold a Combate long,
                  king Achelous minding her for whom began that broile,
                  To conquere where he did contend annexed hope to toyle.
                  
                     Alcmenas Sonne remembring to whose cause he did defend,
                  Euen hers on whom his being and his verie soule depend,
                  So chargd his Contrarie with knocks, and vsed his Club so well,
                  That vanquished (though valerous) king Achelous fell.
                  
                     Thepirotes when they saw their king a Captiue led away,
                  Their hearts were doone: and Hercules subdude them ere day.
                  And Achelous in exile did end his latter dayes:
                  And all AEtolia was fild with Hercules his praise,
                  To whom the king did giue to Wife faire De
                           •
                        anira, she
                  the pleasing prise of that his prowse, and dearelie earned Fee,
                  Who after of her owne decay, and his, the meane should be;
                  The Centaure Nessus was the man that made her erre so much:
                  Of which her error, but his sinne, the circumstance is such.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  
                     WHen ouer deepe Euenus Foord the passage did not fit,
                  This Giaunt, of a Stature tall, did offer helpe to it.
                  And Hercules forgetting him (for at the Centaures Fray
                  The same vnslaine, but not vnskard, escaped then away)
                  Did pray him to the farther shoare with Deianir to wade,
                  And so he did, whilst Hercules this side the Riuer staid.
                  Whom Iunos Breed on further bankes his Passenger had set,
                  Then lust and long conceiued grudge to foule reuenge did whet:
                  Not Deianira coulde auoid a Rape, or little lesse:
                  Or Hercules disioynd by Foord, giue aide to her distresse.
                  One while, contrarie to himself, full humbly he intreates,
                  Anon, like Hercules indeede he did commaund with threats.
                  But first nor latter might preuaile, for Nessus hald her thence?
                  I may not follow, nor in slight is (Centaure) thy defence
                  said Hercules, His deeds approue his latter saying true,
                  For letting she a fatall Shaft the Rauisher he slue.
                  And though the arrow galled him euen at the verie heart,
                  Yet for a while he did indure the not induring smart.
                  And hauing brought his trembling Rape into a vallie said:
                  See Deianira how thy Loue an end of me hath made.
                  Yet is my death lesse griefe to me then that thou shouldst bestow
                  thy selfe on such a changing Churle as Hercules: I know
                  (sweet Wench I know) he doth preferre contrarie Loues to thee,
                  Wherefore my graue (the lesse my griefe) in this thy good shall be.
                  Take this (he gaue a folded cloth and to the bane therein
                  he mixed somewhat of his blood) this same (quoth he) shall win
                  To thee again thy Husbands loue when he shall it estrange:
                  For out of doubt, I know it I, he takes delight in change.
                  When thou suspectast such a wrong, doe boyle a shirt with this:
                  
                     No sooner shall he weare the same (herein such vertue is)
                  but that his nouell Loue will change and fall whence he did flie:
                  Meane while doe not the vnction touch, least so the vertue die.
                  In all this time betwixt his armes he did the Ladie claspe,
                  And hild her so, as Hawke a Pray, vntill his latest gaspe.
                  Then leauing him a liuelesse Coarse, mistrusting nought his drift,
                  Shée meaning simply tooke with her the Traitours poisoned gift▪
                  
                  And Hercules by this had past the Riuer deep and wide:
                  Who (Deianira first imbrast) drew from the Centaures side
                  the fatall Shaft that should the death of braue Achilles proue,
                  In Phoebus Church, by Paris hand, for Polixenas loue.
               
               
                  THE Centaure left vntoombed there, Hée, Shée, and all their train
                        •
                     
                  
                  are come to Lerna, whom the king did noblie entertaine.
                  There had he from the common teares the cruell hauock made
                  by Lernan Hydra, whom in Fenne not armies durst inuade.
                  His v
                        •
                     per parts had humane forme, his nether Serpentine,
                  The whole was monstrous, yet his wit more mōstrous, but most fine,
                  (For wit is monstrous when the same from vertue doth decline.)
                  Such were his subtill arguments, and still supplies therein,
                  That he by often losse of heads was fained heads to winne.
                  And wittie thus to others wrong confounded all he found,
                  Propounding questions, and a word vnanswered was a wound.
                  The scourge of Tyrants hearing this, did promise death or aide,
                  Whilst fearfull Deianira did the contrarie perswade.
                  But womans speech from weapons vse might not withdraw him then,
                  Till entring Palus he had rousd the Monster from his D
                        •
                     nne.
                  Disdainfullie did Hydra take the presence of his Foe,
                  And after subtill arguments too sturdie fight they goe.
                  Two blowes at once with Glaue and Taile made Hercules to réele,
                  Who since he fi
                        •
                     st had vsed armes the like did neuer féele,
                  Not long he borrow
                        •
                     d had the Loan, but Hydra had the like:
                  So either twaine repaie their debt, and neither faintlie strike.
                  But who might stand with Hercules? By him the Monster fell:
                  Who burning vp his vgly shape did passe his soule to hell:
                  Which happie fate of Hydras fall left Lerna glad and well.
                  
                     From whence to Athens, and from thence to Lycia did he saile▪
                  
                  Then to Hesperia Gerions Realme his outrages to quaile.
               
               
                  HE by his triple tyrannie (for Geron he was said
                  three-headed, in respect that him thrée other Giants aid)
                  So spoild and plag'd the neighbour Realmes with daily wrongs & war,
                  That all the force of Africa his furie could not barre.
                  In Gadira when Hercules his Pillers reared had,
                  The which (our Westerne world not knowne) men farther 
                        ••
                     nd forbad,
                  Then with victorious ships he sets on Gerions chased Fleet:
                  And secondly at Megida did either armie meete.
                  There Geron with his brothers twaine the Cittie did beset,
                  And scornfullie aduaunce themselues as men not to be met.
                  Prouiding therefore murall workes, they threaten hot assault:
                  Whilst Hercules contrarie warres vnto his souldiers taught.
                  The Gates wide opened out he comes vnto the Giants thrée,
                  Your men he said are well at worke, well met are also we.
                  This lesse then Monster, more than man, a Fiende in humane shape
                  the Spaniard said, is he from whom I made so hard escape.
                  Yet hardlier shalt thou now escape, said Hercules, and than
                  between them foure, three to one, A cruell fight began,
                  And euerie of the Giants thought himselfe an ouer-match
                  to Hercules, who almost gaue to one a quick dispatch,
                  The second he dispatcht in deed, who fell his latest fall.
                  Then thousands came to rescue them, yet one he fights gainst all:
                  Till Theseus with the other knights did march their Armie out,
                  And ioyne to him, their Foes with them, and all make battaile stout.
                  Then Gerons brother fights againe, and both did bath in blood,
                  It was no fighting where they fought, or standing where they sto
                        •
                     d.
                  King Meleus, Theseus, Hispan, and Philoctes did no lesse:
                  But soueraignlie the Sonne of Ioue bestird him in the presse.
                  The Giant Gerons brother then by him did breath his last,
                  And Gerion did retire his men into their Gallies fast.
                  But where they land, there Hercules wonne landing, though hee past
                  the Pikes: notwithstanding thousand Swords, and warding thousand slings
                  himself alone, ere yt his men to fight on shore he brings,
                  
                     Then Geryon, cursing heauen & earth, bestirre ye friends he cride,
                  Now is the time to liue or die, let good or or bad betide,
                  Doe liue as men, or die as men, sée 
                        •
                     enne we are for one▪
                  
                  What lets vs then from victorie, that victors haue ben knowne?
                  Reuenge your selues, reuenge your friēds, reuenge our commō mone.
                  Nor did he shrinke from what he saide, or said not as he wrought:
                  His onely deeds were manies death. Til Hercules he sought,
                  Whome singling after combat long, of him his end he cought:
                  So to subiection Hespera by Hercules was brought,
               
               
                  NO better Spanish Cacus sped for al his wondrous strength,
                  Whom Hercules from out his Realme debelled at the length.
                  A richer King or Tyrant worse liu'd not in any Land,
                  Nor any one gainst Hercules in hardier fight did stand.
                  Yet chased by his Conqueror he was inforc'd to flie
                  vp to a Mountain in those parts: where as at point to die
                  through famine, by his Magicke Arte he made the Mountaine flame,
                  And by that shift escapt his Foe long wondring at the same.
                  Then sled the Giant night and day (for feare did lend him wings)
                  And as about from place to place the wandring Tyrant flings,
                  He on a Mount in Italie cal'd Auentine did light,
                  Where laboured Cacus did repose his wer
                        ••
                     d limbes all night.
                  In this same Hill he found a Caue which fitting place espide,
                  He did resolue in secrec
                        •
                     e thenceforth himselfe to hide
                  in that same Mount from sight of men. And being there alone,
                  That words at least might vent his woes he maketh thus his mone.
                  Ah wretch (quoth he) no longer King, that title now must change.
                  Thou late weart fearful vnto all, now fearing all must range.
                  This ragged Caue must now suffise in stead of Royal seat,
                  And though (alas) the place should please, yet want I what to eat.
                  where be my solemne banquets now? where is my stately traien?
                  My Tributes? nay my proper Goods? or doe my friends remaine?
                  Not one I feare, proud wealth was such, that now in time of néed
                  I knowe not where so seeke a friend in any hope to speede.
                  And yet despaire not, Picus liues, indebted much to me
                  for great good turnes: to him I will ere here I setled be,
                  
                     Thus droue he foorth the dismall night, and vp by peepe of day
                  he sped him vnto Calabrei, for there king Picus lay.
                  His daughters three of long before, and still did loue him well:
                  And whether with the kings consent, or not, it so befell
                  he tooke them all to Auentin, and there with him they dwell.
                  About his boisterous necke full oft their daintie armes they cast,
                  Still plying him with kisses swéet, no sport was ouer past
                  That Cacus would and they might worke: and more, their custome was
                  by pleasant tales in order told the wearie times to passe.
                  And once especiallie it was concluded on a roe
                  That each of them should tell her tale, the first beginning so.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  KIng Aganippus ere his death had with his Lords decréed
               his only daughter Daphles should in Empire him succeed.
               A fayrer Ladie liu'd not then, and nowe her like doeth lacke,
               And nature, thinke I, neuer will a second She compact.
               The king intombed, Daphles of his Scepter was possest:
               And one there was, a Noble man, that could it not disgest.
               Who (for he was of fame and force) did bid her battaile, and
               In doubtfall end of victorie their ciuill quarrels stand.
               At length the Argiue Maiden Quéene she Doracles subdued:
               But (Cacus) of this Stratagem a Tragedie ensued.
               Now Loues, not Launces came in vre, the man that lost the day,
               and lies in Chaines, left her in cares: her Conquest was his pray.
               Full often did shee blame her selfe for louing him her Foe,
               But oftner thought she it more blame not to haue erred so.
               Thus whom in Campe she loathed late, in chaines she loued now,
               And thought him sure, because so sure. To Princes prisoners bow
               Thinks shee: and watching fitting time vnto the Prison went,
               Where at the dore of such his Lodge a manie teares she spent.
               But entring, when her eyes behild the Image of her heart,
               To her stil péerelesse, though his bands had altered him in part,
               
                  She casting downe her bashfull eies stodd senslesse then a space,
               Yet what her songlesse loue adiornd was extant in her face:
               And now the Gaoler left to her the Prisoner and the place.
               Then chéering carefull Doracles let it suffice (quoth she)
               That I repent me of thy bands, and franklie set thée frée.
               And let that Gr
                     •
                  ce grace out the rest, for more remaines behind
               then, being said, may decent seeme to such as faults will find.
               My selfe, my Land, my Loue, my life, and all what so is mine
               possesse: yet loue▪ and saue my life, that now haue saued thine.
               Then sownes She at his sullen feet that yet abode in thrall:
               Which to auoid, he faintly rubbs his Liuer on his gall:
               And with his hand, not with his heart, did reare her sinking downe,
               And faining to approue her Choise, had promise of the Crowne.
               But neither Crowne, nor Countries care, nor She (worth al ye rest)
               nor grace, nor dutie, reconcile whom enuie hath possest.
               No sooner was he got at large, and wealth suppli'd his lack,
               But he to seeke her ouer throw to forren aids did pack.
               Demaund not how the wronged Queene disgested such her wrong,
               But aske if shée, the tidings tolde, and heare them liu'd so long▪
               
               She liued in deed, yet sowned oft, and sowning ouerpast,
               From her mistempered head she teares her louely Tresses fast.
               And beateth on her Iuorie breasts, and casts her on the ground,
               And wrings her hands, and scricheth out, and slingeth vp and downe.
               Her Ladies pittying her distresse had got their Queene to rest:
               From whencefoorth outward signes & sighes her inward griefe exprest.
               Her sparing Diet, seldome sleepe, her silence, and what not?
               Had framd her now right Louer-like, and hild her so God wot:
               Who hearing where he made abode these lines to him she got.
               WHat fault of mine hath causd thy flight doth rest in cloudes to me,
               But faultles haue I heard of none, & faultie may I be.
               Yet not my Scepter, but my selfe, haue kinglie Suters sought:
               Did all amisse, saue thou alone, that settest both at nought?
               At nought said I? Yea well I said, because so easilie cought.
               But cite a Crime, and for it I will shed a million teares:
               And to be penitent of faults with it a pardon beares.
               Ah Doracles, if our extreames, thy malice and my loue,
               
                  The formers euer ill shall not the la
                     •
                  ters good remoue.
               I heare thou doest frequent the warres, and war thou wilt with me,
               Forgetfull that my Argiue men impatient Warriours be:
               Sweet, hassard not the same to sword that Loue doth warrant thee.
               Ech Speare that shall but crosse thy Helme hath force to crase my hart▪
               
               But if thou bléed, of that thy blood my fainting soule hath part.
               With thee I liue, with thee I die with thee I loose or gaine,
               Liue safe therefore, for in thy life consists the liues of twain.
               Most wiselie valiant are those men that backe their armed Steeds
               In beaten Pathes, ore boorded Tylthes to breake their staffe-like Réeds.
               Where not the dynt of wounding Launce, but some deuise of loue,
               Sance danger, hath sufficient wait their manhoods to approue.
               Where braue Aspects of louely Dames Tantara to the fight,
               Whose formes perhaps are wedgd in harts, when Fauors wag in sight.
               Whereas the Uictors Prize is praise, and Trumpets sound ech blow,
               Where all is well th
                     •
                  t seemes but well, in courage or in show.
               Where Ladies doffe their Champions Hol
                     •
                  ies, & kisse where Beauers hid.
               And parlie v
                     •
                  der Canapies how well or ill they did.
               Retire therefore, sweet heart retire: or if thou wilt be armd,
               Then sight as these where all things make that all escape vnharmd.
               Such manhood is a merriment: things present are regarded:
               Not thousand drammes of blood in warre, one drop is here rewarded.
               In few, the warres are full of wooes, but here euen words of warre
               haue brauer graue then works thēselues, for Courts frō Camps be far.
               Then are the valiant, who more vain? Then Cowards who more wise?
               Not men that trauell Pegasus, but Fortunes fooles do rise.
               Me thinks I see how churlish lookes estrange thy cheerefull face,
               Me thinks thy gestures, talke, & gate, haue changd their wonted grace:
               Me thinks thy sometimes nimble Limbs with armour now are lame:
               Me thinks I see how scarres deforme where swords before did maime:
               I see thee faint with Sommers heat, and droup with Winters cold:
               I see thee not the same thou art, for young, thou seemest old:
               I see not, but my soule doth feare, in fight thou art too bold:
               I sorrow lastlie to haue seene whom now I wish to see,
               Because I see Loues Oratresse pleads tediouslie to thee.
               If wordes, nor we
                     ••
                  ings loue, nor liues, if ease, nor toyle in 
                     •
                  ight.
               
                  May waine thee from a pleasing ill, yet come thou to my sight:
               Perchance my presence may disswade, or partnership delight.
               But wo am I, dead paper pleades, a senceles thing of woe:
               It cannot weepe, nor wring the handes, but say that she did so:
               And saieth so vncredited, or if, then thought of corse;
               Thus thus, because not passionate, to paper failes remorse.
               O that my griefes, my sighes, and teares, might muster to thy viewe,
               Then woes, not wordes, then paine, not pen, should vouch my writing true.
               Yet fare thou wel, whose farwel brings such fare ill vnto me:
               Thy farewel lackes a welcome home, and welcome shalt thou be.
               These lines subscribed with her name, when Doracles did viewe,
               He was so far from liking them, that loathing did ensue.
               And, least that hope should ease her heart or he not seeme vnkinde,
               In written Tables be to her returned thus his minde.
               The Bées of Hybla Honnie beare, but with their honnie stings,
               And beautie doth not want a baite that to repentance brings.
               Content thée Daphles, Mooles take mads, but men knowe Mooles to catch
               & therefore wakes ye 
                  Dav
                        •
                     lian 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   toward ye sloeworms watch.
               I haue perus'd I wot not what a scrole forsooth of loue,
               As if to Dirus in his Tent should Cupid cast his gloue.
               A challenge proper to such Sottes as you would make of me,
               But I disdaine to talke of loue, much more in loue to be.
               Nor thinke a Queene in case of loue shall 
                     •
                  enie to consent,
               But holde the contrarie more true, and it no consequent.
               For persons must in passions iumpe, els loue it proueth lame:
               Nor thinke I of a womans graunt, but as a woers game.
               Your Ser withstands not place and speach: for be she base or hie,
               A womans eie doth guide her wit, and not her wit her eie.
               Then senceles is he, hauing speach, that bids not for the best:
               Euen Carters Malkins wil disdaine when Gentrie will disgest,
               The be
                     •
                  ter match the braue
                     •
                   mart and willinger is fought:
               And willing fute hath best euent: so Vulcan Venus cought.
               I argue not of her estate, but set my Rest on this,
               That opportunitie can win the coyest She that is.
               Then he that rubs her gamesome vaine, and tempers toyes with Arte,
               Brings loue that swimmeth at her eies, to d
                     •
                  ue into her hart.
               
                  But since the best at best is bad, a Shroe or els a Sheepe,
               Iust none at all are best of all, and I from all will keep.
               Admit I come, and come I then because I come to thee?
               No, when I come my comming is contrarie sights to sée.
               My leasure serues me not to loue till fish as haggards flie.
               Til Sea shal flame, til Sonne shal freese, tyll mortal men not die,
               And Riuers climing vp their bankes shal leaue their channels dry.
               When these shal be, and I not be, then may I chance to loue:
               And then the strangest change will be that I a louer proue.
               Let Beuers hide, not busses hurt my lips, for lips vnfit:
               Let skarred limbes, not carefull loues, to honor, honor get.
               I skorne a face effeminate, but hate his bastarde minde
               That borne a man propostrusly by Arte doth alter kinde:
               with figures, Ladie-like, with lockes, with lookes, and gauds in print,
               With fassions barbing formeles beards, and robes that brooke no lint,
               With Spear in wrest like painted Mars, from thought of battaile frée
               With gate, and grace, and euerie gaude, so womanly to sée,
               As not in nature but in name their manhood séemes to be.
               Yea sooner then that maiden heares bud on his Boyish chinne,
               The furie of the fierie God doth in the foole beginne.
               And yet to winne whome would be wonne these woo with lesser spéed
               Then might be wun a towne of warre: the croppe not worth the séede.
               But let them trauell til they tire, and then be ridde for Iaides,
               If Gamesters faire, if Souldirs milde, or Louers true of maides.
               They loue in sporte, or leaue in spight, or if they stoope to luer,
               Their kindnes must haue kindely vse: faultes onely make them suer.
               D
                     •
                  d fancie? noe, did furie? yea, hang vp the Thracian maide.
               The wonders seuen should then be eight could loue thée so perswade.
               But loue or hate, fare ill or wel: I force not of thy fare:
               My welcome which thou doest pretend shall proue a thankelesse care.
               When Daphl
                        •
                     
                   heard him so vnkind she held her selfe accurst:
               And little lacked of so well but that her hart did burst.
               And wheare she read the churlish scrole she fel into a sowne,
               But, brought againe, vpon a bed her selfe she casteth downe,
               Not rising more: 
                     •
                  ho so her loue and life together end.
               Or (if I so may gesse) in death her soule did liue his friend.
               
                  The Quéene interr'd, and Obbit kept (as she in charge did giue)
               A Knight was shipt to Calidon, where Doracles did liue,
               To offer him, as her bequest, the Argiue Throne and Crowne.
               Not that we force, or feare, (quoth he) thy fauour or thy frowne
               We moue this peace, or make thee Prince, but Daphles swore vs so,
               Who louing more then thou couldst hate, nor liu'd nor died thy Foe.
               And is she dead (quoth Doracles) that liued to my wrong?
               I gladlie doe accept these newes expected for of long
               The Lord and Legate were imbarkt, and Ship ran vnder saile,
               Until into the Argiue Strond the Mariners did haile.
               To Dirce by adoption there inthronized a King,
               He diuers yeares good fortune had successiue in each thing,
               All friends, no Foes, al wealth, no want, stil peace, and neuer strife,
               And what might séeme an earthly heauen to Doracles was rise.
               A Subiect but a Noble man, did ritchly feast the King:
               And after meat presented him with many a sight and thing.
               There was a chamber in the which, po
                     •
                  traitered to the quick,
               The Picture of Quéene Daphles was: and déepely did it prick
               The King his conscience, and he thought her like did not remaine,
               So, whome her person could not pierce, her picture now did paine,
               A Kissing Cupid, breathing loue into her breast did hide
               Her wandring eies, whilst to her heart his hand a death did guide.
               
                  Non moereens morior, for the Mott, inchased was beside.
               Her curtesie and his contempt he calleth then to minde,
               And of her beautie in him selfe he did a Caos finde.
               Recalling eke his late degree, and reckoning his desert,
               He could not thinke, or faintly thought, his loue to sterne her harte:
               And to the maker of the feast did such his thoughtes impart.
               And doubtes your Grace the Feaster said▪ if Daphles lou'd or no?
               I wish (I hope I wish no harme) she had not loued so:
               Or you not loathed as you did, then she had liued yet:
               To what her latest speach did tend I neuer shal forget.
               My selfe, with diuers noble men whose teares bewraid their care
               was prsent, when her dying tongue of you did thus declare.
               My hap (quoth she) is simplie bad that cannot haue, nor hope:
               Was euer wretch (I wretch except) held to so skant a scope,
               
                  I sée him roue at other markes, and I vnmarkt to be:
               I finde my fault, but followe it, whilst death doth followe me.
               Ah death (my Lords) dispaire is death, and death must ransom blisse,
               Such Ransome pleaseth Doracles, and Daphles Pliant is.
               Not booteles then (since breathles strait) swéet loue doth flames contriue
               The which shall burne me vp at once that now doe burne aliue.
               Alas (then did she pause in teares) that Doracles were bye,
               To take it from his eies, not eares, that I for him doe die:
               At least, perhaps, he would confesse my loue to be no lie.
               But (Want-wit I) offensiue sights to Doracles I craue:
               Long liue, deare harte, not minding me when I am laid in graue.
               And you (my Lords) by those same Goddes whose sight I hope anon
               I coniure, that ye him inuest your King when I am gon.
               Alonely say I liued and died to him a Louer true,
               And that my dying tongue did sound swéet Doracles adue.
               A sigh concluding such her words, she closed vp her eie:
               Not one of vs beholding it that séemed not to die.
               Thus to your Grace I leaue to gesse how tragick Daphles died:
               In loue, my Lord, yea louing you, that her of Loue denied.
               The Picture, and this same discourse afford sufficient woe
               To him that maimed in his minde did to his Pallace goe.
               There Doracles did set abroch a world of things forgot.
               What meanst thou man? ah frantick man, how art thou ouershot?
               (He said) to hate the substance then, and loue the shadow nowe,
               Her painted board whose amorous breast did breake whilst I not bow
               And couldst thou, churlish wretch, contemne the Loue of such a Quéen?
               O Gods, I graunt for such contempt I iustly bide your teene.
               Her onely beautie (worthy Ioue, that now on me hath power)
               was worthy of farre worthier loue without a further dower,
               But gaze thou on her senceles signe whose selfe thou madest thy pray,
               And gazing perishe for thy life is debt to her decay.
               Time goeing on, gréefe it grewe on▪ of dolour sprung dispaire.
               When Doracles to Daphles Tombe did secretly repaire:
               There (teares a preface to the rest) these onely words he spake:
               Thy Loue was losse, for losse my life in recompence doe take
               Deare Daphles. So a daggers stabbe a Tragedie did make.
               
                  Well did this Tragicke matter sort to Cacus tragicke vaine:
               But merier matter did behoue such humours to restraine.
               That knew the second Sister well, who smiling ere she spake,
               Began her turne, and of her Tale the next report I make.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  
                     A Proper Lad made Loue (quoth she) vnto a pretie Lasse:
                  In self-same house, foreworn with age, this Maidens Grandame was.
                  Her eyes were suncke into her head, her cheekes were leane and lanck,
                  Out stood her chin, into her mouth her bloodlesse lips they sanke.
                  Her toothlesse chappes disgrast her tongue in telling of a Tale,
                  And sucke she might a Teat for teeth, and spoonage to did faile,
                  Her haire, since sixtie yéeres not blacke, was now or white or none,
                  The substance or her wrinkled face was only skin and bone,
                  Dimme were her eyes, deafe were her eares, ranke smelt it she coulde scent,
                  A palsie made her feeling cease, down tastlesse food it went.
                  Sight, hearing, scent, touch, tast, and all, thus failing with her strength,
                  She to her chamber, bed, and chaire, betooke her at the length.
                  But gold is lou'd till graue hath lodg'd her bags and she were one:
                  And she must giue the Maidens Dowre, or els her Dowre is none.
                  The young man though he lou'd the Maid▪ on whom no loue was lost,
                  Yet did he loue to liue, and knew that marriage asketh cost.
                  The oldes wiues bags did let the Baues: with whom he smoothed so,
                  That flattered, she fantised, her moldie braines did cro
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  What Diuell I wote not made her dote, she doted on the man:
                  Her rotten trunke and 
                        •
                     ustie 
                        〈◊〉
                      she 
                        〈◊〉
                      than:
                  And seeth what she could not see, her senslesse Senses worke,
                  And vnderneath a wrinckled hiden wanton heart did lurke.
                  Unkindlie two she kisses gaue, which he did kindly take,
                  Supposing that her kindnes was but for the Maidens sake.
                  
                     Her crooked ioyntes, which long ere then supported scarcely stood,
                  Shée brought vnto a wallowing pace, dis
                        •
                     ellowing so her blood:
                  And all for loue (surreuerence Loue) did make the chewe her cudde.
                  Young Battus from his Omphida (for they were named so)
                  Dislodged by the Grandame long, to worke did roundly goe.
                  Desiring both the Maiden, and to marrie her a Dower,
                  The olde-wise ne
                        •
                     led at his words, for all her loue, did lower,
                  And drying vp what drained out in belching, thus did say.
                  The thing (friend Battus) you demaund I gladly not denay,
                  But wel you wot that I am olde, and yet not all so olde,
                  But that the remnant of my life may spend the wealth I holde.
                  As all are neerest to them selues, so to my selfe am I.
                  And all shal lacke ere I will lacke: store is no sore we trie.
                  If you doe like of Omphida, I not mislike the match:
                  Loue hath no lacke, ye both are young, wealth comes to such as watch.
                  You louing her, she to her selfe a dowrie is, if not,
                  My money shall not sel the Maid: a sinful sale God wot.
                  For money shal not sel my selfe. And yet I cannot see,
                  But that a comfort to mine age an honest match would be.
                  My Goods besides do want a Guide, and often did I knowe
                  Your yongers vpon elder wiues then I themselues bestow:
                  And liued well and loued wel But as I do not care
                  for mariage, so an honest match I neuer will forsweare.
                  Well, Battus, take you Omphida: but if you money craue,
                  My bagges must onely vent to him whome I my selfe shal haue.
                  Yet thinke not I mislike of you in that you haue not sped,
                  But thinke I wish no better match, if I my selfe should wed.
                  Thus cunningly she closde with him, and he conceaues her thought:
                  Unequall was the Combat then that Loue and Lucar wrought.
                  The one was in her flowring age, the other too too olde:
                  The first with beautie did allure, the latter with her Golde.
                  But stormes (thought Battus) haue their stops, not long ye Crone cā liue,
                  Or if my kindenes length her life, my kindenes God forgiue.
                  Resoluing therefore on such hope, with easie sute he got
                  Assurance to be wedded too the olde deformed Trot.
                  
                     Medea charmed Aeson yong, Battus Medea like,
                  
                     Did worke no lesse a cuer vpon this vaine vnweldie Tyke.
                  Now on the bridell played she: yet as she laughes she lookes
                  With ielious eyes, if Omphida he blotted out his bookes.
                  Yea she that could not moue before, now crauleth euery wheare,
                  To prye if Battus play not false, and cause there was to feare.
                  But all this while no mariage was, nor witnesse of their match:
                  And well he knewe that widdowes shrinke, if men forslowe dispatch.
                  So hastning what she hindred not, come was the wedding day.
                  The Morning thawde the eauening frost, and slipprie was the way:
                  Yet habling on her rustie ioynts, to Churchward goes the Bride:
                  Whose feete (her harts vnequall gides) could nothing els but slide.
                  Then Battus kindly leadeth her, and euer as she trips,
                  God blesse thée Mouse the Bridegroome sayd, and smakt her on the lips.
                  The oftner stumbled then his Beast, the oftner to be kist:
                  And thinketh in her gentle Choyse her self not meanly blist.
                  But when the Priest had done his part, and that they homeward come,
                  The Bride, for Battus, might salute the Pauement with her bomine.
                  She réeled oft, and looked backe: he sawe, but would not see.
                  At length she stumbled headlong downe, hoyst vp againe, quoth hee:
                  The second tyme she did the like, hoyst Brock her good-man sayde:
                  And thirdly falling, kindly bad her breake her necke olde Iade.
                  The old-wife tooke it to the hart, and home she went and dyed:
                  But Battus, ere his first was sicke, had owed his second Bryed.
               
               
                  THis Iest from Cacus straynde a smyle, but quickly was it donne.
                  Then, turning to her Sisters twaine, the yongest thus begonne.
                  Ye, Sisters, seuerally haue tolde how foes in loue did fall,
                  And age with youth: but I doe say that Loue can all with all.
                  Examples we, whom Loue hath brought from Court to liue in Caue,
                  And were there néede of further proofe, a thousand proofes I haue.
                  Could Latmus speake, it might accuse euen Phoebe of a kis:
                  And of a Uotarie of hers to speake my purpose is.
                  But first she cheared thus her friend (for Cacus sadly sits)
                  Be merrie man, thy pensiuenesse or pastimes badly fits.
                  Be as thou art, not as thou wouldst, it will be as it is:
                  Learne then to lacke, and learne to liue: for crosses neuer mis.
                  
                     Thinke Fortune newly hatcht is flidge, and waggeth wing to flye:
                  All suffreth change: our selues, new borne, euen then begin to dye.
                  Be resolute, not desperate: the Gods that made thée poore,
                  Can, if they will (doe waite their will) thy former state restoore.
                  At least let patience profite thée, for patience is a thing
                  Whereby a Begger gayneth of a discontented King.
                  Knowe Destinie is Destinie. This Epitaph I réede,
                  Though common-booked Poetrie, yet not vnworthie héede:
                  Unborne, to knowe what I should be to Gods my mother prayde:
                  A Maile quoth Phoebus, Female Mars, and Iuno neither sayde:
                  An Hermophrodit was I borne. My death then askt she after:
                  By Sword quoth Iuno, Trée quoth Mars, and Phoebus sayd by water.
                  A Riuer-shadowing trée I climb'd: out slipt my Sword: I slidd:
                  By feete I hung, stand with my Sword, my head in water hidd:
                  Maile, Femaile, neither, hanging, Sword, & drowning I abid
                        •
                     .
                  Thus Cacus howsoeuer things from likelihoodes discent
                  in birth, life, death, the Gods are first, the middell, and Euent.
                  And not what they can doe they will, but what they will they can:
                  And that they doe, or doe it not, behoues not vs to skan.
                  And saying so, and kissing to, her tale she thus began.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  
                     I Speake not of the Argiue Nimph that had the ielious Syer,
                  To whom, shut vp in brasen Tower, Ioue passage had for hyer.
                  Not of Europa, Semele, or Maia, will I dwell:
                  Not of your Foe his bastardie, or Laedas rape I tell:
                  Not of King Ceus Daughters fault, or other freake of Ioue
                  
                  speake I: saue of th-Arcadian Nunne with whom he thus did roue.
                  
                     Calysto was as faire a Mayde, as faire as one might bée,
                  Her father King Lycaon flead, Ioue chaunced her to see:
                  And seeing liked, liking lou'd, and louing made it knowne
                  To her (swéete Lasse) for fathers losse that maketh then her mone.
                  Take patience wench sayd Iupiter: with thée shall all be well,
                  
                     Thy fathers déeds haue their deserts, but thou in peace shalt dwell.
                  I am his Uictor, but thy selfe art Uictoresse of me:
                  Doe graunt me loue, my zeale is more than fatherlie to thee.
                  The restlesse cloudes that mantling ride vpon the racking Skie,
                  The scouring windes that sightlesse in the sounding aire doe flie,
                  The thriftie Earth that bringeth out and broodeth vp her breed,
                  The shifting Seas whose swelling waues on shrinking shores do féede,
                  Shall fall, and faile, ere I be false (Lycaons Impe) to thee:
                  Of heartie Loue this kisse (he kist) an happie hansell be.
                  But haplesse termes are these, quoth she, vnfitting to a Thrall:
                  Yet, in respect of that I feele, I heare them not at all.
                  A friend (ah friendlesse name I Friend) it being as it is,
                  A friend I say, much more a foe (and more, and worse then this,
                  The sonne of Saturne) should, and shall, that speed and hearing misse.
                  Doe rid, ah rid mine eyes of teares, and set my heart at rest,
                  By taking life▪ not making Loue: the former likes me best:
                  Or if that poore Calistos life shall lengthen to her woe,
                  Graunt that among Dianas Nunnes a votarie I goe:
                  For neither fits it now to loue, or euer shall it so.
                  What viewed Iupiter this while, not pleasing to his sight?
                  Or what vnuiewed did he gesse, not adding to delight?
                  Not excellent, but exquisite, was all to minde and eye:
                  Saue she▪ the hansell of this loue, did him of Loue denie.
                  It greenes that Natures Paragon in Cloister, not in Court,
                  Should loose the beautie of her youth, and he thereby his sport.
                  But constant in her chast pretence, he graunts that would gain-say:
                  And seated in Religion now, with Phaebe did she stay,
                  Blame Iupiter of other Loues, of this doe set him cléere:
                  It was his first, and first is firme, and toucheth verie neere.
                  He did forgoe, but not forget Calysto in hir Cell:
                  When setting higher thoughts apart, the Frithes did please him well:
                  He takes his Quiuer and his Bow, and where she hunts, hunts he:
                  And sacrificed to his eyes that day he did her see.
                  About the Quarrie, Chase, and Toyles, Dogs, Bowes, the Stand, and al
                  he vseth double diligence: so often did befall.
                  Not onely sight of her his Saint he got, but also talk,
                  
                     Whilst thus for his Calistos loue▪ he haunted Phaebees walke.
                  But sight and talke accrew to loue, the substance must be had:
                  And for to bring his drifte about▪ he virgin-like is clad.
                  His nonage kept his Beard frō bloome, no Wench more fair then he,
                  Whom at her Nunnarie a Nun Diana takes to bee,
                  And with his Sisters brotherly doe gesse him to agrée.
                  Thus faines Lycaons Conquerer a Maid, to winne a Maid:
                  His hands too wooll, and Arras worke, and womans Chares he laid,
                  That not so much as by the tongue the Boy-wench was bewraid.
                  Yet thought is frée, he sees, and smiles, and longs perhaps for more:
                  No maruell, for that Sister-hood had goodlie Ladies store:
                  Scarce one for birth and beautie to was there vnworthie him,
                  Yet chieflie to Calistos vaine he formed life and limme.
                  And Sister-like they single oft, and chat of manie things,
                  But that Cal
                           •
                        sto mindeth loue no likelihood he wrings.
                  So Ioue not once durst mention Ioue, and force was sinne and shame,
                  But loue is hardie. Thus it hapt: by long pursute of game.
                  She wearie resteth in the Thicks, where sitting all alone,
                  He seeing her is resolute or now to end his mone,
                  Or for so sweete a bodies vse, to leaue his soule in loue.
                  And Nymph-like sits him by the Nymph, that tooke him for no man:
                  And after 
                        〈◊〉
                     , with néerer signes of Loues assaut began▪
                  
                  He feeleth oft her Iuorie breasts, nor maketh coy to kisse:
                  Yet all was well, a Maiden to a Maiden might doe this.
                  Than ticks he vp her tucked Frocke, nor did Calysto blush,
                  Or thinke abuse: he tickles to, no blab she thinks the Bush.
                  Thus whilest she thinks her sister Nunne to be a merrie Lasse,
                  The Wanton did disclose himself, and told her who he was.
                  Away the Uirgin would haue sled, whom he withhild by force:
                  Thy loue (sweet Nymph) hath vrg'd this shift, wel worthie thy remorse
                  he said: nor scorne with u
                        •
                     e a King to ioyne thy selfe a Queene:
                  Or doe but Loue, and I will liue in Phaebees Celles vnseen:
                  And there in beds, in bushes heere (my Fainings fit so well)
                  we may enioy, what Loue enioynes, and none our scapes shall tell.
                  She would not loue, he could not leaue: she wrangleth, and he wooeth:
                  She would resist, he did persist and sport denied dooeth,
                  
                     That done, which could not be vndone, what booteth discōtent?
                  As God be pleasd, as not be easd: away Calysto went
                  To Cloyster, Iupiter to Court: nor much she did repent,
                  Untill her growing wombe disclos'd an ante-cedent fault,
                  Then in the Chapter house she told of Iupiters assault.
                  
                     Diana, and her virgens all, admyring that escape,
                  Did gird at her, maligning Ioue for such his subtell Rape.
                  And who more ready to controule, then Athalanta was?
                  Whome shortly Meleager brought vnto the selfe same pas.
                  The Lady Abisse did discharge Calysto from her Cell:
                  And, silly Nymph, she great with child some otherwhere must dwell.
                  
                     Pelasgis it was Iupiters, and he her cause of blame,
                  The King her father in exile, her selfe in this defame,
                  What then remain'd? euen secracie, to hyde her selfe from shame.
                  Kéepe close (quoth she) from world yee woods mine error, Ioue his crime:
                  And setling there in simple Caue, did waite her childing tyme.
                  At length was hairie Arcas borne: no sooner cold he goe,
                  But that his wildnes esked to his wretched Mothers woe.
                  No beast so strong that he would shunne, and man he neuer sawe,
                  Nor yet his vexed mother cold from fearcenes him withdrawe.
                  Seauen yeres, the Daughter of a King, she liued thus in Caue,
                  Not wanting griefe, but wanting all that poorest wretches haue.
                  And (worst of all) her sauage sonne, whose manners did agrée
                  Unto his birth-place, howerly threates his mothers death to be:
                  And angrie once, pursued her so long from place to place,
                  That euen into the Cittie gates he followed her in chase.
                  The people when they did behold so fayre a Nimph in flight,
                  A Baer-like Arcas in pursute, (for being naked quite,
                  His skinne was swart and hairie) they did wonder at the sight.
                  And some that would his passage stop, he rudely casteth downe,
                  And spares no spoyle: vntill the sight was noysed through the towne.
                  Then out came Iupiter in Armes, whome when Calysto knewe,
                  Helpe Ioue (she cryde) for loe thy sonne his mother doth pursue.
                  He knewe his Leiman at the first, and ioyed of her sight:
                  Then kisse they, when the Sauage boy by force did leaue to fight.
                  
                     Calysto liued Lady-like, yea Iunos Ryuall now:
                  
                     And Arcas, nobly mannaged, such vertues him indowe,
                  That (Ioue consenting) him for King Pelasgis did Allowe.
                  A Sonne well worthy such a Syer: and for his prowes and fame,
                  
                     Pelasgis then, of Arcas, tooke Arcadia to name.
               
               
                  BUt rather might these Ladies fayre by any pleasant taile,
                  Or daseling toye of masshing loue, (swéet Consorts to preuaile)
                  Disswade outragious Cacus from vnpatientnes of mynde:
                  Who in his greatest tyrannies did chiefest pleasures finde.
                  He sleas the harmles Passengers, from eldest soule to childe,
                  He burnes and spoyles the neighbour parts, and women he defild:
                  And to his Caue (Troponius Caue) did bring the spoyles he gaynes,
                  In which (except to do more harme) he secretly remaynes.
                  Whilst none did passe, that did repasse vnspoyled or vnkild
                  (None knowing how) all Italie with feare thereof was fild.
                  But, lo and helpe: when Hercules had slaughtered out-right
                  Tenne Giants of Cremona Kings, and put th-eleauenth to flight,
                  From thence the Worthy did ariue with his victorious band
                  At King Euanders Cittie, that by Auentin did stand.
                  Amongst a many ritcher Spoyles, though none to him so rare,
                  He brought a sort of Spanish kyne. Euander taking care
                  (Because the like misfortune oft had hapned there before,)
                  Least Hercules should loose: his Kyne, of which he made such store,
                  Gaue counsell that within the walles they might be kept all night.
                  And better to approue his words) with teares he did resight
                  The murthers, theftes, and cruelties, without compassion maide
                  Upon his Subiects, and their goods: by whome could not be said,
                  But that the gods (for so they gesse) for sinne them so inuade.
                  I am resolu'd, quoth Hercules, where gods doe vengeance craue,
                  It is not strong or fensiue walles that any thing can saue:
                  My Kyne shall therefore graese abroade: if mortall man it be,
                  Then know, a Tyrant is my Taske, his blood the Taskers fée.
                  The Cattell graesing then abroade (as was his vse alwaies)
                  The Gyant left his cruell Denne, to seeke his cursed praies.
                  The Moone not wanting of her light, the Kyne he did espye:
                  And knowing them, he also knewe his feared Foe was nye.
                  
                     And f
                        •
                     r much better feare had bene, then mallice at that tide:
                  But hardly shunneth pollicie, what destinies prouide,
                  He might haue lurkt a while in Denne: but of a péeuish spight,
                  Eight of the Kine with fastned cords, by pollicie and might,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e dragged backward by their tailes into his diuelish Nest:
                  Then stopping vp the subtill hole, did lay him downe to rest.
                  Now Hercules (the rather prickt by king Euanders talke)
                  Into the fieldes to sée his Kine by prime of day did walke.
                  Where missing eight, he could not gesse which waie they should be gon:
                  A many therefore had in charge, to search them out anon.
                  The Searchers following euery signe, great store of footings found.
                  Discending from Mount Auentine, into the lower ground:
                  But for the footings did discend, and not ascend, they thought
                  of no such cunning as in deed, in Auentine was wrought.
                  
                     Alcaeus Grand-sonne searching long the Thefts he could not finde,
                  Was much disquieted in him selfe, and angrie in his minde:
                  And chasing when he should depart, he twise or thrise did shake,
                  A Tree that grue on Auent
                           •
                        ne: which 
                        •
                     ooted vp did make
                  So large a vent, that one might view the hollowe Caue belowe,
                  And Cacus with his Leash of wiues, they were disclosed so.
                  Whome, when the Greeke espied there, O gracelesse King he said,
                  Whose Tyrannies haue made the Realmes of Hespera afraid,
                  Whose cruelties haue bene the cause of all the lesse thou hast.
                  What moueth thee in Italie to prosecute such waste?
                  Thinkst thou, whom neither mightie Realmes, nor royal Gards of mē
                  
                  Could late defend, now to escape, inclosed thus in Den,
                  The iust reuengement of the Goddes? no, no, the Heauens wée sée,
                  Haue brought to light a wretch so lewd, euen by a senceles Tree:
                  And since that neither wealth nor want to goodnes may thée win,
                  A greeuous death, condignly, shall cut off thy grounded sinne.
                  To it did Cacus aunswer thus, doest thou pursue me still?
                  Who onely art the chiefest cause of these my doings ill.
                  Not suffring me to liue the rest of my vnhappie daies
                  Among the fruitlesse rocks, a wretch in miserie alwaies.
                  Cease further prate, said Hercules, in troth it gréeueth much,
                  To see a King in this Distresse but since thy life is such
                  
                     As nather in aduersitie, nor prosperous estate,
                  Thou canst afford one iot of good, I purpose to rebate
                  Thy wicked dayes by worthy death, prepare therefore to dye.
                  When Cacus sawe he must perforce so harde a combate trye,
                  He by inchanted flames againe endeuored to flye.
                  But Hercules deluded once by that deuise before,
                  Had learned now for being so deceaued any more:
                  And casting feare a side did leape into the flaming Caue,
                  And so by Arte did conquer Arte. The Gyant then to saue
                  Him selfe, did take his Axe in hand, where Hercules and he
                  Couragiously bestirre themselues, vntill they did agrée
                  To trye it out in open ayer. So dolefull was their fight,
                  That Lookers on could not discerne to whether best should light.
                  The frighted Ladies did their best to helpe their fighting frend:
                  But Hercules had victorie, and Cacus had his end.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  
                     FOr Gyants of Cremona flayne, and Cacus ridded so,
                  The Latine Princes prayse on him and presents did bestoe.
                  Where Rome is now, Pallantia then, Euāder he did frame
                  A Temple, and to Hercules did dedicate the same:
                  And he (intreated thereunto) in Italie did stay:
                  To honour whome did Princes come from farre and euery waye.
                  King Faunus had affaiers abroad, when from Laurentum came
                  His wife Marica, Facua some this louely Quéene do name.
                  From liking, did she fall in loue with Hercules, and he
                  More ready to haue made demaunde, then like to disagrée,
                  Conceauing her by circumstance, so cuppled by contract,
                  That, had King Faunus neuer liu'd, Latinus had not lackt:
                  Yet home came Faunus, fathering his late Coriuals act.
                  But whether gotten lawfully, or thus in loue forbod,
                  
                     Latinus, Brute his Gran-dams Syer, was sonne vnto a God.
               
               
                  WHilst that in loue of this same Quéene, and lawde of all besides,
                  The vanquisher of Vulcans sonne in Italy abydes,
                  Of Calabries a mightie Oste King Picus he prouides.
                  
                     And in reuenge of Cacus, swore his Slayer should be slaine:
                  But he, ere long, that so did sware, vnswared it againe:
                  When, chased home into his holdes, there sparred vp in gates,
                  The valiant Thaebane, all in vaine, a following fight awaites.
                  He, for dispatch, did fayne himselfe a Legate to the King,
                  And him the Porters, as the same, before their Tyrant bring.
                  Then, shaking of his ciuill Robes, his shining Armes appeare:
                  And renting downe an Iron sparre, both Prince and people feare.
                  Some ran to Armor, other some did fight with him their last:
                  Both Court and Cittie in the ende did lay vpon him fast.
                  There Picus, worthely, did winne of valiantnesse a name:
                  Yet Hercules more valiantly by death doth Picus tame.
                  And to attend their King his goste, he sendeth flocke by flocke:
                  His furie was as fier to Ferne, his foes as waues to Rocke:
                  Nor did his Lyons Spoyle giue place to darting or to knocke.
                  Meane tyme his men assault without, whil'st he assayles within:
                  Then fightes he to beate downe the Gates, and so the Goale did win.
                  Within the King his ransackt Court he Iole espyes,
                  Whose teares, then mounting from her hart, dismount thē from her eyes.
                  King Picus (now a lifeles corse) was father of this mayde:
                  In vaine therefore did Hercules her pensiuenesse disswayde.
                  Nor could he but lament her faate, and loue so swéete a face,
                  Whose person also did containe the type of female grace.
                  At first she was so farre from loue, she rather seem'd to hate,
                  Yet could she not so giue the Checke, but that she tooke the Mate.
                  Then eithers loue, was eithers life: poore Deianira shée
                  was out of commons, yea of thought: an other had her fée.
               
               
                  WIth this so faire and portly wench, he sayled into Thrace:
                  And heares how Diomedes did tyrannise in that place.
                  No Straunger scapes vnraunsomed: but Raunsome wanting, then
                  He casteth them, as prouendor, to Horses eating men.
                  A Garde of Tyrants like himself, attending on him still,
                  Who richly did maintaine themselues, by such their doings ill.
                  The Scourge of such was moued, not to be remoued now
                  by Iole, whose louing teares such laboures disalow.
                  
                     With Diomedes and his Garde in Forrest did he méete:
                  Who with their common Stratagim the Straunger thinke to gréete.
                  Hands of, commaunded Hercules, for Horse I am no hay,
                  All Straungers Raunsome once for all, my comming is to pay:
                  Which sayd, himself against them all began a noble fray.
                  The sturdie Thracians, mightie men, did hardly loose their ground:
                  But, then the King, a mightier man not any where was found.
                  These all at once assayle, and strike, and thunder on his Sheeld:
                  But number fitted to his force, vnwonted so to yeeld.
                  For with his Club he skuffles then amongst their Curates so,
                  That speedie death was sweeter dole, then to suruiue his blo.
                  Well mounted comes the King himself, whom he dismounts anon,
                  But, rescued to his Horse againe, away he would be gon.
                  Lesse haste, he sayd, I Harts out runne, nor shalt thou me out ride:
                  Out stripping so the man-fead horse, he topled ore his side
                  The monstrous King, that rescules to flying people cride.
                  Who, lying all to frusshed thus, the sonne of Ioue did bring
                  His cruell Iades, that soone deuoure their more then cruell King.
                  The Thracians all submit themselues, and ioye their Tyrants death:
                  And thinke some God had left the Heauens, to succour men on earth,
                  From such, as what they would they will, and what they will they can,
                  And what they can they dare and doe, and doing none withstan.
                  Nor thought they better of the man then did his deedes approue,
                  That neuer was a Conqueror vnto his owne behoue,
                  But to establish vertuous men, and Tyrants to remoue.
                  This common Soldiour of the world with Iole did land
                  in Lycia: and, the earth in peace, discharged there his band.
                  Sweete busses, not sharpe battelles, then did alter man and minde:
                  Till he, as others, sorrowe in securitie did finde.
                  From Assur went the Empier then, when Tonos he had tyme
                  To court his Trulles: Arbaces so espying place to clyme.
                  Secure in Tomyris her flight, was valiant Cyrus slaine.
                  From Capua, not from Cannas, grewe the braue Carthagians vaine.
                  The same to whose victorious Sword a second world was sought,
                  That Macedon in Court, not Campe, to traytrous end was brought.
                  A Louer, not a Soldiour, went Achilles to his graue.
                  
                     And Caesar not in steele, but silke, to Rome his farwell gaue.
                  Euen so, this second vnto none, superior vnto all,
                  To whome did soner Causes cease, then Conquests not befall,
                  This Monster-Master Hercules, this Tyrant-Tamer, he
                  Whose ligh Exploytes did leaue the Earth, frō spoyle & Spoylers frée,
                  In pleasures did perrish now, that did in perrilles thriue:
                  A gréeuous Taske I vndertake his dying to reuiue.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  
                     WHen Deianira vnderstood her husbands back returne,
                  She thought it strange, that he from her so strangely did soiorne:
                  Explorers sent to search the cause, returne was made that he
                  Did loyter in a Strangers loue: and Iole was she
                  That euer hanged at his lips, and hugged was of him,
                  And that, his armor layd a-part, in silke he courts it trim.
                  The daughter of th-Atolian King did little lesse then raue:
                  And can the churle (quoth she) preferre in loue a captiue Slaue
                  Before his wife? whome late he faynd inferiour vnto none:
                  Ah Hercules thou art a man, thy manhood thus is knowne.
                  Fye, may a forren Strumpits armes so fasten on his necke.
                  As he (the Rector of the Earth) must bowe if she doe becke?
                  Oh how vnlike to Hercules, is Hercules in this?
                  But, leauing men to natures fault, in her the lewdnes is:
                  No man so chaste, but such as she may worke to doe amis.
                  Thus whilst her ouerplus of loue to Ielosie did growe,
                  She simply mynds the spightfull gift that Nessus did bestowe.
                  And, for he dying spake the words, she held it as her Créede
                  That it could winne him to her selfe: of which (now hauing néede)
                  She vseth part: and sent a Shirte so boyled as she bad
                  To Hercules: and Hercules was of the Present glad:
                  Confessing her his onely Wiffe: And whilst he did repent
                  His breach of loue, on Oeta Mount to sacrifice he went.
                  
                     Philoctes Paeans valiant Sonnne, and Lychas he that brought
                  
                     The poysned Shirt, were present there: but of no treason thought:
                  Nor Deianiras selfe (good Soule) till tryall made it playne,
                  When as his body and the fire gaue moysture to the bayne.
                  His stoutnes hid such torments long, as els could none abyde,
                  Yea till the baine his Bowels and his verie Marroe fryde.
                  But when his torments had no meane, the Altar downe he throes,
                  And from his martred body rents the gory smoking clothes,
                  And striuing to strip of the Shirt he teareth flesh from bone,
                  And left his breaking Synooes bare, his Intrailes euery one
                  Did boyle, and burst, and shew themselues where lumpes of flesh did lack,
                  And still the murdrous Shirt did cleue vnto his mangled backe.
                  Espying Deianiras Squire, that quaking stoode, he sayde,
                  And art thou wretch the Instrument of my distruction mayde?
                  Whome swinging then about his head, he slinged downe the hill:
                  And so did silly Lychas dye, that purposed no ill.
                  Then running downe from hill to Playne, from Playne to hill againe,
                  He rents vp Rockes and mightie Hils in error of his paine:
                  Till, sadly leaning on his Club, he sighing, vowes that none
                  Should be the death of Hercules, but Hercules alone.
                  And to his frend Philoctes tooke his Arrowes and bis Booe,
                  And gladly to the hallowed fyer as to his bead did goe.
                  Where lying downe, and taking leaue with reared hands to skye,
                  The Earths Protector so, in peace, amidst the flames did dye.
                  
                     Philoctes, néere or gone with gréefe, his Asshes did conuaye
                  To Italy, in shrined in his Temple there to staye:
                  And wofull Deianira heares of Hercules decay.
                  His Goste she voucheth and the gods to witnes, that her mynde
                  Was giltles of a traitrous thought: nor thinke me so vnkynd,
                  (Swéet Husband) as to haue the will to ouerliue thée heer,
                  But that my goste, before thy goste it selfe of guyle shall cleer:
                  And now I come, ah now I come, forgiue yée gods the déed
                  She sayde: and pearsing so her breast, a breathles Corse did bléed.
               
               
                  AS Greekes lament their Champions losse, so did the Phrygians ioy:
                  And Priamus did fortefie his stately Cittie Troy.
                  
                  Twyse Hercules had raysed it, and thirdly was it reard
                  
                     By Pryam, strong in wealth, and walles, through Asia lou'd and feard.
                  He cald to mynd Laomedon whome Hercules had slayne,
                  His Sister too Hesione, that Captiue did remayne
                  in Salamis with Telamon: and well he was a
                        •
                     ayde,
                  In that the doer of the same liu'd not the Greekes to ayde.
                  His Sister therefore not restoorde, his Legates asking it,
                  By stealing of the Spartane Quéene did Paris crye them quit.
                  Twelue hundred fiftie fiue war-Shippes, with men & Armor frought,
                  By seauentie Kings & kingly Péeres, frō 
                     Greece to Troy were brought,
                  To winne her thence. King Priamus (besides his Empier greate)
                  Had ayders Princes thirtie three: lesse Lords I not repeate,
                  Nor Sagitar, that in this Warre did many a valiant feate.
                  Tenne yeres, tenne monthes, and twise sixe daies, the siege they did abide:
                  Eight hundred sixtie thousand Greekes, by Troian weapons dyed:
                  Sixe hundred fiftie sixe thousands of Troians fighting men,
                  Besides the slaughtred at the sacke, by Greacians perisht then:
                  And (if that Hector, Troilus, and Paris, so we name)
                  Fell fortie Kings: omitting more, of little lesser fame.
                  Mislike, and ciuell quarrelles, when the Greacians homewards drewe,
                  Did well néere waste the remnant Kings that Phrigia did subdewe.
                  Thus secure Troy was ouer-set, when Troy was ouer stoute,
                  And ouer rich, was ouer-runne, and tardie lookt aboute.
                  The Greekish Ships with Phrigian Spoyles through Xant & Samoies roe:
                  For now Antenor had betrayde Palladium to the foe,
                  And with Palladium Priamus AEneas sought to hyde
                  From Pyrrhus Polyxena, she for whom Achilles dyde,
                  Wherefore vpon Achilles Tombe her self was after slayne,
                  What tyme old Hecuba discryde yong Polydor his bayne:
                  For which AEneas banished hoysts sayles, tis sayd, to winde,
                  And, after many perilles, rule in Italie did finde.
               
               
                  
                     AENeas dead, Aschanius raign'd: Aschanius dead, his brother
                  
                     Posthumus Syluius did succéede. Lauinia was his mother,
                  Her Syer Latinus, Faunus his, and Picus him begot,
                  And Saturne him: from mother thus Posthumus lacked not
                  The noblest bloud. On Fathers side his petigree was thus:
                  
                     
                     Ioue had Dardanus: and the same begot Erictheus:
                  
                  He Tros: Tros, Assaracus: he Capys: and the same
                  
                     Anchisis: he AEneas had: of him Posthumus came:
                  And he was father vnto Brute: and thus the Brutons bring
                  Their petegrée from Iupiter, of Pagane Gods the King:
                  And add they may, that Brute his Syer of Venus sonne did spring.
                  Thrise fiue degréees from Noe was Brute, and fower tymes sixe was hée▪
                  
                  from Adam: and from Iaphets house doth fetch his petegrée.
                  
                     Posthumus Syluius perrishing in Chace amongst the brakes,
                  Mistooke for Game, by Brute his sonne: Brute Italie forsakes.
                  And to assosyate his Exile, a many Troians moe
                  At all aduentures put to Seas, vncerten where to goe:
                  To whom did Fortune, Fortune-like, become a friend and foe.
                  Till Brute, with no lesse payne and praise then had his Grandsier late
                  Achiued Latium, landing here, suppressed so the state
                  Of all the Féend-bread Albinests, huge Gyants fearce and strong,
                  Or race of Albion, Neptuns sonne (els some deriue them wrong)
                  That of this Isle (vn-Scotted yet) he Empier had ere long.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  
                     NOw, of the Conquerour, this Isle had Brutaine vnto name,
                  And with his Troianes Brute began manurage of the same.
                  For raised Troy, to reare a Troy, fit place he searched then:
                  And vewes the mounting Northerne partes: These fitt (quoth he) for men
                  That trust asmuch to flight, as fight: our Bulwarks are our brests,
                  The next Ariuals héere, perchance, will gladlier buyld their nests.
                  A Troians corrage is to him a Fortres of defence.
                  And leauing so, where Scottes be now, he South-ward maketh thence:
                  Whereas the earth more plentie gaue, and ayre more temprature,
                  And nothing wanted that by wealth or pleasure might allure.
                  And more, the Lady Flood of Floods, the Ryuer Thamis, it
                  Did séeme to Brute against the foe, and with him selfe to fitt.
                  Upon whose fruitfull bancks therefore, whose bounds are chiefly sayd,
                  The want-les Counties Essex, Kent, with which the wealthie Glayde
                  Of Hertfordshire for Citties store affords no little ayde,
                  Did Brute buyld vp his Troy-nouant, inclosing it with wall:
                  Which Lud did after beautifie, and Luds-towne it did call
                  That now is London: euermore to rightfull Princes trewe,
                  Yea Prince and people still to it as to their Storehouse drewe,
                  For plentie and for popilous the like we no wheare vewe.
                  Howbe-it many neighbour townes as much ere now could say,
                  But place for people, people, place, and all for sinne decay.
                  When Brute should dye thus to his sonnes he did the Isle conuay.
                  To Camber Wales, to Albanact he Albanie did leaue,
                  
                     To Locrine Brutaine: whom his Quéene of life did thus bereaue.
               
               
                  THe furous Hun, that drowning there to Humbar left his name,
                  The King did vanquish, and for spoyle vnto his Nauie came.
                  Where Humbars Daughter, Patragon for beautie, such a Dame
                  As Loue himself could not but loue, did Locrine inflame,
                  That Guendoleyne, the Cornish Duke his daughter, Locrins Quéene,
                  Grewe in contempt: and, Coryn dead, his Change of Choyse was seene▪
                  
                  To Cornwell goes the wrothfull Quéene to seaze her fathers Land,
                  From whence she brought, to worke reuenge, of warriours stout a band:
                  And bids her husband battell, and in battell is he slaine:
                  And for their sonne in Nonage was, she to his vse did raine.
                  The Lady Estrild Locrins Loue, and Sabrin, wondrous faier,
                  Her Husbands and his Leimans impe, she meaning not to spaier,
                  Did bring vnto the Water, that the Wenches name doth baier.
                  There binding both, and bobbing them, then trembling at her yre,
                  She sayd: if Scythia could haue h
                        ••
                     d the wandring King thy Syre,
                  Then Brittish waters had not bin to him deserued bayne:
                  But Estrild, snout-faire Estrild, she was sparde, forsooth, to trayne
                  With whorish tricks a vicious King: but neither of you twayne,
                  Thou stately Drabb, nor this thy Brat, a bastard as thy selfe,
                  Shall liue in triumph of my wrong: first mother, and her Elfe,
                  Shall 
                        •
                     ish in Flood for Humbars soule, and bring him newes to hell,
                  That Locrins wife on Locrins Whore reuenged her so well.
                  They lifting vp their lillie hands, from out their louely eyes
                  Powre teares like Pearles, and washe those Chéekes where naught saue beautie lyes:
                  And seeking to excuse themselues, and mercie to obtaine,
                  With spéeches good, and prayers faire, they speake and pray in vaine.
                  Quéene Guendoleyne so bids, and they into the Flood are cast,
                  Whereas amongst the drenching waues the Ladies breath their last.
                  As this his Grandame, such appear'd Mempricius, Madans sonne,
                  Whose brother Manlius traytrously by him to death was done.
                  And since of noble Brute his lyne prodigious things I tell,
                  I skipping to the Tenth from him, will shewe what befell.
                  
                     ABout a thirtie yeres and fiue did Leit rule this Land,
                  When, doting on his Daughters thrée, with them he fell in hand
                  To tell how much they loued him: the Eldest did estéeme
                  Her life inferior to her loue, so did the Second déeme:
                  The Youngest sayd her loue was such as did a childe behoue,
                  And that how much himself was worth, so much she him did loue.
                  The formost two did please him well, the youngest did not so:
                  Upon the Prince of Albanie the First he did bestoe,
                  The Middle on the Cornish Prince: their Dowrie was his Throne,
                  At his decease: Cordellas parte was very small, or none.
                  Yet for her forme, and vertuous life, a noble Gallian King
                  Did her, vn-dowed, for his Quéene into his Countrie bring.
                  Her Sisters sicke of Fathers health, their Husbands by consent
                  Did ioyne in Armes: from Leir so by force the Scepter went:
                  Yet, for they promise pentions large, he rather was content.
                  In Albanie the quondam King at eldest Daughters Court
                  Was setled scarce, when she repynes, and lessens still his Porte.
                  His second Daughter then, he thought, would shewe her selfe more kinde,
                  To whom, he going, for a while did franke allowance finde.
                  Ere long, abridging almost all, she keepeth him so loe,
                  That of two badds, for betters choyce he backe againe did goe.
                  But Gonorill at his returne, not onely did attempt
                  Her fathers death, but openly did hold him in contempt.
                  His aged eyes powre out their teares, when holding vp his hands,
                  He sayd: O God, who so thou art, that my good happ withstands,
                  Prolong not life, deferre not death, my selfe I ouer-liue,
                  When those, that owe to me their liues, to me my death would giue.
                  Thou Towne, whose walles roofe of my wealth, stand euermore to tell
                  Thy Founders Fall, and warne that none doe fail as Leir fell.
                  Bid none affie in Friends, for say, his Children wrought his wracke:
                  Yea those, that were to him most deare, did loath and let him lacke.
                  
                     Cordella, well Cordella sayd, she loued as a Childe:
                  But sweeter words we seeke then sooth, and so are men begilde.
                  She onely rests vntryed yet: but what may I expect
                  From her? to whom I nothing gaue, when these doe me reiect.
                  Then dye, nay trye, the rule may fayle, and Nature may assend:
                  
                     Nor are they euer surest friends, on whom we most doe spend.
                  He shippes himself to Gallia then: vut maketh knowne before
                  Unto Cordella his estate, who rueth him so poore,
                  And kept his there ariuall close, till she prouided had
                  To furnish him in euery want. Of him her King was glad,
                  And nobly intertayned him: the Queene, with teares among,
                  (Her duetie done) conferreth with her father of his wrong.
                  Such duetie, bountie, kindnes, and increasing loue, he found
                  In that his Daughter and her Lord, that sorrowes more abound
                  For his vnkindly vsing her, then for the others cryme:
                  And King-like thus in Agamps Court did Leir dwell, till tyme
                  The noble King his Sonne-in-law transports an Armie greate,
                  Of forcie Gawles, possessing him of dispossessed Seate,
                  To whom Cordeilla did succeede, not raigning long in queate.
                  Not how her Nephewes warre with her and one of them slew th'other
                  Shall followe: but I will disclose a most tyrannous mother.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  
                     
                        GOrbodugs double Issue now, when eighteene Kings were past,
                  Hild ioyntly Empier in this Land: till Porrex, at the last,
                  Not tyed so by brotherhood, but that he did disdaine
                  A fellowe King, (for neuer can one Kingdome brooke of twaine)
                  Did leuie secrete bands, for dread whereof did Ferrex flye,
                  And out of Gallia bringeth Warre, in which himselfe did dye.
                  Then Porrex only raigned here, and ruled all in peace:
                  Till Iden, mother Quéene to both, her furie did increase
                  So fearcely, as she seekes reuenge euen in the highest degrée.
                  Why liueth this (quoth she) a King? in graue why lyeth he?
                  Dye Iden, dye: nay dye thou wretch, that me a wretch hast mayde:
                  His goste, whose life stoode in thy light, commaundeth me of ayde.
                  Nor want I (Ferrex) will to ayde: for why the Gods I see
                  Deferre reuenge, nor with a Deuill the Deuilles disagree.
                  
                     The heauens, me thinks, with thunderbolts should presse his soule to hell,
                  Or Earth giue passage, that at feast with men he might not dwell:
                  But I my selfe, euen I my selfe, their flacknesse will supplye,
                  And mothers name, and Nature both to such a Sonne denye.
                  Dead night was come, when Iden found the King her sonne a sléepe,
                  And all was still: not then as now did Gards their Princes kéepe.
                  Admit they had, who would haue feard such mischiefe in a mother?
                  She whispring softly, sleepe thy last, yea sleepe as doth thy brother,
                  Did gash his throte: who starting vp, when strength & spéech were gone,
                  Lifts vp his faynting hands, and knewe the Tyrantisse anone:
                  And maketh signes, as who would say, ah mother, thou hast done
                  a déede, as neuer mother earst did practise on her Sonne.
                  But name of Sonne, nor signes did serue him stil wt wounds she plyes,
                  Nor (more then Monster) did it please that simply so he dyes,
                  But that his bodie, peecemeale tore, about the Lodging flyes.
                  And thus from noble Brute his lyne the Scepter then did passe:
                  When of his bloud for to succéede no heire suruiuing was.
               
               
                  FOwer Dukes at once, in ciuell broyles, seiunctly after raine:
                  Néere when, the Scottes (whom some accuse by Ante-dates to gaine)
                  Did settle in the Northerne Isles. These people bring their lyne
                  from Cecrops, and that Pharo, he that euer did declyne
                  from Moses, seeking Hebers house from AEgypt to conuay.
                  His daughter Scota, Gathelus their Duke brought thence away,
                  When Pharos sinne to Iacobs Séede did nere that Land decay.
                  And Cecrops sonne brought then frō thence (as Scottes inforce the same)
                  The Stone that Iacob slept vpon, when Angles went and came.
                  Of it was made their fatall Chaire: of which they beare in hand,
                  That wheresoere the same is found, the Scottes shall brooke that land:
                  At Westminster that Monument doth now decaying stand.
                  In Lusitania Gathelus did first his Kingdome found:
                  And of his race (of Scota, Scottes) when Spanish Scottes abound,
                  Ariue in Ireland, and in it a second Empier ground.
                  And thirdly, when their broodie Race that Isle did ouer-store,
                  Amongst the Islands Heb
                           •
                        edes they seeke out dwellings more.
                  These Irish, sometime Spanish Scotts, of whēce our now-Scotts bée,
                  
                     Within the Isles of Albion thus, whil'st Brutaines disagrée,
                  Did seate themselues, and nestle too amongst the Mountaine groundes:
                  What tyme a Scythian people, Pichtes, did seaze the middle bounds
                  Twixt them and vs: and these did proue to Brutaine double wounds.
                  The Penthland people and the Scottes alying, friendly liue,
                  Untill the Pichtes, by Brittish wyles, contrary cause did giue.
                  Then from their Captaines fell the Scottes, and chuse to them a King:
                  And Fergus out of Ireland did the Chaire of Marble bring:
                  In which, instal'd the first Scotch King in Albion, so he wrought,
                  That Pichtes & Scottes, then vp in Armes, were to attonement brought.
                  Three valiant people thus at once in Albion Empier hold,
                  
                     Brutes, Scottes, and Pichtes: the latter twaine lesse ciuell, but as bold.
                  The Pichtes were fearce and Scythian like: much like the Irish now
                  The Scottes were then: couragious both: nor them I disallow
                  That wright they fead on humaine flesh, for so it may be well,
                  Like of these men their bloudie mynds their natiue Stories tell:
                  But to our Brittish busines now, to shewe what there befell.
                  Not how the tri-partited Rule vnto his quartarne Rayne
                  
                     Donwallo, after fortie yeres, did Monarchize againe:
                  Not what precedent Kings in Fraunce, and Denmarke, did obtaine
                  Speake I. From Porrex fortie Kings in scilence shall remaine:
                  Saue only valiant Brennus, and his brother Belyne: thay
                  Unpraised for their warres and workes shall not escape away.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  
                     THese Brothers, thristing amplier Raynes, did martially contend,
                  Till Brenn his force was not of force his brothers to defend.
                  To Norway sayles he, where he got an Armie, and a Prize,
                  The Prince of Norwaies Daughter: whom he winneth in this wise.
                  The King of Denmarke stood with him, vntill the States decréede
                  That both should plead before their Prince, and better Pleador spéede.
                  
                     And when the Norgane Prince and Peeres were seated for their strife,
                  The King of Danes beginning first, thus pleaded for a wife.
                  Not yet a King, King Phillips Sonne wt none but Kings would cope,
                  His reason was, inferiour strife of glorie giues no hope.
                  I am a King, and graunt the Prize in question worthy me,
                  But grudge that my Compettitor a banisht man should be.
                  Doe graunt him what he hath for-gon, and neuermore shall git,
                  Yet were he but a Demi-king, to challenge me vnfit.
                  
                     Dunwallos yonger Sonne, that hath his Brother to his Foe,
                  And worthely, his trecheries haue well deserued foe.
                  And yet (audatious that he is) he blusheth not to heare
                  The troth of his vntroth, nor yet an héere Repulse doth feare.
                  Would she for whom I must contend, were not to me the same
                  She is, or he that stands with me a man of better fame.
                  But since in this vnequall Plea I must my selfe imbace,
                  Knowe, Norwaies, that my pleaded cause concernes your publique cace.
                  It is the King of Denmarke doth your Prince his daughter craue,
                  And note, it is no little thing with vs Allie to haue.
                  By League, or Leigure, Danske can fence, or front you, friend, or foe,
                  Our Neighborhood doth fit to both, your wel-fare or your woe.
                  Combyne therefore in néedfull League our néere conioyned States:
                  I may your good, nought lesse can he that thus with me debates.
                  He is a Bruton (if Exile allowe we call him so)
                  And farre from ayding you, that knowes himselfe not to bestoe.
                  Admit he were receiued home, what Empier doth he sway?
                  A sorrie Islands Moyetie, and farre from hence away.
                  Her Dowrie is your Diedeme: what Ioynter can he make?
                  Not any: giue not then to him, from whom ye cannot take.
                  And Lady (She for whom they stroue was present) well I wot,
                  My loue doth claime a greater debt, then so to be forgot.
                  I wish (myne Opposite his want) that Armes might giue the right,
                  It is not dread, but doom'd (sweete wench) that thus with tongue I fight.
                  Proude Bruton (frouning so on Brenn) disclaime in her my dewe,
                  Els thou repyning shalt repent: doe make thy choyse a newe.
                  At least amend thyne Error, and myne Enuie shall haue end:
                  I néede not force so weake a Foe, seeke thou so strong a frend.
                  
                     
                     Norwaies concent, and Lady, be no Conter-mande to this:
                  Discent not Brenn: conclude her myne: els my Conclusion is,
                  If not for worth, by force perforce to winne her from you all,
                  Yea though our banisht Cops-mate could his Brittish Succours call.
                  The King of Danes concluded thus: and after scylence shorte,
                  The Brutaine Heros vailed, and did answer in this sorte.
                  Most gracious Norgane Péeres, you heare the ouer-tearming taunts
                  Of this Appelant, that himselfe, and Scepter ouer-vaunts.
                  It lesser gréeueth he should grudge that I with him co-riue,
                  Then this so parramptorie speach in youx dispight to wiue.
                  It gréeues, in troth, not for my selfe, but for he beardeth you,
                  And seemes disdainfull of your ayde, that doth so proudly owe.
                  How captiously he derogates from me, and myne estate?
                  And arrogates vnto himselfe, to bring me so in hate.
                  How daintely his eyes endure so base and Obiects vewe?
                  How despretly doth he conclude, and threatneth me and you?
                  Well, barke he, byte he, bragges nor blowes shall dare me to defend
                  A Challenge, where so braue a Prize stands for the Wagers end.
                  Nor thinke (vainglorious that thou art) me lesser then a King,
                  Or greater then by suite, or sworde, to prize so rare a thing.
                  Upbrayd me not with banishment, nor Belyns quarrell touch,
                  Nor yet my Petite Signorie: nor more then troth by much.
                  These present Nobles knowe the cause for which I hether come:
                  Not as an Exile, but for ayde, and they assure me some.
                  Then knowe, the cause is honest when their Honors giue supplyes:
                  As capable are they of troth, as thou art apt for lyes.
                  My Brothers Kingdome seemes, forsooth, an Ouer-match to myne,
                  My Kingdome, Cutlake, therefore is an Under-match to thyne?
                  Nay, giue (and so I hope ye will) the Prize to me, and than,
                  Let Cutlake with his Crowne of Danske vn-crowne me, if he can.
                  Then he, disabling me to make a Ioynter, happelie,
                  With Denmarke such a Ioynters want (if wanting) should supplie.
                  But neither haue I such a lacke, nor hold I such a loue,
                  As that her Dowrie (not in quest) before her selfe doth moue.
                  He harpeth as himself would haue, that maketh loue his Staile:
                  Els would he sewe in milder sorte, and, sewing, feare to faile.
                  
                     For, Lady, see your Louers Plea: your loue, sayth he, is debt:
                  And if not words, nor worthines, then Armor shall you get.
                  Braue words, and fit to feare, not feede, a courted Ladies vayne.
                  But say he cannot owe in print, but Soldiour-like and playne:
                  Nor I, in sooth, more loues my heart then can my tongue explayne.
                  Conclude we therefore Soldiour-like, and let a Combate yeeld
                  Unto the hardier of vs twayne the honor of the feeld.
                  If not: then, if my Lords so please, or she thereto agree,
                  Although thou should'st by force of Armes subdew her hence to thee,
                  Yet from thy strongest Hold in Danske I would thy Conquest free.
                  Loe here my Gage (he terr'd his Gloue) thou know'st the Uictors meede:
                  (So did he pause, his Pledge vntoucht, and then did thus proceede)
                  Then freat thy fill, and worse thy worst: deliuer, Lords, your willes:
                  Ye haue experience how this same with bragges, not battell, killes.
                  He threatneth onely, I intreate, he claimeth her of dewe,
                  I wish, and hope for to deserue. The Counsell then withdrewe
                  themselues aparte: and soone for Brenn a verdict did ensewe.
                  The Dane inraged fayled thence, and rigged out a Fléete,
                  And did with Brenn, resayling home, at great aduantage méete.
                  Their Shippes did grapple, and their swords did sunder life from lim:
                  So fought they, as their Shippes did seeme in Seas of blood to swim.
                  But multitude oppressed Brenn, he hardly did escape,
                  His Lady will be, nill he, left the King Denmarkes Rape.
                  Not meanely insolent the Danes hoyst vp their home-meant Sayles:
                  But after many crabbed Flawes, and long contrarie Gayles,
                  The Kings and Norgane Ladies Shippe was tossed to the Coste
                  Of Brutaine: where, imprisoned, King Belyn was their Hoste:
                  Untill, sufficient Pledges had that Denmarke it should pay
                  Continuall Tribute to the Brutes, he them dismist away.
                  Howbeit Brenn, receiued now amongst the Gawles, did threate
                  For Norgane Lady him with-held his Brothers selfe and Seate:
                  For Tyme, alaying Loue, did add vnto domesticke hate.
                  He with the Cenouesean Gawles, whose Prince his heire of late
                  He had espoused, did inuade the Empier of his Brother:
                  And almost did their Battelles ioyne, when thus intreates their Mother.
                  I dare to name ye Sonnes, because I am your Mother, yet
                  
                     I doubt to tearme you Brothers, that doe Brotherhood forget.
                  These Prodigeies, their wrothfull Sheilds, forbodden Foe to Foe,
                  Do ill beséeme allyed hands, euen yours allyed foe.
                  O, how seeme Oedipus his Sonnes in you againe to striue?
                  How séeme these Swords in me (aye me) Iocasta to reuyue?
                  I would Dunwallo liued, or ear death had lofte agayne.
                  His Monarchie, sufficing Fower, but now to smale for Twayne.
                  Then either would you, as did he, imploy your wounds elswheare:
                  Or for the smalenes of your Power agrée at least for feare,
                  But pryde of ritch & rome-some Throones, that wingeth now your darts,
                  It will (I would not as I feare) worke sorrowe to your harts.
                  My Sonnes, swéet Sonnes, attende my words, your Mothers words attend,
                  And for I am your Mother, doe conclude I am your frend:
                  I cannot councell, but intreate, nor yet I can intreate
                  But as a Woman: and the same whose blood was once your meate.
                  Hence had yée Milk (She baerd her Pappes) these Armes did hug ye oft:
                  These fyled hands did wype, did wrap, did rock, and lay yée soft:
                  These Lippes did kisse, or Eyes did wéepe, if that ye were vnqueat,
                  Then plye I did, wt Song, or Sighes, wt Dance, with Tonge, or Teate.
                  For these kinde Causes, deer my Sonnes, disarme your selues: if not,
                  Then for these bitter teares, that now your Mothers Chéekes doe spot:
                  Oft vrge I Sonnes and Mothers Names, Names not to be forgot.
                  Send hence these Soldiors: yée, my Sonnes, & none but ye would fight:
                  When none should rather be at one, if Nature had her right.
                  What comfort, Beline, shall I speede? swéet Brenn, shall I preuaile?
                  Say yea (swéet Youthes) ah yea, say yea: or if I néedes must faile,
                  Say noe: and then will I beginn your Battell with my baiel.
                  Then then some Stranger, not my Sonnes, shall close me in the Earth,
                  When we by Armor ouer-soone shall méet, I feare, in death.
                  This sayd, with gushing teares eftsoones she plies the one and other,
                  Till both did shewe themselues at length Sonnes worthy such a Mother:
                  And with those hands, those altred hands, that lately threatned blooes,
                  They did imbrace: becoming thus continuall frends of fooes.
                  Glad was the Quéene: and Beline hild sole Empier: more he had
                  From Denmarke Tribute: and to this a greater honor add,
                  
                     His daughter Cambra, wedded to the Almayne Prince, gaue vaine
                  Unto the Cimbrians, holding Rome so long and warlike game.
                  Some (if no Error) giue to him for forren Conquests fame.
                  His Ualour, Warre, and Peace 
                        •
                     re-past: now speake we of the Knight,
                  That this side and beyond the Alpes subdewed all by fight.
                  The stateliest Townes in Italie had Brenn their Buylder, and
                  Euen Rome, the terror of the World, did at his mercie stand.
                  The Senate, giuing to the Earth eax-while both warre and peace,
                  Could not themselues, their Cittie, scarce their Cappitoll release.
               
               
                  THeir Gander Feast, what Manlius and Camillus did therein,
                  How This the Cappitole, & That from Brenn his Spoyles did win,
                  I pretermit. The thrée-topt Mount Parnassus had beloe
                  
                     Appollos Temple, whether men for Oracles did goe.
                  This, with the God and Goods the Gawles did put to sacke and spoyle:
                  And whil'st, incamped here, they kept such sacraligious coyle,
                  The God, or rather Deuill, whom th'Almightie did permit,
                  His Deitie prophaned, to deceiue the world in it,
                  With Tempests, Earth-quakes, Stench, & Sights, so cryde the Spolers quit,
                  That most did perrish, fewe disparse, and all were out of harte,
                  Yea Brenn himselfe discouraged did chaunge in euery parte.
                  He looking after, and vpon, the scattered, and the slayne,
                  Did seeme a second Cadmus, saue lesse patient of his payne.
                  And, shaming to be seene to wéepe, deuoured sightles teares:
                  And in these words his hartie gréefes did number to their Eares.
                  Swéete Soldiours leaue me to my selfe, it likes me that ye leaue me,
                  More takes your tarriance from my health then can these plagues bereaue me.
                  Ech of these Masse of Courses dead, hath bin a death to mee,
                  Deliuer then myne Eyes of you, too many deathes I see.
                  Suruiue, and tell the Westerne World what we exployted haue:
                  How that to Rome, amidst her Roofe, the Mayden Sacke we gaue.
                  Tell of our Battelles, Booties, and our Buyldings: lastly tell
                  (An honor to our Ouerthrowe) that we at Delphos fell
                  By wounds deuine, no humaine Armes. But God, who so thou be,
                  Lesse is thy courage then thy meanes, els would'st thou cope with me,
                  As Pluto with Alcides did, and Mars sometymes with men:
                  
                     Doe me like honor, and these Graues shall lightly gréeue me then.
                  But thou full little darest so. Nay I doe dare to much,
                  That with my so vnhallowed tongue thy Deitie dare touch.
                  Ah, see these Slaughters, and reserue aliue this small Remayne,
                  Let last me, and only me, eeke to the number slayne.
                  But bootlesse to a ruthles God I see my prayers spent,
                  As haughtelie doest thou reuenge, as humbly I repent.
                  Well (God of Delphos) since our teares, this Incence, nor these Graues,
                  Appease thyne yre, parsist to plague this flesh, that henceforth craues
                  No pittie: to the Hebrewe God, of power excéeding thyne,
                  (Men say) appeale I, and bequeath the Soules of me and myne:
                  Accept my simple Legacie, O Godhood most deuyne,
                  Sayd Brenn. And with a selfe-wrought wound did perrish: and his men
                  Departing, wonne, and left the name to Gallo-Grecia then.
                  The rightuous Gorboman might add fresh Subiect to our Muse,
                  But skipping to his Fathers Sonnes, of them it thus ensewes.
               
               
                  FIue yeres had Archigallo raign'd, when, hated doing wrong,
                  He was depriued of his Realme, and liued vagrant long,
                  And fearing all that frended none, kept close the Woods among.
                  There Elidurus hunting found his wretched Brother, and
                  They gasing each in others face, with sighes and wéepings stand.
                  A King, as Elidurus is, once was I thinks his brother,
                  A wretch, as Archigallo is, I may be thinkes the other.
                  The lowlie King alights anon, and when they had imbrac'd,
                  Then Archigallo secretly in Ebranks Towne was plac'd:
                  In which, the King commaunding so, the Nobles did conuent,
                  To whom did Elidurus thus informe of his intent.
                  If Fortune had bin crosse (my Lords) to me, or any feare
                  Of Armor were approching vs, I should perchaunce appeare
                  Faint, and false-harted in my charge, but euer lackt the one,
                  Nor hath the other likelihood, for quietler ruleth none.
                  Yet Kings may thinke their heads to weake their Dyademes to sustaine,
                  For endles cares concurre with Crownes, a bitter sweete is Rayne:
                  Howbeit, Subiects falsely iudge their Princes blessed are,
                  When both of peace and perrilles they containe to common care,
                  
                     And yet for this they grudgingly from Pounds a Penny spare.
                  Not these, my Lords, make me disclame in it which all pursue,
                  But Iustice biddes my Brothers right I should commend to you.
                  This one Request includes, I knowe, excéeding dangers twayne,
                  To me, if for a priuate life I change a publique Rayne,
                  To you, if whom ye haue depriu'd ye shall bestoore agayne.
                  But for I haue done right, no wrong, though Iustice wants not fooes,
                  And though vnto a Magistrate digrading bringeth woes,
                  Yet to the bad a conscience good may saue it selfe oppoes.
                  Nor be ye fearefull of reuenge, that did no more then right:
                  Euen Archigallo will confesse his sinne, and clear your spight:
                  Whose restitution (were he wrong) at least shall you acquire.
                  You hassard lesse, re-kinginge him, then I vn king'
                        •
                      to be,
                  And Danger ouer-dares, if it from Iustice disagrée.
                  Then, good my Lords, doe right his wrong, at least-wise doe him right,
                  Whose smarte, no doubt, hath wrought in him a reconsciled spright.
                  Iust Gorboman his brotherhood, succeding in their Lyne,
                  Then Archigallo should be King, to him let me resyne.
                  So much the King did vrge this Text, that Archigallo raynde:
                  And Elidurus willingly in priuate life remaynde:
                  The one restored, for his late depryuing nothing mou'de,
                  The other (wonders tell I now) dis-crowned yet belou'd.
                  Tenne yeres did Archigallo rayne, beloued well, and dyed:
                  And Elidurus once againe the Kingly Throne supplyed:
                  Untill his Brothers secondly depoose him of his rayne,
                  But they deceasing, thirdly he was crowned King agayne:
                  And so, vntill his Dying day, with honor did remayne.
                  A many Kings whose good or bad no Wrighter hath displayde
                  Did followe: Lud, and Hely, for their stately buyldings maide
                  Rest chiefly famous: nor forget King Bledgabred I shall,
                  Whome Brutons did their Glée-god for his skill in Musike call.
                  The next whose dayes gaue famous deedes, Cassiuelan is fayde:
                  Whome Caius Iulius Caesar did with Armor thus inuayde.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  
                     THis Conquerour of Gallia, found his Uictory prolong'd
                  By Brittish Succoures, and for it, pretending to bee wrong'd,
                  Did send for Tribute: threatning els to bring the Brutons Warre.
                  The former going forward first, the Albinests to barre
                  A common fooe, concurr as friends: and now was come the Spring,
                  When Caesar out of War-wonne France victorious Trowpes did bring.
                  But eassier wonne the Grecians land at Pargama by much,
                  Then got the Latines footing heer, their Contraries were such.
                  Yée might haue séen of Hectors race, tenn thousand Hectors heer,
                  With pollicie on either part, the Romanes buying deer
                  The bloddy Shoore: the water yet lesse déerer then the land
                  To them, whom valiantly to proofe the Ilanders withstand.
                  Oft battell they, the Brutons still victorious, and in vaine
                  Their fooes were valiant: onely heer was Caesars force in wayne.
                  And as our men vnto his men were as tempestious Thunder,
                  So did his ankred Shippes on Seas by Tempest dash in sonder.
                  But twise (ꝙ Caesar) Fortune, thou weart opposite to myne,
                  But thirdly heer, to Caesars selfe thou (wontles) doste declyne.
                  Conuaying than his weerie men into his wasted Shippes,
                  To Gallia, there to Winter them, he miscontented slippes.
                  Of this same Uictorie did spring securitie and strife,
                  The Scottes and Pichtes did sunder hence, the Brutons,, ouer ryffe
                  In Largesse, making frollike Cheer, a quarrell then aroes
                  Betwixt the king and Luds false Sonne, and they dis-ioyne as fooe
                        •
                     :
                  That Caesar slippes Aduantage such were error to suppooes.
                  Euen of the Brutons some there were recalling backe the Foe,
                  And Winter past, with dubled power he backe againe did roe.
                  The Romaines more, the Brutons they farre fewer then before,
                  Offend, defend, fight for, fence from, to winn, and warde the Shore.
                  But Caesar landed: and ensew'd continuall cruell fight,
                  Thrise put the fearce Cassiuelanes the Caesarines to flight:
                  
                     And still the King incouraging in euery wing appeares,
                  So giuing needles spurres to sight, his Soldiours brookt not feares:
                  Nor little did the Cornish Belles offend the Romaine eares.
                  When Caesars oft successes fight had tyred him and his,
                  Inringed with his mayhmed Campe, the Romaine speaketh this:
                  Are these same Bands, those self-same Bands, yt neuer faught in vaine?
                  And ye the men, that following still my Standard, still did gaine?
                  Euen these, and ye, are very those: nor can I discommend
                  Your manhoodes, that with lesser work, brought greater Warres to end.
                  But not, as was my wont to wright, the Senate now shall réede,
                  I came: I sawe: I ouer-came: such Foes forbid such spéede.
                  Nor let the Senate muse, for Troy with Troy doth here contend:
                  This warlike people (fame is so) from whence sprong we discend.
                  Yea, if AEneas had not left the Phrygian Gods to vs,
                  And Greekes Palladium shipt to Greece, this Fortune foyling thus,
                  I would haue thought those very Gods had followed our anoy:
                  But them haue we, these onely haue vndanted harts from Troy.
                  
                  But what? shall Caesar doubt to fight against so braue a Foe?
                  No, Caesars Tryumphes with their Spoyles shall giue the brauer shoe.
                  Ye Gods that guide our Capitall, Mount Palatin thou Throne
                  Of stately Rome, ye Followers too of her affayres each one,
                  Delay not, but depriue me quite my Triumphes, now in hand,
                  Nor let me liue, if so I leaue vnconquered this Land:
                  This Land, the last of Westerne Isles, an Isle vnknowne ere this,
                  Which famous now, through Caesars fight, and our misfortune is.
                  Enough, my fellowe friends in Armes, enough we Romaines haue
                  To seeke reuenge: your Conquest is a Countrie rich and braue:
                  And (which perswadeth Uictorie) in Troynouant there bée,
                  That hold that Cittie to our vse: the Brutons disagrée,
                  No Scot or Pichte assisting them in rhese our Warres I sée.
                  Their ciuell strife will proue their skourge, how stout soere they seeme,
                  And perpetuitie doth fayle in euery thing extreeme.
                  Not Fortune still is good or bad, and now let be our day:
                  To long we liue, if that so long we shall on triffles stay,
                  Sayd Caesar: and with such his words did so inflame his men,
                  That with lesse patience did they liue, then linger battell then.
                  
                     The Romaines bid the Ba
                        •
                     e, and then did cruell Warre begin:
                  And little wanted, that the Brutes the better did not win.
                  But Caesar so foresawe Supplies, and Succors here and theare,
                  Perswading this, disswading that, controuling flight and feare,
                  That, after many Romaines slayne, the Brutons tooke their flight
                  To Southerne Shoores: whereas to proofe Cassiuelan did fight
                  With oft Erruptions out of Woods: vntill the traytrous Knight,
                  The Earle of London yéeldes his Charge and Cittie to the Foe,
                  Through which disloyall presedent did other Citties foe:
                  And then with hard-won Tribute hence the Conquerour did goe.
               
               
                  BUt he, that wonne in euery Warre, at Rome in ciuell Robe
                  Was stab'd to death: no certentie is vnderneath the Globe.
                  The good are enuied of the bad, and glorie findes disdayne,
                  And people are in constancie as Aprill is in rayne:
                  Whereof, amidst our serious penne, this Fable intertayne.
                  An Asse, an Old-man, and a Boye, did through a Cittie passe,
                  And whil'st the wanton boye did ride, the old-man led the Asse:
                  See yonder doting foole, sayd Folke, that crauleth scarce for age,
                  Doth set the boye vpon his Asse, and makes himselfe his Page.
                  Anon the blamed Boy alightes, and lets the Old-man ride,
                  And, as the old-man did before, the boy the Asse did gide:
                  But passing so, the people then did much the old-man blame,
                  And told him, Chur
                        •
                     e, thy limbes be tough, ye Boy should ride for shame.
                  The fault thus found, both man and boy did backe the Asse and ride,
                  Then that the Asse was ouer-charg'd each man that met them cride.
                  Now both a-light, and goe on foote, and leade the emptie Beast,
                  But then the people laugh, and say, that one might ride at least.
                  With it they both did vndershore the Asse on either side,
                  But then the wondring people did that witles pranke deride.
                  The old-man seeing by no waies he could the people please,
                  Not blameles then, did driue the Asse and drowne him in the Seas.
                  Thus whil'st we be, it will not be, that any pleaseth all:
                  Els had bin wanting, worthely, the noble Caesars fall.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  
                     
                        AVgustus, quayling Antonie, was Emperour alone:
                  In whose vn-foed Monarchie our commō health was knowne.
                  The Brooser of the Serpents head, the Womans promis'd Seede,
                  The Second in the Trinitie, the Foode our soules to feede.
                  The Uine, the Light, the Doore, the Way, the Shepheard of vs all,
                  Whose Manhood ioyn'd to Deitie did Raunsome vs from thrall,
                  That was, and is, and euermore will be the same to his,
                  That sléepes to none that wake to him, that turnes our Curse to blisse,
                  Whom, yet vnseene, the Patriarkes sawe, the Prophets haue fortold,
                  Th'apostles preacht, the Saincts addore, and Martiers doe behold,
                  The same (Augustus Emperour) in Palastine was borne,
                  Amongst his owne, and yet his owne bid crosse their Blisse in skorne:
                  Bi-formed Ianus then in Mewe: so would this Prince of peace,
                  That Caesars Edict euery where should Mars his enuie ceace.
               
               
                  THen raigned here King Cymbelin, King Theomantius sonne:
                  Next him Guiderius, that with-held the Tribute Caesar wonne.
                  The Romaines that, in our respect, neglected Misia, Spayne,
                  
                  
                     Armenia, Fraunce, and Siria, then Recusants of their Rayne,
                  Not by their Captaines, but himself the Emperour of Rome,
                  
                  Into relapsed Brutaine with imperiall Ensignes come.
                  Then hotter then the Punick Warres to Romaines did begin:
                  And Claudius looseth valiantly all that the Brutons win.
                  But Romish Hamo, from whose death Southhampton had that name,
                  In Brittish Armes salutes the King, and slewe by gyle the same.
                  Duke Aruiragus, vsing then the Armor of the King,
                  Maintayned fight, and wonne the field ere Brutons knewe the thing.
                  This hardie Knight, his Brother slayne, was Crowned in his place:
                  And with his winnings, also wonne the Emperour to grace:
                  Who sending for his Daughter faire Genissa, so did ende
                  The Warres in Wedding: and away did Claudius Caesar wende.
                  
                     But Aruiragus after this reuolted, and to stay
                  The hauocke made of Romaines here came succors euery day.
                  His Quéene Genissa, childing dyed, when his Reuolt she knewe:
                  And Voada, deuorsed late, became his Quéene of newe.
                  Then he, that at Ierusalem the fatall siege begonne,
                  Was sent from Rome: and warring here, the wonted Tribute wonne:
                  And through his gentle Uictorie, bound Aruiragus still
                  A friend to Caesar, whom the King adopted heire by will.
                  I here omit the dismall Warre in the Isle of Nona made
                  Against the Romaines, whom the Priestes the Drudes inuade
                  With banning words, and women, with their hayre vntrussed, stand
                  With brands of fier in furious wise about their desperat band:
                  The King deceased, Voada and her two Daughters, they
                  Abused by the Romaine Lords, doe hotter warres assay.
               
               
                  THe noble Scot King Corbred, he confeddrats with the King
                  of Pichtes, and they and Brittish Péeres to field their Armies bring,
                  To ayde the Quéene of Brutes: that like the Amazonian Dame
                  That beating downe the bloodie Greekes in Priams succour came,
                  Had pight her Iauelen at her feete, when entred in among
                  The fearce Confedrates, thus she spake amidst the scylent throng:
                  My state and sexe, not hand or hart, most valiant friends, withhild
                  Me wretched Cause of your repaier, by wicked Romaines ild,
                  From that reuenge which I doe wish, and ye haue cause to worke:
                  In which, suppose not Voada in female feares to lorke.
                  For loe my selfe, vnlike my selfe, and these same Ladies faire
                  In Armor, not to shrinke an ynch where hottest doings are.
                  Euen we doe dare to bid the Bace, and you your selues shall see
                  Your selues to come behinde in Armes, the Romaines too that bee
                  Such Conquerors, and valiantly can womenkind oppresse,
                  Shall knowe that Brittish women can their Romish wrongs redresse.
                  Then arme ye with like courages as Ladies shall present,
                  Whom ye, nor wounds, nor death, the praise of Onset shall preuent.
                  Nor enuie that our Martiall rage excéedes your manly ire,
                  For by how much more we endewer, so much more we desire
                  Reuenge on those, in whose default we are vnhallowed thus,
                  
                     Whil'st they forget themselues for men, or to be borne of vs.
                  Ye yéeld them Tribute, and from vs their Legions haue their pay:
                  Thus were to much, but more then thus the haughtie Tyrants sway.
                  That I am Quéene, from being wrong'd doth nothing me protect:
                  Their Rapes against my Daughters both I also might obiect:
                  They Maydes deflower, they Wiues enforce, and vse their willes in all,
                  And yet we liue deferring fight, inferring so our fall.
                  But valiant Brutons, ventrous Scottes, and warlike Pichtes I erre,
                  Exhorting, whom I should dehorte your fearcenes to deferre.
                  Lesse courage more considerat would make your Foes to quake:
                  My hart hath ioy'd to see your hands the Romaine Standards take,
                  But when as force, and Fortune fayld, that you with téeth should sight,
                  And in the faces of their Foes your women in dispight
                  Should fling their sucking Babes, I hild such valentnes but vaine:
                  Inforced flight it is no shame, such Flyers fight againe.
                  Well, here ye are, that with the King my valiant Brother dead
                  the Latines, wondring at your Prowes, through Rome in triumph lead:
                  Ye Mars-stard Pichtes of Scythian bréed are here Coleagues: and more,
                  Ye Dardan Brutes, last named, but in valour meant before:
                  In your Conduct, most knightly Friends, I supersede the rest:
                  Ye come to fight, and we in sight to hope and helpe our best.
                  Scarce did this braue Bellona ende, when as the Battelles ioyne,
                  And life and death was bought and sold with courage, not with coyne.
                  Aboue the rest the Quéene of Brutes through blood did cut her way,
                  Sixe thousand Ladies Lyons-like exployting like a Fray:
                  Till Cattus with his Romaine Armes subdewed, flead away.
                  Of Romaines seuentie thousand dyed, of Brutons then were slaine
                  Twise fiftéene thousand, and the rest their ceased fréedome gaine.
                  When valiant Plancius, Presedent in Gallia, heard such newes,
                  He waffes an Armie out of Fraunce, and Voada pursewes.
                  The Albinestes to ayde the Quéene assemble at her call,
                  And then began a second Warre, nor was the slaughter small.
                  The Brutons, barring flight, had closde themselues with Waines about,
                  In which the awles women stood, suruaying who was stout,
                  Controuling Cowards, and among did fill the ayre with dinne:
                  But, valiant though the Brutones were, the day the Romaines winne.
                  
                     In vaine the furious women then on Sonnes and Husbands call,
                  Themselues with Sonnes and Husbands did by aduerse weapons fall.
                  Quéene Voade past helpe, and hope, betooke her selfe to flight:
                  Till looking backe, vnfollowed then, and hauing in her sight
                  The senceles Troukes of slaughtred friends, she leaning on her Launce
                  Did powre foorth teares, and grewe at length impatient of the chaunce,
                  And sayd: my selfe, my trustie friends, will with my dearest blood
                  Kéepe Obite to your happie Gosses, that for your Countries good
                  Be as you be, and I will be: no Romaine sworde shall boste
                  Of my dispatch, So on her Launce she yéelded vp her Goste.
                  Her Daughter then, for to reuenge her friends vpon her foes,
                  Assisted by the vanquished, against the Uictors roes,
                  And slaughtring through ye 
                     Romaine Tentes the braue Virago goes:
                  Till Plancius, euer prouident of perrilles, brought supplyes,
                  What tyme Vodicia, vrging wounds, with constant courage dyes.
               
               
                  SUch busines hanging, Lucius here the first Baptized King
                  dyed issules: and for the Crowne did long contention spring.
                  At length Constantius Caesar (for the Brutons yéelded so)
                  Did Helen, Colis daughter wed: of her doe praysings go
                  For finding of the holly Crosse, and her deuotion raier:
                  From These procéeded Constantine, the most vndoubted haier
                  Both to the Romaine Monarchie, and this his Parents Reame.
                  He turn'd the Empiers ebbing pompe into her flowing streame,
                  And was a Prince religious: yet (with reuerence be it sayd)
                  If lesse religious, then not he the Empier had decayd,
                  By largesse to a pompeous Priest, Appostolique ere then,
                  But now intruding euen on God, insulting ouer men.
                  Nor sparest thou his natiue Realme that seazed thee of Rome,
                  
                  Admit his franknesse were a fault (as is their common dome,
                  That say he made a Paule a Salue, that made a Priest a Prince,
                  And in that grace the Empiers grace disgraced euer since)
                  Finde thou no fault, with such a fault whereby he fitted thee:
                  But if thou wilt vngratefull proue, vngracious cease to bee:
                  A Traytors Tutor is a.K. nor force we such a.T.
                  Let such a Prelate blesse or banne, with Candle Booke or Bell,
                  
                     He cannot raise himselfe to heauen, nor rid a knaue from hell.
                  Uayne are his Bulles, engendring Calues, sent hether from his Stalles,
                  To feede (mad Fooles) the Foule, that by his name the Sender calles.
                  Nor thinke he dreamed this in vayne, that dreamed thus of late:
                  One seemed to haue passed Styx, and entring Plutos gate,
                  Sawe Hecat newe canonized the Sourantisse of Hell:
                  And Pluto bad it hollyday, for all which there did dwell.
                  Sterue Minos, and grinne Radymant, discend their duskie roomes:
                  The Docket to was cléere of Gosts, adiorn'd to after doomes:
                  The Furies, and the deadly Sinnes, with their inuectiue Scroles
                  Departe the Barre: the Féendes rake vp their euer burning Coles:
                  The Elues, and Faries, taking fists did hop a merry Rounde:
                  And Cerberus had lapp enough: and Charon leasure founde:
                  The ayrie Sprightes, the walking Flaures, and Goblines great & small,
                  Had there good cheare, and companie, and sporte the Deuill and all.
                  To Tantalus the shrinking flood nor starting fruite were such:
                  Nor Tityus his bowelles did the hungrie Uultur touch:
                  Upon his Stone sat Cisaphus: Ixeon on his Whéele:
                  The Belides vpon their Tubbes: no wonted toyle they féele.
                  Till in this anticke Festiuall, these last rescyted fiue,
                  Of dignities, for dueties there, they earnestly did striue:
                  And then the quarrell grewe so hot that hell was hell againe,
                  And flocking Gosts did seu'rally their Fauctors parte maintaine.
                  With Cisaphus tooke parte the Gosts of mynds that did aspire,
                  And by ambicious clyming fell, desarts vnlike desire.
                  With Tantalus hild starued Gosts, whose pleasure was their paine,
                  Whose euer Hords had neuer vse, and gettings had no gaine.
                  To Belides assisted Soules of Unthriftes, whose supplies
                  Did passe frō thē a Sea through Ciues, whose wasts no wealthes suffice.
                  Unto Ixeon stood their Sprights that had their lustes for lawe,
                  Rebellants to a common good, and sinning without awe.
                  To Tityus lastly ioyned Gosts, whose harts did emptie hate
                  As Todes their poyson, growing when it seemeth to abate.
                  About flye Apples, Stones, & Tubbes, the Whéele was tumbled downe,
                  The Uultur girds, no Goste but had at least a broken crowne.
                  This skufling and confedracie in hell made such a reare,
                  
                     That, wontles of such braules and blowes, Proserpine did feare.
                  But Pluto, laughing, tolde his Bride to Ela it was fay:
                  To morrowes dinne should proue that same to be a ciuell day:
                  In peace, these were their practises on earth, and here in hell
                  (Saue that their Soules haue neuer peace) we finde them as they fell.
                  They worke to me, each of these fiue, though daylie coumpt I aske,
                  Doe newly number Million Soules, whose torments is their taske.
                  The Quéene of Such, not free of feare, replyed thus agayne,
                  And yet, me thinkes, that Pluto should haue pittie on their payne.
                  He lowers: and Feast with Fray had ende, and drinke did euery Soule
                  Of Lethe: who, their ioyes forgot, euen yet in torments houle:
                  Nay Pluto must be Pluto still, and so I will (quoth he,)
                  For this same onely day the Gosts indebted are to thée:
                  For as the like shall neuer come, so neuer like befell,
                  But henceforth all, yea Prince, and Pope, shall euer finde it hell:
                  So dreamed one: but ouer-long fantazies I dwell.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  
                     THe Cosen of great Constantyne in Rome and here succéedes:
                  Betwixt the Brutes, the Scottes, and Pichtes, continuall trouble bréedes:
                  And long the reg'ment of this Land the Romaines did inioye,
                  Transmitting Captaines euermore as Foes did here anoye.
                  But Rome it selfe declined now, and Brutaine was opprest,
                  No longer were the Scottish Spoyles by Romaine swordes redrest.
                  Then ends the Tribute, then began newe troubles, worser farre
                  Then Tribute: for the Scottes and Pichtes inferre consuming warre.
                  The Brutons, vnder Rome secure, as men that did relye
                  On others, were disabled now by Martiall meanes to trye
                  The fame of fight: but Captaineles, confusedly they deale,
                  And giue a wretched instant of an headles Common-weale:
                  And whom so many Romaine Péeres, Grand-Captaines of such might,
                  
                     Of whom Nine Emperours themselues, in persons here did sight,
                  Could hardly foyle, were fronted now euen of a barbrous Foe:
                  And at the poynt (a wondrous chaunge) their Countrie to forgoe.
                  Such fruite hath ease, such pollicie did serue the Romaines turne,
                  Who, wayning Martiall mynds, themselues the quietler here soiurne.
                  The Brutons thus dispoy
                        •
                     d of A
                        •
                     mes, and courage in effect,
                  Of Prince, of Captaines, and aduise, their busines to direct,
                  Dispatch their Legate to the Land Deminatiue in name
                  To Brutaine: where the Legate thus his Ambassie did frame:
                  The back-slide of our helples friends, the down-fall of our state,
                  Our lacke of Prince, of people, and our wealth not now as late,
                  The sauage dealing of our Foes, consuming ours and vs,
                  Is cause (right mightie King) that we approach thy present thus.
                  Not for we are in blood allyed, or that whil'st Fortune smil'd
                  Your Auncestors had rule from vs, not for the Dames defil'd
                  At Cullin, who withstanding lust for it did loose their liues,
                  That els to Conon and his Knights had liued noble wiues,
                  We are imboldned in our suite: though all of these might moue:
                  But for our former Wants, O King, and for thyne owne behoue,
                  Great Brutaine doth submit it selfe thy Subiect (if thou please.)
                  Or els dispose it at thy will: prouided we haue ease
                  Against such foes, as would not saue our liues to haue our Land:
                  Whom to conclude (except thou helpe) we neuer may withstand.
                  The King Aldroen pittying much the Cause of his Allies,
                  Arm'd thence his brother Constantine, a Captaine stout and wise.
                  He chacing hence the Scottes and Pichtes, with glorie wore the Crowne,
                  And through his vertue stayed vp a Kingdome sinking downe.
               
               
                  WIthin a while did Vortiger the Duke of Cornwalle rayne,
                  When Constans sonne of Constantine he traytrously had slayne.
                  The Scottes did ruffle then a-new, nor did the King affye
                  In Brutons, for they hated him, and reason had they why:
                  And Saxon Fléetes from Germanie in Armor here ariue,
                  Through whose support, ye King in warres against the Scottes did thriue.
                  
                     The Foe by Hengest foyled thus, he and his Brother git
                  The chiefest credit with the King, but fewe gainsaying it,
                  Necessitie of Soldiours here so well for them did fit.
                  And Hengests Daughter intertayn'd King Vortiger so well,
                  That to misliking of his wife, and liking her he fell:
                  And sotted thus in forren loue, did wed the Saxon Wench:
                  Which wrought vnto the Saxons weale, but to the Brutes offence.
                  For whatsoere the Quéene did aske, the King would not denye,
                  Untill his Subiects rann to Armes, and made the Saxons flye:
                  And, putting downe the Father, then did set vp Vortimer,
                  
                  Who, poysoned by his Stepdame, they restored Vortiger:
                  
                  With this condition, that he should no Saxons intertayne.
                  But Hengest hearing from the Quéene that Vortimer was slayne,
                  And Vortiger his Sonne-in-lawe re-kinged did resayle
                  With Saxon forces: though with fraude, not force, he did preuayle.
                  For thus by pollicie he did the Brutons circumuent:
                  He craued Parlie, as a man that were to quietnes bent:
                  The place appoynted, Parlants him in simple meaning meet
                  Farre from their Armie all vnarm'd, whom Saxon Traytors greet
                  With deadly wounds, by hidden kniues, and held the King with them:
                  Confounding so the Brittish Oste. Nor cease they to contemne
                  Both Christian rightes, and ciuell Rule, subuerting either twaine:
                  And what they would of Vortiger through fearfull threats they gaine.
                  And plant themselues in Southfolke, Kent, and elswhere at their will:
                  And ruffling runne throughout the Land oppressing Brutons still.
                  The King and Brutons flead to Wales, and Feend-got Marlyn theare
                  Bewrayed more, then I beléeue, or credit seemes to beare:
                  As shewing how the Castell worke rear'd dayly, fell by night
                  By shaking of two Dragons great that vnderneath it fight,
                  With other wonders, tedious, if not trothles, to resight.
                  
                     Aurelius Ambrose, brother to King Constans murdred late,
                  From either Bruton hauing ayde, wonne so the Kingly state:
                  And, ere that Hengest or his sonne stout Octa he subdew'd,
                  First to reuenge his Brothers death he Vortiger pursew'd.
                  
                     In vaine the Welsh wild Mountaines fence the flyer from his Foe,
                  Or Gerneth Castell, when as flames throughout the buildings goe:
                  In midst whereof the wretched King did end his daies in woe.
               
               
                  THe Brutons thus had peace a-while, till Vortigerus Sonne,
                  And Guillamour the Irish King, in newe Conflicts begonne:
                  Whom, whil'st that Vter valiantly in Wales to wracke did bring,
                  His brother Ambrose did decease, and Vter then was King.
                  What Vter did by Marlyns Arte, in compassing his will
                  Upon the Wife of Garolus, transfigured by skill
                  Into the likenes of her Lord, on whom he got a sonne
                  Renowmed Arthur: or to name the Acts by Vter donne,
                  Were much and néedles: onely note he was a valiant Prince,
                  But such as was his noble Sonne, was not before or since.
                  Yet blazing Arthur, as haue some, I might be ouer-seene:
                  He was Uictorious, making one amongst the Worthiest méene.
                  But (with his pardon) if I vouch his world of Kingdomes wonne,
                  I am no Poet, and for lacke of pardone were vndone.
                  His Scottish, Irish, Almaine, French, and Saxone Battelles got,
                  Yéeld fame sufficient: these seeme true, the rest I credite not.
                  But Brutone is my taske, and to my taske I will retier:
                  Twelue tymes the Saxone Princes here against him did conspier,
                  And Arthur in twelue Battelles great went Uanquishor away:
                  Howbeit Saxone forces still amongst the Brutons stay.
                  This King to intertaine discourse, and so to vnderstand,
                  What Accedents in after-tymes should happen in this Land,
                  He with the Brittish Prophet then of Sequelles fell in hand.
                  Of Syx long after Kings the man, not borne of humaine seede,
                  Did Prophesie, and many things, that came to passe in déede.
                  Now Arthur, chiefe of Cheualrie, had set his Crowne at stay,
                  And to his Nephewe Mordred did commit thereof the sway,
                  When with his Knights, the wonder of the world for Martiall déedes,
                  Beyond the Seas in forren fights he luckely procéedes:
                  Till faithlesse Mordred calde him backe that forward goes with fame,
                  For at his Uncles Dyademe he traytrously did ame.
                  Twise Arthur wonne of him the field, and thirdly slewe his Foe,
                  
                     When deadly wounded, he himselfe victorious dyed foe.
               
               
                  INterred then with publique playnts, and issules, ensewes
                  A drouping of the Brittish state: the Saxon still subdewes,
                  Howbeit worthie Kings succéeded: but Destinie withs
                        •
                     ood
                  The aunciant Scepter to inure in Bruts succéeding blood.
                  Unlou'd Careticus was he that lost the Goale at length:
                  Whenceforth, in vayne, to winne their losse ye 
                     Brutons vse their strength▪
                  
                  Yea God, that as it pleaseth him, doth place or dispossesse,
                  When foes, nor foyles, nor any force, their courage might suppresse,
                  Séem'd partiall in the Saxon Cause, and with a Plague did crosse
                  The Brutons, that had els, at least, rebated from their losse:
                  For Cadwane, and Cadwallyne, and Cadwallader, the last
                  But not the least, for valarous, of Brittish Princes past,
                  Brought out of Wales such knightly Warres as made their foes agast.
                  The Plague (worse spoyler then ye Warres) left Cambre almost waste,
                  Which to auoyde, the remnant Brutes into their Shippes did haste.
                  
                     Cadwallader, in leauing thus his natiue Shore he fixt
                  His eyes from whence his bodie should, and with his sighes he mixt
                  His royall teares, which giuing place, he speaketh thus betwixt.
                  Swéete Brutaine (for I yet must vse that sweete, and ceasing name)
                  Adewe, thy King bids thee adewe, whose flight no weapons frame:
                  But God cōmaunds, his Wroth cōmaunds, all counter-maund is vaine,
                  Els, for thy loue, to dye in thée were life to thy Remaine.
                  Thus tymes haue turnes, thus Fortune still is flying to and fro:
                  What was not, is: what is, shall cease: some come, and others goe:
                  So, Brutaine, thou of Nation and of name endewrest chaunge,
                  Now balking vs whom thou hast bread, and brooking people straunge.
                  Yet (if I shoote not past myne aime) a world of tyme from me,
                  Parte of our blood, in highest pompe, shall Englands glorie be:
                  And chiefly, when vnto a First succeedes a second She.
                  But, leauing spéeches ominous: Cadwallader is woe,
                  That seeing death determines griefe, he dyes not on his foe.
                  Ah, Fortune faileth mightie Ones, and meaner doth aduaunce:
                  The mightest Empier Rome hath chaunge, then Brutaine brooke thy chaunce:
                  Let it suffice thou wert before, and after Rome in fame:
                  
                     And to indure what God intends were sinne to coumpt a shame.
                  Nor vaunt, ye Saxons, of our flight: but if ye néedes will vaunt,
                  Then vaunt of this, that God displac'd whom you could neuer daunt.
                  This said, ye teares contrould his tongue, & sayles wrought land frō sight:
                  When (saue a Remnant small) the Isle was rid of Brutons quight.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  THE Brutons thus departed hence, Seauen Kingdomes here begonne:
               Where diuersly in diuers broyles the Saxons lost and wonne.
               King Edell and King Adelbright in Diria ioyntly rayne:
               In loyall concorde during life these Kingly friends remayne.
               When Adelbright should leaue his life, to Edell thus he saies:
               By those same bonds of happie loue, that held vs friends alwaies,
               By our by-parted Crowne, of which the Moyetie is myne,
               By God, to whom my Soule must passe, and so in tyme may thyne,
               I pray thée, nay I Coniure thée, to nourish as thyne owne
               Thy Néece my Daughter Argentile, till she to age be growne,
               And then, as thou receiuest it, resigne to her my Throne.
               A promise had for this Bequest, the Testator he dyes:
               But all that Edell vndertooke, he afterward denyes.
               Yet well he fosters for a tyme the Damsell that was growne
               The fayrest Lady vnder heauen: whose beautie being knowne,
               A many Princes seeke her loue, but none might her obtaine:
               For grippell Edell to himselfe her Kingdome sought to gaine,
               And for that cause, from sight of such he did his Ward restraine.
               By chaunce one Curan, sonne vnto a Prince in Danske did sée
               The Mayde, with whom he fell in loue as much as one might bée.
               Unhappie Youth, what should he doe? his Sainct was kept in Mewe,
               Nor he, nor any Noble-man admitted to her vewe.
               One while in Malancholy fits he pynes himselfe away,
               Anon he thought by force of Armes to winne her if he may,
               
                  And still against the Kings restraint did secretly inuay.
               At length the high Controller Loue, whom none may disobay,
               Imbased him from Lordlynes, vnto a Kitchin Drudge:
               That so at least of life or death she might become his Iudge.
               Accesse so had to see, and speake, he did his loue bewray
               And telles his bearth: her aunswer was she husbandles would stay.
               Meane while the King did beate his braines his bootie to achiue,
               Not caring what became of her, so he by her might thriue:
               At last his resolution was some Pessant should her wiue.
               And (which was working to his wish) he did obserue with ioye
               How Curan, whom he thought a Drudge, scapt many an amorous toy
                     •
                  .
               The King, perceiuing such his vayne, promotes his Uassall still,
               Least that the bacenesse of the man should let perhaps his will.
               Assured therefore of his loue, but not suspecting who
               The Louer was, the King himselfe in his behalfe did owe.
               The Lady, resolute from loue, vnkindly takes that hée
               Should barre the Noble, and vnto so base a Match agrée:
               And therefore, shifting out of doores, departed thence by stealth,
               Preferring pouertie before a daungerous life in wealth.
               When Curan heard of her escape, the anguish in his harte
               Was more then much, and after her from Court he did departe:
               Forgetfull of himselfe, his bearth, his Countrie, friends, and all,
               And onely mynding (whom he mist) the Foundresse of his thrall.
               Nor meanes he after to frequent or Court, or stately Townes,
               But sollitarilie to liue, amongst the Countrie grownes.
               A brace of yeres he liued thus, well pleased so to liue,
               And Shepheard-like to féede a Flocke, himselfe did wholly giue.
               So wasting loue, by worke, and want, grewe almost to the Waene:
               But then began a second Loue, the worser of the twaene,
               A Coūtrie wēch, a Neatheards Mayd, where Curan kept his Shéepe
               Did féede her Droue: and now on her was all the Shepheards kéepe.
               He borrowed, on the working daies, his holly Russets oft:
               And of the Bacons fat, to make his Startups blacke and soft:
               And least his Tarbox should offend he left it at the Folde:
               Swéete Growte, or Whigge, his Bottle had as much as it might holde:
               A Shéeue of bread as browne as Nut, and Chéese as white as Snowe,
               
                  And Wyldings, or the Seasons fruite, he did in Skrippe bestowe:
               And whil'st his py-bald Curre did sléepe, and Shéep-hooke lay him by,
               On hollowe Quilles of oten Strawe he pyped melodie.
               But when he spyed her his Sainct, he wipte his greasie Shooes,
               And clear'd the driuell from his beard, and thus the Shepheard owes.
               I haue, swéete Wench, a péece of Chéese as good as tooth may chawe:
               And bread, and Wyldings, souling well: and therewithall did drawe
               His Lardrie: and in eating, see you Crumpled Ewe (quoth hée)
               Did twinne this fall, and twinne should'st thou if I might tupp with thée.
               Thou art to eluish, faith thou art to eluish, and to coye:
               Am I, I pray thée, beggerlie that such a Flocke enioye?
               I wis I am not: yet that thou doest hold me in disdaine
               Is brimme abroade, and made a gibe to all that kéepe this Plaine.
               There be as quaint (at least that thinke themselues as quaint) that craue
               The Match, which thou (I wot not why) mayst, but mislik'st to haue.
               How wouldst thou match? (for well I wot, thou art a female) I,
               I knowe not her that willingly with Mayden-head would dye.
               The Plowmans labour hath no end, and he a Churle will proue:
               The Craftsman hath more worke in hand, then fitteth vnto loue:
               The Marchant traffaquing abroade, suspects his wife at home:
               A Youth will play the Wanton, and an old-man proue a Mome:
               Then choose a Shepheard. With the Sunne he doth his Flocke vnfold,
               And all the day on Hill or Plaine he merrie chat can hold:
               And with the Sunne doth folde againe, then iogging home betyme,
               He turnes a Crabb, or tunes a Rounde, or sings some merrie ryme:
               Nor lackes he gléefull tailes to tell, whil'st that the Bole doth trot:
               And sitteth singing care-away, till he to bed hath got:
               There sléepes he soundly all the night, forgetting Morrowe caeres,
               Nor feares he blasting of his Corne, or vttring of his w
                     •
                  eres,
               Or stormes by Seas, or stirres on Land, or cracke of credit lost,
               Not spending franklier then his flocke shall still defray the cost.
               Well wot I, sooth they say, that say: more quiet nights and daies
               The Shepheard sléepes and wakes then he whose Cattell he doth graize.
               Beléeue me Lasse, a King is but a man, and so am I:
               Co
                     ••
                  ent is worth a Monarchie, and mischiefes hit the hye.
               
                  As late it did a King and his, not dying farre from hence:
               Who left a Daughter, (saue thy selfe) for faier, a matchles wench:
               (Here did he pause, as if his tongue had made his harte offence.)
               The Neatresse longing for the rest, did egge him on to tell
               How faire she was, and who she was. She boore (quoth he) the bell
               For beautie: though I clownish am, I know what beautie is,
               Or did I not, yet seeing thee, I senceles were to mis.
               Suppose her beautie Hellens-like, or Hellens somewhat lesse,
               And euery Starre consorting to a puer complection gesse.
               Her Stature comely tall, her gate well graced, and her wit
               To maruell at, not meddell with, as matchles I omit.
               A Globe-like head, a gold-like haier, a Forhead smooth and hye,
               An euen-Nose, on either side stoode out a graish Eye:
               Two rosie Chéekes, round ruddie Lippes, white iust set Téeth within,
               A Mouth in meane, and vnderneath a round and dimpled Chin.
               Her snowish Necke, wlth blewish Uaynes, stood bolt vpright vpon
               Her portly Shoulders: beating Balles, her vayned Breastes, anon
               Add more to beautie: wand-like was her Middell, falling still,
               And rising whereas women rise: but ouerskip I will,
               What Males in females ouerskip, ymagin nothing ill.
               And more, her long and limber Armes, had white and azure Wristes:
               And slender Fingers aunswer to her smooth and lillie Fistes.
               A Legge in print, and prettie Foote: coniecture of the rest,
               For amorous Eyes, obseruing forme, thinke parts obscured best.
               With these (oh thing deuine) with these, her Tongue of spéech was spaer:
               But speaking, Venus seem'd to speake the Ball from Ide to baer.
               With Pallas Iuno, and with both her selfe contends in face:
               Where equall mixture did not want of milde and stately grace.
               Her smyles were sober, and her lookes were chearfull vnto all:
               And such as neither wanton seeme, nor waward, melt, nor gall.
               A quiet minde, a patient moode, and not disdayning any:
               Not gybing, gadding, gawdie, and her faculties were many.
               A Nimph, no tung, no harte, no Eye, might praise, might wish, might sée,
               For Life, for Loue, for Forme, more good, more worth, more fayre, then shée:
               Yea such an one, as such was none, saue only she was such:
               Of Argentile to say the most, were to be scylent much.
               
                  I knewe the Lady very well, but worthles of such praes,
               The Neatresse sayd: and muse I doe, a Shepheard thus should blaze
               The Coote of Beautie. Credit me, thy latter speach bewraies
               Thy clownish shape, a coyned shewe. But wherefore doest thou wéepe?
               (The Shepheard wept, and she was woe, and both did scylence kéepe.)
               In troth, quoth he, I am not such as seeming I professe:
               But then for her, and now for thee, I from my selfe digresse.
               Her loued I, (wretch that I am, a Recreant to bée)
               I loued her, that hated loue: but now I dye for thée.
               At Kirkland is my Fathers Court, and Curan is my name,
               In Edels Court sometymes in pompe, till Loue contrould the same:
               But now. What now? deare hart how now? what aylest thou to wéepe?
               (The Damsell wept, and he was woe, and both did scylence kéepe.)
               I graunt, quoth she, it was too much, that you did loue so much:
               But whom your former could not moue, your second loue doth touch.
               Thy twise beloued Argentile, submitteth her to thee:
               And for thy double loue presents her selfe a single fee:
               In passion, not in person chaung'd, and I my Lord am shee.
               They swéetly surfecting in ioye, and scylent for a space,
               When as the Extasie had end, did tenderly imbrace:
               And for their Wedding, and their wish, got fitting tyme and place.
               Not England (for of Hengest then was named so this Land)
               Then Curan had an hardier Knight, his force could none withstand:
               Whose Shéep-hooke layd a parte, he then had higher things in hand.
               First, making knowne his lawfull claime in Argentile her right,
               He warr'd in Diria: and he wonne Brenitia too in fight:
               And so from trecherous Edell tooke at once his life and Crowne,
               And of Northumberland was King: long raigning in renowne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  
                     THe Saxons 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , in these Discēts, deriue from Gods, and men,
                  Ioue, Minos, Geta, Flokwald, Flyn, Fredwolfe, Fra
                        •
                     loffe, Woden,
                  Each as I name them others Sonne, not only Conquer here,
                  But with their wandring Armies spoyle the World through out welnere.
                  The English Saxon Kings oppresse the mightier ones the weake:
                  Each trifeling cause suffising here, there loue and leagues to breake.
                  One seazeth of his Neighbours Realme, and is disseazd ere-long:
                  For Empier some, for Enuie some, and some to right their wrong
                  Contend vnto their common losse, and some like like Monsters rayne:
                  As Sigbert, who for tyrannie did banishment sustayne.
                  He wandred vnbewayled long, a man whom men exempt
                  From house, and helpe, pursewing him with cappitall contempt.
                  Forlorne therefore, with drouping limbes, and dropping eyes, in vaine,
                  He friendles walkes the fruitles Woods, and foodles did complaine.
                  A Swinheard meeting him by chaunce, and pittying his estate,
                  Imploy'd this Westerne King, vnknowne, on his affayres to wate.
                  Nor did the néedie King disdaine such roome, for such reliefe:
                  An Under-Swinheardship did serue, he sought not to be chiefe.
                  But when by speach, and circumstaunce, his Maister vnderstood
                  His Seruant was the sometymes King: blood cryes (quoth he) for blood:
                  My giltles Maister in thy pompe, thou Tyrant diddest slay:
                  Nor, vnreuenged of his death, thou shalt escape away.
                  With that he tooke a Libbat vp, and beateth out his braines:
                  And dead (so odious Tyrants be) not one for him complaines.
               
               
                  NOt all so ill, yet cause of worse vnto the English state
                  Was Osbret of Northumberland: his loue did winne him hate.
                  Enamored on Lord Buerns wife, as tyred in the Chace,
                  H
                        •
                      left the Hounds, and with a fewe dismounts at Buerns Place.
                  Her Husband absent, hartely his Lady intertaynes
                  
                     The King, and feastes him royally, not sparing costs or paynes.
                  But he that fead on Fansies foode, and hungred whil'st he eates,
                  Thought Venus sparer in her Loues, then Ceres in her Meates.
                  The Trayne and table voyded, then he taking her a-parte,
                  Directs her by his tongue and teares, vnto his louing harte.
                  Delay, he sayeth, bréedeth doubts, but sharpe denyall death:
                  Or doe not long surcharge my blisse, or soone discharge my breath:
                  For if my prayers add no edge vnto thy begged doome,
                  The Uintage of my thristles loue is blasted in the bloome.
                  Be fauour able to my fier: for thy swéet sake, be bold,
                  I durst attempt euen Hell (if hell so swéet a thing might hold.)
                  Well, thinke her coye, or thinke her chaste, my Censure I suspend:
                  Most women yeeld not at the first, yet yeeld they in the end.
                  She gaue repulses to his lust, and he Replies of Loue:
                  Not all the Wrights Diana had, might Cupids Plaint remoue.
                  She countermaunding his demaund, he ceased Courting now,
                  And did with her by vyolence, what vertues disalowe.
                  And then departed, leauing her in selfe-conceit disgraste:
                  More trespassed then some would thinke, and yet perhaps as chaste.
                  Home came her Lord, whose Browes had buds, and found his wife in teares:
                  And (foolish thing) she told a troth: for which reuenge he sweares.
                  But so the Man did proue a Beast, he better might haue hid it,
                  Some such are mistically domme, yet dombly doe forbid it:
                  His wifes Escapes done secretly if by the man detected,
                  Shewes hilled būpes (supposed būpes) mere hornes, not hornes suspected.
                  At Denmarke in his Cosens Court, he telleth of his wrong:
                  And gaines against his soueraigne Lord, of Danes an Armie strong.
                  
                     Hungar, and Hubba, and himself, Conductors of this Oste,
                  Did with their forren Forces land, and spoyle the Northerne Coste.
                  The vicious valiant Osbret, that had vanquished ere then
                  The King and Kingdome of the Scottes, though wanting Armes & men,
                  Thought skorne his Foes should beard him so, & barre him vp in walles,
                  And therefore issuing out of Yorke, vpon the Danes he falles.
                  A bloodie Bargane then begonne, no fight might fearcer bee,
                  And of the Danish parte were slayne for euery English three.
                  But manhood lost, and number wonne, the Danes they got the feelde:
                  
                     And Osbret dyed valiantly, that not to liue would yeelde.
               
               
                  MEane while the Danes with fresh Supplies ariue at euery Shore,
                  And warre almost in euery Shire, infesting England sore.
                  With whom couragious Etheldred contended long in vayne,
                  By them was he, King Ella, and the holly Edmond slayne.
                  Nothing was done, but all vndone, till King Alured hée
                  In daunger of his royall selfe did set his Subiects frée:
                  For euery day, in euery place, the Danes did so increase,
                  That he nor any English King enioye one day of peace.
                  Nor mightier men at Armes then they, might any where be found:
                  Who in their diuers Warres els-where, did diuers Realmes confound:
                  For as the Gothes, the Vandales, Hunnes, and Saxons earst did range,
                  So now the Danes did plague the world, as sent by interchange.
                  This Westerne and victorious King, and greatest Monarke here,
                  Perceiuing of this spoyled Isle a toward Rewen nere,
                  Disguised like a Minstrell poore, did haunt the Danish Tentes,
                  And with his feates and melodie the Enemie presents:
                  And of their sloth, their gluttonie, and Councels priuie so,
                  He tooke aduantage, giuing them a sudden ouerthroe.
                  And slayeth Hubba, Hungar, and the Cause of their repaer,
                  And putteth all to Sword and Seas, that vnbaptised waer.
                  Yet to Northumberland return'd fearce Gurmond with the Danes,
                  
                  Meane tyme did King Alured dye, the Hatchet of their Tranes.
                  But Adelstane (one King betwixt) not only clear'd the Land
                  Of Danes, but of all England had sole Empier in his hand.
                  Thus of this long dismembred Realme was he the only King:
                  In which, till Egelred his raigne, did prosper euery thing.
                  He raigning, much of England then the Lordly Danes did hold,
                  Exacting Tributes euery yeare, and selling Peace for Gold.
                  And (which no doubt did hatch those Plagues) the King a wicked one,
                  Did enter by his Brothers blood, extorting thus his Throne:
               
               
                  KIng Edgar that subdew'd the Scottes, and slaughtered the Danes,
                  
                  And of the Welsh had Tribute Wolffes, of whom it more remanes
                  That, as it were in Triumph-wise, Eight Under-kings did roe
                  
                     Him, Sterns-man, on the Riuer Dee, with diuers honors moe,
                  This Edgar by a former wife had Edward, by an other
                  This Egelred, a Sonne vnto a kinde and cruell Mother:
                  For as she labors to preferre her owne by well and ill,
                  So to destroy her Sonne-in-law she wanted meanes, not will.
                  And meanes did hit. King Edward hunts, and hunting lost his Trayne,
                  Whom Man-les at her Castell Corfe the Quéene did intertayne.
                  He hauing seene to whom he came in curtesie to see,
                  Made haste away in Quest of them that still a Hunting bee:
                  And mounted, when he should departe to him his Stepdame drinkes,
                  Whom pledging, him an Hierling stab'd, and lifeles downe he sinkes.
                  Thus Egelred obtaynd the Crowne, but for his crowning so
                  His Subiects grudge, and he became the Preface to their woe.
                  For when this proude and vicious King, was neither lou'd of his,
                  Nor liued safely for the Danes, his secret Edict is,
                  That suddenly, in one selfe hower, throughout the Land should passe
                  A common slaughter of the Danes, which so performed was:
                  And Welwyn, called Wealth-wyn then for promptnes in that charge,
                  Beginning, other Townes as it themselues from Danes inlarge.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  
                     THis common Massacre of Danes, was common mirth to all
                  The English, whom they did oppresse with slaueries not small.
                  Compelling men by greeuous Draught as Beastes to plough their Land,
                  Of whom the English as of Gods, or Feends, in terror stand.
                  The Husband durst not vse his Wife, if liked of a Dane,
                  
                  Nor House, nor Goods, nor aught he had, for who resistes was slane.
                  That prankes and feedeth daintely, this pynes and fareth ill,
                  And of his Sweat that hath the sweete, and is imperious still.
                  Each house maintayned such a Dane, that so they might preuent
                  Conspiracies, if any were, and grope how mynds were bent:
                  
                     Lord Dane the same was called then, to them a pleasing name,
                  Now odiously Lur-dane say we, when ydell Mates we blame.
                  When Swayne the Dacian King did heare his Danes were murdred so,
                  With bitter vowes, he shipt his men for Englands ouerthroe:
                  And landing, spaerd no Shrine, nor Sainct, nor Sex, nor any State,
                  Not wanting Ayders English-men, that held their King in hate:
                  Especially false Edricus the Admirall deceiues
                  His King, and Countrie oftentymes, and Bribes of Swayne receiues:
                  And Egelred his cowardisse incouraged the Foe,
                  Till Swayne at length, by Masses great, was bribed hence to goe.
                  But, making short returne, the Péeres of England that disdayne
                  Th'indignities of such a King, that did féebly rayne,
                  Submit them Subiects vnto Swayne: and Egelred did flye
                  Unto the father of his Quéene, the Duke of Normandie:
                  
                  And Swayne, possessed of the Land, did shortly after dye.
                  His sonne Canutus present here, had Seazen of the Crowne,
                  Till Egelred, returning backe, by Armor puts him downe.
                  Who scarcely giueth breathing tyme, but that he backe resayles
                  From Denmarke, and by force, by friends, and Fortune here preuayles:
                  For in this Warre King Egelred did sicken, and decease:
                  And then the broyles (Canutus King) did for a tyme decrease,
                  Till Edmund, sonne of Egelred, did interrupt that peace.
               
               
                  COnferring Armes to Edmunds age, when Egelred did lye
                  On Death-bed, to his Sonne he sayd: not quite forlorne am I,
                  Whose life hath had so much of gréefe, thus graciously to dye.
                  Add more, thy vertues glad my death, yet two things gréeue among,
                  To leaue my Kingdome thus in Warres, and thée for Warres so yong.
                  So may these troubles waer to none, as thou doest wax I pray,
                  And so possesse thy fathers Seate, that all approue thy Sway.
                  Not to be made a King (my Sonne) is so to make thée proude,
                  For mildnes fitteth Maiestie, high mynds are disaloude.
                  Sée me thy father now a King, and by and by but earth,
                  Nor thinke that euery King hath happ to dye a happie death.
                  
                     Let Nature for perfection mold a Paragon each way,
                  Yet Death at least, on finest lumpes of liuing flesh will pray:
                  For Nature neuer framed it, that neuer shall decay.
                  The brauest are as Blossomes, and the longest Liuer dyes,
                  And dead, the louelest Creature as the lothsomst Carrion lyes.
                  Then thinke not but that Kings are men, and as the rest miscarrie,
                  Saue that their fame or infamie continually doth tarrie.
                  Déeme past Examples Sentences, and (which did fayle in me)
                  Make vse of those not now in vse, for now will cease to be.
                  Attempt not things beyond thy reach, ioyne Fortune to thy will:
                  Least Phaebus Chaire doe els surcharge rash Phaoton his skill.
                  If Fortune helpe whom thou would'st hurt, freat not at it the more:
                  When Aiax stormed, then from him the Prize Vlisses bore.
                  Trye friends by Touch, a feeble friend may proue thy strongest Foe:
                  Great Pompeis head to Caesars hand it was betrayed so.
                  Admit thou hadst Pactolian waues, to land thée Gold at will,
                  Knowe, Craesus did to Cyrus knéele, and thou maist spéede as ill.
                  Abandon lust, if not for sinne, yet to auoyde the shame:
                  So Hoggs of Ithacus his men the Latian Witch did frame.
                  Be not to modie in thy wrath, but pause though Fist be bent:
                  Oft Phillips Sonne did rashly strike, and leisurly repent.
                  Content thée with vnthreatned Meane, and play not AEsops Dogg:
                  The Gold that gentell Bacchus gaue, was gréedie Midas Clogg.
                  Be valiant, not to venterous, but fight to fight againe:
                  Euen Hercules did hold it ods, for one to striue with twaine.
                  Be not ambiciously a King, nor grudgingly decline:
                  One God did roote out Cis his stocke, and raise vp Iesses line.
                  Iest not with edge tooles, suffer Saincts, let mightie Fooles be mad:
                  Note, Seneca by Neros doome, for Precepts pennance had.
                  Haue care to whom, of whom, and what to speake, though spéech 
                        •
                     e trew▪
                  
                  That Misse made Phaebus contrary his Rauens Swan-like hew.
                  He frameth torments to himselfe, that feedes a Tyrants vayne:
                  
                     Perillus was by Phalaris adiudg'd to selfe-taught payne.
                  Praise not the beautie of thy wife, though she of forme be sped:
                  For Gyges, moued so, did graft on Candaules his head.
                  Shunne Ielosie that hart-breake Loue, if Cat will goe to kinde:
                  
                     Be sure that Io hath a meane that Argus shalbe blinde.
                  Commit not Treasure with thy Childe to greedie mynded men:
                  Thou leauest Polydor a Spoyle, to Polymnestor then.
                  Occurrants giue occasions still of like, in which be sure
                  To serue thy God, to saue thy selfe, and well to all procure.
                  Be vertuous, and assure thy selfe thou canst not then but thriue:
                  In only Uertue is it sayd that men themselues suruiue.
                  As for the vicious, such they are as is the heedlesse Flye,
                  That killes it selfe, and hurts his sight, that hath her in his Eye.
                  Farewell my Sonne: England farewell, thy neuer happie Prince
                  Doth take his leaue, an happie leaue, if taken so long since.
                  And, Edmund (burying not with me thy vertues, nor my speech)
                  I blesse thee in his blessed name whom I of blesse beseech,
                  Sayd Egelred: and shortly gaue a quiet gaspe or twayne,
                  And being dead, his noble Sonne succeeded him in Rayne.
               
               
                  THis like himselfe, euen knightlike and an English-man in deede,
                  Did quicken Englands quayling Prowes, and Mars-like did proceed.
                  A brauer Captaine then was he not any Band might haue:
                  And yet a Mars did match this Mars, Canutus was as braue.
                  These Wonders of that age for Armes, and Dirij of those daies,
                  Did often battell, equally to eithers losse and praies.
                  Now after many bloodie Fieldes, when none might estimate
                  The better or the worser parte, a Knight that sawe the state
                  Then present, and by likelihoodes presaged what might fall,
                  Sayd (hearing it the diffring Kings and Soldiours almost all:)
                  We euer warre, and neuer winne, Edmund hath Fortitude,
                  
                     Canutus Fortune, neither thus of other is subdude.
                  Death feares not vs, nor for their liues our Contraries doe crare:
                  It followes then, that all must dye, where all so despret are.
                  If all be slayne, then who shall serue our Princes that suruiue?
                  Or fence out Forrens? better one, then none of both should thriue.
                  To thriue therefore, were not a-misse, that seeing one of twayne
                  Will Owner all, that only they the quarrell doe maintayne.
                  Or if Combattansie not please, the Land is rich and large,
                  And they Coperciners may liue, and vs of death discharge.
                  
                     If Combate nor Partition be, then will this Warre reuiue,
                  Till one, suruiuing all of vs, wants one with whom to striue.
                  This sayd, the Kings did marke and make a profite of the same,
                  And did conclude by Combacie to loose or winne the Game.
                  Within a little Island nere, round which the Armies stand,
                  The Kingly Champions trye their force, by fighting hand to hand.
                  They spurre their Horses, breake their Speares, and beate at Barriars long,
                  And then, dismounting, did renewe a Battell braue and strong.
                  Whil'st either King thus Martially defends, and did offend,
                  They breathing, King Canutus sayd: we both I see shall end,
                  Ere Empier shall begin to one: then be it at thy choyce,
                  To fight, or parte. With it their Knights crye out with common voyce,
                  Deuide most valiant Kings deuide, enough ye haue of sight:
                  And so the Champions did imbrace, forgetting Mallice quight.
                  Partition equally was made betwixt these Princes twaine,
                  And brother-like they liue and loue: till by a deulish traine,
                  Earle Edricus, a Traytor to the Father and the Sonne,
                  Did murther Edmund: and his head (supposing to haue wonne
                  The fauour of Canutus so) presenting sayd (O King)
                  For loue of thee I thus haue done. Amazed at the thing,
                  
                     Canutus sayd, and for that thou hast headded him for mee,
                  Thy head aboue all English heads exalted it shall bee:
                  The Earle was headded, and his head poolde vp for all to see.
                  Of England, Danske, and Norway, then Canut was perfect Lord,
                  And in his triple Regment all with vertue did accord.
                  
                     Harolde, and Hardi-knought his Sonnes, each did succeede:
                  Of either which small certen Fame of well or ill we reede,
                  Saue, by their Raynes, to English-men did gréeuous thraldome bréed:
                  But after Hardi-knought his death, the Danes were chased hence,
                  Not intermedling with the State of England euer sence.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXII.
               
                  
                     OF forsayd Egelred his Sonnes, Alured, and his brother,
                  Was Edward King: (for Goodwyns gile had made away that other.)
                  Religious, chaste, wise, fortunate, stout, franke, and milde, was he:
                  And from all Taxes, wrongs, and Foes, did set his Kingdome frée.
                  By ouer-ruling of his Lords, intreating long the same,
                  Least, dying Issules, he leaue succession out of frame,
                  He tooke to Quéene a Damsell faire: howbeit, by conscent,
                  In vowes of secret chastitie their louing liues they spent.
                  The Father of this Mayden-wife in sitting by the King,
                  And seeing one that stumbled, but not falling, vp did spring,
                  He laughing sayd, the brother there the brother well hath easd,
                  (His meaning was the Stumblers Feete.) And, haddest thou so pleasd,
                  So had my Brother, quoth the King, bin easing vnto me.
                  The traytrous Earle tooke bread and sayd, so this digested be
                  As I am giltles of his death: these words he scarcely spoke,
                  But that in presence of the King the bread did Goodwyn choke.
                  
                     Harolde his sonne, by Hardi-knoghts late daughter him suruiues,
                  He, crossed by contrary windes, in Normandie ariues.
                  There Goodwyns Sonne did take an oth, Duke William vrging so,
                  To keepe vnto the Duke his vse, when Edward hence should goe,
                  The Crowne of England: clayming by Adoption, and by blood,
                  But Harolde, after Edwards Death, not to his promise stood.
                  And for he was in wealth, in friends, in blood, and Armor strong,
                  And title had his Mothers right, he forced not the wrong:
                  But arming him against the Duke, so vrged vnto wroth,
                  Did seaze the Crowne vnto himselfe, contrary to his Oth.
                  Whil'st William therfore works for Warre, King Harolde had not rest,
                  For Harolde Hare-foote King of Danes and Norwaies, much opprest
                  The English with his pusant Bands. But Harolde him assayles,
                  And, after fearce and doubtfull fight, most valiantly preuayles:
                  
                     And with the Norgayne Prince he slewe his people almost all:
                  When, for deuision of the Spoyle, did much contention fall
                  Betwixt the King and English-men: and many a noble Knight
                  Not only murmor and malinge, but did forsake him quight.
                  Such mallice growing, William with his Normanes taking land,
                  Found hot-spurr Harolde prest in Armes, his pusance to withstand:
                  And either Battell Marshalled as either Captaine wild,
                  The King of England eagerly the Normane Oste behild,
                  And with his chearfull speeches thus his men with courage fild.
                  Sée (valiant Warr-friends) yonder be the first, the last, and all
                  The Agents of our Enemies: they henceforth cannot call
                  Supplies: for weedes at Normandie by this in Porches groe:
                  Then Conquer these would Conquer you, and dread no further Foe.
                  They are not stouter then the Brutes, whom we did hence exile:
                  Nor stronger then the sturdie Danes, our Uictorie erwhile:
                  Not Saxonie could once contayne, or scarce the world beside
                  Our Fathers, who did sway by Sword where listed them to bide.
                  Then doe not ye degenerat, take courage by discent,
                  And by their Buryalles, not abode, their force and flight preuent.
                  Ye haue in hand your Countries cause, a Conquest they pretend,
                  Which (were ye not the same ye be) euen Cowards would defend.
                  I graunt that parte of vs are flead and linked to the Foe,
                  And glad I am our Armie is of Traytors cléered so:
                  Yea pardon hath he to departe, that slayeth Mal-content:
                  I prize the mynd aboue the man, like zeale hath like euent.
                  Yet troth it is, no well or ill this Iland euer had,
                  But through the ill or well Support of Subiects good or bad.
                  Not Caesar, Hengest, Swayn, or now (which nertheles shall fayle)
                  The Normane Bastard (Albion true) did, could, or can preuayle.
                  But to be selfe-false in this Isle a selfe-Foe euer is,
                  Yet, wot I, neuer Traytor did his Treasons Stypend mis.
                  Shrinke who will shrinke, let Armors wayte presse downe the burdned Earth,
                  My Foes with wondring eyes shall see I ouer-prize my death.
                  But since ye all (for all, I hope, a-like affected be,
                  Your Wiues, your Children, liues, and Land, from Seruitude to frée)
                  Are armed both in shewe and zeale, then gloriously contend.
                  
                     To winne and weare the home-brought Spoyles, of Uictorie the end.
                  Let not the Skinners daughters Sonne possesse what he pretends,
                  He liues to dye a noble death that life for Fréedome spends.
                  As Harolde hartned thus his men, so did the Normane his:
                  And, looking wishly on the Earth, Duke William speaketh this.
                  To liue vpon, or lye within, this is my Ground or Graue,
                  (My louing Soldiours) one of twaine your Duke resolues to haue.
                  Nor b
                        •
                     ye Normanes now to seeke in what ye should be stout,
                  Ye come amidst the English Pykes to hewe your Honors out,
                  Ye come to winne the same by Launce, that is your owne by lawe,
                  Ye come, I say, in rytious Warre reuenging Swords to drawe.
                  Howbeit of more hardie Foes no passed Fight hath spead ye,
                  Since Rollo to your now Abode with Bands victorious lead ye,
                  Or Turchus, Sonne of Troyelus, in Scythian Fazo bread ye.
                  Then worthy your Progenitors ye Séede of Priams Sonne
                  Exployt this busnesse: Rollons doe that as ye wish be donne.
                  Thrée People haue as many tymes got and for-g
                        •
                     n this Shore,
                  It resteth now ye Conquer it, not to be Conqured more:
                  For Normane and the Saxon Blood conioyning, as it may,
                  From that consorted Séede the Crowne shall neuer passe away.
                  Before vs are our armed Foes, behinde vs are the Seas,
                  On either side the Foe hath Holds of succour, and for ease.
                  But that Aduantage shall returne their Disaduantage thus,
                  If ye obserue no Shore is left, the which may shelter vs,
                  And so hold out amidst the Rough, whil'st they hael in for Lée,
                  Whereas, whil'st men securely sayle, not seldome Shipwrackes bée,
                  What should I cite your passed Acts, or tediously incence
                  To present Armes? your faces shewe your hearts conceiue offence:
                  Yea euen your Courages deuine a Conquest not to fayle:
                  Hope then your Duke doth Prophesie, and in that hope preuayle.
                  A People braue, a terren Heauen, hath Obiects wroth your Warres
                  Shall be the Prizes of your Prow's, and moun
                        •
                      your fame to Starres▪
                  
                  Let not a Traytors periur'd Sonne extrude vs from our right:
                  He dyes to leaue a famous life, that doth for Conquest sight.
                  By this the furious Battelles ioyne, a bloodie day to either,
                  And long they fight, the Uictorie inclyning vnto neither:
                  
                     At length the English had the ods, who kéeping close aray,
                  Unto the Duchie Forces gaue no entrance any way.
                  Then fayning feare, and Martially retyring as opprest,
                  The English so became secure, and followe on disperst.
                  To which aduantage, furiously the Normanes did returne,
                  And got a bloodie victorie. In vayne the English th
                        ••
                     ne
                  Amidst the Pykes against the pricke: 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Harolde then was slayne:
                  From him began the Normanes sole, but soone 
                        •••
                     ioyned ray
                        •
                     e:
                  For second Henrie, Mawde her Sonne, fréed Englands blood agayne.
                  Since whence (and euer may they so) that Of-spring ruled vs:
                  Of whose Coniunction in the Crowne, the Genalogue is thus:
                  King Edmund Irne side Issue had Edward the Our-law: he
                  Had Margret: Mawde by Mancholyn the King of Scottes had she:
                  
                     Mawde to the Conqueror his Sonne first Henrie Mawde did beire:
                  This second Mawde, the Angeos wife, had second Henrie heire.
               
               
                  
                     EDward, King Harolds Preregnant, of this same Change foretold,
                  Who present, and succéeding tymes thus dying did vnfold:
                  It is a World, to note (quoth he) the waies that men adoor,
                  And how Hippocrasie hath bred of God-like Deuilles stoer,
                  That speake to seeme, that seeme to shift, that shift to spoyle by gile,
                  That smooth, and sooth, and yet deceiue with Scriptum est meane while:
                  But let them heaue their hands to Heauen, they haue their hier in Hell,
                  That seeme deuoute to cloke deceipt, and say, but doe not well.
                  The Rich are retchles in their willes, their 
                        •
                     iking is for lawe:
                  The Poore repine, and Goods not theirs, by ydell Shiftings clawe.
                  The Lords and Landed ouer-rent, and cunningly the same
                  The Parrasite doth ouer-reach, and beares away the game.
                  One riseth by an others fall, and some doe clime so fast,
                  That in the Clowdes they doe forget what Esymates they haue past.
                  But Egell-winged mynds that flye to nes
                        •
                     ell in the Sunne,
                  Their loftie heads haue leaden héeles, and end where they begunne.
                  It is a common poynt on which the aged grosely ronne,
                  On
                        •
                     e to haue dared, sayd, and seene, more then was euer donne.
                  The Youth are foolish-hardie, or lesse hardie then they ought,
                  Effeminate, phantasticall, in fewe, not fewe are nought.
                  
                     At Cypris not the wanton Sainct, nar yet her wylie Sonne,
                  Did want their Orgies: nor at Rome did Vesta lacke her Nonne:
                  The Lampsacens gaue Pryapus his filthie Rytes: and Creat
                  
                  To Ioue his Bulles: and Cicilie to Ceres tythed Wheat:
                  The Thracians with their Bachinales did Lybers Temple fill:
                  And Italie did blood of Babes on Saturns Alters spill:
                  And fatall wreathes of Myrtell boughes were sacred vnto Dys:
                  
                  In fewe, there was no Pagane God his Sacrafice did mys:
                  But English-men, nay Christian men, not only seeme prophayne,
                  But Man to Man, as Beast to Beast, holds ciuell dueties vayne.
                  Yea Pulpits some, like Pedlers packes yéeld forth as men affect,
                  And what a Synod shall conclude a Sowter will correct.
                  The rude thus hosting Litrature, one Sisme begets an other,
                  And grosely though a Sisme, yet hath each Sismatike his Soother.
                  Meane while the learned want their Méede, and none with profite heares
                  The tedious Doult, whose artles tongue doth preach to wearie Eares.
                  Here could I enter in a Feild of Matter more then much:
                  But gesse that all is out of frame, and long tyme hath bin such,
                  And what shalbe let tyme disclose. This only will I touch:
                  A Gréene Trée cut from withered Stocke, deuided Furlongs thrée
                  From proper Roote, it shall reioyne, and after fruitfull bée:
                  Thus sayd the King. And thus doe some expound that Prophesie:
                  The Trée this Land, the Stocke and Roote the thralled English line:
                  King Harold, and the Williams twaine, the Furlongs some define:
                  
                     Henrie the Normane that begot one Mawde his English Quéene,
                  
                     Mawde second Henries Mother, was the Trées Returne to gréene.
               
               
                  KIng Stephen first, though not so firme, did in this Turne precéed
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  But second Henrie perfectly restalled Wodens Séede.
                  Nor supersticiously I speake, but .H. the Letter still
                  Might be obserued ominous to Englands good or ill.
                  First Hercules, Hesione, and Hellen, were the cause
                  Of Warre to Troy, AEneas seede becomming so Out-lawes.
                  
                     Humbar the Hunne, with forren Armes did first the Brutes inua
                        ••
                     .
                  
                     Hellen to Romes imperiall Throne the Brittish Crowne conuaed:
                  
                     Hengest and Horsus first did plant the Saxones in this Isle.
                  
                     
                     Hungar and Hubba first brought Danes that swayed here long while.
                  At Harolde had the Saxone ende, at Hardi-knought the Dane.
                  
                  
                     Henries the first and second did restore the English Rayne.
                  
                     Henrie Letigious Lancaster and Yorke vnites in peace.
                  
                     Henrie the Eight did happely Romes Erreligion cease.
                  Much more escapes this Catalogue. In Honor God increase
                  Good double .H. this workes Defence, her Councell and Allie
                  That ruleth vs, and safe may rule long after I shall dye.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶An Addition, or Remaine in Prose, to the Second Booke of ALBIONS ENGLAND: contayning a Breuiat of the true Historie of AENEAS.
            
               ACcept him (friendly Reader) where hée is, not where he ought: and as he speaketh, not as hée should: Misapplyed he is not for Matter preceadent, howsoeuer the penning or misplacing may like or mislike for the English or Order. The Printers forwardnesse presented me of seating AEneas in his 
                  〈…〉
                I the Taske to prosecute his Historie in Uerse: howbeit rather hath my Remisnes borrowed of Decorum and your patience, then that a Patriarke of our Brutones should bee obruptly estranged. Of AEneas therefore it thus followeth:
            
               
               AEneidos.
               
                  WHen the reuengfull Flames of Troy, properly called Ilion, the thē Metrapolitaine Citie of Asia, had perfected the more then Tenne yearrs Siege of the Gretians expugning the same: then AEneas (howsoeuer by some aucthorities noted of disloyaltie towards Priam) in this not vnworthely surnamed vertuous, burdning his armed Shoulders with his féeble and most aged Father Anchises, that laboured also vnder his Loode of the Troyan Gods & sacret Reliques, AEneas (as I say) with such his Burthen, leading by the hand his Sonne Ascanius, of the age of twelue yeares, followed not onely of the beautifull Creusa his wife, the Daughter of King Priam, but also of a many Troyans participating that common calamitie, brake through the wastfull Flames, mauger the wrothfull Foes, into the fields of Phrigia. There the Ayre emptied of downe-burnt Turrets, and filled with smoke of fixed Buildings, assured frō their hearts more teares to their eyes, then the benefite of their present Escape could promise them comfort.
               
                  Troy therfore not to be rescued, or Creusa, in this businesse lost and perishing, to be recouered, AEneas and his Followers imbarking themselues in Simois, after long and wearie Seafaring, arriued in a parte of Thrace called Cressa, bounding on Mygdonia. Here AEneas purposing an end of his tedious Saylings, and not meanly furnished of Treasure conuayed from Troy, layed Foundation of a Cittie, after the Founder, called AEnea. This Cittie going forward lesse effectually then was expected, AEneas supposing the Gods to bee yet opposite to the Troyans, knocking downe a milk-white Bull, pitched

an Alter to doe Sacrafice. Neere at hand were growing vltiers shrubbed Trees, the Boughes whereof, for the greater reuerence and exornation of the present Solempnetie, he cutting and sliuing downe, perceiued blood in great aboundance issewing from the broken Branches: whereat long admyring, and with great terror and deuotion intercessing the Gods, on his knées, to reueale ye meaning of that miraculous Accident, at the length he heard a pittifull and feeble voyce (for diuersly, in those daies, did the Deuilles aunswer and giue Oracles) thus aunswering.
               Reason were it (AEneas) that ye Graues of the dead should priuiledge their bodies from the tyrannie of the liuing: but by so much the lesse doe I esteeme my preiudice, by how much the more I knowe thee vnwittingly iniurious. Thou tearest AEneas, in these Braunches thou tearest, the bodie of thy vnfortunate Brother-in-lawe Polydor, Sonne to the like starred Priamus. Troy as yet was only threatned, not besieged, whē my Father (as thou knowest) deliuered me with a world of Treasure to Polymnestor the barborous King of this Countrie: here daungerles (as he pretended) to abide, as the Conseruor and Restauration of his House & Empier, whatsoeuer should betide of him, his other Issue, or the Warres beginning. But the Greekes preuayling, Auerice, and the declyning State of Phrigia, imboldned my Garden (fearlesse of Reuengers) to the murthering of me: which he traytrously accomplishing on this Shoore, secretly raked me vp in these Sands, without honor of better Sepulcher: and of my bodie (so hath it peased the Gods, and Nature) are sprong these Braūches, in tearing of which thou tormentest me. Howbeit, in respect of my desire to profite thee by fortelling of thy Destinie, I accoumpt me happely harmed: For knowe (AEneas) that in vayne thou doest builde, where the Gods denye thyne abode: leaue therefore these defamed Costes, and prosperously plant the Remayne of Troy, and thy Posteritie, in the fertill Italian Clime.
               The voyce thus ceased to speake, and AEneas, without further touch of the forbidden Shrubbes, continuing his feare

finished the Sacrafice, and after the Phrigian fashion solemnly held an Obit to the ghost of his murthered kinsman.
               THen by this admonishment, hee and his Troians leauing the newe reared Cittie, disanker from Thrace in quest of behighted Italie. But no sooner had they put to Sea, then that the windes and the waues sollycited (a Poeticall fiction) by the wife of Iupiter, so tossed and turmoyled the disparkled Nauie, that the horror of the circumstaunces, continuallie threatning their liues, left onlie hoped for death as the remaine of all cōfort. At length, these instruments of their long wandringes, and the causes of Anchises, and of manie noble personages, their perishing, coūterpleaded (as is fabled) by Venus, tossed their distackled Fléete to the shoore of Libya.
               
               Néere to the place of their arriuall, stoode the beautifull Cittie of Carthage, which Elisa (whom the Phaenicians for her magnanimious dying, did afterwards name Dido) had newly builded: AEneas by a safe conduct receiued from her, repayring thether, found such royall entertainement, that in respect of the present sollace, hee had forgotten al passed sorrowes, and his hart-spent Troians, found bountifull supplies to all their late endured scarsities.
               In the meanewhile AEneas for personage the Iouilist, for well-spoken the Mercurilist, and no lesse fortunate vnder Venus her constellation, with his comlines so intised the eyes, with his spéeches so inchaunted the eares, & with his vertues so enflamed the hart of the amorous Carthagian Quéene, that hardly modestie discented, that her tongue affirmed not the loue, which her eyes outwardly blabbed, and her hart inwardly nourished. In thend, not able longer to containe such extraordinarie Passions, in this order she vented the same to the Lady Anna her Syster.
               
                  My trustie Sister, quoth shee, (then sighing out a paws
                     •
                  ) how manie great Princes, since the decease of my late husband Sichaeus, and our departure from Tyrus, haue in vayne laboured a marriage with me, hath béene vnto thée no lesse apparant, then of me hetherto vnapproued. But nowe (haled on I knowe not by what desteny) our newcome Guest AEneas the Troian, whose matchlesse personage and knightlie prowesse I partially commende not, all confirming of him, no lesse then I can affirme, the same, euen the same hath supplanted my chast determinations of continuall widdowhood, with an amarous desire of a second marriage: howbeit, to determine without him, as I must, were to be deceiued of him, as I may. What counsell? My selfe (Anna) ah my selfe to motion loue were immodestie, and to be silent lesse tollerable thē death. I would (a violent no volentarie wish) that Elisa knewe her selfe beloued of AEneas, AEneas not knowing himselfe so loued of Elisa.
               
               Her Syster with a chéerefull countenaunce promising comfort, performed the same in this aunswer. Dum signes (quoth she) haue their spéeches: not any that obserueth your lookes, but easilie aymeth at your loue: greater is the wonder of your strickt chastity, then it woulde be a nouell to sée you a Bigama: that pryuately peuishe and curious, this publiquely, common and commodious. Or euer Carthage be perfected in the ayre, Elisa may putrefie in the earth: What Moniment then leauest thou to thy Tyrians, scarce warme in Affric, then a Citties imperfect foundation? Which béeing alreadye an eyesore to the wylde and warlike Libyans, Barchaes, Getulians, and the rest of the Affricans, shall then be vtterly extinct, with the verie name of the Foundres. But in matching with so great and valiāt a Prince as is AEneas, thou shalt not onelie liue with whom thou dost loue, and by consorting thy Tyrians with his Troians, strongly disapoynt the enuie of those Nations, but (for Nature hath

not gyuen thée such beauty to dye barren) béeing a wyfe, become (no doubt) a mother, and by legistimat propagation so glad thy Subiects feareles of ciuill discentions. Who can then dislike that Elisa should so loue? Bury Sister the thoughts of Sichaeus with his dead bones, and prosperously prosecute and preuaile in thy swéete passions of AEneas. Plie him with all prouisions and amorous entertainments, onely for his Shippe-workes sayne delatorie wants: and by Winter be past, hee partly comming will (feare not) be perfectly reclamed. This counsell of Anna, though it heaped as it were Athos on AEtna, yet was it praysed and practised of Elisa: for Counsel soothing the humour of the councelled, howsoeuer vnprofitable, is accounted plausable. Henceforward the Quéene to be admyred, not matched for her exquisite beauty, and rather borrowing of Arte then scanting Nature, as braue in apparell, as beautifull in person, and voted, euen in her better part, to the loue of AEneas, so sorted all her deuises to his best liking, that shortly him selfe laboured with her in one and the selfe same payne of wished for pleasure. Omytting therefore the circumstaunces of their discourses, feastings, and all Poeticall faynings, onely procéede we, in few, to the Euent of these their amorous Begininges.
               A hunting was generally appointed: the Queene, AEneas, their Ladies, and Knights brauely mounted: the Standes were prewned: the Toyles pitched: ye Hounds vncopled: the Game rowsed a foote, and followed: when suddainly amidst the harborlesse Desart in the hottest pursute, the Skye, ouercast with blacke Clowdes, shewred downe such flashes of Lyghtning, vollies of Thunder, Haylestones, and Rayne, that glad was euery of the Tyrians and Troians, dispersing themselues, to shyft for one, Elisa and AEneas, in the meanewhile, finding a Caue that sheltred them twayne. Béeing there all alone, vnknowne

of, and vnsought for of their Seruaunts. Oportunitie the chiefe Actrisse in all attempts, gaue the Plaudiat in Loue hys Comedie. Imagine short wooing where either partie is▪ wylling: their faithes plighted for a marriage to be solemnized (with kind kysses among) hee did what harmed not, and shee had what displeased not: A younge AEneas shoulde haue béene molded, had hee not béene marred (as might séeme) in the making. When this swéete Calme in the sharpe storme, was with the Tempest thus ouerpassed, then came they both out, not such as they entred in: & were receiued of their Traynes, attending their pleasures, not examining their pastimes: and so hauing continued the Chace, vntill night discontinued their sport, they retyring to Carthage, were sumptuously feasted of Elisa in her Pallace. During these their Alcion daies (not generally liked of all) one there was, a Noble Troian, that had these spéeches to AEneas.
               
               Shouldest thou beléeue (farre be it from AEneas so to beléeue) that the Oracles of our Gods, behighting vs the Conquest of Italie, were supersticious, then beléeue also (vndeceiued maist thou so beléeue) that our effeminate abode heere is vaine and slaunderous: to attempt that former without an Oracle, yea with the losse of our liues, is honourable, because we are Troians: to entertaine this latter, inuited and daungerles, reprochfull, because we are Troians. Ah (AEneas) haue we shipped our Gods from home, to be witnesses of our wantonnesse heere? Beléeue me, better had it béene we had dyed in Phrygia men, then to liue thus in Affric like women. Consider also the place whereinto wee are nowe broughte, and then conceaue of the possibility of our héere abode: shall I tell thée, were there not (if in the meane whyle no other Accident crosse thy now blisse) were there not I say, an Elisa héere to loue thée, or were there not an AEneas to be belooued of her, no sooner should the first deceased of you be deliuered of life, then the Suruyuors of vs Troians
                  
be denyed thys Land: and then, if we should prooue so vngratefull as to resist our Releuors, yet hauing number we want Munition: for neyther our Shyppes bee tackled, nor wee armed, but at the deliuerie and appointment of the Tyrians. Learne therefore (AEneas) after so long pleasure in loue, at the last profitably and politickly to loue: and whatsoeuer thy play be in Affrick, let henceforth the Mayne be Italie. Mean-while commaunde (most humbly we desire to bee so commaunded) that thy Shyppes be secretely calked, tallowed, ballaced, tackled, victled, and armed: and then (thy selfe also reformed) wittingly or vnwillinglie to Elisa leaue her and her effeminate Cittie: with resolution neuertheles (if thou so please) at more leysure to loue her. So effectuallie did AEneas lysten to this motion, that gyuing order for the readines and secrete repayring of his Fléete, hee promised a spéedie and suddaine departure: and hys men not slypping opportunities, executed the same with as effectuall diligence.
               It happened in thys meanewhyle, ye Quéene to mount the high Turrets of her Pallace royal, where looking towardes the Rhode, she perceyued how earnestly the Troians laboured in trymming, pauashing, and furnishing theyr Nauie: then assuring her selfe not deceiued, that she should be deceiued, and discending as it were maiestically madde, méeting with AEneas, she sayd.
               Before (AEneas) I beheld thy shypwracks and wants, I beléeued some God aryued at Carthage: yea when I knewe thée but a man, yet hath my conceit honoured thee with a Deitie: but nowe these thy inhumaine Trecheries, not worthy the vnworthyest Tytles, argue so farre of from a Godhood, as thou shewest thy selfe lesse then a Man, and worse then a Deuill. What hath Carthage not woorthy AEneas? I assure thée, if any be so much, no Cittie is more happy then Carthage. But the Queene pleaseth not AEneas: oh that AEneas had not pleased the

Quéene: then might I haue bettered my choyse for honour, or not haue bewayled thy chaunge for the dishonor. But (vngratefull) wilt thou indéede leaue me? yea, then that thou meanest the contrary nothing more false, but to deriue thy departure from any desert of myne, nothing lesse true. If therefore the life of Elisa, the loue of Elisa, the land of Elisa, her wealth, thy want, her teares, thy vowes, her distresse, thy dishonor, the delightes of thys Shore, the daungers of those Seas, Carthage possessed, Italie vnconquered, peace without warre héere, warre without peace there, thy wracks past, the Winter to come, anie euils whereof I warne thée, anie good that I haue wrought thée, and more good that I haue wished thée, if anie thing said, or more then I can say, hath or doth want Argument to seate thée in Affrick, yet at the least for thine owne safety, stay a more temperate season: vrging in the meane-while excuses, for thine vnurged departure: and so I flattered, shall either patient my selfe, or repent thy fléeting in a mylder Extasie. I did (wel may I forethinke me so to haue doone) entertaine thée beyond the degrée of an Hostesse, or the dignity of a Gueste: and yet (vngratefull Guest to so kind an Holtis) for such welcome thou hast not pretended a farewell. Thus alas finding thy loue lesse then it ought, I repent to haue loued more then I should: and because thou appearest not the same thou wert, I am not reputed the same I am: but as the by-worde of the Tyrians, the Stayle of the Troians, and the scorne of the Affricans, howbeit (in trueth) the fayth-plyghted Wyfe of faythlesse AEneas. But who will so beléeue? nay beleeue not so who wyll, thy departure shall bée my death, my death thy sinne, thy sinne the worldes spéeche, the worldes spéeche thy reproofe, and thy reproofe my purgation: for were thy selfe Iuror and Iudge of the more offensyue, my credulencie, or thine inconstancie, the Iuror coulde not but

giue Uerdict for Elisa, and the Iudge sentence against AEneas: then (yf not for my sute) yet for thyne owne sake, let mee not pleade tediouslye, and without grace, that pleade so truelie, and with more gréefe then for the quantitie I may suffer, or for the quallitie thou canst censure.
               
                  AEneas, not lightly gauled at her impatience, whom hee styll loued more then a lyttle, howbeit lesser then hys nowe regarde of honour, thankfully acknowledged her great bounty, counterpleading to haue pretended a departure without leaue taken, vouching moreouer the displeasure of hys Gods for contempt of their Oracles, manifested by fearefull Dreames and sundry Uisions, as also the vrging of hys Troians impatient of tarriance: so that hee resting in Resolution, not to bee wonne by wooing, or reclamed by exclaiming, the Quéene became spéechles and sencelesse, and was in a swoune conuayed from his presence: In which businesse hée boording hys Shyppes, in the deade of nyght hoysting vppe sayles, left Carthage to séeke Italie.
               
               THe Quéene, not capable of anie rest, by day appearing discried from a Turret the Rhode cleered of the Troian Nauie: then not willingly silent, nor able to speake, shee stoode as stoode Niobe, after the fouretéenth reuenge by Latonas Issue. Which her then, and after Extremities, to bee glaunced at, not iudged of, bréefelie I thus decyfer: Imagine, (for vnimagined, vnacted) a substātial, & palpable appearāce of Loue, Wroth, Sorrow, and Dispayre, acting in their aptest habits, and extreamest passyons, and then suppose Elisa not onely the same, but more feruently louing, more furiously wrothfull, more confusedly sorrowfull, and more impatientlye desprett. Imagine lastly the first thrée imagined Actors, after long partes occupyed, leauing the Stage to the

fourth, as to the perfectest Imperfection: and then from such imagined Stratagem attend thys actuall Catastropha.
               
               A Wyzarde or Wytch (the too common Oracles of manie too credulent women) had instructed the Quéene, that an Emollation or burnt Sacrifice offered to the infernall Deities, of the Armour, Ornaments, and al what soeuer the Reliques of AEneas, left behind him at his departure from Carthage, would effectually estraunge the outrage of her passions, and extinct in her ye very remembraunce of AEneas. Thys Counsell (either for that at the first she beléeued it possible, or for that opportunitie so offered it selfe to practise the thing she did purpose) Elisa entertayning, opened the same to Anna her Syster: who simply, vnsuspitious of the sequell, prouided secretely as was gyuen her in charge, a pyle of dry Faggots, crowned with Garlands for the dysmall Sacrifice: which, and Elisa her selfe in a readynes, AEneas his Armour béeing her eyes Obiect became in thys wise her tongues Subiect.
               Wyth this quoth she (eying the Armour) ye craking Troian bosted to haue buckled wt the gallant Diomedes, not seldome to haue offended the defenclesse Grecians, and after many loned blowes at the sacking of Troy, valiantly to haue boordded his thence-bent Nauie: thys Armour profitable to my preiudice, there defensiue to him, to bee héere offensiue to me, were it vnnecessarie to thys Sacrifice, shoulde neuerthelesse burne for the same trespasse. Thys Cuppe, thys Phrigian Cuppe, too guilty of too many Tyrian draughts, Assystaunts in forming me audatiously amorous, shall now occupy these cerimonial flames, as the then Accessarie to a contrarie fire. These Bracelets, and these Earinges, by too often and offentious handes fastned, and loosed, with begged and graunted kysses among, and nowe lesse precious by the Gyuer hys practise, shall also adde Cynders to the repentant payment of mine ouer-rated pleasure. Lastly are remayning

onely two Reliques of that Recreant, this Sword, and Elisa her selfe. But what? diddest thou (AEneas) leaue this, and thyne Armor in Carthage, as if in Italie thou shouldest encounter an other Elisa? inconsiderat that thou art, albeit such feareles Conflicts best beséeme such effeminate Captaines, yet no Clymat can affoorde thée one so foolish, and therefore in no Country expecte such Fortune. The Storme (ah from thence are these teares) sheltring vs twayne lately in one Caue, was (no doubt) ominous to these euills: for then shoulde I haue remembred, that like as Shelters are chiefely sought for in Stormes, so men labour our fauours onely in extremities: but their lustes satisfyed, or wants supplyed, as of Shelters in Sunne-shyne they estimat our bountie, leauing thenceforth euen to séeme such as (in troth) they neuer were: but what is naturall is of necessitie, onely let it be graunted, he is a Man, and it foloweth necessarilye he is deceitful. Fly Traytor, AEneas flye, vnfollowed and vnfriended of Elisa: euer may the windes bee contrarie to thy Course, and the Seas not promise thée one howres safety: euer be thy Shippe drowning, and thy selfe neuer but dying: often resayle in a moment, whence thou wert sayling a moneth: let no blaste from the Ayre, or Billowe in the Sea, stirre but to thy preiudice: and when no horror and mishap hath fayled thee, with thy dead bodie to the vttermost plagued, perrish also may thy Soule vnpardoned. But least mine incharitie prooue lesse pardonable then his Iniurie, I that will not lyue to heare it so, hartily disclame to haue it so: pardon therefore ye Gods me desiring it, and him deseruing it. Troth is it, this one Sacrifice shall giue ende to myne infinite sorrowes: but not (alas) with these burninges rather found guiltie of new beginninges, but with my harts blood, the latest Ceremonie wanting to thys Exquisie. Scarcely had these words passed her mouth, when with AEneas hys Sworde sh
                     •
                   pierced her Brest: so performing

on her selfe a Tragedie sought for, and to hers a terror vnlooked for.
               WHilst Dido (so named of this her death, or, as haue some not lesse probable of so preuenting Hiarbas, minacing her marriage) was thus passionate, & did thus perrish, AEneas after weary Sea-faring, much sorrowe many people and places séene and sayled from, arryuing in Sicilie, was ioyfully entertayned of his auncient friend Kyng Acestes: and there (as the yéere before, at Drepaum) did solemnize an Anniuersarie, at the Tombe of hys father Anchises. The Masteries, feates, and actiue pastymes, tryed heere by the Troian and Cicilian youth, with land & sea Skirmidges by running, ryding, leaping, shooting, wrestling, and such like, with Bacing on foote and on horsback: this last a sport lately vsed of our English youthes, but nowe peuishly perhaps, vnpollitickly I am sure discontinued: Or how ye Women of Troy (wher of manie were also imbarcked from thence) tyred with the perils of the Sea, and intised with the pleasures of Sicilie, to preuent further sayling fired their Shyps, not without great losse rescued: Or howe AEneas buylding there the Cittie Acesta, peopled the same with his women, and impotent Troians: Or of the drowning, and Reuise of Palinurus: & manie Occurrants hapning héere, at Cuma, Caieta, and els-where I omit, as lesse pertinent then the hastning of AEneas into Italie.
               
               Wherefore shypping him from Sicilie, I nowe lande him in Latium: in which part of Italie raigned and was Resident in his Cittie Laurentum the King Latinus, to whom AEneas addressed a hundred Knights, one of them delyuering this Ambasie.
               Ignoraunt are we not most gracious King (for in that Tytle art thou famous, and in that tryall may we prooue fortunate) of thy Consanguinitie with the Troians, by noble discentes from Dardanus our auncient Progenitor:

neyther canst thou but know that Troy is sacked, and her people for the most part slaughtered: onely know, (if alreadie thou knowst it not) that AEneas our Duke, with a few hys Folowers, hetherto reserued to more infortunes, after more then seauen yéeres sayling, are lastly (and luckilie I hope) arryued in thy Countrey. Howbeit of many vnpeopled places, for pleasure and fertility moste worthy manuring, haue we abandoned the quiet possession: yea many the greatest Princes of Europe and Affrick, haue voluntarily desired our Taryance denyed: onely infinite Seas haue we sayled, and more sorrowes sustayned to séeke this Clyme, from whence we Troians deryue our Originalles, and whether our Gods haue dyrected vs by their Oracles. Thys thy Country in respect of the bignes, may easilie affoorde rome for a newe Troy to be builded: A plot more spacious wee doo not aske, A smaller sute thou canst not graunt, if with our present extremities thou also peise our purposed loyalties. Neuer were we thy foes, & euer wil we cōtinue thy friends. Seated we must be, and héere we would be. We dare not disobey the Gods commaunding it, nor would we discontent thée in demaunding it: graciously therefore conceaue of our Petition, and gratefully receiue from AEneas these worthlesse Presents.
               Hauing thus sayd, he in the name of AEneas, presented the King with a most ritch Mantell or Robe▪ with an inualuable Crowne of Golde, enchased with precious Stones: and with the late royall Scepter of King Priamus: with a standing Cuppe, and other Treasure: which Latinus chéerefully receiuing, returned the Troians thys aunswere:
               Had not the Gods commanded your hether repaire, which I gainsay not: or were we not of Allyance, wherin I disclame not: Or my Kingdome not rome-some enough to receiue you, as it is: Or had ye not brought pretious and peaceable Presents, as ye haue: yet to dismisse

Wayfarers vnrested and vnreléeued, were contrary to the Gods of Hospitalitie, and (which they defend, that I should therin offende) Latinus his honour. Ouer fast hee sitteth, that securely sitteth: for as hee that is timerous hath too little prouidence, so he that is feareles hath too much presumption: yea lesse gréeuous are expected then vnlooked for euilles. I speake not this as I feare to fall, but as I fore-sée I may fal: for the vnpearching of others should be for preachings to vs. Priuie am I vnto your distresse, applying the like possibility for me so to decline: for who is priuiledged from becomming such? and who is such that would not haue succour? My déere Fréendes and Alies, sorrie I am that ye haue so yll cause to estrang your selues from home, but gladde that I am in so good case to entertaine you héere. Let AEneas seate him, and prosper ye in Italie: my land well may abide it, and my selfe brooke it. Yea more: (for the Oracle of my mynde consorts no doubt with those of our GODS) Lauinia my sole Daughter and heyre, forbidden a Natiues, and behighted a Straungers Marriage, hath founde a Husband, and I a Sonne-in-lawe: at the leaste I wyshe it would be, and hope it wyll be. Make my thanks to AEneas for his Presents, and be you Masters of your Petitions.
               The Troians sumptuously feasted: euery mā on a gyuē Corser brauely & ritchly mounted: dismissed: returned: & Latinus his aunswere and Present deliuered: AEneas neuertheles, as farre from béeing secure, as ioyous of such Tydings, knowing the good spéede of a Straunger, to be an Eye-sore to the people, and therefore not careles suspitious of it that might causeles succéede, strongly inmured his Men in a new-built Fortresse.
               In the meane-while, their Arriuall and Entertaynement with Latinus, occupied and for the most-part, offended all Italie. Enuiously stormed Amata the Quéene,

that Lauina her Daughter and Darling should be wedded to a Straunger, an Exile (as she termed him:) and therefore, when she could not disswade the King by flattery, she insensed his Nobles and Subiectes to resist it, forcibly.
               On the otherside, Turnus, Prince of the Rutules, in person excéeding all for comlines, and in Armes equall to anie for his courage, to whom Lauinia was before promised in Marriage, as Mal-content as any for being thus circumuented by AEneas, therefore helde a Counsell in hys sumptuous Cittie Ardea, scituate in the territory of Latium, how to intercept the Troians by wyles, expell them by warres, weaken them by wants, disapoynt AEneas, and possesse himselfe of Lauinia. Often sent he Messengers, and sometimes Menaces, to aduertise Latinus that he was promised he should, and to assure him he purposed he would enioy her, or anger him. But by howe much more Latinus was religiously vnremoouable in his Resolution for AEneas, by so much the more did Turnus giue loose raynes to hys headye anger: Howbeit sufficient matter wanted for his mallice to worke vpon, vntill by euill happe his chollor tooke aduauntage of his colour.
               
                  Ascanius, with diuers Troian Gentlemen his Fréends, and others his Attendants, Hunting in a Forrest not farre from their Fortresse, by chance did incounter strike and chace a fayre and well spread Stagge, which ye Chyldren of one Tyrrhus the Kinges Raunger, and Steward of his Grounds, a Man of no meane account amongst the Latines, had from a Fawne nourished, & so intreated that, no Beast might be more tamer. This S
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ge thus stroken and followed of the Troians, and taking the readiest way to the house of Tyrrhus, with bléeding hawnches entring the Hall, was first espied of Syluia or Ilia, a yong Gentlewoman, in whose lappe he sléeping had often layd his head, and at whose handes he had many a time taken Brouse, béene kemed, and trimmed. She séeing the Stag

in such plight, almost swouned ere she could wéepe, and wept ere she might speake, and spoake ere shee was heard, and was heard ere shee was pittied, and pittied ere she was comforted, and comforted onely in promise of Reuenge.
               At the winding of an Horne, came flocking thether in a tryse, the Heards-men, Shepheardes, Plow-men, and Hyndes: thys Anticke of Groomes, finding Almon the eldest Sonne of Tyrrhus, and theyr young Mystres Syluia gréeuously passionate, and their olde fellowe the Stagge bloody and braying his last, question no farther what should be done, but were furiously inquisitiue after the dooers.
               In thys meane-time by euill hap, Ascanius & hys Companie drawing by Parsie after the Stagge (which they knewe not for tame) were entred the viewe of this Schoole of inraged Clownes: who all at once and suddainly, with such weapons as they had or founde néerest at hand, as Staues, Shéep-hookes, Dung-forks, Flayles, Plow-staues, Ares, Hedging-Betels, yea Lybbattes newelie snatched from burning, and what not? fearcely assayled with downe ryght blowes the amazed Troians: who not hauing leysure to aske questions, couragiously entertayne the vnknowne Quarrell. And so long and daungerously for eyther part continued this confusion of blowes, and effusion of bloode, that by nowe it was bruted at the Fortresse, and at Laur
                        •
                     ntum, and was anon increased by rescue from either Faction: neither had this Skufling an ende vntill night was begunne: at what time the Latines, Rutules, and Troians, left the wylde Medlye, howbeit not discontinuing their malice.
               Of chiefe account amongst the Latines, were slayne lusty Almon, and aged Galesus, a man of an honest and wealthye condition, whilst hee vnseasonably amongste blowes, deliuered vnregarded perswasions of Peace.
               
                  The wounded Corses of these twayne, did Turnus cause to be conuayed to the viewe of Latinus, as Arguments of their common dammage: him selfe with an enuious hart, and an enuectiue tongue, amplefying the same to the vttermost: not vnasisted therein by the yrefull Quéene Amata, or vn-furthered by the hurly burlie of the impatient people, all labouring the King to denounce Armour against the Troians.
               
               
                  Latinus in this tumult of hys Subiects, and trauell of hys Senses, assuring himselfe that AEneas was ye man prophesied to the Marriage of Lauinia, and succession of Latium, Disswaded, but might not Perswade wyth the heady multitude. In fewe, with such efficacie did she dead Corses inuite it, the Quéene intreate it, Turnus affect it, and the People followe it, that lastly, though against his mind, the King did suffer the Laurentines to reare on their Walles absolute Tokens of imynent Warres. Thus founde Turnus that which hee longed for, and AEneas no lesse then he looked for: and eyther sollyciting succours, were not long vnfurnished of hardy Souldiers: yea, in respecte of their multuous Armies, the Warres lately ceased at Troy, might now haue béene sayd reuiued in Jtalie.
               
               But as in hys Wandringes, so in his warres, my purpose is breuity: eyther which the Lawriat Trumpetor of his glory hath so effectually sownded, that many might amplifie, I could itterat, but not any can amende it: neuertheles in remembring of this Hystorie, I haue also vsed other Authorities.
               YT followeth: After long Warres valiantly on eyther part performed, Manie greate Kinges, Princes, and Parsonages perrished: when lastly the Rutiles begunne to be repentant of their wrong, and the Troians wearie of the Warres, AEneas and Turnus méeting had these wordes. And first AEneas.
               
               
                  Often Truces haue we had (Turnus) for the burial of our deade, neuer Intreaties of peace for the welfare of those aliue: onely once (as I haue béene euer) diddest thou séeme (thou diddest but séeme) prouident that no moe should miscarie, offering me Combate, which I accepting haue in vaine expected: but since thy minde chaunged I wote not by what meanes, haue chaunged ye lyues of I wote not how many. But now, euen now (when for the palpable leas
                     •
                  ng thou shouldest not speake like Turnus, shouldest thou deny the better of the warres to abide with AEneas, and yet I still be AEneas, though playing vpon that Aduauntage with Turnus) euen nowe, I say, my selfe doo request thée of that Combate, whereby further Blood-sheds may, happily, bee concluded. Beléeue me, wert thou a Begger, and I a Monark, yet (so much doo I emulate, not enuie, thy glory) I woulde hazarde all in a Combate, requested of so valerous a Competitor. But least (perhaps) I ouer-breath thy tyckled Conceite with more selfe-lyking then is expedient, knowe Man, Turnus know, Nature, Beath, Arte, Education, nor whatsoeuer are in any thing more beneficiall to Turnus, then that iustly be may enuie as much or more in AEneas.
               
               To thys aunswered the Rutule thus: Whether thou speakest this (AEneas) as insulting ouer my infortune, or as insolent of thine owne felicitie, or emulous (as thou sayst and I beléeue it) of my glory, trust mee, (onely if thus, in thy better successe, to abandon thy selfe to such offered disaduauntage be not indiscretion) neuer hearde I wherein to derogate from thy pollicie: but say it indiscretion, yet by Iupiter (AEneas) it is honourable indiscretion. Not to encounter so heroicall (for in thée I enuie not that Epitithon) a Combattant, is as contrary to my thought, as contenting to my very Soule, and as contenting to my Soule, as if AEneas were already conquered and Turnus Conqueror: either which I deuine, at ye leastwise

I am determined to aduenture: be prouided therefore (AEneas) of courage, for thou prouokest no Cowarde, but euen Turnus, that would haue asked no lesse, had hée not doubted AEneas not to haue dared to aunswere so much. Thus, and with these Conditions: that further warres should finish, that the Espousall of Lauinia, and Succession of Latium should bee the Prize to the Uictor, A Combat to be tryed by these twayne body against body was, vpon Othes taken and other Circumstaunces, ratefyed.
               Nowe were they Armed, Mounted, and did Encounter: their Coursers were breathles, the Ryders Dysmounted, and buckled on Foote: both offended, eyther defended, and nayther faynted. Lastly, not with vnrequited blowes, was Turnus Disarmed, the Uanquished pleading for life, and the Uictor not purposing his death, had he not espied on his Shoulders the sometimes Badrike of his once especiall Fréende Pallas, King Euander his Sonne, whom Turnus in Battell ouercomming had put to Sword: then AEneas saying, onely in this Spoyle thou shalt not tryumphe, and onely for his sake am I vnintreatable, shoffed his Sworde through hys Breaste, Turnus so ending the World, and AEneas the Warres.
               Then was he peaceably wedded to Lauinia, & shortly after possessed of Latium: After which, about thrée yéeres he dying, left his Kingdome to Ascanius, and Lauinia with Childe. She at her time, and at the house of the before remembred Tyrrhus, was deliuered of Syluius Posthumu
                        •
                     
                  : so called of hys béeing borne amongst ye Wooddes, after the death of his Father. To him (because in right, it was the Inheritance of Syluius from his Mother) dyd Ascanius voluntarilie resigne the Kingdome of Latium: and of him, for his honourable Regyment, were all the after Latine Kinges called Syluij: Finally he Hunting and mistaken amongst the Thickets for a Stagge, was slayne with an Arrowe by his Sunne Brutus. This Brutus,
                  
for sorrow and his safety, accompanied with manie lusty Gentlemen, and others of AEneas his Troians Ofsprings, imbarking themselues, after long Sayling, aryued in this Iland, then called Albion: whose Cyantlike Inhabitants (in respect of their monstrous making and inciuill Manners sayd to haue béene engendred of Deuilles) he ouercomming, Manured theyr Countrey, and after his owne name called it Brutaine. And thus hauing begotten Brutus an Originall to our Brutons, I conclude this abridged Hystorie of his Grand-Father AEneas.
               
               
                  William Warner.
               
            
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Thomas Cadman. Anno. Do. 1586.
            
            
         
      
   