
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧An  inuectyue agaynſt Treaſon
            
               ¶ Remember well, o mortall man, to whom god geueth reaſon
               How he truly moſt ryghtfully, doth alwayes punyſhe treaſon.
               
                  COnſyderyng oft the ſtate of man, and of this mort all lyfe
               which is but ſhort, and very ful of mutabylyte
               I called to remembraunce, the hateful war and ſtryle
               Which hath ben don within this realme thrugh gret iniquite
               In clymyng to achyue the crowne, & reyal dingnyte
               Of this kyngdome now called England, but ſomtyme greate bretain
               And howe by falſe and ranke craycours, the kynges they haue ben ſlayne.
            
            
               What moued the Duke of Gloceſter, Edwarde the fourthes brother
               Of his two natural Neuewes, by lyneall diſſent.
               Sekyng of them diſtruction, and alſo of the queene their mother,
               But that he the ryghtfull rayne of them, he falſely myght preuent
               Styll workynge tyl he had brought to paſſe, his falſe and yll encent
               by murtherynge the innocentes, that he him ſelfe myght raygne
               Yet lyke a noughty falſe traytour, at Boſeworth was he ſlayne.
            
            
               He neuer reſted tyll he had, made away his owne naturall brother
               George the good duke of clarence, that noble prince truly
               Cauſyng the kynge to graunt therto, for it wolde be none other
               For which wycked fact ſone afterwarde, the kynge was ryght ſory
               That in a but of Malmeſey, the man was forſt to dye
               Within the towre aſwel was knowen, the ſtory is ryght playne
               Yet at the laſt this ranke traytour, at boſe worth was he ſlayne.
            
            
               ¶ He ekeſle we with a ſhort dagger, that mylde Henry the ſext
               Remaynynge in the towre vntyl, his lyfe he did there end
               That he to were the crowne therby, myght ſurely be the next
               Thus to murther and falſe treaſon, he dyd him ſelfe extende
               Vntyll ſuche tyme moſt ryghtfully, god brought him to his ende
               Leuyng hym in tyranny, no lenger for to raygne
               But at the laſt for his deſartes, at Boſeworth was he ſlayne.
            
            
               Lyke treaſone to our laſt Henry, was wrought by haynous ſpyghe
               By olde Hemſon and by Dudley, as traytours moſt vntrue
               At Rychemond was their full entent. to haue diſtroyd him quyght
               That their malicious purpoſe, myght there forthwith enſue
               But god out of this preſent lyfe, awaye them ſtreyght he drue
               Takyng their heades from their bodyes, which thyng is moſt certayne
               So not vnlyke to falſe traytours, they both were iuſtly ſlayne
            
            
               Yet many treaſons mo were done. agaynſt this noble kynge
               By dyuers men of wyckednes, as is moſt euydent
               But god alwayes of his goodnes, reueled their dowynge
               So that theyr euyl deuyſed thynges, he euer dyd preuent
               That no myſcheuous traytour could, obtayne his owne entent
               But al theyr crafty falſe treaſons, which deuelyſhely they wrought
               Were ryght ſone ſerched out truly, and ryght ſone brought to nought
            
            
               But out alas the noughty ſede, of traytours hath increaſed
               And ſpronge vp very haſtely, nowe in his ſonnes dayes
               Edwarde the ſyxt forſoth I meane, whom god hath now diſplaced
               Which ſought and mynded goddes glory, entendyng vertuous wayes
               With him and his two vncles deare, they made dyuers aſſayes
               Vntyll ſuch tyme as they cought them, in theyr moſt crafty trayne
               And ſo workyng moſt wyckedly, the ryghteous haue they ſlayne.
            
            
               At laſt they dyd attempt agaynſt, theyr lyege Lady and Queene:
               Mary by the grace of god, of Englande and of Fraunce
               And alſo ryght heyre of Irelande, moſt comly to be ſene,
               Whom the myghty lorde preſerue, from all hurt and myſchaunce
               For ſhe to ioyful godlynes. ledeth the parfect daunce
               Whom god at her great nede doth helpe, workynge nothyng in vayyne
               Subdueth to her, her enemies al, which wrought with dredful crayne:
            
            
               When they forth went lyke men they were, moſt fearefull to beholde
               Of force and eke of puſaunt power. they ſemed very ſtronge
               In theyr attemptes alſo they were, both fearſe and wonders bolde
               If god wolde haue ben helper to ſuch, as ſtryueth in the wronge
               But at the laſt he helped vs, though we thought it ryght longe
               The Nobles here proclaymed her queene, in voydyng of all blame
               Wherfore prayſe we the lorde aboue, and mangnyfie his name.
            
            
               Which thyng was done the .xix. day, of this moneth of Iuly
               The yere of God .xv. hundred fyfty addynge thre
               In the Cytie of glad London, proclaymed moſt ioyfully
               Where cappes and ſyluer plenteouſly, about the ſtretes dyd ſlye
               The greateſt ioy and moſt gladnes, that in this realme myght be
               The trumpetres blewe vp all on hye, our Maries royall fame
               Let vs therfore ſtyll gloryfy, and prayſe his holy name.
            
            
               The nobles all conſented than, together with one accorde
               To go to Paules churche euery man, to gyue thankes vnto the lorde
               Wheras they harde a ſonge of praiſe, as cuſtome it hath bene
               To rendre thankes to god alwayes, for the victorie of our queene.
            
            
               Suche there was made in euery ſtrete, as no man can expreſſe
               In ſettyng forth wyne and plentie of meate: and fyers of much gladnes
               Such myrth was made in euery place: as the lyke was neuer ſeene
               That god had ſhewed on vs his grace: in geuyng a ryghtful queene
            
            
               And where as he went forth full glad, as prince both ſtout and bolde
               He came a traytourin full ſad, with hart that myght be colde
               The ſame whom al before dyd feare, and were in moſt ſubiection
               The people wolde in peeces teare, yf they myght haue election.
            
            
               The ſame for whom before they prayde, reuyled was and curſte
               And he that longe the ſwynge hath ſwayde, was now moſt vyle & worſt
               We ſe therfore the ouerthrowe, of al theyr wicked wayes
               Howe wicked might is brought furlowe, to gods great Laude & prayſe,
            
            God ſaue the Queene. ꝙ. T. W.
            
            Finis. 
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprynted at London by Roger Madeley, and are to beſolde in Paules Church yearde at the ſygne of the Starre.
         
      
   