
      
         
            
            
            A
MONVMENTAL
COLVMNE,
Erected to the liuing Memory of
the euer-glorious HENRY, late
Prince of Wales.
            
            
               Virgil. Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata
            By IOHN WEBSTER.
            
               LONDON,
Printed by N. O. for William Welby, dwelling in
Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the
Swan▪ 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE SIR
ROBERT CARRE VISCOVNT
Rochester, Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, and one of his Maiesties most
Honourable Priuy Councell.
            
               MY Right Noble Lord: I present to your
voidest leasure of Suruey, these few
sparkes, found out, in our most glorious
Prince his ashes: I could not have
thought this worthy your view, but
that it aimes at the preseruation of His
fame; then which, I know not any thing, (but the sacred
liues of both their Maiesties, and their sweete Issue)
that can be dearer vnto you. Were my whole life turned
into leasure, and that leasure acccompanied with all
the Muses, it were not able to draw a Map large enough
of him: for his praise is an high-going sea, that wants
both shore and bottome. Neither do I (my Noble Lord)
present you with this night-peece, to make his death-bed
still floate, in those compassionate riuers of your eyes: you
haue already, (with much lead vpon your heart) sounded

               
                  •
               oth the sorow Royal, and your Owne: O that care should
euer attaine to so ambitious a Title! Onely heere (though
I dare not say) you shall find him liue: (for that assurance
were worth many kingdomes,) yet you shall perceiue
him draw a little breath, such as giues vs comfort, His
Critticall day is past, and the glory of a new life risen,
neither subiect to Physicke. nor Fortune. For my defects
in this vndertaking, my wish presents it selfe with
that of Martials.
               
                  O vtinam mores animum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      effingere possem!
                  Pulcrior in terris nulla tabella foret.
               
Howsoeuer: your protection is able to giue it noble lusture,
and bind me by that honour able courtesy to be euer
            Your Honours truely
deuoted seruant,
IOHN WEBSTER.
         
      
      
         
            
            A FVNERAL ELEGY.
            THe greatest of the Kingly Race is gone,
            Yet with so great a reputation,
            Layd in the earth, we cannot say hee's dead,
            But as a perfect Diamond set in lead,
            (Scorning our foyle) his glories do breake forth,
            Worne by his Maker, who best knew his worth:
            Yet to our fleshly eyes, there does belong
            That which we thinke helps griefe, a passionat tongue.
            
            Me thinkes I see mens hearts pant in their lips,
            
               " We should not grieue at the bright Sunnes Ecclips
            
            
               " But that we loue his light. So trauellers stray
            Wanting both guide, and conduct of the day:
            Nor let vs striue to make this sorrow old,
            
               " For wounds smart most, when that the bloud growes cold.
            
            If Princes thinke that Ceremony meet
            To haue their corps imbalm'd to keepe them sweet:
            Much more they ought to haue their Fame exprest
            In Homer, though it want Darius Chest
            
            
               To adorne which, in her deserued Throne,
            I bring those colours, which Truth calles her owne.
            Nor gaine, nor praise, by my weake lines are sought,
            
               " Loue that's borne free, cannot be hir'd nor bought.
            
            Some great inquisitors in nature say,
            Royall and Generous formes, sweetly display
            Much of the heauenly vertue, as proceeding
            From a pure essence, and elected breeding.
            How ere, truth for him thus much doth importune,
            His forme, and vertue, both deseru'd his fortune:
            For 'tis a question, not decided yet,
            Whether his Mind, or Fortune were more great.
            Me thought I saw him in his right hand weild
            A Caduceus; in th'other Pallas shield:
            His minde quite voyd of ostentation,
            His high erected thoughts look't downe vpon
            The smiling valley of his fruitfull heart.
            
               Honour and Curtesie in euery part
            Proclaim'd him, and grew louely in each lim,
            He well became those vertues which grac'd him.
            He spread his bounty with a prouident hand;
            And not like those that sow th'ingratefull sand.
            His rewards followed reason, nere were plac't
            For ostentation, and to make them last,
            He was not like the mad and thriftlesse Vine,
            That spendeth all her blushes at one time:Simile.
            
            But, like the Orange tree, his fruits he bore;
            Some gather'd, he had greene▪ and blossomes store.
            
               Wee hopt much of him, till death made hope erre,
            Wee stood as in some spacious Theater
            Musing what would become of him; his flight,
            Reacht fuch a noble pitch aboue our sight.
            Whilst he discretly wise, this rule had wonne,
            Not to let fame know his intents, till done.
            Men came to his Court as to bright Academies
            Of vertue and of valour, all the eies
            That feasted at his Princely exercise:
            Thought that by day Mars held his launce, by night
            
               Minerua bore a torch to giue him light.
            As once one Rhodes Pindar reports of old,
            Soldiers expected 'twould haue raign'd down gold:
            Old husbandmen 1'th Country gan to plant
            
               Lawrell in steed of Elme, and made their vaunt
            Their sons and daughters shold such Trophies weare
            When as the Prince return'd a Conquerer
            From Forraine Nations:The Character of Edward the blacke Prince. For men thought his star
            Had markt him for a iust and glorious war.
            And sure his thoughts were ours, he could not reade
            
               Edward the blacke Princes life, but it must breed
            A vertuous emulation to haue his name
            So lag behind him both in Time and Fame.
            
            Hee that like lightning did his force aduance,
            And shook to th' Center the whole Realm of France▪
               
            
            That of warme bloud open'd so many sluces,
            To gather and bring thence sixe Flower de Luces.
            
            
               Who ne're saw feare but in his enemies flight,
            Who found weak nūbers conquer arm'd with right,
            Who knew his humble shadow spread no more
            After a victory then it did before.
            Who had his breast instated with the choice
            Of vertues, though they made no ambitious noise:
            Whose resolution was so fiery still,
            It seem'd he knew better to die then kill:
            And yet drew Fortune, as the Adamant, Steele,
            Seeming t'haue fixt a stay vpon Her wheele.
            Who iestingly, would say it was his trade
            To fashion death-beds, and hath often made
            Horror looke louely, when i'th' fields there lay
            Armes and legges, so distracted, one would say
            That the dead bodies had no bodies left:
            He that of working pulce sicke France bereft,
            Who knew that battailes, not the gaudy show
            Of ceremonies, do on Kings bestow
            Best Theaters, t'whom naught so tedious as Court 
                  •
               port
            That thought all faun's and ventoies of the Court
            Ridiculous and loathsome to the shade
            Which (in a March) his wauing Ensigne made.
            Him did He striue to imitate, and was sorry
            Hee did not liue before him, that his glory
            Might haue bene his example; to these ends,
            Those men that followed him were not by-friends:
            
               Or letters prefer'd to him: he made choice
            In action, not in complementall voice.
            And as Marcellus did two Temples reare
            To Honour and to Vertue, plac't so neare
            They kist; yet none to Honours got accesse,
            But they that past through Vertues: So to expresse
            His VVorthinesse, none got his Countenance
            But those whom actuall merite did aduance.
            Yet, alas! all his goodnesse lies full low.
            O Greatnesse! what shall we compare thee to?
            To Giants beasts, or Towers fram'd out of Snow,
            Or like wax-guilded Tapers, more for show
            Then durance? Thy foundation doth betray
            Thy frailty, being builded on such clay.
            This shewes the al-controuling power of Fate,
            That all our Scepters and our Chaires of State;
            Are but glasse-mettall that weare full of spots,
            And 
                  •
               hat like new writ Copies, t'auoid blots,
            Dust must bee throwne vpon vs: for in him
            Our comfort sunke and drown'd learning to swim.
            And though he died so late, hee's no more neere
            To vs, then they that died three thousand yeare
            Before him; onely memory doth keepe
            Their Fame as fresh as his from death or sleepe.
            Why should the Stag or Rauen liue so long?
            And that their age rather should not belong,
            
               Vnto a righteous Prince? whose lengthned yeares,
            Might assist mens necessities and feares.
            Let beasts liue long, and wilde, and still in feare,
            The Turtle Doue neuer out-liues nine yeare.
            " Both life and death haue equally exprest
            " Of all, the shortest madnesse is the best.
            Wee ought not thinke that his great triumphs need,
            Our withred taunts, Can our weake praise feed
            His memory, which worthily contemnes,
            
               Marble and Gold and Orientall Gemmes.
            
            His merits passe our dull inuention,
            And now me-thinkes I see him smile vpon
            Our fruitlesse tears, bid's vs dispeirce these showers,
            And say's his thoughts are farre refin'd from ours.
            As Rome of her beloued Titus said,
            That from the body the bright soule was fled.
            For his owne good and their affliction,
            On such a broken Columne we leane on.
            And for our selues, not him, let vs lament,
            Whose happinesse is growne our punishment.
            But surely God gaue this, as an allay,
            To the blest vnion of that nuptiall day
            VVee hopt, for feare of surfet, thought it meete
            To mittigate, since we swell with what is sweete.
            And for sad tales, suite griefe, 'tis not amisse
            To keepe vs waking, I remember this.
            
               
               Iupiter one some businesse once sent downe
            
               Pleasure vnto the world, that shee might crowne
            Mortals with her bright beames, but (her long stay
            Exceeding farre the limite of her day.
            Such feasts and gifts were numbred to present her,
            That shee forgot heauen and the God that sent her,)
            Hee cals her thence in thunder, at whose lure,
            Shee spreds her wings and to returne more pure:
            Leaues her eye-seeded roabe wherein shee's suited,
            Fearing that Mortall breath had it polluted.
            
               Sorrow that long had liu'd in banishment,
            Tug'd at the oare in Gallies, and had spent
            Both mony and her selfe in Court delaies:
            And sadly numbred many of her daies,
            By a prison Kalender, though (once she brag'd
            She had bene in great mens bosomes:) now all rag'd
            Crawl'd with a Tortoise pace or somewhat slower,
            Nor found shee any that desired to know her:
            Till by good chance, (ill hap for vs) shee found,
            Where Pleasure laid her garment from the ground:
            Shee takes it, done's it, and to adde a grace,
            To the deformity of her wrinkled face.
            An old Court Lady, out of meere compassion,
            Now paints it or'e or puts it into fashion,
            When straight from Country, Citty, and from Court,
            
            Both without wit or number there resort,
            
               Many to this imposter, all adore
            Her haggish false-hood, Vsurers from their store
            Supply her and are cosened, Citizens buy
            Her forged titles, riot and ruine flye,
            Spreading their poison vniuersally.
            Nor are the bosomes of great Statesmen free
            From her intelligence, who let's them see
            Themselues and fortunes in false perspectiues,
            Some landed Heires consort her with there wiues,
            Who being a baud corrupts their all spent oathes
            They haue entertain'd the diuill in Pleasures cloaths.
            And since this cursed maske, which to our cost
            Lasts day and night, we haue entirely lost
            
               Pleasure, who from heauen wils vs be aduis'd,
            That our false Pleasure is but Care disguis'd.
            Thus is our hope made frustrate, ô sad ruth!
            Death lay in ambush for His glorious Youth.
            
            And finding him prepar'd was sternely bent,
            To change his loue into fell rauishment.
            O cruell Tyrant, how canst thou repaire
            This ruine? though hereafter thou shouldst spare
            All mankind; break thy Dart & Ebon Spade,
            Thou canst not cure, this wound, which thou hast made.
            Now view his death-bed; and from thence let's meet
            In his example our owne winding sheete.
            There his humility, setting apart
            All titles did retire into his heart.
            
               O blessed solitarinesse that brings,
            The best content, to meane men and to Kings.
            Manna their fates, from heauen the Doue there flies
            With Oliue to the Arke (a sacrifice
            Of Gods appeasement) Rauens in their beaks
            Bring food from heauen, Gods preseruation speaks
            Comfort to Daniel in the Lyons den,
            Where contemplation leads vs, happy men
            To see God face to face: and such sweete peace
            Did he enioy, amongst the various presse,
            Of weeping visitants, it seem'd he lay
            As Kings at Reuels sit; wisht the crowd away,
            The tedious sports done, and himselfe a sleepe,
            And in such ioy did all his sences steepe:
            As great Accountants (troubled much in mind)
            When they heare newes of their Quietus sign'd.
            Neuer found prayers, since they conuerst with death
            A sweeter aire to flye in then his breath.
            They left in's eyes nothing but glory shining,
            And though that sickenesse with her ouerpining
            Looke gastly, yet in him it did not so,
            He knew the place to which he was to go.
            Had larger titles, more triumphant wreathes,
            To instate him with; and forth his soule he breaths
            Without a sigh; fixing his constant eie,
            Vpon his triumph, immortality.
            
               He was raign'd downe to vs out of heauen, & drew
            Life to the spring, yet like a little dew
            Quickly drawne thence; so many times miscarries
            A Christall glasse whilst that the workeman varries,
            The shape i'th' furnace (fixt too much vpon
            The curiousnesse of the proporrion)
            Yet breakes it ere't be finisht, and yet then
            Moulds it anew, and blowes it vp agen,
            Exceeds his workemanship and sends it thence,
            To kisse the hand and lip of some great Prince.
            Or like a dyall broke in wheele or screw,
            That's tane in peeces to be made go true.
            So to eternity he now shall stand,
            New form'd and gloried by the All-working hand.
            
               Slander which hath a large and spacious tongue,
            Farre bigger then her mouth to publish wrong.
            And yet doth vtter't with so illagrace
            Whilst she's a speaking no man sees her face.
            That like dogges licke foule vlcers not to draw
            Infection from them, butto keepe them raw.
            Thogh she oft scrape vp earth frō good mens graus
            And wast it in the standishes of slaues,
            To throw vpon their inke, shall neuer dare
            To approach his Tombe, be shee confin'd as farre
            From his sweete reliques as is heauen from hell.
            Not witchcraft shall instruct her how to spell
            
               That barbarons language which shall sound him ill,
            Fames lips shall bleed, yet nere her trumpet fill
            VVith breath enough, but not in such sicke aire,
            As make waste Elegies to his Tombe repaire,
            VVith scraps of commendation more base
            Then are the ragges they are writ on, ô disgrace:
            To nobler Poesie. This brings to light,
            Not that they can, but that they cannot write,
            Better, they had, nere troubled his sweet trance,
            So, silence should haue hid their ignorance:
            For hee's a reuerend subiect to be pend
            Onely by his sweet Homer and my frend.
            Most sauadge Nations should his death deplore;
            VVishing he had set his foot vpon their shore,
            Onely to hane made them ciuill. This blacke night
            Hath falne vpon's be Natures ouer-sight:
            Or while the fatall sister sought to twine
            His threed, and keepe it eeuen, she drew it so fine,
            It burst. O all compos'd of excellent parts,
            Yong, graue Me
                     •
                  anas of the noble Arts,
            VVhose beames shall breake forth from thy hollow Tombe,
            Staine the time past, and light the time to come.
            O thou that in thy owne praise still wer't mute,
            Resembling trees, the more they are tane with fruit,
            The more they striue to bow and kisse the ground.
            Thou that in quest of man, hast truly found,
            
               That while men rotten vapours, do persue,
            They could not be thy friends, and flatterers too:
            That despight all iniustice wouldst haue proued
            So iust a Steward for this Land, and loued
            Right for it owne sake: now ô woe the while,
            Flet'est dead in teares, like to a mouing lle.
            Time was when Churches in the land were thought
            Rich Iewel-houses, and this Age hath bought
            That time againe, thinke not I faine, go view
            
               Henry the seuenths Chappell, and you'le find it true,
            The dust of a rich Diamond's there inshrind
            To buy which thence, would begger the West-Inde.
            
            What a darke night-peece of tempestious weather,
            Haue the inraged clouds summon'd together,
            As if our loftiest Pallaces should grow
            To ruine, since such Highnesse fell so low.
            And angry Neptune makes his Pallace groane,
            That the deafe Rockes may Ecco the Lands moane.
            Euen senceles things seeme to haue lost their pride,
            And looke like that dead month wherein he died,
            To cleare which; soone arise that glorious day,
            VVhich in her sacred Vnion shall display
            Infinite blessings that we all may see,
            The like to that of Virgils golden Tree.
            A branch of which being slipt, there freshly grew
            Another that did boast like forme and hew.
            
               And for these worthlesse lines, let it be said,
            I hasted, till I had, this tribute paid
            Vnto his graue, so let the speede excuse,
            The zealous error of my passionate Muse.
            
            Yet though his praise heere beare so short a wing,
            
               Thames hath more Swannes, that will his praises sing
            In sweeter tunes, bee-pluming his sad Hearce,
            And his three fethers, while men liue, or verse.
            And by these signes of loue let great men know,
            That sweete and generous fauour they bestow
            Vpon the Muses, neuer can be lost:
            For they shall liue by them, when all the cost
            Of guilded Monuments shall fall to dust,
            " They graue in metle that sustaines no rust.
            " Their wood yeelds hony and industrious Bees,
            " Kills Spiders, and their webs like Irish Trees.
            " A Poets pen like a bright Scepter swaies,
            "And keepes in awe dead mens dispraise or praise.
            Thus tooke He acquittance of all worldly strife,
            
               " The euening showes the day, and death crownes life.
            
            My Impresa to your Lordship, a Swan flying
to a Lawrell for shelter; the Mot.
            Amor est mihi causa.
            FINIS.
         
      
   