
      
         
            
            
            A Discourse of English Poetrie.
            
            Together, with the Authors iudgment, touching the reformation of our English Verse.
            
               By VVilliam VVebbe. Graduate.
            
            
               Imprinted at London, by Iohn Charlewood for Robert Walley. 1586.
         
         
            
            
            To the right vvorshipfull, learned, and most gentle Gentleman, my verie good Master, Ma. Edward Suliard, Esquire. VV. VV. wysheth his harts desire.
            
               
                  MAy it please you Syr, thys once more to beare with my rudenes, in presenting vnto your viewe, an other slender conceite, of my simple capacity: wherin although I am not able to bring you anie thing, which is meete to detaine you from your more serious matters: yet vppon my knowledge of your former courtesy & your fauourable countenaunce towardes all enterprises of Learning, I dare make bold to craue your accustomed patience, in turning ouer some of these fewe leaues, which I shall account a greater recompence, then the wryting thereof may deserue. The firme hope of your wonted gentlenes, not any good lyking of myne owne labour, made me thus presumptuously to craue your worships patronage for my poore booke. A pretty

aunswere is reported by some to be made by Apelles to King Alexander, who (in disport) taking vp one of his pensilles to drawe a line, & asking the Paynters iudgment of his draught, It is doone (quoth Apelles) like a King: meaning indeede it was drawen as he pleased, but was nothing lesse then good workmanshippe. My selfe in like sort, taking vppon me, to make a draught of English Poetry, and requesting your worshyps censure of the same, you wyll perhaps gyue me thys verdict, It was doone like a Scholler, meaning, as I could, but indeede more like to a learner, then one through grounded in Poeticall workmanship.
            
               Alexander in drawing his lyne, leaned sometime too hard, otherwhyle too soft, as neuer hauing beene apprentice to the Arte: I in drawing this Poeticall discourse, make it some where to straight (leauing out the cheefe colloures and ornaments of Poetry) in an other place to wyde (stuffing in peeces little pertinent to true Poetry) as one neuer acquainted wyth the learned Muses. VVhat then? as he being a king, myght meddle in what Scyence him listed, though therein hee had no skyll: so I beeing a learner, wyll trye my cunning in some parts of Learning, though neuer so simple.
            Nowe, as for my saucie pressing vppon your expected fauor in crauing your iudgment, I beseech you let me make thys excuse: that whereas true Gentilitie did neuer withdrawe her louing affection from louely Lady Learning, so I am perswaded, that your worshyppe cannot chuse, but continue your wonted fauourable benignitie towardes all the indeuourers to learning, of which corporation I doo indeede professe my selfe one sillie member.
            For sith the wryters of all ages, haue sought as an vndoubted Bulwarke and stedfast sauegarde the patronage of Nobilitye, (a shielde as sure as can be to learning) wherin to shrowde

and safelye place their seuerall inuentions: why should not I seeke some harbour for my poore trauell to reste and staye vppon, beeing of it selfe vnable to shyft the carping cauilles and byting scornes of lewde controllers?
            And in trueth, where myght I rather choose a sure defence and readye refuge for the same, then where I see perfecte Gentilitye, and noblenesse of minde, to be faste lyncked with excellencie of learning and affable courtesye? Moreouer, adde thys to the ende of myne excuse: that I sende it into your sight, not as anie wyttie peece of worke that may delight you: but being a sleight somewhat compyled for recreation, in the intermyssions of my daylie businesse, euen thys Summer Eueninges) as a token of that earnest and vnquenchable desyre I haue to shewe my selfe duetifull and welwylling towardes you. VVherevnto I am continually enflamed more and more, when I consider eyther your fauourable freendshyppe vsed towardes my selfe, or your gentle countenaunce shewed to my simple trauelles. The one I haue tryed in that homely translation I presented vnto you: the other I finde true in your curteous putting to my trust, and dooing me so great honesty and credite, with the charge of these toward young Gentlemen your sonnes.
            To which pregnant ympes of right excellent hope, I would I were able, or you myght haue occasion to make triall of my louing minde: who shoulde well perceyue my selfe to remayne vnto them a faythfull and trusty Achates, euen so farre as my wealth my woe, my power or perrill, my penne or witte, my health or lyfe may serue to serche myne ability.
            Huge heapes of wordes I myght pyle together to trouble you wythall: eyther of my selfe or of my dooinges, (as some doo) or of your worshyppes commendable vertues (as the moste doo) But I purposely chuse rather to let passe the spreading

of that worthy fame which you haue euer deserued, then to runne in suspicion of fawning flattery which I euer abhorred.
            Therefore once againe crauing your gentle pardon, and patience in your ouerlooking thys rude Epistle: and wyshing more happinesse then my penne can expresse to you and your whole retinewe, I rest.
            
               Your worshippes faithfull Seruaunt. VV. VV.
               
            
         
         
            
            A Preface to the noble Poets of Englande.
            
            
               AMong the innumerable sortes of Englyshe Bookes, and infinite fardles of printed pamphlets; wherewith thys Countrey is pestered, all shoppes stuffed, and euery study furnished: the greatest part I thinke in any one kinde, are such as are either meere Poeticall, or which tende in some respecte (as either in matter or forme) to Poetry. Of such Bookes therfore, sith I haue beene one, that haue had a desire to reade not the fewest, and because it is an argument, which men of great learning haue no leysure to handle, or at the least hauing to doo with more serious matters doo least regarde: If I write something, concerning what I thinke of our English Poets, or aduenture to sette downe my simple iudgement of English Poetrie, I trust the learned Poets will giue me leaue, and vouchsafe my Booke passage, as beeing for the rudenesse thereof no preiudice to their noble studies, but euen (as my intent is) an instar cotis to stirre vppe some other of meete abilitie, to bestowe trauell in this matter: whereby I thinke wee may not onelie get the meanes which wee yet want, to discerne betweene good writers and badde, but perhappes also challenge from the rude multitude of rusticall Rymers, who will be called Poets, the right practise and orderly course of true Poetry.
            It is to be wondred at of all, and is lamented of manie, that where as all kinde of good learning, haue aspyred to royall dignitie and statelie grace in our English tongue, being not onelie founded, defended, maintained, and enlarged, but also purged from faultes, weeded of errours, & pollished from barbarousnes, by men of great authoritie

and iudgement: onelie Poetrie hath founde fewest frends to amende it, those that can, reseruing theyr skyll to thē
               selues, those that cannot, running headlong vppon it, thinking to garnish it with their deuises, but more corrupting it with fantasticall errours. VVhat shoulde be the cause, that our English speeche in some of the wyfest mens iudgements, hath neuer attained to anie sufficient ripenes, nay not ful auoided the reproch of barbarousnes in Poetry? the rudenes of the Countrey, or basenesse of wytts: or the course Dialect of the speeche? experience vtterlie disproueth it to be anie of these: what then? surelie the canckred enmitie of curious custome: which as it neuer was great freend to any good learning, so in this hath it grounded in the most, such a negligent perswasion of an impossibilitie in matching the best, that the finest witts and most diuine heades, haue contented them selues with a base kinde of fingering: rather debasing theyr faculties, in setting forth theyr skyll in the coursest manner, then for breaking custome, they would labour to adorne their Countrey and aduaunce their style with the highest & most learnedst toppe of true Poetry. The rudenes or vnaptnesse of our Countrey to be either none or no hinderaunce, if reformation were made accordinglie, the exquisite excellency in all kindes of good learning nowe flourishing among vs, inferiour to none other nation, may sufficiently declare.
            That there be as sharpe and quicke wittes in England, as euer were among the peerelesse Grecians, or renowmed Romaines, it were a note of no witte at all in me to deny. And is our speeche so course, or our phrase so harshe, that Poetry cannot therein finde a vayne whereby it may appeare like it selfe? why should we think so basely of this? rather then of her sister, I meane Rethoricall Eloquution,
               
which as they were by byrth Twyns, by kinde the same, by originall of one descent: so no doubt, as Eloquence hath founde such fauourers, in the English tongue, as she frequenteth not any more gladly so would Poetrye if there were the like welcome and entertainment gyuen her by our English Poets, without question aspyre to wonderfull perfection and appeare farre more gorgeous and delectable among vs. Thus much I am bolde to say in behalfe of Poetrie, not that I meane to call in question the reuerend and learned workes of Poetrie, written in our tongue by men of rare iudgement, and most excellent Poets: but euen as it were by way of supplication to the famous and learned Lawre
                  •
               t Masters of Englande, that they would but consult one halfe howre with their heauenly Muse, what credite they might winne to theyr natiue speeche, what enormities they might wipe out of English Poetry, what a fitte vaine they might frequent, wherein to shewe forth their worthie faculties: if English Poetrie were truely reformed, and some perfect platforme or Prosodia of versifying were by them ratifyed and sette downe: eyther in immitation of Greekes and Latines, or where it would skant abyde the touch of theyr Rules, the like obseruations selected and established by the naturall affectation of the speeche. Thus much I say, not to perswade you that are the fauourers of Englishe Poetry but to mooue it to you: beeing not the firste that haue thought vpō this matter, but one that by cōsent of others, haue taken vppon me to lay it once again in your wayes, if perhaps you may stumble vppon it, and chance to looke so lowe from your diuine cogitations, when your Muse mounteth to the starres, and ransacketh the Spheres of heauen: whereby perhaps you may take compassion of noble Poetry, pittifullie mangled and defaced,

by rude smatterers and barbarous immitatours of your worthy studies. If the motion bee worthy your regard it is enough to mooue it, if not, my wordes woulde sim, ply preuaile in perswading you, and therefore I rest vppon thys onely request, that of your courtesies, you wyll graunt passage, vnder your fauourable corrections, for this my simple censure of English Poetry, wherein if you please to runne it ouer, you shall knowe breefely myne opinion of the most part of our accustomed Poets, and particularly in his place, the lyttle somewhat which I haue sifted out of my weake brayne concerning thys reformed verfifying.
            
               VV: VV:
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Discourse of Englishe Poetrie.
            
               
                  INtending to write some discourse of English Poetrie, I thinke it not amysse if I speake something generally of Poetrie, as, what it is, whence it had the beginning, and of what estimation it hath alwayes béene and ought to be among al sorts of people. Poetrie called in Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , beeing deriued from the Uerbe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which signifieth in Latine facere in English, to make, may properly be defined, the arte of making: which word as it hath alwaies beene especially vsed of the best of our English Poets, to expresse yt very faculty of speaking or wryting Poetically: so doth it in deede containe most fitly the whole grace and property of the same, ye more fullye and effectually then any other English Uerbe. That Poetry is an Arte, (or rather a more excellent thing then can be contayned wythin the compasse of Arte) though I neede not stande long to prooue, both the witnes of Horace, who wrote de arte Poetica, and of Terence, who calleth it Artem Musicam, and the very naturall property thereof may sufficiently declare: The beginning of it as appeareth by Plato, was of a vertuous and most deuout purpose, who witnesseth, that by occasion of méeting of a great company of young men, to solemnize ye feasts which were called Panegeryca, and were wont to be celebrated euery fift yeere, there, they that were most pregnant in wytt,

and indued with great gyfts of wysedome & knowledge in Musicke aboue the rest did vse commonly to make goodly verses, measured according to the swéetest notes of Musicke, containing the prayse of some noble vertue, or of immortalitie, or of some such thing of greatest estimation: which vnto them séemed, so heauenly and ioyous a thing, that, thinking such men to be inspyrde with some diuine instinct from heauen, they called them Vates. So when other among them of the finest wits and aptest capacities beganne in imitation of these to frame ditties of lighter matters, and tuning them to the stroake of some of the pleasantest kind of Musicke, then began there to growe a distinction and great diuersity betwéene makers and makers. Whereby (I take it) beganne thys difference: that they which handled in the audience of the people, graue and necessary matters, were called wise men or eloquent men, which they meant by Uates: and the rest which sange of loue matters, or other lighter deuises alluring vnto pleasure and delight, were called Poetae or makers. Thus it appeareth, both Eloquence and Poetrie to haue had their beginning and originall from these exercises, béeing framed in such swéete measure of sentences & pleasant harmonic called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which is an apt composition of wordes or clauses, drawing as it were by force ye hearers eares euen whether soeuer it lysteth: that Plato affirmeth therein to be contained 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                an inchauntment, as it were to perswade them anie thing whether they would or no. And héerehence is sayde, that men were first withdrawne from a wylde and sauadge kinde of life, to ciuillity and gentlenes, and ye right knowledge of humanity by the force of this measurable or tunable speaking.
            This opinion shall you finde confirmed throughout the whole workes of Plato and Aristotle. And that such was the estimation of this Poetry at those times, that they supposed all wisedome and knowledge to be included mystically in that diuine instinction, wherewith they thought their Uates to bee inspyred. Wherevpon, throughout the noble workes of those most excellent Philosophers before named, are the authorities of Poets very often alledged▪ And Cicero in his Tusculane questions

is of that minde, that a Poet cannot expresse verses aboundantly, sufficiently, and fully, neither his eloquence can flowe pleasauntly, or his wordes sounde well and plenteously, without celestiall instinction: which Poets themselues doo very often and gladlie witnes of themselues, as namely Ouid in 6. Fasto: Est deus in nobis Agitante callescimus illo. &c. Wherevnto I doubt not equally to adioyne the authoritye of our late famous English Poet, who wrote the Sheepheards Calender, where lamenting the decay of Poetry, at these dayes, saith most swéetely to the same.

                  Then make thee winges of thine aspyring wytt,
                  And whence thou camest flye backe to heauen apace. &c.
               
            
            Whose fine poeticall witt, and most exquisite learning, as he shewed aboundantly in that péece of worke, in my iudgment inferiour to the workes neither of Theocritus in Gréeke, nor Virgill in Latine, whom hee narrowly immitateth: so I nothing doubt, but if his other workes were common abroade, which are as I thinke in ye close custodie of certaine his fréends, we should haue of our owne Poets, whom wee might matche in all respects with the best. And among all other his workes whatsoeuer, I would wysh to haue the sight of hys English Poet, which his fréend E. K. did once promise to publishe, which whether he performed or not, I knowe not, if he did, my happe hath not béene so good as yet to sée it.
            But to returne to the estimation of Poetry. Besides ye great and profitable fruites contained in Poetry, for the instruction of manners and precepts of good life (for that was chéefly respected in the first age of Poetry) this is also added to the eternall commendations of that noble faculty: that Kinges and Princes, great and famous men, did euer encourage, mayntaine, and reward Poets in al ages: because they were thought onely to haue the whole power in their handes, of making men either immortally famous for their valiaunt exploytes and vertuous exercises, or perpetually infamous for their vicious liues. Wherevppon it is said of Achilles, that this onely vantage

he had of Hector, that it was his fortune to be extolled and remowned by the heauenly verse of Homer. And as Tully recordeth to be written of Alexander, that with natural teares he wept ouer Achilles Tombe, in ioy that he conceiued at the consideration, howe it was his happe to be honoured wyth so diuine a worke, as Homers was. Aristotle, a most prudent and learned Philosopher, béeing appointed Schoolemaster to the young Prince Alexander, thought no worke so meete to be reade vnto a King, as the worke of Homer: wherein the young Prince being by him instructed throughly, sound such wonderfull delight in the same when hee came to maturity, that hee would not onely haue it with him in all his iourneyes, but in his bedde also vnder his pyllowe, to delight him and teache him both nights and dayes. The same is reported of noble Scipio, who finding the two Bookes of Homer in the spoyle of Kyng Darius, estéemed them as wonderfull precious Iewelles, making one of them his companion for the night, the other for the day. And not onely was he thus affected to ye one péece or parte of Poetry, but so generally he loued the professors thereof, that in his most serious affayres, and hottest warres against Numantia and Carthage, he could no whitte be without that olde Poet Ennius in his company. But to speake of all those noble and wyse Princes, who bare speciall fauour and countenaunce to Poets, were tedious, and would require a rehearsall of all such, in whose time there grewe any to credite and estimation in that faculty. Thus farre therefore may suffice for the estimation of Poets. Nowe I thinke most méete, to speake somewhat, concerning what hath béene the vse of Poetry, and wherin it rightly consisted, and whereof consequently it obteyned such estimation.
            To begin therefore with the first that was first worthelye memorable in the excellent gyft of Poetrye, the best wryters agrée that it was Orpheus, who by the swéete gyft of his heauenly Poetry, withdrew men from raungyng vncertainly, and wandring brutishly about, and made them gather together, and kéepe company, made houses, and kept fellowshippe together, who therefore is reported (as Horace sayth) to asswage the

fiercenesse of Tygers, and mooue the harde Flynts. After him was Amphion, who was the first that caused Citties to bee builded, and men therein to liue decently and orderly according to lawe and right. Next, was Tyrtaeus, who began to practise warlike defences, to kéepe backe enemies, and saue themselues from inuasion of foes. In thys place I thinke were most conuenient to rehearse that auncient Poet Pyndarus: but of the certaine time wherein he flourished, I am not very certaine: but of the place where he continued moste, it shoulde séeme to be the Citty of Thebes, by Plinie who reporteth, that Alexander in sacking the same Cittie, woulde not suffer the house wherein he dwelt to be spoyled as all the rest were. After these was Homer, who as it were in one summe comprehended all knowledge, wisedome, learning, and pollicie, that was incident to the capacity of man. And who so liste to take viewe of hys two Bookes, one of his Iliades, the other his Odissea, shall throughly perceiue what the right vse of Poetry is: which indeede is to mingle profite with pleasure, and so to delight the Reader with pleasantnes of hys Arte, as in ye meane time, his mind may be well instructed with knowledge and wisedome. For so did that worthy Poet frame those his two workes, that in reading the first, that is his Iliads, by declaring and setting forth so liuely the Grecians assembly against Troy, together with their prowesse and fortitude against their foes, a Prince shall learne not onely courage, and valiantnesse, but discretion also and pollicie to encounter with his enemies, yea a perfect forme of wyse consultations, with his Captaines, and exhortations to the people, with other infinite commodities.
            Agayne, in the other part, wherein are described the manifold and daungerous aduentures of Vlisses, may a man learne many noble vertues: and also learne to escape and auoyde the subtyll practises, and perrilous entrappinges of naughty persons: and not onely this, but in what sort also he may deale to knowe and perceiue the affections of those which be néere vnto him, and most familiar with him, the better to put them in trust with his matters of waight and importaunce. Therefore

I may boldly sette downe thys to be the truest, auncientest and best kinde of Poetry, to direct ones endeuour alwayes to that marke, that with delight they may euermore adioyne commoditie to theyr Readers: which because I grounde vpon Homer the Prince of all Poets, therefore haue I alledged the order of his worke, as an authority sufficiently proouing this assertion.
            Nowe what other Poets which followed him, and béene of greatest fame, haue doone for the moste parte in their seuerall workes, I wyll briefely, and as my slender ability wyll serue me declare. But by my leaue, I must content my selfe to speake not of all, but of such as my selfe haue séene, and beene best acquainted withall, and those not all nor the moste part of the auncient Grecians, of whom I knowe not how many there were, but these of the Latinists, which are of greatest fame and most obuious among vs.
            Thus much I can say, that Aristotle reporteth none to haue greatly flourished in Gréece, at least wyse not left behynd them any notable memoriall, before the time of Homer. And Tully sayth as much, that there were none wrytt woorth the reading twyce in the Romaine tongue, before ye Poet Ennius. And surely as the very summe or chéefest essence of Poetry, dyd alwayes for the most part consist in delighting the readers or hearers wyth pleasure, so as the number of Poets increased, they styll inclyned thys way rather then the other, so that most of them had speciall regarde, to the pleasantnesse of theyr fine conceytes, whereby they might drawe mens mindes into admiration of theyr inuentions, more then they had to the profitte or commoditye that the Readers shoulde reape by their works. And thus as I suppose came it to passe among them, that for the most part of them, they would not write one worke contayuing some serious matter: but for the same they wold likewise powre foorth as much of some wanton or laciuious inuention. Yet some of the auncientest sort of Grecians, as it séemeth were not so much disposed to vayne delectation: as Aristotle sayth of Empedocles, that in hys iudgment he was onely a naturall Philosopher, no Poet at all, nor that he was like vnto Homer in any thing but hys méeter, or number of féete, that is, that hée

wrote in verse. After the time of Homer, there began the firste Comedy wryters, who compyled theyr workes in a better stile which continued not long, before it was erpelled by penalty, for scoffing too broade at mens manners, and the priuie reuengements which the Poets vsed against their ill wyllers. Among these was Eupolis, Cratinus, and Aristophenes, but afterward the order of thys wryting Comedies was reformed and made more plausible: then wrytte Plato, Comicus, Menander, and I knowe not who more.
            There be many most profitable workes, of like antiquity, or rather before them, of the Tragedy writers: as of Euripides, and Sophocles, then was there Phocitides and Theagines, with many other: which Tragedies had their inuentiō by one Thespis, and were pollished and amended by AEschitus. The profitte or discommoditie which aryseth by the vse of these Comedies and Tragedies, which is most, hath béene long in controuersie, and is sore vrged among vs at these dayes: what I thinke of the same, perhaps I shall bréefely declare anon.
            Nowe concerning the Poets which wrote in homely manner, as they pretended, but indéede, with great pythe and learned iudgment, such as were the wryters of Shéepeheards talke and of husbandly precepts, who were among the Grecians that excelled, besides Theocritus and Hesiodus I know not, of whō the first, what profitable workes he left to posterity, besides hys Idillia, or contentions of Goteheards, tending most to delight, and pretty inuentions, I can not tell. The other, no doubt for his Argument he tooke in hande, dealt very learnedly and profitably, that is, in precepts of Husbandry, but yet so as he myred much wanton stuffe among the rest.
            The first wryters of Poetry among the Latines, shoulde séeme to be those, which excelled in the framing of Commedies, and that they continued a long time without any notable memory of other Poets. Among whom, the chéefest that we may sée or heare tell of, were these. Ennins, Caecilius, Naeuius, Licinius, Attilius, Turpitius, Trabea, Luscius, Plautus, & Terens, Of whom these two last named, haue béene euer since theyr time most famous, and to these dayes are estéemed, as greate

helpes and furtheraunces to the obtayning of good Letters. But héere cannot I stay to speake of the most famous, renowned and excellent, that euer writte among the Latine Poets, P. Virgill, who performed the very same in that tongue, which Homer had doone in Gréeke: or rather better if better might as Sex. Propert. in his Elegies gallantly recordeth in his praise. Nescio quid magis nascitur Iliade. Under the person of AEneas he expresseth the valoure of a worthy Captaine and valiaunt Gouernour, together with the perrilous aduentures of warre, and polliticke deuises at all assayes. And as he immitateth Homer in that worke, so dooth he likewyse followe the very steps of Theocritus, in his most pythy inuentions of his AEglogues: and likewyse Hesiodus in hys Georgicks or bookes of Husbandry, but yet more grauely, and in a more decent style. But not withstanding hys sage grauity and wonderfull wisedome, dyd he not altogether restrayne his vayne, but that he would haue a rast at some wanton and skant comely an Argument, if indéede such triflles as be fathered vppon him were his owne. There followed after him, very many rare and excellent Poets, wherof the most part writt light matters, as Epigrammes and Elegies, with much pleasant dalliance, among whom may be accoun ted Propertius, Tibullus, Catullus, with diuers whom Ouid speaketh of in diuers places of his workes. Then are there two Hystoricall Poets, no lesse profitable then delightsome to bee read: Silius and Lucanus: the one declaring the valiant prowesse of two noble Captaines, one enemie to the other, that is, Scipio and Hamball: the other likewise, the fortitude of two expert warriours (yet more lamentably then the other because these warres were ciuill) Pompey and Caesar. The next in tyme (but as most men doo account, and so did he himselfe) the second in dignity, we well adioyne Ouid, a most learned, and erquisite Poet. The worke of greatest profitte which he wrote, was his Booke of Metamorphosis, which though it consisted of fayned Fables for the most part, and poeticall inuentions, yet béeing moralized according to his meaning, and the trueth of euery tale béeing discouered, it is a worke of excéeding wysedome and sounde iudgment. If one lyst in like manner, to

haue knowledge and perfect intelligence of those rytes and ceremonies which were obserued after the Religion of the Heathen, no more profitable worke for that purpose, then his bookess De fastis. The rest of his dooinges, though they tende to the vayne delights of loue and dalliaunce (except his Tristibus, wherein he bewayleth hys exile) yet surely are mixed with much good counsayle and prositable lessons if they be wisely and narrowly read. After his time I know no worke of any great fame, till the time of Horace, a Poet not of the smoothest style, but in sharpnesse of wytt inferiour to none, and one to whom all the rest both before his time and since, are very much beholding. About the same time were Iuuenall and Persius, then Martial, Seneca a most excellent wryter of Tragedies, Boetius, Lucretius, Statius, Val: Fiaccus, Manilius, Ausonius, Claudian, and many other, whose iust times and seuerall workes to speake of in this place, were neither much néedefull, nor altogeather tollerable, because I purposed an other argument. Onely. I wyll adde two of later times, yet not farre inferiour to the most of them aforesayde, Pallengenius, and Bap: Man
                     •
                  uanus, and for a singuler gyft in a sweete Heroicall verse, match with them Chr. Oclan. the Authour of our Anglorum Praelia But nowe least I stray too farre from my puopose, I wyl come to our English Poets, to whom I would I were able to yeelde theyr deserued commendations: and affoorde them that censure, which I know many woulde, which can better, if they were nowe to write in my stéede.
            I know no memorable worke written by any Poet in our English spéeche, vntill twenty yéeres past: where although Learning was not generally decayde at any time, especially since the Conquest of King William Duke of Normandy, as it may appeare by many famous works & learned bookes (though not of this kinde) wrytten by Byshoppes and others: yet surelye that Poetry was in small price among them, it is very manifest, and no great maruayle, for euen that light of Grieke and Latine Poets which they had, they much contemned, as appeareth by theyr rude versifying, which of long time was vsed (a barbarous vse it was) wherin they conuerted the naturall property

of the swéete Latine verse, to be a balde kinde of ryming, thinking nothing to be learnedly written in verse, which fell not out in ryme, that is, in wordes whereof the middle worde of eche verse should sound a like with the last, or of two verses, the ende of both should fall in the like letters, as thus.

                  O malè viuentes, versus audite sequentes.
               
And thus likewyse.

                  Propter haec et alia dogmata doctorum.
                  Reor esse melius et magis decorum:
                  Quisque suam habeat, et non proximorum.
               
            
            This brutish Poetrie, though it had not the beginning in this Countrey, yet so hath it béene affected héere, that the infection thereof would neuer (nor I thinke euer will) be rooted vppe againe: I meane this tynkerly verse which we call ryme: Master Ascham sayth, that it first began to be followed and maintained among the Hunnes and Gothians, and other barbarous Nations, who with the decay of all good learning, brought it into Italy: from thence it came into Fraunce, and so to Germany, at last conueyed into England, by men indeede of great wisedome and learning, but not considerate nor circum spect in that behalfe. But of this I must intreate more heereafter.
            
               Henry the first King of that name in England, is wonderfully ertolled, in all auncient Recordes of memory, for hys singuler good learning, in all kinde of noble studies, in so much as he was named by his surname Beaucleark, as much to say, as Fayreclerke (whereof perhappes came ye name of Fayreclowe) what knowledge hee attained in the skyll of Poetry, I am not able to say, I report his name for proofe, that learning in this Country was not little estéemed of at that rude time, and that like it is, among other studies, a King would not neglect the faculty of Poetry. The first of our English Poets that I have heard of, was Iohn Gower, about the time of king

               Rychard the seconde, as it should séeme by certayne coniectures bothe a Knight, and questionlesse a singuler well learned man: whose workes I could wysh they were all whole and perfect among vs, for no doubt they contained very much déepe knowledge and delight: which may be gathered by his fréend Chawcer, who speaketh of him oftentimes, in diuer places of hys workes. Chawcer, who for that excellent fame which hee obtayned in his Poetry, was alwayes accounted the God of English Poets (such a tytle for honours sake hath béene giuen him) was nert after, if not equall in time to Gower: and hath left many workes, both for delight and profitable knowledge, farre excéeding any other that as yet euer s
                  •••
               e hys time directed theyr studies that way. Though the manner of hys stile may séeme blunt & course to many fine English eares at these dayes, yet in trueth, if it be equally pondered, and with good iudgment aduised, and confirmed with the time wherein he wrote, a man shall perceiue thereby euen a true picture or perfect shape of a right Poet. He by his delightsome vayne, so gulled the eares of men with his deuises, that, although corruption bare such sway in most matters, that learning and truth might skant bée admitted to shewe it selfe, yet without controllment, myght hée gyrde at the vices and abuses of all states, and gawle with very sharpe and eger inuentions, which he did so learnedly and pleasantly, that none therefore would call him into question. For such was his bolde spyrit, that what enormities he saw in any, he would not spare to pay them home, eyther in playne words, or els in some prety and pleasaunt couert, that the simplest might espy him.
            Néere in time vnto him was Lydgate a Poet, surely for good proportion of his verse, and méetely currant style, as the time affoorded comparable with Chawcer, yet more occupyed in supersticious and odde matters, then was requesite in so good a wytte: which, though he handled them commendably, yet the matters themselues béeing not so commendable, hys estimation hath béene the lesse. The next of our auncient Poets, that I can tell of, I suppose to be Pierce Ploughman, who in hys dooinges is somewhat harshe and obscure, but indéede a

very pithy wryter, and (to hys commendation I speake it) was the first that I haue séene, that obserued ye quantity of our verse without the curiosity of Ryme.
            Since these I knowe none other tyll the time of Skelton, who writ in the time of kyng Henry the eyght, who as indéede he obtayned the Lawrell-Garland, so may I wyth good ryght yéelde him the title of a Poet: hée was doubtles a pleasant conceyted fellowe, and of a very sharpe wytte, excéeding bolde, and would nyppe to the very quicke where he once sette holde. Next hym I thynke I may place master George Gaskoyne, as paine full a Souldier in the affayres of hys Prince and Country, as he was a wytty Poet in his wryting: whose commendations, because I found in one of better iudgment then my selfe, I wyl sette downe hys wordes, and suppresse myne owne, of hym thus wryteth E. K. vppon the ninth AEglogue of the new Poet.
            Master George Gaskoyne a wytty Gentleman, and the very chéefe of our late rymers, who and if some partes of learning wanted not (albeit is well knowne he altogether wanted not learning) no doubt would haue attayned to the excellencye of those famous Poets. For gyfts of wytt, and naturall prompt nes appeare in him aboundantly. I might next speake of the dyuers workes of the olde Earle of Surrey: of the L. Vaus, of Norton, of Bristow, Edwardes, Tusser, Churchyard. VVyl: Hunnis: Haiwood: Sand: Hyll: S. Y. M. D. and many others, but to speake of their seuerall gyfts, and aboundant skyll shewed forth by them in many pretty and learned workes, woulde make my discourse much more tedious.
            I may not omitte the deserued commendations of many honourable and noble Lordes, and Gentlemen, in her Maiesties Courte, which in the rare deuises of Poetry, haue béene and yet are most excellent skylfull, among whom, the right honourable Earle of Oxford may challenge to him selfe the tytle of ye most excellent among the rest. I can no longer forget those learned Gentlemen which tooke such profitable paynes in translating the Latine Poets into our English tongue, whose desertes in that behalfe are more then I can vtter. Among these, I euer estéemed, and while I lyue, in my conceyt I shall account Master

               D. Phaer: without doubt the best: who as indéede hee had the best péece of Poetry whereon to sette a most gallant verse, so performed he it accordingly, and in such sort, as in my conscience I thinke would scarcely be doone againe, if it were to doo again. Notwithstanding, I speak it but as myne own fancy, not preiudiciall to those that list to thinke otherwyse. Hys worke whereof I speake, is the englishing of AEneidos of Virgill, so farre foorth as it pleased God to spare him life, which was to the halfe part of the tenth Booke, the rest béeing since wyth no lesse commendations finished, by that worthy scholler and famous Phisition Master Thomas Twyne.
            
            Equally with him may I well adioyne Master Arthur Golding, for hys labour in englishing Ouids Metamorphosis, for which Gentleman, surely our Country hath for many respects greatly to gyue God thankes: as for him which hath taken infinite paynes without ceasing, trauelleth as yet indefatigably, and is addicted without society, by his continuall laboure, to profit this nation and spéeche in all kind of good learning. The next, very well deserueth Master Barnabe Googe to be placed, as a painefull furtherer of learning: hys helpe to Poetry besides hys owne deuises, as the translating of Pallengenius. Lodiac. Abraham Flemming as in many prety Poesis of hys owne, so in translating hath doone to hys commendations. To whom I would heere adioyne one of hys name, whom I know to haue excelled, as well in all kinde of learning as in Poetry most especially, and would appeare so, if the dainty morselles, and fine poeticall inuentions of hys, were as common abroade as I knowe they be among some of hys fréendes. I wyl craue leaue of the laudable Authors of Seneca in English, of the other partes of Ouid, of Horace, of Mantuan, and diuers other, because I would hasten to ende thys rehearsall, perhappes offensyue to some, whom eyther by forgetfulnes, or want of knowledge, I must néedes ouer passe.
            And once againe, I am humbly to desire pardon of the learned company of Gentlemen Schollers, and students of the Uniuersities, and Innes of Courte, yf I omitte theyr seuerall commendations in this place, which I knowe a great number

of them haue worthely deserued, in many rare deuises, and singuler inuentions of Poetrie: for neither hath it béene my good happe, to haue séene all which I haue hearde of, neyther is my abyding in such place, where I can with facility get knowledge of their workes.
            One Gentleman notwithstanding among them may I not ouer slyppe, so farre reacheth his fame, and so worthy is he, if hee haue not already, to weare the Lawrell wreathe, Master George VVhetstone, a man singularly well skyld in this facul ty of Poetrie: To him I will ioyne Anthony Munday, an earnost traueller in this arte, and in whose name I haue séene very excellent workes, among which surely, the most exquisite vaine of a witty poeticall heade is shewed in the swéete sobs of Shéepheardes and Nymphes: a worke well worthy to be viewed, and to bée estéemed as very rare Poetrie. With these I may place Iohn Graunge, Knyght, VVylmott, Darrell, F. C. F. K. G. B. and many other, whose names come not nowe to my remembraunce.
            This place haue I purposely reserued for one, who if not only, yet in my iudgement principally deserueth the tytle of the rightest English Poet, that euer I read: that is, the Author of the Shéepeheardes Kalender, intituled to the woorthy Gentleman Master Phillip Sydney: whether it was Master Sp. or what rare Scholler in Pembrooke Hall soeuer, because himself and his fréendes, for what respect I knowe not, would not reueale it, I force not greatly to sette downe: sorry I am that I can not find none other with whom I might couple him in this Catalogue, in his rare gyft of Poetry: although one there is, though nowe long since, seriously occupied in grauer studies, (Master Gabriell Haruey) yet, as he was once his most special fréende and fellow Poet, so because he hath taken such paynes, not onely in his Latin Poetry (for which he enioyed great com mendations of the best both in iudgment and dignity in thys Realme) but also to reforme our English verse, and to beautify the same with braue deuises, o which I thinke the chéefe lye bidde in hatefull obscurity: therefore wyll I aduenture to sette them together, as two of the rarest witts, and learnedst masters

of Poetrie in England. Whose worthy and notable skyl in this faculty, I would wysh if their high dignities and serious businesses would permit, they would styll graunt to bee a furtheraunce to that reformed kinde of Poetry, which Master Haruey did once beginne to ratify: and surely in mine opinion, if hée had chosen some grauer matter, and handled but with halfe that skyll, which I knowe he could haue doone, and not powred it foorth at a venture, as a thinge betwéene iest and earnest, it had taken greater effect then it did.
            As for the other Gentleman, if it would please him or hys fréendes to let those excellent Poemes, whereof I know he hath plenty, come abroad, as his Dreames, his Legends, his Court of Cupid, his English Poet with other: he shoulde not onely stay the rude pens of my selfe and others, but-also satisfye the thirsty desires of many which desire nothing more, then to see more of hys rare inuentions. If I ioyne to Master Haruey hys two Brethren, I am assured, though they be both busied with great and waighty callinges (the one a godly and learned Diuine, the other a famous and skylfull Phisition) yet if they lysted to sette to their helping handes to Poetry, they would as much beautify and adorne it as any others.
            If I let passe the vncountable rabble of ryming Ballet makers, and compylers of sencelesse sonets, who be most busy, to stuffe euery stall full of grosse deuises and vnlearned Pamphlets: I trust I shall with the best sort be held excused. For though many such can frame an Alehouse song of fiue or sixe score verses, hobbling vppon some tune of a Northen Iygge, or Robyn hoode, or La lubber &c. And perhappes obserue iust nū
               ber of sillables, eyght in one line, sixe in an other, and there withall an A to make a iercke in the ende: yet if these might be accounted Poets (as it is sayde some of them make meanes to be promoted to ye Lawrell) surely we shall shortly haue whole swarmes of Poets: and euery one that can frame a Booke in Ryme, though for want of matter, it be but in commendations of Copper noses or Bottle Ale, wyll catch at the Garlande due to Poets: whose potticall poeticall (I should say) heades, I would wyshe, at their worshipfull comencements might in

steede of Lawrell; be gorgiously garnished with fayre greene Barley, in token of their good affection to our Englishe Malt. One speaketh thus homely of them, with whose words I wyll content my selfe for thys time, because I woulde not bee too broade wyth them in myne owne speeche.
            In regarde (he meaneth of the learned framing the newe Poets workes which writt the Sheepheardes Calender.) I scorne and spue out the rakehelly rout of our ragged Kymers, (for so themselues vse to hunt the Letter) which without learning boaste, without iudgment iangle, without reason rage and fume, as if some instinct of poeticall spyrite had newlie ranished them, aboue the meanesse of common capacity. And beeing in the midst of all their brauery, suddainly for want of matter or of Kyme, or hauing forgotten their former conceyt, they seeme to be so payned and trauelled in theyr remembraunce, as it were a woman in Chyldbyrth, or as that same Pythia when the traunce came vpon her. Os rabidum fera corda domans &c.
            
            THus farre foorth haue I aduentured to sette downe part of my simple iudgement concerning those Poets, with whom for the most part I haue beene acquainted through myne owne reading: which though it may seeme something impertinent to the tytle of my Booke, yet I trust the courteous Keaders wyll pardon me, considering that poetry is not of that grounde and antiquity in our English tongue, but that speaking thereof only as it is English, would seeme like vnto the drawing of ones pycture without a heade.
            Nowe therefore by your gentle patience, wyll I wyth like breuity make tryall, what I can say concerning our Englishe Poetry, first in the matter thereof, then in the forme, that is, the manner of our verse: yet so as I must euermore haue recourse to those times and wryters, whereon the English poetry taketh as it were the discent and proprietye.

English Poetry therefore béeing considered according to common custome and auncient vse, is, where any worke is learned ly compiled in measurable spéeche, and framed in wordes contayning number or proportion of iust syllables, delighting the readers or hearers as well by the apt and decent framing of wordes in equall resemblance of quantity, commonly called verse, as by the skyllfull handling of the matter whereof it is intreated. I spake somewhat of the beginning of thys measuring of wordes in iust number, taken out of Plato: and indeede the regarde of true quantity in Letters and syllables, seemeth not to haue been much vrged before the time of Homer in Gréece, as Aristotle witnesseth.
            The matters whereof verses were first made, were eyther erhortations to vertue, dehortations from vices, or the prayses of some laudable thing. From thence they beganne to vse them in erercises of immitating some vertuous and wise mā at their feastes: where as some one shoulde be appointed to represent an other mans person of high estimation, and he sang fine ditties and wittie sentences, tunably to their Musick notes. Of thys sprang the first kinde of Comedyes, when they beganne to bring into these ercercises, more persons then one, whose speeches were deuised Dyalogue wise, in aunswering one another. And of such like erercises, or as some wyll néedes haue it, long before the other, began the first Tragedies, and were so called of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , because the Ador when he began to play his part, slewe and offered a Goate to their Goddesse: but Commedies tooke their name of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               comessatum ire; to goe a feasting, because they vsed to goe in procession with their sport about the Citties and Villages, mingling much pleasaunt myrth wyth theyr graue Religion, and feasting cheerefully together wyth as great ioy as might be deuised. But not long after (as one delight draweth another) they began to inuent new persons and newe matters for their Comedies, such as the deuisers thought méetest to please the peoples vaine: And from these, they beganne to present in shapes of men, the natures of vertues and vices, and affections and quallities incident to men, as Justice, Temperance, Pouerty, Wrathe, Uengeaunce, Sloth, Ualiantnes

and such like; as may appeare by the auncient workes of Aristophanes. There grewe at last to be a greater diuersitye betwéene Tragedy wryters and Comedy wryters, the one expressing onely sorrowfull and lamentable Hystories, bringing in the persons of Gods and Goddesses, Kynges and Quéenes, and great states, whose partes were chéefely to expresse most miserable calamities, and dreadfull chaunces, which increased worse and worse, tyll they came to the most wofull plight that might be deuised.
            The Comedies on the other side, were directed to a contrary ende, which beginning doubtfully, drewe to some trouble or turmoyle, and by some lucky chaunce alwayes ended to the ioy and appeasement of all parties. Thys distinction grewe as some holde opinion, by immitation of the workes of Homer: for out of hys Iliads, the Tragedy wryters founde dreadfull euents, whereon to frame their matters, and the other out of hys Odyssea tooke arguments of delight, and pleasant 
                  •…
               nding after dangerous and troublesome doubtes. So that, though there be many sortes of poeticall wrytings, and Poetry is not debarred from any matter, which may be expressed by penne or spéeche, yet for the better vnderstanding, and bréefer method of thys discourse, I may comprehende the same in thrée sortes, which are, Comicall, Tragicall, Historicall. Under the first, may be contained all such Epigrammes, Elegies and delectable ditties, which Poets haue deuised respecting onely the delight thereof: in the seconde, all dolefull complaynts, lamentable chaunces, and what soeuer is poetically expressed in sorrow and heauines. In the third, we may comprise, the reste of all such matters, which as indifferent betwéene the other two, doo commonly occupy the pennes of Poets: such, are the poeticall com pyling of Chronicles, the fréendly gréetings betwéene fréendes, and very many sortes besides, which for the better destinction may be referred to one of these thrée kindes of Poetry. But once againe, least my discourse runne too farre awry, wyll I buckle my selfe more neerer to English Poetry: the vse wherof, because it is nothing different from any other, I thinke best to cō
               firme by the testimony of Horace, a man worthy to beare authoin

this matter: whose very opinion is this, that the perfect perfection of poetrie is this, to mingle delight with profitt in such wyse, that a Reader might by his reading be pertaker of bothe, which though I touched in the beginning, yet I thought good to alledge in this place for more confirmation thereof some of hys owne wordes. In his treatise de arte Poetica, thus hee sayth.

                  Aut prodesse volunt aut delectare poetae,
                  Aut simul et iucunda et idonea dicere vitae.
               
            
            As much to saie: All Poets desire either by their works to profitt or delight men, or els to ioyne both profitable & pleasant lessons together for the instruction of life. And againe.

                  Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci,
                  Lectorum delectando pariterque monendo.
               
            
            That is. He misseth nothing of his marke which ioyneth profitt with delight, as well delighting his Readers, as profiting them with counsell. And that whole Epistle which hee wryt of his Arte of Poetrie, among all the parts thereof, runneth chéefelie vppon this, that whether the argument which the Poet handleth, be of thinges doone, or fained inuentions, yet that they should beare such an Image of trueth, that as they delight they may likewise profitt. For these are his wordes. Ficta voluptatis causa sint proxima veris. Let thinges that are faigned for pleasures sake, haue a néere resemblance of ye truth. This precept may you perceiue to bee most duelie obserued of Chawcer: for who could with more delight, prescribe such whol some counsaile and sage aduise, where he séemeth onelie to respect the profitte of his lessons and instructions? or who coulde with greater wisedome, or more pithie skill, vnfold such pleasant and delightsome matters of mirth, as though they respected nothing, but the telling of a merry tale? so that this is the very grounde of right poetrie, to giue profitable counsaile, yet so as it must be mingled with delight. For among all the auncient

works of poetrie, though the most of them incline much to that part of delighting men with pleasant matters of small importannce, yet euen in the vainest trifles among them, there is not forgotten some profitable counsaile, which a man may learne, either by flatte precepts which therein are prescribed, or by loathing such vile vices, the enormities whereof they largelie discouer. For surelie, I am of this opinion, that the wantonest Poets of all, in their mest laciuious workes wherein they busied themselues, sought rather by that meanes to withdraw mens mindes (especiallie the best natures) from such foule vices, then to allure them to imbrace such beastly follies as they detected.
            
               Horace speaking of the generall dueties of Poets, sayth, Os tenerum pueri balbumque poeta fugitat, and manie more wordes concerning the profitte to be hadde out of Poets, which because I haue some of them comprised into an English translation of that learned and famous Knight, Sir Thomas Elyot, I wyll set downe his wordes.

                  The Poet fashioneth by some pleasant meane,
                  The speeche of children stable and vnsure:
                  Gulling their eares from wordes and thinges vncleane,
                  Giuing to them precepts that are pure:
                  Rebuking enuy and wrath if it dure:
                  Thinges well donne he can by example commend,
                  To needy and sicke he doth also his cure
                  To recomfort if ought he can amende.
               
            
            And manie other like wordes are in that place of Horace to like effect. Therefore poetrie, as it is of it selfe, without abuse is not onely not vnprofitable to the liues and studies of menne, but wonderfull commendable and of great excellencie. For nothing can be more acceptable to men, or rather to be wished, thē swéete allurements to vertues, and commodious caucates from vices? of which Poetrie is excéeding plentifull, powring into gentle witts, not roughly and tirannicallie, but as it were with a louing authoritie. Nowe if the ill and vndecent prouocations,

whereof some vnbridled witts take occasion by the reading of laciuious Poemes, bee obiected: such as are Ouids loue Bookes, and Elegies, Tibullus, Catullus, and Martials workes, with the Comedies for the most part of Plautus and Terence: I thinke it easily aunswered. For though it may not iustlie be denied, that these workes are indéede very Poetrie, yet that Poetrie in them is not the essentiall or formall matter or cause of the hurt therein might be affirmed, and although that reason should come short, yet this might be sufficient, that the workes themselues doo not corrupt, but the abuse of the vsers, who vndamaging their owne dispositions, by reading the discoueries of vices, resemble foolish folke, who comming into a Garden without anie choise or circumspectiō tread downe the fairest flowres, and wilfullie thrust their fingers among the nettles.
            And surelie to speake what I verelie thinke, this is mine opinion: that one hauing sufficient skyll, to reade and vnderstand those workes, and yet no staie of himselfe to auoyde incon ueniences, which the remembraunce of vnlawfull things may stirre vppe in his minde, he, in my iudgement, is wholy to bée reputed a laciuious disposed personne, whom the recitall of sins whether it be in a good worke or a badde, or vppon what occasion soeuer, wyll not staie him but prouoke him further vnto them. Contrariwise, what good lessons the warie and skylful Readers shall picke out of the very worst of them, if they list to take anie heede, and reade them not of an intent to bee made the worse by them, you may sée by these fewe sentences, which the foresayd Sir Thomas Elyott gathered as hee sayth at all auentures, intreating of the like argument. First Plautus in commendations of vertue, hath such like wordes.

                  Verely vertue doth all thinges excell,
                  For if liberty, health liuing or substaunce,
                  Our Country our parents, and children doo well,
                  It hapneth by vertue: she doth all aduaunce,
                  Vertue hath all thinges vnder gouernaunce:
                  And in whom of vertue is founde great plenty,
                  Any thing that is good may neuer be dainty.
               
               
               Terence, in Eunucho hath a profitable spéeche, in blasin
                  •…
                forth the fashions of harlots, before the eyes of young men. Thus sayth Parmeno.
               
                  In thys thing I tryumphe in myne owne conceite,
                  That I haue found for all young men the way,
                  Howe they of Harlots shall know the deceite,
                  Their witts and manners: that thereby they may
                  Them perpetuallie hate, for so much as they
                  Out of their owne houses be fresh and delicate,
                  Feeding curiously: at home all day
                  Lyuing beggerlie in most wretched estate.
               
            
            And many more wordes of the same matter, but which may be gathered by these fewe.
            
               Ouid in his most wanton Bookes of loue, and the remedies thereof, hath very many pithie and wise sentences, which a beedefull Reader may marke, and chose out from ye other stuffe. This is one.

                  Tyme is a medicine if it shall profitt,
                  VVine gyuen out of time may be annoyaunce.
                  A man shall irritat vice if he prohibitt,
                  VVhen time is not meete vnto his vtteraunce.
                  Therfore if thou yet by counsayle art recuperable,
                  Fly thou from idlenes and euer be stable.
               
            
            
               Martiall, a most dissolute wryter among all other, yet not without many graue and prudent spéeches, as this is one worthy to be marked of these fond youthes which intangle theyr wytts in raging loue, who stepping once ouer shoes in theyr fancyes, neuer rest plunging till they be ouer head and eares in their follie.

                  If thou wylt-eschewe bitter aduenture.
                  And auoyde the annoyance of a pensifull hare,
                  
                     
Set in no one person all wholly thy pleasure,
                  The lesse maist thou ioy, but the lesse shalt thou smart.
               
            
            These are but fewe gathered out by happe, yet sufficient to shewe that the wise and circumspect Readers may finde very many profitable lessons, dispersed in th
                  •…
                
               
                  •…
               orkes, neither take any harme by reading such Poemes, but good, if they wil themselues. Neuertheles, I would not be thought to hold opinion, that the reading of them is so tollerable, as that there neede no respect to be had in making choyse of readers or hearers: for if they be prohibited from the tender and vnconstant wits of children and young mindes, I thinke it not without great reason: neyther am I of that deuillish opinion, of which some there are, and haue beene in England, who hauing charge of youth to instruct them in learning, haue especially made choyse of such vn childish stuffe, to reade vnto young Schollers, as it shoulde seeme of some filthy purpose, wylfully to corrupt theyr tender mindes, and prepare them the more ready for their loathsome dyetts.
            For as it is sayd of that impudent worke of Luciane, a man were better to reade none of it then all of it, so thinke I that these workes are rather to be kept altogether from children, thē they should haue frée liberty to reade them, before they be méete either of their owne discretion or by héedefull instruction, to make choyse of the good from the badde. As-for our Englishe Poetrie, I know no such perilous péeces (except a fewe balde ditties made ouer the Béere potts, which are nothing lesse then Poetry) which anie man may vse and reade without damage or daunger: which indeede is lesse to be meruailed at among vs, then among the olde Latines and Gréekes, Considering that Christianity may be a state to such illecibrous workes and inuentions, as among them (for their Arte sake) myght obtaine passage.
            Nowe will I speake some what, of that princelie part of Poetrie, wherein are displaied the noble actes and valiant exploits of puissaunt Captaines, expert souldiers, wise men, with the famous reportes of auncient times, such as are the Heroycall

workes of Homer in Gréeke, and the heauenly verse of Virgils AEneidos in Latine: which workes, comprehending as it were the summe and grounde of all Poetrie, are verelie and incon
                  •…
               
               parably the best of all other. To these, though wee haue no English worke aunswerable, in respect of the glorious ornaments of gallant handling: yet our auncient Chroniclers and reporters of our Countrey affayres, come most néere them: and no doubt, if such regarde of our English spéeche, and curious handling of our verse, had béene long since thought vppon, and from time to time béene pollished and bettered by men of learning, iudgement, and authority, it would ere this, haue matched them in all respects. A manifest example thereof, may bée the great good grace and swéete vayne, which Eloquence hath attained in our spéeche, because it hath had the helpe of such rare and singuler wits, as from time to time myght still adde some amendment to the same. Among whom I thinke there is none that. will gainsay, but Master Iohn Lilly hath deserued moste high commendations, as he which hath stept one steppe further therein then any either before or since he first began the wyttie discourse of his Euphues. Whose workes, surely in respecte of his singuler eloquence and braue composition of apt words and sentences, let the learned examine and make tryall thereof thorough all the partes of Rethoricke, in fitte phrases, in pithy sentences, in gallant tropes, in flowing spéeche, in plaine sence, and surely in my iudgment, I thinke he wyll yéelde him that verdict, which Quintilian giueth of bothe the best Drators Demosthenes and Tully, that from the one, nothing may be taken away, to the other, nothing may be added. But a more néerer example to prooue my former assertion true, (I meane ye méetnesse of our spéeche to receiue the best forme of Poetry) may bée taken by conference of that famous translation of Master D. Phaer with the coppie it selfe, who soeuer please with courteous iudgement but a little to compare and marke them both together: and weigh with himselfe, whether the English tongue might by little and little be brought to the verye maiesty of a ryght Heroicall verse. First you may marke, how Virgill alwayes 
                  •…
               itteth his matter in hande with wordes agréeable vnto

the same affection, which he expresseth, as in hys Tragicall exclamations, what pathe
                  •…
               all spéeches he frameth? in his com fortable consolations, howe smoothely hys verse runnes? in his dreadfull battayles, and 
                  •…
               réery byckerments of warress, howe bygge and boystrous his wordes sound? and the like notes in all partes of his worke may be obserued. Which excellent grace and comely kind of choyse, if the translatour hath not hitte very neere in our course English phrase iudge vprightly: wee wyll conferre some of the places, not picked out for the purpose, but such as I tooke turning ouer the Booke at randon. When the Troyans were so tost about in tempestious wether, caused by AEolus at AEunoes request, and driuen vpon the coaste of Affrick with a very néere scape of their liues: AEneas after hée had gone a land and kylled plenty of victuals for his company of Souldiours, hée deuided the same among them, and thus louinglie and swéetely he comforted them. AEn. Lib. 1.

                  -et dictis moerentia pectora mulcet
                  O socij (ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ignari sumus ante malorum)
                  O pa
                        •…
                      grau
                        •…
                     ora: dabit deus his quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      finem.
                  Uos et scyllaeam rabiem, penitus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sonantes,
                  Accestis scopulos: vos et cyclopea saxa
                  Experti, reuocate animos, maestumque timorem
                  Mittite. forsan et haec olim meminisse i
                        •…
                     uabit.
                  Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum,
                  Tendimus in Latium: sedes vbi fata quietas
                  Ostendunt, illic fas regna resurgere troiae.
                  Durate, et vosmet rebus seruate secundis.
                  Talia v
                        •…
                     ce refert, curis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ingentibus aeger
                  Spem vuliu simulat, premit altum corde dolor
                        •…
                     m.
               
            
            Translated thus.

                  And then to chéere their heauy barts with these words he bim bent.
                  O Mates (quoth he) that many a woe haue bidden and borne ere thvs,
                  Worse haue we séene, and this also shall end when Gods wyll is.
                  Through Sylla rage (ye wott) and through the roaring rocks we past,
                  Though Cyclops shore was full of feare, yet came we through at last.
                  Plucke vppe your harts, and driue from thence both feare and care away
                  To thinke on this may pleasure be perhapps another day.
                  By paynes and many a daunger sore, by sundry chaunce we wend,
                  To come to Italy, where we trust to find our resting ende:
                  And where the destnyes haue decréed Troyes kingdome eft to ryse.
                  Be bold and harden now your harts, take ease while ease applies
                  Thus spake he tho, but in his hart huge cares had him opprest,
                  Dissembling hope with outward eyes full heauy was his brest.
               
            
            
               
Againe, marke the wounding of Dido in loue with AEneas, with howe 
                  •…
               hoyse wordes it is pithily described, both by the Poet and the translator in the beginning of the fourth booke.

                  At Regina graui iamdudum saucia cura
                  Uulnus alit venis, et caeco carpitur igni, &c.
               
               
                  By this time perced satte the Quéene so sore with loues desire,
                  Her wound in euery vayne she feedes, she fryes in secrete fire.
                  The manhood of the manfull oft, full oft his famous lyne
                  She doth reuolue, and from her thought his face cannot vntwyne.
                  His countnaunce déepe she drawes and fired fast she beares in brest,
                  His words also, nor to her carefull hart can come no rest.
               
            
            And in many places of the fourth booke is the same matter so gallantly prosecuted in swéete wordes, as in mine opinion the coppy it selfe goeth no whit beyond it.
            Compare them likewise in the woefull and lamentable cryes of the Quéene for the departure of AEneas, towards the ende of that Booke.

                  Ter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quaterque manu pectus percussa decorum,
                  Flauentesque abscissa comas, proh Iupiter, ibit?
                  Hic ait, 
                        •…
                     t nostris illuserit aduena Regnis? &c.
               
               
                  
                  Thrée times her hands she bet, and thrée times strake her comely brest,
                  Her golden hayre she tare and frantiklike with moode opprest,
                  She cryde, O Iupiter, O God, quoth she, and shall a goe?
                  Indéede? and shall a flowte me thus within my kingdome so?
                  Shall not mine Armies out, and all my people them pursue?
                  Shall they not spoyle their shyps and burne them vp with vengance due?
                  Out people, out vppon them, follow fast with fires and flames,
                  Set sayles aloft, make out with oares, in ships, in boates, in frames.
                  What speake I? or where am I? what furies me doo thus inchaunt?
                  O Dydo, wofull wretch, now destnyes fell thy head dooth haunt.
               
            
            And a little after preparing to kyll her owne selfe.

                  But Dydo quaking fierce with frantike moode and griefly hewe.
                  With trembling spotted chéekes, her huge attempting to persue.
                  Besides her selfe for rage, and towards death with visage wanne,
                  Her eyes about she rolde, as redde as blood they looked than.
               
            
            At last ready to fall vppon AEneas sworde.

                  O happy (welaway) and ouer happy had I béene,
                  If neuer Troian shyps (ahlas) my Country shore had séene.
                  Thus sayd she wryde her head, and bereuenged must we die?
                  But let vs boldly die (quoth shée) thus, thus to death I ply.
               
            
            Nowe likewise for the braue warlike phrase and bygge sounding kynd of thundring spéeche, in the hotte skyrmyshes of battels, you may confer them in any of the last fiue Bookes: for examples sake, thys is one aabout the ninth Booke.

                  It clamor totis per propugnacula muris,
                  Intendunt acries arcus, amentaque torquent.
                  Sternitur omne solum telis. tum scutae cauae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  
                  Dant sonitum 
                        ••
                     ctu galeae: pugna asper surgit? &c.
               
               
                  A clamarous noyse vpmounts on fortresse tops and bulwarks towers,
                  They strike, they bend their bowes, they whirle from strings sharp shoting showres.

                  
                     
All stréetes with fooles are strowed, than helmets, skulles, with battrings marro,
                  And shieldess dishyuering cracke, vpriseth roughnesse byckring hard.
                  Looke how the tempest storme when wind out wrastling blowes at south,
                  Raine ratling beates the grownde, or clowdes of haile from Winters mouth,
                  Downe dashyng headlong driues, when God from skyes with griesly steuen,
                  His watry showres outwrings, & whirlwind clowdes downe breakes frō heauen.
               
And so foorth much more of the like effect.
            Onely one comparison more will I desire you to marke at your leysures, which may serue for all the rest, that is, the description of Fame, as it is in the 4. booke, towardes the end, of which it followeth thus.

                  Monstrum horrendum ingens cui quot sunt corpore plumae
                  Tot vigilos oculi &c.
               
               
                  A Monster gastly great, for euery plume her carkasse beares,
                  Like number learing eyes she hath, like number harkning eares.
                  Like number tongues, and mouthes she wagges, a wondrous thing to speake,
                  At midnight foorth shée flyes, and vnder shade her sound dooth squeake.
                  All night she wakes, nor slumber swéete doth take nor neuer sléepes.
                  By dayes on houses tops shée sits or gates of Townes she kéepes.
                  On watching Towres she clymbes, and Citties great she makes agast,
                  Both trueth and falshood forth she telles, and lyes abroade doth cast.
               
            
            But what néede I to repeate any more places? there is not one Booke among the twelue, which wyll not yéelde you most excellent pleasure in conferring the translation with the Coppie, and marking the gallant grace which our Englishe spéeche affoordeth. And in trueth the like comparisons, may you choose out through the whole translations of the Metamorphosis by Master Golding who (considering both their Coppyes) hath equally deserued commendations for the beautifying of the English spéeche. It would be tedious to stay to rehearse any places out of him nowe: let the other suffice to prooue, that the English tongue lacketh neyther variety nor currantnesse of phrase for any matter.
            
               
I Wyll nowe spaake a little of an other kinde of poetical writing, which might notwithstanding for the variablenesse of the argument therein vsually handled, bee comprehended in those kindes before declared: that is, the compyling of Eglogues, as much to say as Goteheardes tales, because they bee commonly Dialogues or spéeches framed or supposed betwéene Shéepeheardes, Neteheardes, Goteheardes, or such like simple men: in which kind of writing, many haue obtained as immor tall prayse and commendation, as in any other.
            The chéefest of these is Theocritus in Gréeke: next him, and almost the very same, is Virgill in Latin. After Virgyl in like sort writ Titus Calphurnius and Baptista Mantuan, wyth many other both in Latine and other languages very learnedlye. Although the matter they take in hand séemeth commonlie in appearaunce rude and homely, as the vsuall talke of simple clownes: yet doo they indéede vtter in the same much pleasaunt and profitable delight. For vnder these personnes, as it were in a cloake of simplicitie, they would eyther sette foorth the prayses of theyr fréendes, without the note of flattery, or enueigh grieuously against abusess, without any token of bytternesse.
            Somwhat like vnto these works, are many péeces of Chawcer, but yet not altogether so poeticall. But nowe yet at ye last hath England hatched vppe one Poet of this sorte, in my conscience comparable with the best in any respect: euen Master Sp: Author of the Sheepeheardes Calender, whose trauell in that péece of English Poetrie, I thinke verely is so commendable, as none of equall iudgment can yéelde him lesse prayse for hys excellent skyll, and skylfull excellency shewed foorth in the same, then they would to eyther Theocritus or Virgill, whō in mine opinion, if the coursenes of our spéeche (I meane the course of custome which he woulde not infringe) had béene no

more let vnto him, then theyr pure natiue tongues were vnto them, he would haue (if it might be) surpassed them. What one thing is there in them so worthy admiration, whereunto we may not adioyne some thing of his, of equall desert? Take Virgil and make some little comparison betwéene them, and iudge as ye shall sée cause.
            
               Virgill hath a gallant report of Augustus couertly comprysed in the first AEglogue: the like is in him, of her Maiestie, vnder the name of Eliza. Virgill maketh a braue coloured complaint of vnstedfast fréendshyppe in the person of Corydon: the lyke is him in his 5. AEglogue. Agayne behold the pretty Pastorall contentions of Virgill in the third AEglogue: of him in ye eight Eglogue. Finally, either in comparison with them, or respect of hys owne great learning, he may well were the Garlande, and steppe before ye best of all English Poets that I haue séene or hearde: for I thinke no lesse deserueth (thus sayth E, K. in hys commendations) hys wittinesse in deuising, his pithinesse in vttering, his complaintes of loue so louely, his discourses of pleasure so pleasantly, his Pastrall rudenes, his Morrall wysenesse, his due obseruing of decorum euery where, in personages, in season, in matter, in spéeche, and generally in all sé
                  •…
               me ly simplicity, of handling hys matter and framing his wordes. The occasion of his worke is a warning to other young men, who being intangled in loue and youthful vanities, may learne to looke to themselues in time, and to auoyde inconueniences which may bréede if they be not in time preuented. Many good Morrall lessons are therein contained, as the reuerence which young men owe to the aged in the second Eglogue: the caueate o
                  •…
                warning to beware a subtill professor of fréendshippe in the fift Eglogue: the commendation of good Pastors, and shame and disprayse of idle & ambitious Goteheardes in the seauenth, the loose and retchlesse lyuing of Popish Prelates in the ninth. The learned and swéete complaynt of the contempt of learning vnder the name of Poetry in the tenth. There is also much matter vttered somewhat couertly, especially ye abuses of some whom he would not be too playne withall: in which, though it be not apparant to euery one, what hys speciall meaning

was, yet so skilfully is it handled, as any man may take much delight at hys learned conueyance, and picke out much good sence in the most obscurest of it. 
                  〈◊〉
                notable prayse deserued in euery parcell of that worke, because I cannot expresse as I woulde and as it should: I wyll cease to speake any more of, the rather because I neuer hearde as yet any that hath reade it, which hath not with much admiration commended it. One only thing therein haue I hearde some curious heades call in question: viz: the motion of some vnsauery loue, such as in the sitt Eglogue he séemeth to deale with
                  •…
               , (which say they) is skant allowable to English eares, and might well haue béene left for the Italian defenders of loathsome beastlines, of whom perhappes he learned it: to thys obiection I haue often aunswered and (I thinke truely) that theyr nyce opinion ouer shooteth the Poets meaning, who though hee in that as in other thinges, immitateth the auncient Poets, yet doth not meane, no more did they before hym, any disordered loue, or the filthy lust of the deuillish Pederastice takē in the worse sence, but rather to shewe howe the dissolute life of young men intangled in loue of women, doo neglect the fréendshyp and league with their olde fréendes and familiers. Why (say they) yet he shold gyue no occasion of suspition, nor offer to the viewe of Christians, any token of such filthinesse, howe good soeuer hys meaning were: wherevnto I oppose the simple conceyte they haue of matters which concerne learning or wytt, wylling them to gyue Poets leaue to vse theyr vayne as they sée good: it is their foolysh construction, not hys wryting that is blameable. Wée must prescrybe to no wryters, (much lesse to Poets) in what sorte they should vtter theyr conceyts. But thys wyll be better discussed by some I hope of better abillity.
            One other sorte of Poeticall wryters remayneth yet to bee remembred, that is, The precepts of Husbandry, learnedly compiled in Heroycall verse. Such were the workes of Hesiodus in Greeke, and Virgils Georgickes in Latine. What memorable worke hath beene handled in immitation of these by any English Poet, I know not, (saue onely one worke of M. Tusser, a péece surely of great wytt and experience, and wythal

very prettilye handled) And I thinke the cause why our Poets haue not trauayled in that behalfe, is especially, for that there haue béene alwayes plenty of other wryters that haue handled the same argument very largely. Among whom Master Barnabe Googe, in translating and enlarging the most profitable worke of Heresbachius, hath deserued much commendation, as well for hys faythfull compyling and learned increasing the noble worke, as for hys wytty translation of a good part of the Georgickes of Virgill into English verse.
            Among all the translations, which hath béene my fortune to sée, I could neuer yet finde that worke of the Georgicks wholly performed. I remember once Abraham Flemming in hys conuersion of the Eglogues, promised to translate and publishe it: whether he dyd or not I knowe not, but as yet I heard not of it. I my selfe wott well I bestowed some time in it two or thrée yeeres since, turning it to that same English verse, which other such workes were in, though it were rudely: howe beit, I did it onely for mine owne vse, and vppon certayne respectes towardes a Gentleman mine especiall fréende, to whom I was desirous to shewe some token of duetifull good wyll, and not minding it should goe farre abroade, considering howe slenderly I ranne it ouer: yet since then, hath one gott it in kéeping, who as it is told me, eyther hath or wyll vnaduisedly publishe it: which iniury though he meanes to doo me in myrth, yet I hope he wyll make me some suffycient recompence, or els I shall goe néere to watch hym the like or a worse turne.
            But concerning the matter of our Englysh wryters, lett thys suffice: nowe shall ye heare my simple skyl in what I am able to say concerning the forme and manner of our Englyshe verse.
            The most vsuall and frequented kind of our English Poetry hath alwayes runne vpon, and to this day is obserued in such equall number of syllables, and likenes of wordes, that in all places one verse either immediatly, or by mutuall interpo
               
                  •…
               tion, may be aunswerable to an other both in proportion of length, and ending of lynes in the same Letters. Which rude kinde of verse, though (as I touched before) it rather discrediteth

our spéeche, as borrowed from the Barbarians, then furnisheth the same with any comely ornament: yet béeing so ingraffed by custome, and frequented by the most parte, I may not vtterly dissalowe it, least I should séeme to call in question the iudgement of all our famous wryters, which haue wonne eternall prayse by their memorable workes compyled in that verse.
            For my part therefore, I can be content to estéeme it as a thing, the perfection whereof is very commendable, yet so as wyth others I could wysh it were by men of learning and ability bettered, and made more artificiall, according to the woorthines of our spéeche.
            The falling out of verses together in one like sounde, is commonly called in English, Kyme, taken from the Greeke worde 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which surely in my iudgment is verye abusiuelye applyed to such a sence: and by thys, the vnworthinesse of the thing may well appeare, in that wanting a proper name, wherby to be called, it borroweth a word farre exéeding the dignitye of it, and not appropriate to so rude and base a thing. For Ryme is properly, the iust proportion of a clause or sentence, whether it be in prose or méeter, aptly comprised together: wherof there is both an naturall and an artificiall composition, in any manner or kynde of spéeche, eyther French, Italian, Spanish, or English: and is propper not onely to Poets, but also to Readers, Oratours, Pleaders, or any which are to pronounce or speake any thing in publike audience.
            The first begynning of Ryme (as we nowe terme it) though it be some what auncient, yet nothing famous. In Greece (they say) one Symias Rhodias, because he would be singuler in somthing, wryt poetically of the Fable, contayning howe Iupiter béeing in shape of a Swanne, begatte the Egge on Leda, wherof came Castor, Pollux, and Helena, whereof euery verse ended in thys Ryme, and was called therefore 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : but thys foolyshe attempt was so contemned and dispysed, that the people would neither admitte the Author nor Booke any place in memory of learning. Since that it was not hearde of, till yt time ye 
               Hunnes and Gothians renued it agayne, and brought it into Italie. But

howsoeuer or wheresoeuér it beganne, certayne it is, that in our English tongue it beareth as good grace, or rather better, then in any other: and is a faculty whereby many may and doo deserue great prayse and commendation, though our spéeche be capable of a farre more learned manner of versifying, as I wyl partly declare héereafter.
            There be thrée speciall notes necessary to be obserued in the framing of our accustomed English Ryme: the first is, that one méeter or verse be aunswerable to an other, in equall number of féete or syllables, or proportionable to the tune whereby it is to be reade or measured. The seconde, to place the words in such sorte, as none of them be wrested contrary to the naturall inclination or affectation of the same, or more truely ye true quantity thereof. The thyrd, to make them fall together mutually in Ryme, that is, in wordes of like sounde, but so as the wordes be not disordered for the Rymes sake, nor the sence hin dered. These be the most pryncipall obseruations, which I thinke requisite in an English verse: for as for the other ornaments which belong thereto, they be more properly belonging to the seuerall gyfts of skylfull Poets, then common notes to be prescribed by me: but somewhat perhaps I shall haue occasion to speake héereafter.
            Of the kyndes of English verses which differ in number of syllables, there are almost infinite: which euery way alter according to hys fancy, or to the measure of that méeter, wherein it pleaseth hym to frame hys ditty. Of the best and most frequented I wyll rehearse some. The longest verse in length, which I haue séene vsed in English consisteth of sixtéene syllables, eache two verses ryming together, thus.

                  Wher vertue wants & vice abounds, there wealth is but a bayted hooke,
                  To make men swallow down their bane, before on dāger deepe they looke.
               
            
            Thys kynde is not very much vsed at length thus, but is cō
               monly deuided, eche verse into two, whereof eche shal containe eyght syllables, and ryme crosse wyse, the first to the thyrd, and the second to the fourth, in thys manner.

                  
                  Great wealth is but a bayted hooke,
                  VVhere vertue wants, and vice aboundes:
                  VVhich men deuoure before they looke,
                  So them in daungers deepe it drownes.
               
            
            An other kynd next in length to thys, is, where eche verse hath fourtéene syllables, which is the most accustomed of all other, and especially vsed of all the translatours of the Latine Poets for the most part thus.

                  My mind with furye fierce inflamde of late I know not howe,
                  Doth burne Pernassus hyll to see, adornd wyth Lawrell bowe.
               
            
            Which may likewyse and so it often is deuyded, eche verse into two, to first hauing eyght sillables, the second sixe, wherof the two sixes shall alwayes ryme, and sometimes the eyghtes, sometimes not, according to the wyll of the maker.

                  My minde with furye fierce inflamde,
                  Of late I knowe not howe:
                  Doth burne Pernassus hyll to see,
                  Adornd wyth Lawrell bowe.
               
            
            There are nowe wythin this compasse, as many sortes of verses as may be deuised differences of numbers: wherof some consist of equall proportions, some of long and short together, some of many rymes in one staffe (as they call it) some of crosse ryme, some of counter ryme, some ryming wyth one worde farre distant from another, some ryming euery thyrd or fourth word, and so likewyse all manner of dytties applyable to euery tune that may be sung or sayd, distinct from prose or continued spéeche. To auoyde therefore tediousnesse and confusion, I wyll repeate onely the different sortes of verses out of the Sheepeheardes Calender, which may well serue to beare authoritie in thys matter.
            There are in that worke twelue or thirtéene sundry sorts of

verses, which differ eyther in length, or ryme, of destinction of the staues: but of them which differ in length or number of sillables not past sixe or seauen. The first of them is of tenne sillables, or rather fiue féete in one verse, thus.

                  A Shéepheards boy no better doo him call,
                  When Winters wastfull spight was almost spent.
               
            
            Thys verse he vseth commonly in hys swéete complayntes, and mornefull ditties, as very agréeable to such affections.
            The second sort hath naturally but nine syllables, and is a more rough or clownish manner of verse, vsed most commonly of him if your mark him in hys satyricall reprehensions, thys Shéepeheardes homelyest talke, such as the second AEglogue is.

                  Ah for pitty wyll rancke Winters rage,
                  These bytter blasts neuer gynne to asswage.
               
            
            The number of nine sillables in thys verse is very often altered, and so it may without any disgrace to the same, especially where the spéeche should be most clownish and simple, which is much obserued of hym.
            The third kynd is a pretty rounde verse, running currantly together, commonly seauen sillables or sometime eyght in one verse, as many in the next, both ryming together: euery two hauing one the like verse after them, but of rounder wordes, and two of them likewyse ryming mutually. That verse expresseth notably, light and youthfull talke, such as is the thyrde AEglogue betwéene two Shéepheardes boyes concerning loue.

                  
                     Thomalin why sitten we so
                  As weren ouerwent with woe
                  Upon so fayre a morrowe?
                  The ioyous time now nigheth fast
                  That wyll allay this bitter blast
                  And stake the Winter sorrow.
               
            
            
               
The fourth sort containeth in eche staffe manie vnequall verses, but most swéetelie falling together: which the Poet cal leth the tune of the waters fall. Therein is his song in prayse of Eliza.
               
                  Ye daintie Nymphes which in this blessed brooke
                  doo bathe your brest,
                  Forsake your watrie bowres and hether looke,
                  at my request.
                  And eke yée Uirgins that on Parnass dwell,
                  Whence floweth Helicon the learned Well,
                  helpe me to blaze
                  her woorthy praise
                  That in her sex doth all excell. &c.
               
            
            The fift, is a deuided verse of twelue sillables into two verses, whereof I spake before, and séemeth most méete for ye hand ling of a Morrall matter, such as is the praise of good Pastors, and the dispraise of ill in the seauenth AEglogue.
            
            The sixt kinde, is called a round, béeing mutuallie sung betwéene two: one singeth one verse, the other the next, eche rymeth with himselfe.

                  
                     Per.
                     It fell vppon a holie eue,
                  
                  
                     Wyl.
                     Hey ho holliday
                  
                  
                     Per.
                     When holie fathers wont to shrieue,
                  
                  
                     Wyl.
                     Thus ginneth our Kondelay. &c.
                  
               
            
            The seauenth sorte is a verie tragicall mournefull measure, wherein he bewayleth the death of some fréend vnder the person of Dydo.
               
                  Up then Melpomene the mournfulst Muse of nyne,
                  such cause of mourning neuer hadst afore:
                  Up grie
                        •…
                     y ghostes, and vp my mournfull ryme:
                  matter of myrth now stalt thou haue no more.
                  
                     
                     Dydo my déere alas is dead,
                  Dead and lyeth wrapt in leade:
                  O heause hearse
                  Let streaming teares be powred out in store.
                  O carefull vearse.
               
            
            These sortes of verses for breuities sake haue I chosen foorth of him, whereby I shall auoide the tedious rehearsall of all the kindes which are vsed: which I thinke would haue béene vnpossible, seeing they may be altered to as manie formes as the Poets please: neither is there anie tune or stroke which may be sung or plaide on instruments, which hath not some poetical ditties framed according to the numbers thereof: some to Rogero, some to Trenchmore, to downe right Squire, to Galliardes, to Pauines, to Iygges, to Brawles, to all manner of tunes which euerie Fidler knowes better then my selfe, and therefore I will let them passe.
            Againe, the diuersities of the staues (which are the number of verses contained with the diuisions or partitions of a ditty) doo often times make great differences in these verses. As whē one staffe containeth but two verses, or (if they bee deuided) foure: the first or the first couple hauing twelue sillables, the other fourteene, which versifyers call Powlters measure, because so they talle their wares by dosens. Also, when one staffe hath manie verses, whereof eche one rimeth to the next, or mutuallie crosse, or distant by thrée, or by foure, or ended contrarye to the beginning, and a hundred sortes, whereof to shewe seuerall examples, would bée too troublesome: nowe for the second point.
            The naturall course of most English verses séemeth to run vppon the olde Iambicke stroake, and I may well thinke by al likelihoode, it had the beginning thereof. For if you marke the right quantitie of our vsuall verses, ye shall perceiue them to containe in sound ye very propertie of Iambick féete, as thus.

                  ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯
                  I that my slender oaten pipe in verse was wont to sounde:
               
            
            
               
For transpose anie of those féete in pronouncing, and make short either the two, foure, sixe, eight, tenne, twelue sillable, and it will (doo what you can) fall out very absurdly.
            Againe, though our wordes can not well bee forced to abyde the touch of Position and other rules of Prosodia, yet is there such a naturall force or quantity in eche worde, that it will not abide anie place but one, without some foule disgrace: as for example try anie verse. as thys.

                  ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ 
                  Of shapes transformde to bodies strange I purpose to intreate.
               
            
            Make the first sillable long, or the third, or the fift & so foorth: or contrariwise make the other sillables to admitte the shortnesse of one of them places, and sée what a wonderfull defacing it wilbe to the wordes. as thus.

                  ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ 
                  Of strange bodies transformd to shapes purpose I to intreate.
               
            
            So that this is one especiall thing to be taken héede of in making a good English verse, that by displacing no worde bee wrested against his naturall propriety, wherevnto you shal per ceyue eche worde to be affected, and may easilie discerne it in wordes of two sillables or aboue, though some there be of indifferencie, that wyll stand in any place. Againe, in chouching the whole sentence, the like regarde is to be had, that wee excéede not too boldly in placing the verbe out of his order, and too farre behinde the nowne: which the necessitie of Ryme may oftentimes vrge. For though it be tollerable in a verse to sette wordes so extraordinarily as other spéeche will not admitt, yet héede is to be taken, least by too much affecting that manner, we make both the verse vnpleasant and the sence obscure. And sure it is a wonder to sée the folly of manie in this respect, that vse not onely too much of thys ouerthwart placing, or rather displacing of wordes, in theyr Poemes and verses, but also in theyr prose or continued writings: where they thinke to rolle

most smoothlie, and flow most eloquently, there by this means, come foorth theyr sentences dragging at one Authors tayle as they were tyde together with poynts, where often you shall tarrie (scratching your heade) a good space before you shall heare hys principall verbe or speciall word, leaste hys singing grace, which in his sentence is contained should be lesse, and his spéeche séeme nothing poeticall.
            The thyrd obseruation is, the Ryme or like ending of verses: which though it is of least importance, yet hath won such credite among vs, that of all other it is most regarded of the greatest part of Readers. And surely as I am perswaded, the regarde of wryters to this, hath béene the greatest decay of that good order of versifying, which might ere this haue béene established in our spéeche. In my iudgment, if there be any ornament in the same, it is rather to be attributed to the plentifull fulnesse of our spéeche, which can affoorde ryming words sufficient for the handling of any matter, then to the thing it selfe for any beautifying it bringeth to a worke: which might bee adorned with farre more excellent collours then ryming is. Not withstanding I cannot but yéelde vnto it (as custome requireth) the deserued prayses, especially where it is with good indgement ordered. And I thinke them right worthy of admi ration, for their readines and plenty of wytt and capacity, who can with facility intreate at large, and as we call it extempore, in good and sencible ryme, vppon some vnacquainted matter.
            The ready skyll of framing anie thing in verse, besides the naturall promptnesse which many haue therevnto, is much helped by Arte, and erercise of the memory: for as I remember, I reade once among Gaskoynes workes, a little instruction to versifying, where is prescribed as I thinke thys course of learning to versifye in Ryme.
            When ye haue one verse well setled, and decently ordered which you may dispose at your pleasure, to ende it with what word you wyll: then what soeuer the word is, you may spéedilie runne ouer the other wordes which are aunswerable thereunto, (for more readines through all the letters Alphabetically) whereof ro
                  •…
                may choose that which wyll best fitte the sence

of your matter in that place: as for example: if your last worde ende in Booke, you may straightwayes in your minde runne them ouer thus. Brooke, Cooke, crooke, hooke, looke, nooke, pooke, rooke, forsooke, tooke, awooke. &c. Nowe it is twenty to one, but alwayes one of these shall iumpe with your former worde and matter in good sence. If not, then alter the first.
            And indéede I thinke, that next to the Arte of memory, thys is the readyest way to attaine to the faculty of ryming well Ertempore, especially if it be helped with thus much paynes. Gather together all manner of wordes especially Monasillables, and place them Alphabetically in some note, and either haue them méetely perfectly by hart (which is no verye laboursome matter) or but looke them dilligently ouer at some time, practising to ryme indifferent often, whereby I am perswaded it wil soone be learned, so as the party haue withall any reasonable gyft of knowledge and learning, whereby hee want not bothe matter and wordes altogether.
            What the other circumstaunces of Ryming are, as what wordes may tollerably be placed in Ryme, and what not: what words doo best become a Ryme, and what not, how many sortes of Ryme there is: and such like I wyll not stay nowe to intreate. There be many more obseruations and notes to be prescribed, to the exacte knowledge of versifying, which I trust wilbe better and larger laide forth by others, to whom I deferre manie considerations in this treatise: hoping that some of greater skill will shortlie handle this matter in better sorte.
            Nowe the sundry kindes of rare deuises, and pretty inuentions which come from ye fine poeticall 
                  •…
               aine of manie in strange and vnacustomed manner, if I could report them, it were worthie my trauell: such are the turning of verses: the infolding of wordes: the fine repititions: the clarklie conueying of contraries, and manie such like. Whereof though I coulde sette downe manie: yet because I want bothe manie and the best kindes of them, I will ouerpasse: onelie pointing you to one or two which may suffice for example.
            Looke vppon the rufull song of Colin sung by Cuddie in the Sheepheardes Calender, where you shall sée a singuler rare

deuise of a dittie framed vpon these sixe wordes VVoe, sounde, cryes, pact, sleep, augment, which are most prettilie turned and wounde vppe mutually together, expressing wonderfully the dolefulnesse of the song. A deuise not much vnlike vnto the same, is vsed by some, who taking the last wordes of a certaine number of verses, as it were by the rebound of an Echo, shall make them fall out in some prettie sence.
            Of this sorte there are some deuised by Iohn Graunge, which because they be not long I wyll rehearse one.

                  If feare oppresse howe then may hope me shielde?
                  Denyall sayes, vayne hope hath pleased well,
                  But as such hope thou wouldest not be thine,
                  So would I not the like to rule my hart.
                  For if thou louest it bidds thee graunt forthwith
                  Which is the ioy whereof I liue in hope.
               
            
            Héere if you take the last worde of euerie verse, and place them orderlie together, you shall haue this sentence: Shielde well thyne hart with hope. But of these Echoes I knowe in déede verie daintie péeces of worke, among some of the finest Poets this day in London: who for the rarenesse of them 
                  〈◊〉
                them priuelie to themselues, and wil not let them come abroad.
            A like inuention to the last rehearsed, or rather a better, haue I séene often practised in framing a whole dittie to the Letters of ones name, or to the wordes of some two or thrée verses which is very witty, as for example this is one of W. Hunnis, which for the shortnes I rather chusde then some yt are better.

                  If thou desire to liue in quiet rest,
                  Gyue care and see, but say the best.
               
            
            These two verses are nowe as it were resolued into dyuers other, euery two wordes or sillables being the beginning of an other like verse, in this sort.

                  
                  
                     If thou delight in quietnes of life,
                  
                     Desire to shunne from brawles, debate and strife:
                  
                     To liue in loue with GOD, with freend and foe,
                  
                     In rest shalt sleepe when other cannot so.
               
               
                  
                     Gyue eare to all, yet doo not all beleeue,
                  
                     And see the end and then thy sentence gyue:
                  
                     But say For trueth of happy liues assignde
                  
                     The best hath he that quiet is in minde.
               
            
            Thus are there infinite sortes of fine conueiances (as they may be termed) to be vsed, and are much frequented by versifyers, as well in composition of their verse, as the wittines of their matter: which all I will referre to the consideration of euerie pleasant headded Poet in their proper gifts: onelie I sett 
                  •…
               ne these fewe sortes of their formes of versifying, which may stand in stéede to declare what manie others may be deuised in like sorte.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •…
               ne to procéede to the reformed kind of English verse which manie haue before this, attempted to put in practise, and to establish for an accustomed right among English Poets, you shall heare in like manner my simple iudgment concerning the same.
            I am fully and certainlie perswaded, that if the true kind of versifying in immitation of Gréekes and Latines, had béene practised in the English tongue, and put in vre from time to tyme by our Poets, who might haue continually béene mending and pollyshing the same, euery one according to their seuerall gifts: it would long ere this haue aspyred to as full perfection, as in anie other tongue whatsoeuer. For why may I not thinke so of our English, séeing that among the Romaines a long time, yea euen till the dayes of Tully, they estéemed not the Latine Poetrie almost worth any thing, in respecte of the Gréeke, as appeareth in the Oration pro Archia Poeta: yet afterwardes it increased in credite more and more, and that in short space: so that in Virgilles time, wherein were they not

comparable with the Gréekes? So likewise, now it séemeth not currant for an English verse to runne vpon true quantity, and those féete which the Latines vse, because it is straunge, and the other barbarous custome, béeing within compasse of euery base witt, hath worne it out of credite or estimation. But if our wry ters, béeing of learning and iudgment, would rather infringe thys curious custome, then omitte the occasion of inlarging the credite of their natiue spéeche, and theyr owne prayses, by practising that commendable kind of wryting in true verse: then no doubt, as in other partes of learning, so in Poetry, shoulde not stoupe to the best of them all in all maner of ornament and comlinesse. But some obiect that our wordes are nothing resemblaunt in nature to theirs, and therefore not possible to bee framed with any good grace after their vse: but cannot we thē as well as the Latines did, alter the cannon of the rule according to the quallity of our worde, and where our wordes and theyrs wyll agrée, there to iumpe with them, where they w
                  •…
               l not agrée, there to establish a rule of our owne to be directed by? Likewise, for ye tenor of the verse might we not (as Horace dyd in the Latine) alter their proportions to what sortes w
                  •…
                li
                  •…
               ed, and to what we sawe wold best become the nature of the thing bandled, or the quallity of the words? Surely it is to be thought that if any one, of sound iudgment and learning, shoulde putt foorth some famous worke, contayning dyuers formes of true verses, fitting the measures, according to the matter: it would of it selfe be a sufficient authority without any prescription of rules, to the most part of Poets, for them to follow and by custome to ratify. For sure it is, that the rules and principles of Poetry, were not precisly followed and obserued of the first beginners and wryters of Poetry, but were selected and gathered seuerally out of theyr workes, for the direction and behoofe of their followers. And indéede, he that shall with héedefull iudgment make tryall of the English wordes, shall not finde them so grosse or vnapt, but that they wyll become any one of ye most accustomed sortes of Latine or Gréeke verses méetely, and run thereon somewhat currantly
            I my selfe, with simple skyll I 
                  •…
               onfesse, and farre vnable

iudgment, haue 
                  •…
               entured on a fewe, which notwithstanding the rudenes of them may serue to shewe what better might bée brought into our spéeche, if those which are of méete abilitye woulde bestowe some trauell and endeuour thereuppon. But before I sette them downe, I wyll speake somewhat of such abseruations as I could gather necessary to the knowledge of these kinde of verses, least I should séeme to runne vpon them rashly, without regarde either of example or authority.
            The speciall poyntes of a true verse, are the due obseruations of the féete, and place of the féete.
            The foote of a verse, is a measure of two sillables, or of thrée, distinguished by time which is eyther long or short. A foote of two sillables, is eyther simple or mixt, that is, of like time or of diuers. A simple foote of two sillables is likewise twofolde, eyther of two long sillables called Spondaeus, as ¯ ¯ goodnesse, or of two short called Pyrrichius as ˘ ˘ hyther. A myxt foote of 2. sillables, is eyther of one short and one long called Iambus as ˘ ¯ dying: or of one long and one short, called Choreus as ¯ ˘ gladly. A foote of 3. sillables in like sorte is either simple or myxt. The simple is eyther Molossus, that is of thrée long, as ¯ ¯ ¯ forgiuenes: or Trochaeus, that is of 3. short, as ˘ ˘ ˘ merylie. The mixt is of 6. diuers sortes, 1. Dactylus, of one long, and two short, as ¯ ˘ ˘ happily. 2. Anapaestus, of two shorte, and one long, as ˘ ˘ ¯ tauelers. 3. Bacchius, of one short, and two long, as ˘ ¯ ¯ remembrers. 4. Palimbachius, of two long, and one short, as ¯ ¯ ˘ accorded. 5. Creticus of a long, a short, and a long, as ¯ ˘ ¯ daungerous. 6. Amphibrachus, of a short, a long, and a short, as ˘ ¯ ˘ reioyced.
            
            Many more deuisions of féete are vsed by some, but these doo more artificially comprehende all quantities necessary to the skannning of any verse, according to Tallaeus in hys Kethorique. The place of the féete is the disposing of them in theyr propper roomes, whereby may be discerned the difference of eche verse which is the right numbring of the same. Now as for the quantity of our wordes, therein lyeth great difficultye, and the chéefest matter in this faculty. For in truth there being such diuersity betwixt our words & the Latine, it cannot stande

indéede with great reason that they shoulde frame, wée béeing onelie directe
                  •…
                by such rules as serue for onely Latine words, yet notwithstanding one may well perceiue by these fewe, that these kinde of verses would well become the spéeche, if so 
                  •…
               ee there were such Rules prescribed, as woulde admitt the placing of our aptest and fullest wordes together. For indéede excepting a fewe, if our Monasyllables, which naturally shoulde most of them be long, we haue almost none, that wyll stande 
                  •…
               tlie in a short foote: and therfore if some exception were made against the precise obseruation of Position, and certaine other of the rules, then might we haue as great plenty and choyse of good woordes to furnish & sette foorth a verse, as in any other tongue.
            Likewise if there were some derection in such wordes, as fall not within the compasse of Gréeke or Latine rules, it were a great helpe, and thereof I had great misse in these few which I made. Such as is the last sillable in these wordes, able, noble, or possible and such like: againe for the nature and force of our W. of our th, of our oo, and ee, of our wordes which admytte an e in the ende after one or two Consonantes, and many other. I for my part, though (I must néedes confesse) many faultes escaped me in these fewe, yet looke I as good héede as I coulde, and in trueth did rather alwaies omitt the best wordes and such as would naturally become the spéech best, thē I wolde committe any thing, which shoulde notoriously impugne the Latine rules, which herein I had onely for my direction. Indéede most of our Monasyllables I am forced to make short, to supply the want of many short wordes requisite in these verses. The Participle A, being but the English article adioyned to Nownes, I alway
                  •…
                make short, both alone & in 
                  •…
               ōposition, and like wise the wordes of one sillable ending in E. as the, when it is an article, he, she, ye, &c. we I thinke should néedes be alwayes long because we pronounce continually VVe. I, beeing alone standing for the Pronowne Ego, in my iudgment might well be vsed common: but because I neuer sawe it vsed but short I so obserued it. Words ending in y I make short without doubt, sauing that I haue marked in others one difference

which they vse in the same, that is to make it short in the ende ˘ of an Aduerb, as gladly, and long in the ende ˘ of an Adiectiue as goodly: but the reason is as I take it, because the Adiectiue is or should be most commonly written thus goodlie. O, béeing an Aduerbe is naturally long: in the ende of wordes both Monasyllables and other I thinke it may be vsed common. The first of Pollisyllables I directed according to the nature of the worde, as I thought most aunswerable to Latine examples, sauing that somewhere I am constrayned to straine curtesy with the preposition of a worde compounded or such like, which brea keth no great square: as in defence or depart, &c. The myddle sillables which are not very many, come for the most part vnder the precinct of Position, whereof some of them will not possibly abide the touch, and therfore must néedes be a little wrested: such are commonly ye Aduerbs of thrée sillables, as mourn fully, spyghtfully and such like words, deriued of this Adiectiue, full: and therfore if there be great occasion to vse them, they must be reformed by detracting onely (l) & then they stand méetely currant, as mournfuly. The last sillables I wholly directed so néere as I could to the touch of common rules.
            The most famous verse of all the rest, is called Hexametrum Epicum, which consisteth of sixe féete, wherof the first foure are indifferently either Spondaei or Dactyli, the fift is euermore a dactyl, and the sixt a Spondae, as thus.

                  ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ 
                  Tyterus happily thou liest tumbling vnder a beetchtree.
               
            
            Thys kinde of verse I haue onely séene to be practised in our English spéeche: and indéede wyll stand somewhat more order lye therein then any of the other kindes, vntill we haue some tolleration of wordes made by speciall rule. The first that attempted to practise thys verse in English, should séeme to be the Earle of Surry, who translated some part of Virgill into verse indéede, but without regard of true quantity of sillables. There is one famous Distichon, which is common in the monthes of all men, that was made by one Master VVatson, fellowe of S.

               Iohns Colledge in Cambrydge about 40. yéeres past, which for the swéetnes and gallantnes therof in all respects doth math & surpasse the Latine coppy of Horace, which he made out of Homers wordes, qui mores hominum, &c.
               
                  ¯˘˘¯¯¯˘˘¯¯¯˘˘¯¯
                  All trauellers doo gladlie report great praise of Ulisses:
                  ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ 
                  For that he knevve manie mens maners, and savv many citties.
               
            
            Which two verses if they be examined throughout all the rules and obseruations of the best versifying, shall bee founde to attaine the very perfection of them all. There bee two other not much inferiour to these, which I found in ye Glosse of E. K.
                vppon the fift AEglogue of the newe Poet: which Tully translated out of Gréeke into Latine, Haec habui quae edi &c.
               
                  All that I eate did I ioy and all that I greedilie gorged.
                  ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ 
                  As for those manie goodlie matters left I for others.
               
            
            Which though they wyll not abide the touch of Synalaepha in one or two places, yet perhappes some English rule which might wyth good reason be established, would make them currant enough, and auoyde that inconuenience which is very obuious in our wordes. The great company of famous verses of thys sort, which Master Haruey made, is not vnknowne to any and are to be viewed at all times. I for my part, so farre as those examples would leade me, and mine owne small skyll affoorde me, haue blundered vppon these fewe, whereinto I haue translated the two first AEglogues of Virgill: because I thought no matter of mine owne inuention, nor any other of antiquitye more fitte for tryal of thys thing, before there were some more speciall direction, which might leade to a lesse troublesome manner of wryting.

                  
                  
                     
                        
                           The Argument of the first AEglogue.
                           
                           
                              Vnder the personne of Tityrus Vyrgill beeing figured himselfe, declareth to Melibeus an nother Neateheard, the great benefittes that he receyued at Augustus hand, who in the spoyle of Mantua gaue him hys goods and substaunce againe.
                           
                           
                              Melibaeus. and Tityrus.
                              TItyrus, happilie thou lyste tumbling vnder a beech tree,
                              All in a fine oate pipe these sweete songs lustilie chaunting:
                              VVe, poore soules goe to wracke, and from these coastes be remooued,
                              And fro our pastures svveete: thou Tityr, at ease in a shade plott
                              Makst thicke groues to resound vvith songes of braue Amarillis.
                              
                           
                           
                              Tityrus.
                              O Melibaeus, he vvas no man but a God vvho releeude me:
                              Euer he shalbe my God: from this same Sheepcot his alters
                              Neuer, a tender Lambe shall vvant, vvith blood to bedevv them.
                              This good gift did he giue, to my steeres thus freelie to vvander,
                              And to my selfe (thou seest) on pipe to resound vvhat I listed.
                           
                           
                              Melibaeus.
                              Grutch thee sure I doo not, but this thing makes me to vvonder,
                              VVhence comes all this adoo: vvith grieeuous paine not a little
                              
                                 
Can I remooue my Goates: here, Tityre skant get I forvvard
                              Poore olde crone, tvvo tvvyns at a clappe ith boysterous hasilles
                              Left she behind, best hope i'my flock laid hard on a bare stone.
                              Had not a lucklesse lotte possest our mindes, I remember
                              VVarnings oft fro the blast burnt oake vve savv to be sent vs.
                              Oft did a left hand crovv foretell these thinges in her hull tree,
                              But this God let vs heare vvhat he vvas, good Tityre tell me.
                           
                           
                              Tityrus.
                              That same Cittie so braue vvhich Rome vvas vvont to be called,
                              Foole did I thinke, to be like this of ours, vvhere vve to the pastures
                              VVonted vvere to remooue from dammes our young prettie Cattell.
                              Thus did I thinke young vvhelpes, & Kids to be like to the mothers,
                              Thus did I vvont compare manie great thinges vvith many little.
                              But this aboue all tovvnes as loftily mounteth her high head,
                              As by the lovve base shrubbes tall Cypresse shooteth aboue them.
                           
                           
                              Melibaeus.
                              And vvhat did thee mooue that needes thoū must goe to see Rome?
                           
                           
                              Tityrus.
                              Freedome: vvhich though late, yet once lookt backe to my pore state,
                              After time vvhen haires from my beard did ginne to be vvhitish:
                              Yet lookt back at last and found me out after a long time.
                              VVhen Amarill vvas once obtainde, Galatea departed:
                              For (for I vvill confesse) vvhilst as Galatea did hold mee,
                              Hope did I not for freedome, and care had I none to my cattell.
                              Though manie faire young beastes our folde for the aulters aforded
                              And manie cheeses good fro my presse vvere sent to the Cittie:
                              Seldome times did 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  bring anie store of pence fro the markett.
                           
                           
                              Melibaeus.
                              O Amarill, vvherefore, to thy Gods (very much did I meruaile)
                              Heauilie thou didst praie: ripe fruites vngathered all still:
                              Tityrus is not at home: these Pyne trees Tityre mist thee.
                              Fountaines longd for thee: these hedgrovves vvisht thy return bome
                           
                           
                              Tityrus.
                              VVh
                                    •…
                                 t vvas then to be doone? from bondage could not I vvind out:
                              Neither I could haue found such gentle Gods any vvhere els.
                              There did I see (Melibaee) that youth vvhose hestes I by course still
                              
                                 
Fortnights whole to obserue on the Alters sure will I not faile.
                              Thus did he gentlie graunt to my sute when first I demaunded.
                              Keepe your heardes poore slaues as erst, let bulles to the makes still.
                           
                           
                              Melibaeus.
                              Happy olde man, then thou shalt haue thy farme to remaine still,
                              Large and large to thy selfe, others nought but stonie grauell:
                              And foule slymie rush where with their lees be besprinkled.
                              Heere no vnwoonted foode shall grieue young theaues who be laded,
                              Nor the infections foule of neighbours flocke shall annoie them.
                              Happie olde man. In shaddowy bankes and coole prettie places,
                              Heere by the quainted floodes and springs most holie remaining.
                              Here, these quicksets fresh which lands seuer out fro thy neighbors
                              And greene willow rowes which Hiblae bees doo reioice in,
                              Oft fine whistring noise, shall bring sweete sleepe to thy sences.
                              Vnder a Rock side here will proyner chaunt merrie ditties.
                              Neither on highe Elme trees, thy beloude Doues loftilie sitting,
                              Nor prettie Turtles trim, vvill cease to crooke vvith a good cheere.
                           
                           
                              Tityrus.
                              First, therefore swift buckes shall flie for foode to the skies ward,
                              And from fish vvith drawn broade seas thēselues shal auoid hence:
                              First, (both borders broke) Araris shal run to the Parthanes,
                              And likewise Tygris shall againe runne backe to the Germanes:
                              Ere his countnaunce sweete shall slippe once out from my hart roote.
                           
                           
                              Melibaeus.
                              UUe poore soules, must some to the land eald Affrica packe hence.
                              Some to the farre Scythia, and some must to the swift flood Oaxis.
                              Some to Britannia coastes quite parted farre fro the whole world.
                              Oh these pastures pure shall I nere more chance to behold yee?
                              And our cottage poore with warme turues couerd about trim.
                              Oh these trim tilde landes, shall a rechlesse souldier haue them?
                              And shall a Barbarian haue this croppe? see what a mischiefe
                              Discord vile hath araisde? for whom was our labour all tooke?
                              
                                 
Novv Melibaee ingraft pearie stocks, sette vines in an order.
                              Now goe (my braue flocke once that were) O now goe my kidlings.
                              Neuer againe shall I now in a greene bowre sweetelie reposed
                              See ye in queachie briers farre a loofe clambring on a high hill.
                              Now shall I sing no Iygges, nor whilst I doo fall to my iunkets.
                              Shall ye my Goates, cropping sweete flowres & leaues sit about me.
                           
                           
                              Tityrus.
                              Yet thou maist tarrie heere, and keepe me companie this night,
                              All on a leauie couch: good Aples ripe I doo not lacke,
                              Chestnutts sweete good store, and plentie of curddes will I set theé.
                              Marke i'the Towne how chimnie tops doo beginne to be smoaking,
                              And fro the Mountaines high how shaddowes grow to be larger.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           The seconde AEglogue called Alexis.
                           
                           
                              The Argument.
                              
                                 Virgill in the personne of Corydon as some thinke, complayneth that he is not so gratious with Augustus as he would bee: or els it is to be referred to a youth Alexander, which was giuen him of Asinius Pollio, whom he blameth for the vnstedfastnes of his witt and wandring appetite, in refusing the freendly counsayle which he vsed to giue him.
                           
                           THat Sheepheard Corydon did burne in loue with Alexis,
                           All his masters deare: and nought had he whereby to hope for.
                           Onely in beechen groues, and dolesome shaddowy places.
                           Dailie resorted he: there these rude disordered outcryes,
                           Hylles and desert woodes throughout thus mournfully tuned.
                           O hard harted Alex, hast thou no regard to my sweete song?
                           Pyttiest me not a whitt: yea makst me nowe that I shall dye.
                           Yet doo the beastes find out fine shades and trim pretty coole plottes,
                           And fro the sun beames safe lie lyzardes vnder a bush
                                 •…
                              ufte:
                           And for workmen toughe with boyling heate so beparched,
                           Garlick sauery sweete and coole hearbes plenty be dressed.
                           But, by the scorcht banke sydes i'thy foote steppes stil I goe plodding.
                           
                              
Hedgerowes hott doo resound with Grashops mournfully squeaking.
                           O had I not ben better abyd Amarillis her anger?
                           And her proude disdaine? yea better abyde my Menalcas?
                           What though brown did he seeme? yea what though thou be so gallant
                           O thou fine chery cheekt child trust not t'much to thy beauty.
                           Black violetts are tooke when dayses white be refused.
                           Me thou dost despise vnknowne to thy selfe yet Alexis:
                           What be my riches great in neate, in milke what aboundance.
                           In Sicill hylles be my Lambes of which there wander a thousand.
                           All times, colde and hoteyet fresh milke neuer I wanted.
                           Such be my Musicke notes, as (when his flockes he recalling)
                           Amphion of Dirce did vse on shore Aracynthus.
                           Much mishapt I am not, for late in a bancke I behelde me,
                           VVhen still seas were calme, to thy Daphnis neede not I giue place
                           No, though thou be the iudge, if pictures haue any credite.
                           O were thou content to remaine with me by the downes heere,
                           In these lodgings small, and helpe me proppes to put vnder,
                           And trym kydling flocke with me to driue to the greene fieldes:
                           Pan in singing sweete with me shouldst brauely resemble:
                           Pan, was first the inuenter, pypes to adioyne in an order:
                           Pan, poore flockes and Sheepheardes to most duly regardeth.
                           Those fine lips thou needst not feare to bruse with a sweete pype:
                           VVhat did Amynt forsake i'this excercise to be cunning?
                           One pype with seauene sundry stops matcht sweetly together.
                           Haue I my selfe, Damaetas which ats death he bequeathd me,
                           And sayd, heere, thou art now the second which euer hath ought it.
                           So sayd Damaetas: but Amyntas spightfully scornde it.
                           Also, two pretty small wyld kyddes, most goodlie bespotted
                           Haue I, that heere i'the dales doo runne skant safe I doo feare me.
                           Twyce in a day two teates they suck: for thee will I keepe them.
                           Wondrous faine to haue had them both was Thestylis of late:
                           And so she shall: for I see thou scornst whatso-euer I giue thee.
                           Come hyther O thou sweete face boy: see see, to thy selfe heere
                           How fayre Nymphes in baskets full doo bring manie Lillies:
                           White violets sweete Nais plucks and bloomes fro the Poppies,
                           Narcyss, and dyll flowres most sweete that sauoureth also.
                           
                              
Casia, broade mary Goldes, with pancyes, and Hyacinthus.
                           And I my selfe rype peaches soft as silke will I gather.
                           And such Chestnutts as Amarill was wont to reioyce at.
                           Ploms wyll I bring likewise: that fruite shall be honored also.
                           And ye O Lawrell twygges shal I croppe, and myrte thy selfe next.
                           For ye be wont, (bound both in a bunch) most sweetely to sauour.
                           Thou art but a Clowne Corydon: these gifts esteemes not Alexis:
                           Nor by thy gifts to obtaine art meete to incounter Iolas.
                           VVretch, (ahlas) whats this that I wish? south blasts to the yong flowers
                           Or cleere crystall streames with loath some swyne to be troubled?
                           Ah mad boy from whom doost runne? why Gods ithe woods dwelt:
                           And Paris erst of Troy: Pallas most gladly reioyseth,
                           In these bowres: and in trym groues we all chiefely delight vs.
                           Grym Lyonesse doth course curst wolues, so wolues doo the kydlinges.
                           And these wantou Kyddes likewise these faire Cytisus flowers.
                           Thee Corydon (O Alex) some pleasure euery wight pulles.
                           See these yoked steeres fro the plough nowe seeme to be lett loose.
                           And these shaddowes large doo declare thys sun to depart hence
                           Styll I doo burne in loue. What meane in loue to be lookt for?
                           Ah Corydon Corydon, what raging fury dooth haunt thee,
                           Halfe cropt downe be thy vynes and broade brauncht elmes ouerhang them.
                           Rather about some needefull worke now busy thy selfe well,
                           Either on Osyers tuffe or bulrush weaue pretty basketts.
                           And if Alexis scorne thee still, mayst hope for another.
                           FINIS.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            I durst not enterpryse to goe any further with this rude translation: béeing for the respects aforesayd a troublesome and vnpleasant peece of labour: And therefore these shall suffice till further occasion shall serue to imploy some profitable paynes in this behalfe.
            The next verse in dignity to the Hexameters, is ye Carmen Elegiacū
                which consisteth of foure féete & two od sillables: viz: the two first feete, eyther Dactyli or Spondaei indifferent, the one long sillable: next two Dactyli and an other long sillable ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ some doo measure it in this sorte (and more truely yet not so readily to all) accoūting first two indifferently either Dactyli or Spondaei, then one Spondaei & two

               Anapaesti. But it commeth all to one reckoning. Thys verse is alwayes vnseperably adioyned vnto the Hexameter, and serueth especially to the handling of loue and dalliances, whereof it taketh the name. It will not frame altogether so currantlye in our English as the other, because the shortnesse of the seconde Penthimimer will hardly be framed to fall together in good sence, after the Latine rules. I haue not séene very many of them made by any: and therefore one or two for example sake shall be sufficient.
            This Distichon out of Ouid.
               
                  Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiosius auro,
                  At nunc barbaria est grandis habere nihil.
               
            
            May thus be translated.

                  Learning once was thought to be better then any gold was,
                  Now he that hath not wealth is but a barbarian.
               
            
            And thys.

                  Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo:
                  Et subito casu quae valuere ruunt.
               
               
                  Tis but a slender thread, which all mens states do depend on:
                  And most goodly thinges quickly doo fall to decay.
               
            
            As for the verses Phalocium and Iambicum, I haue not as yet made any tryall in them: but the Sapphic I assure you, in my iudgment wyl doo very pretty, if yt wants which I speake were once supplied. For tryall of which I haue turned the new Poets swéete song of Eliza into such homely Sapphick as I coulde.
            Thys verse consisteth of these fiue féete, one Chore, one spondae, one dactyl, and two Choreis, with this addition, that after euery third verse be sette one Adonium verse, which consisteth of a dactyl and a spondae. It is more troublesome and

tedious to frame in our spéeche by reason they runne without difference, euery verse being a like in quantity throughout, yet in my iudgement standeth méetely well in the same. I pray looke the Coppy which I haue translated in the fourth AEglogue of the Sheepheardes Calender: yt song of Colins making which Hobbinoll singeth in prayse of the Quéenes maiesty, vnder the name of Eliza.
               
                  
                     YE dainty Nymphcs that in this blessed brooke,
                     doo bathe your brest:
                     Forsake your watry bowres and hether looke,
                     at my request:
                     And onely you Uirgins that on Parnass dwell.
                     Whence floweth Helicon the learned well,
                     helpe me to blase
                     her worthy praise
                     That in her ser doth all excell.
                  
                  
                     Of fayre Eliza be your siluer song
                     that blessed wight:
                     The flowre of Uirgins, may she flourish long,
                     in princely plight.
                     For she is Syrinx daughter without spott,
                     Which Pan the Shéepheards God on her begot:
                     so sprang her grace,
                     of heauenly race,
                     No mortall blemish may her blott.
                  
                  
                     Sée where she sittes. &c,
                  
               
            
            The Saphick verse.

                  
                     ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ 
                     ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ 
                     ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ 
                     ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ 
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     O ye Nymphes most fine who resort to this brooke,
                     For to baths there your pretty breasts at all times:
                     Leaue the watrish bowres, hyther and to me come
                     at my request nowe.
                  
                  
                     And ye Uirgins trymme who resort to Parnass,
                     
                     Whence the learned well Helicon beginneth:
                     Helpe to blase her worthy deserts, that all els
                     mounteth aboue farre.
                  
                  
                     Nowe the siluer songes of Eliza sing yée,
                     Princely wight whose peere not among the virgins
                     Can be found: that long she may remaine among vs.
                     now let vs all pray.
                  
                  
                     For Syrinx daughter she is, of her begotten
                     Of the great God pan, thus of heauen aryseth,
                     All her exlent race: any mortall harde happe
                     cannot aproche her.
                  
                  
                     Sée, she sittes most séemely in a grassy gréene plott,
                     Cl
                           •…
                        thed in wéedes méete for a princely mayden,
                     Boste with Ermines white, in a goodly scarlett
                     brauely beséeming.
                  
                  
                     Decked is that crowne that vpon her head standes
                     With the red Rose and many Daffadillies.
                     Bayes, the Primrose and violetts, be sette by: how
                     ioyfull a sight ist.
                  
                  
                     Say, behold did ye euer her Angelike face,
                     Like to Phaebe fayre? or her heauenly hauour,
                     And the princelike grace that in her remaineth?
                     haue yée the like séene?
                  
                  
                     Medled ist red rose with a white together
                     Which in either chéeke do depeinct a trymme chéere,
                     
                        
Her maiestie and eye to behold so comely, her
                     like who remembreth?
                  
                  
                     
                        Phaebus once péept foorth with a goodly guilt hewe,
                     For to gaze: but when he sawe the bright beames
                     Spread abroade fro'her face with a glorious grace,
                     it did amaze him.
                  
                  
                     When another sunne he behelde belowe héere,
                     Blusht he red for shame, nor againe be durst looke:
                     Would he durst bright beames of his owne with hers match,
                     for to be vanquisht.
                  
                  
                     Shew thy selfe now Cynthia with thy cléere rayes,
                     And behold her: neuer abasht be thou so:
                     When she spreades those beames of her heauenly beauty, how
                     thou art in a dump dasht?
                  
                  
                     But I will take heede that I match not her grace,
                     With the Laton seede, Niobe that once did,
                     Nowe she doth therefore in a stone repent: to all
                     other a warning.
                  
                  
                     
                        Pan be may well boaste that he did begit her
                     Such a noble wight, to Syrinx is it ioy,
                     That she found such lott with a bellibone trym
                     for to be loaden.
                  
                  
                     When my younglinges first to the dammes doo bleat out,
                     Shall a milke white Lambe to my Lady be offred:
                     For my Goddesse shée-is yea I my selfe her Heardgrome
                     though but a rude Clowne.
                  
                  
                     Unto that place Caliope dooth high her,
                     Where my Goddesse shines: to the same the Muser
                     
                        
After her with sw
                           •…
                        te 
                           •…
                        iolincs about them
                     chéerefully tracing.
                  
                  
                     Is not it Bay braunche that aloft in handes they haue,
                     Eune to giue them sure to my Lady Eliza:
                     
                     D so sweete they play-and to the same doo sing too
                     heaunly to heare ist.
                  
                  
                     Sée, the Graces trym to the stroake doo foote it,
                     Deftly dauncing, and meriment doo make them,
                     Sing to the-instruments to reioyce the more. but
                     wants not a fourth grace?
                  
                  
                     Then the daunce wyll be eune, to my Lady therefore
                     Shalbe geune that place, for a grace she shall be
                     For to fill that place that among them in heaune, 
                           •…
                        e
                     may be receiued.
                  
                  
                     Thys beuy of bright Nymphes, whether ist goe they now?
                     Raunged all thus fine in a rowe together?
                     They be Ladies all i'the Lake behight soe?
                     they thether all goe.
                  
                  
                     One that is there chiefe that among the rest goes,
                     Called is Chores of Olyues she beares a
                     Goodly Crownett, méete for a Prince that in peace
                     euer abideth.
                  
                  
                     All ye Shéepheardes maides that about the gréene dwell,
                     Speede ye there to her grace, but among ye take héede
                     All be Uirgins pure that aproche to deck her,
                     duetie requireth.
                  
                  
                     When ye shall present ye before her in place,
                     Sée ye not your selues doo demeane too rudely:
                     
                        
Bynd the 
                           •…
                        llets: and to be fine the waste gyrt
                     fast with a tawdryne
                  
                  
                     Bring the Pinckes therewith many Gelliflowres swéete,
                     And the Cullambynes: let vs haue the Wlynesops,
                     With the Cornation that among the loue laddes
                     wentes to be worne much.
                  
                  
                     Daffadowndillies all a long the ground strowe,
                     And the Cowslyppe with a prety paunce let héere lye.
                     Kyngcuppe and Lillies so beloude of all men.
                     And the deluce flowre.
                  
               
            
            One verse there remaineth vntransilated as yet,-with some other of this sorte, which I meant to haue finished, but by reason of some let which I had, I am constrained to defer to some other time, when I hope to gratify the Readers with more and better verses of this sort: for in trueth I am perswaded a little paine taking might furnish our spéeche with as much pleasaunt delight in this kinde of verse, as any other whatsoeuer.
            
               
               Heere followe the Cannons or generall cautions of Poetry, prescribed by Horace, first gathered by Georgius Frabricius Cremnicensis: which I thought good to annex to thys Trearise, as very necessary obseruations to be marked of all Poets.
               
                  In his Epistle ad Pisones de arte Poetica.
                  FIrst let the inuention be méete for the matter, not differing, or straunge, or monstrous. For a womans head, a horse necke, the bodie of a dyuers coloured Byrd, and many members of sundry creatures compact together, whose legges ending like a Fyshes tayle: this in a picture is a wonderful deformitie: but if there be such diuersitye in the frame of a spéeche. what can be more vncomely or ilfauoured?
                  2. The ornaments or colours must not bee too many, nor rashly aduentured on, neither must they be vsed euery where and thrust into euery place.
                  3. The proprietie of spéeche must bee duely obserued, that wayghty and great matters be not spoken slenderly, or matters of length too briefly: for it belongeth much both to the comlinesse and nature of a matter: that in big matters there be lykewise vsed boysterous wordes.
                  4 In Poetical descriptions, the spéeche must not excéede all credite, nor any thing fainedlie brought in, against all course of nature.
                  5 The disposing of the worke must be such, that there be no offence committed, as it were by too cxquisite dilligence: for many thinges may be oft committed, and some thing by too

curious handling be made offenciue. Neyther is it in one part to be well furnished, and in another to be neglected. Which is prooued by example of a Caruer, who expressed very artificially the heade and vpper part of a body, but the rest hee could not make an ende of. A
                        •…
                     aine, it is prooued thus, that a body should not be in other partes beautifull, and yet bee deformed in the crooked nose: for all the members in a well shapen bodie must be aunswerable, sound, and well proportioned.
                  6. He that taketh in hande to write any thing must first take héede that he be sufficient for the same: for o
                        •…
                     ten vnwary fooles through their rashnes are ouertooke with great want of ability
                  7. The ornament of a worke consisteth in wordes, and in the manner of the wordes, are either simple or mixt, newe or olde, proppar or translated. In them all good iudgment must be vsed and ready wytt. The chiefest grace is in the most frequented wordes, for the same reason holdeth in wordes, as doth in coynes, that the most vsed and tried are best estéemed.
                  8. The kinde of verse is to be considered and aptly applied to the argument, in what measure is most méete for euery sort. The most vsuall kindes are foure, the Heroic, Eelegiac, Iambick, and Lyric.
                  
                  9. One must vse one kynde of spéeche alike in all wrytings. Sometime the Lyric ryseth aloft, sometime the comicall. To the Tragicall wryters belong properly the bygge and boysterous wordes. Cramples must be interplaced according fitly to the time and place.
                  10. Regarde is to be had of affections: one thing becommeth pleasant persons, an other sadde, an other wrathfull, an other gentle, which must all be héedefully respected. Thrée thinges therefore are requisite in verses, beauty, sweetnes, and the affection. Theophrastus sayth that this beauty or delectablenesse is a deceyt, and Aristotle calleth it 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      a momentany tyrrany. Sweetnesse retayneth a Reader, affection moueth him.
                  11 Euery person must be fitted accordingly. and the spéeche well ordered: wherein are to be considered the dignity, age, sex, fortune, condition, place, Country, &c, of eche person.
                  
                     
12 The personnes are eyther to be fayned by the Poets them selues, or borrowed of others, if he borrow them, then must hee obserue 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, that he folow that Author exactly whom he purposeth to immitate, and whereout he bringeth his examples. But if he fayne newe personnes, then must he kéepe his 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is equallie: so bringing them in eche place, that it be alwayes agréeable, and the last like vnto the first, and not make one person nowe a bolde boaster, and the same straightwaies a wise warie man, for that is passing absurd. Againe, euery one must obserue 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which is interpreted conuenientiam fitnesse: as it is méete and agréeable euery where, a man to be stoute, a woman fearefull, a seruant crafty, a young man gentle.
                  13 Matters which are common may be handled by a Poet as they may be thought propper to himselfe alone. All matters of themselues are open to be intreated of by any man: but if a thing he handled of some one in such sort, as he thereby obtaine great prayse, he maketh it his owne or propper to himselfe, as many did write of the Troiane war, but yet Homer made matter which was common to all, propper to himselfe.
                  14 Where many thinges are to be taken out of auncienter tongues, as the Latines tooke much out of the Gréekes, the wordes are not so preciselie to be followed, but that they bee altered according to the iudgment and will of the Immitator, which precept is borrowed of Tully, Non verbum verbo necesse est reddere.
                     
                  
                  15. The beginning must not be foolishly hand
                        •…
                     ed, that is, straungly or too long.
                  16. The proposition or narration let it n
                        •…
                     t be far fetched or vn likely, and in the same forget not the differences of ages and persons.
                  17. In a Comedie it is needfull to exhibite all the actions openlie, as such as are cruell, vnhonest, or ougly, but

such thinges may better boe declared by some méete and handsome wordes, after what sorte they are supposed to bee doone.
                  18. If a Commedye haue more Actes then fiue, it is tedious, if fewer, it is not sufficient.
                  It fytteth not to bring in the personnes of Gods, but in verie great matters. Cicero sayth, when the Tragedy wryters cannot bring theyr matters to good passe, they runne to God. Let not more personnes speake together then foure for anoyding confusion.
                  The Chori must be well garnished & sette foorth: wherin eyther menne are admonished, or reprehended, or counsayled vnto vertue. Such matter must bee chosen for the Chorus, as may bee méete and agréeable to that which is in hand. As for instruments and singing, they are Reliques of olde simplicitye. For the Musicke commonlye vsed at Theaters and the licenciousnesse of theyr songes, which together wyth theyr wealth increased among the Romaines, is hurtfull to discipline and good manners.
                  19 In a Satyr the clownish company and rurall Gods, are brought in to temperate the Heauinesse of Tragedies, wyth some myrth and pastyme. In iesting it must be obserued that it bee not lacyuious or Rybaldlike, or slaunderous, which precept holdeth generallie in all sortes of wrytynges.
                  In a 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      héede is to be taken, of the place, of the day, and of the personnes: as of Bacchus, Silenus, or the Satyres. Againe of the vnméetnesse or inconuenience of the matter, and of the wordes that they be fitted according to the persons: of Decorum, that he which represented some noble personage in the Tragedie, bée not some busy foole in the Satyr: finallie of the hearers, least they bee offended by myxing filthy matters with iestes, wanton toyes wyth vnhonest, or noysome with merry thinges.
                  
                     
20. The féete are to be applied propper to eucry kinde of verse, & therin a Poet must not vse too much licence or boldnes. The ancient writers in Iābick verses vsed at first pure Iābicks: Afterwards Spondaeus was admitted into Locos impares, but at last such was the licentious custome, that they woulde both Spondaeus where they listed, and other féete without regarde.
                  21. In compyling of verses great care and circumspection must be vsed.
                  Those verses which be made Extempore, are of no great estimation: those which are vnartificiall, are vtterly repelled as too foolish. Though many doo lightlic regard our verses, yet ought the Carelesnesse of the hearers to bee no cause in vs of errour and negligence. Who desireth to make any thing worthy to be heard of learned eares, let hym reade Greeke Authors heedefullie and continually.
                  22. Artes haue their increasinges euen as other things, béeing naturall, so haue Tragedies which were first rudely inuen ted by Thespis, at last were much adorned by AEschylus: at the first they were practised in Uillages of the Countrey, afterwardes brought to stages in great Citties.
                  23. Some Artes doo increase, some doo decay by a certayne naturall course. The olde manner of Commedies decayde, by reason of slaundering which therein they vsed against many, for which there was a penaltie appointed, least their bitternes should proceede too farre: In place of which among the Latines came the Satyres.
                  
                  The auncient Authors of Comedies, were Eupolis, Cratinus, and Aristophanes, of the middle sorte, Plato Comicus, of the last kinde Menander, which continued and was accounted the most famous.
                  24. A Poet should not content himselfe onely with others inuentions, but himselfe also by ye example of old wryters sholde bring something of his owne industry, which may bee laudable. So did they which writte among the Latines the Comedies called Togatae, whose arguments were taken from ye Gréekes, and the other which wrytt the Pretextatae, whereof the arguments were Latine.
                  
                     
25. Héedefulnesse and good composition maketh a persecte verse, and that which is not so may be reprehended. The faculty of a good witte exceedeth Arte.
                  26. A Poet that he may be perfect, hath neede to haue know ledge of that part of Philosophy which informeth ye life to good manners. The other which pertaineth to naturall thinges, is lesse plausible, hath fewer ornaments, and is not so profitable.
                  27. A Poet to the knowledge of Philosophie shoulde also adde greater experience, that he may know the fashions of men and dispositions of people. Thys profit is gott by tra
                        •…
                     elling, that whatsoeuer he wryteth he may so expresse 
                        〈◊〉
                      order it, that hys narration may be formable.
                  28. The ende of Poetry is to wryte pleasant thinges, and profitable. Pleasant it is which delighteth by béeing not too long, or vneasy to be kept in memory, and which is somewhat likelie, and not altogether sorged. Profitable it is, which 
                        〈◊〉
                      reth vppe the mindes to learning and wisedome.
                  29. Certaine escapes are to be pardoned in some Poets, specially in great workes. A faulte may bee committed either in respect of hys propper Arte, or in some other Arte: that a Poet shoulde erre in precepts of hys owne arte, is a shamefull thing, to committe a faulte in another Arte is to be borne withal: as in Virgill, who fayueth that AEneas comming into Affrica sl
                        •…
                     w with hys darte certaine Stagges, whereas indéede Affrica hath in it none of those beastes. Such errours doo happen eyther by vn
                        •…
                     defulnes, when one escapeth them by negligence: or by the common fragility of man, because none there is which can know all thinges. Therefore this last kinde of errour is not to be stucke vppon.
                  30. A good Poet should haue respect to thys, how to retaine hys Reader or hearer. In a picture some thing delighteth béeing sette farre of, something neerer, but a Poet should delight in all places as well in sunne as shaddowe.
                  31. In a Poet is no meane to be admitted, which if hée bee not he of all is the worst of all.
                  32 A Poeme if it runne not swéetely and smoothly is odious: which is proued by a simile of the two senses, hearing and tasting,

as in swéete and pleasaunt meates. And the Poem must bee of that sorte, that for the swéetenesse of it may bee acceptable and continue like it selfe vnto the ende, least it wearye or driue away a Reader.
                  33. Hée that would wryte any thing worthy the posteritye, let him not enterprise any thing wherevnto his nature is not agréeable. Mercury is not made of wood (as they say) neyther doth Minerua fauour all studies in euery one. In all Artes nature is the best helpe, and learned men vse commonly to say that A Poet is as well borne as made a Poet.
                  
                  34 Let no man estéeme himselfe so learned, but that he may submytte hys wrytinges to the iudgments of others, and correct and throughly amend the same himselfe.
                  35 The profitte of Poetry sprang thus, for that the auncient wyse men set downe the best things that pertained to mans life, manners, or felicity, and examining and proouing the same by long experience of time, when they were aged they published them in wrytinges. The vse of Poetry what it was at the first, is manifest by the examples of the moste learned men: as of Orpheus who first builded houses: of Amphion who made Citties: of Tyrtaeus who first made warre: of Homer, who wryt most wysely.
                  36 In an artificiall Poet thrée thinges are requisite, nature, Arte, and dilligence.
                  37 A wryter must learne of the learned, and he must not sticke to confesse when he erreth: that the worse he may learne to auoyde, and knowe howe to follow the better.
                  The confession of an errour betoken a noble and a gentle minde. Celsus and Quintillian doo report of Hippocrates, that least he should deceiue his posterity, he confessed certayne errours, as it well became an excellent minded man, and one of great credite. For (as sayth Celsus) light witts because they haue nothing, wyll haue nothing taken from them.
                  38. In making choise of such fréendes as should tell vs the trueth, and correct our wrytinges, héedefull iudgment must bee vsed: least eyther we choose vnskylfull folke, or flatterers, or dissemblers. The vnskilfull know not how to iudge, flatterers

feare to offende, dissemblers in not praysing doo séeme to commende.
                  39 Let no man deceiue himselfe, or suffer himselfe to be deceiued, but take some graue learned man to be iudge of his dooing, and let him according to hys counsayle change and put out what hée thinketh good.
                  40. He which wyll not slatter and is of ability to iudge, let him endeuour to nothing so much, as to the correction of that which is wrytten, and that let be doone with earnest and exquisite iudgment. He which dooth not thus, but offendeth wilfully in breaking his credit
                        •…
                      too rashly, may be counted for a madde, furious, and franticke foole.
                  41. The faultes commonly in verses are seauen, as either they be destitute of Arte, of facility, or ornament: or els, they be superfluous, obscure, ambicious, or néedelesse.
               
               
                  Out of the Epistles ad Mecaenatem, Augustum, & Florum.
                  42 An immitation should not be too seruile or superstitious, as though one durst not varry one iotte from the example: neyther should it be so sencelesse or vnskilfull, as to immitate thinges which are absurde, and not to be followed.
                  43 One should not altogether treade in the steppes of others, but sometime he may enter into such waves as haue not boene haunted or vsed of others. Horace borrowed ye 
                     Iambick verse of Archilocus, expressing fully his numbers and eleganty, but his vnséemely wordes and pratling tauntes hee moste wyshlye shunned.
                  44 In our verses we should not gape after the phrases of the simpler sorte, but striu
                        •…
                      to haue our writings allowable in the

iudgments of learned menne.
                  45. The common peoples iudgments of Poets is seldome true, and therefore not to be sought after. The vulgar sort in Rome iudged Pacu
                           •…
                        ious to be very learned, Accius to bee a graue wryter, that Aff
                           •…
                        ius followed Menander, Plautus, Ep
                           •…
                        charmus: that Terence excelled in Arte Caecilius in grauity: but the learned sorte were not of this opinion. There is extant in Macrobius (I knowe not whether Angellius) the like verdite concerning them which wryt Epigrammes. That Catullus and Caluus wrytt fewe thinges that were good, Naeuius obscure, Hō
                        
                           •…
                        tensius vncomely, Cynna vnpleasant, and Memmius rough.
                  46. The olde wryters are so farre to be commended, as nothing be taken from the newe: neyther may we thinke but that the way lyeth open styll to others to attaine to as great matters. Full well sayd Sidonius to Eucherius, I reuerence the olde wryters, yet not so as though I lesse estéemed the vertues and desertes of the wryters in this age.
                  47. Newnes is gratefull if it be learned: for certaine it is, Artes are not bothe begunne and perfected at once, but are increased by time and studie: which notwithstanding when they are at the full perfection, doo debate and decrease againe.
                  
                     Cic. de orat. There is nothing in the world which bursteth out all at once, and commeth to light all wholly together.
                  48. No man should dare to practise an Arte that is daungerous, especially before he haue learned the same perfectly: so doo guyders of Shyppes: so doo Phisitions: but so did not manie Romaine Poets (yea so doo not too many English wryters) who in a certaine corragious heate gaped after glory by wryting verses, but fewe of them obtayned it.
                  49. A Poet should be no lesse skylfull in dealing with the affectes of the mynde, then a tumbler or a Juggler shoulde bee ready in his Arte. And with such pyth shoulde he sette foorth hys matters, that a Reader should séeme not onely to heare the thing, but to sée and be present at the dooing thereof. Which faculty Fabius calleth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and Aristotle 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  50. Poets are either such as desire to be liked of on stages,

as Commedie and Tragedie wryters: or such as woulde bee regestred in Libraries. Those on stages haue speciall respect to the motions of the minde, that they may stirre bothe the eyes and eares of their beholders. But the other which séeke to please priuately with the walles, take good aduisement in their workes, that they may satisfy the exact iudgments of learned men in their studies.
                  51 A Poet shoulde not bee too importunate, as to offende in vnseasonable spéeches: or vngentle, as to contemne the admonitions of others: or ambicious, as to thinke too well of hys owne dooinges: or too wayward, as to thinke, reward enough cannot be gyuen him for his deserte, or finally too proude, as to desyre to be honoured aboue measure.
                  52 The emendations of Poemes be very necessary, that in the obscure poyntes many thinges may be enlightned, in the baser partes many thinges may be throughly garnished. Hee may take away and put out all vnpropper & vnséemely words, he may with discretion immitate the auncient wryters, he may abridge thinges that are too lofty, mittigate thynges that are too rough, and may vse all remedies of spéeche throughout the whole worke. The thinges which are scarce séemely, he may amende by Arte and methode.
                  53 Let a Poet first take vppon him, as though he were to play but an Actors part, as he may bée estéemed like one which wryteth without regarde, neyther let him so pollish his works, but that euery one for the basenesse thereof, may think to make as good. Hée may likewyse exercise the part of gesturer, as though he séemed to meddle in rude and common matters, and yet not so deale in them, as it were for variety sake, nor as though he had laboured them thoroughly but tryfled with them, nor as though he had sweat for them, but practised a little. For so to hyde ones cunning, that nothing should séeme to bee laborsome or exquisite, when notwithstanding, euery part is pollished with care and studie, is a speciall gyft which Aristotle calleth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  54. It is onely a poynt of wysedome, to vse many and thoyse elegant wordes, but to vnderstand also and to set foorth

thinges which pertaine to the happy ende of mans life. Wherevppon the Poet Horace, calleth the Arte poeticall, without the knowledge of learning and philosophy, a prating vanity. Therfore a good and allowable Poet, must be adorned with wordes, plcutious in sentences, and if not equall to an Drator, yet very néere him, and a speciall louer of learned men.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Epilogus.
            THis small trauell (courteous Reader) I desire thee take in good worth: which I haue compyled, not as an exquisite censure concerning this matter, but (as thou mayst well perceiue, and) in trueth to that onely ende that it might be an occasion, to haue the same throughly and with greater discretion, taken in hande and laboured by some other of greater abilitie: of whom I knowe there be manie among the famous Poets in London, who bothe for learning and ley sure, may handle this Argument far more pythilie th
                  •…
                my selfe. Which if any of them wyll vouchsafe to doo, I trust wee shall haue Englishe Poetry at a higher price in short space: and the rabble of balde Rymes shall be turned to famous workes, comparable

(I suppose) with the best workes of Poetry in other tongues. In the meane time, if my poore skill, can sette the same any thing forwarde, I wyll not cease to practise the same towardes the framing of some apt English Prosodia: styll hoping, and hartelie wishing to enioy first the benefitte of some others iudgment, whose authority may beare greater credite, and whose learning can better performe it.
         
      
   