
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            ¶A moſte frutefull / piththye and learned treatiſe, how a Chriſten mā ought to behaue himſelf in the daūger of death: and howe they are to be releued and cōforted, whoſe deare frendes ar departed oute of thys worlde, moſte neceſſarye for this our vnfortunate age and ſorowfull dayes.
            
               Iohn. 6.
               Verely verely, I ſay vnto you, he, that beleueth in me, hath euerlaſtyng lyfe.
            
         
         
            
            
            Vnto all thoſe / that vnfaynedly deſyer to lyue vnder the feare of god, and with pacience abide the commyng of our lord and ſauiour Ieſus Chryſte, thorowe the workynge of the holy goſt, grace and peace be multiplyed.
            THough al kīdes of beſtes haue ſome thynges commen one with another, as in that thei ſee, heare, fele deſier, moue frō one place to another: yet hath euery beaſte alſo hys own ſpeciall propertie, as the birde hath another nature then the fiſhe, the lion another

diſpoſicion then the wolfe. Euē ſo in other my bookes, heretofore by me publyſhed, I haue ſette forth a generall comforte concerninge trouble, ſickneſſe, pouertie, diſpleaſure, derth, warre, impriſonment & death, vnder ye whiche I haue comprehended al ye croſſe and afflyccyon of man. Neuertheles, euerye miſchaunce or aduerſity hath alſo hys owne ſpeciall conſideraciō. And foraſmuch as among terrible thynges vpon earth, death is eſtemed the moſt cruel of al, and it can yet wyth no wyſdome of man be ryghtfullye iudged, how it goeth with a Chriſtian in and after death: Therefore the greateſt neceſſitye requireth, that we Chriſtians be diligently inſtructed, by the infallyble worde of god, in eſpeciall touchyng the ende and concluſion of our lyfe. For whā the laſte houre

draweth nye, whyche we euerye daye (yea euery twincklyng of an eye) loke for: whether the ſoule, after it be departed, do liue: whether the corrupted body ſhal ryſe agayn: whether eternal ioye and ſaluacion be at hande, and which way conducteth and leadeth to ſaluacyon, therof hath the moſte ſubtyle worldly wiſe man, bi his owne naturall reaſon, no knoweledge at all,
            Plato, Ariſtotel, Cicero ye greteſt learned and wyſeſt, wryte of theſe high waightie maters, very childiſhly and folyſhli: and as for conſolacion that they geue, it is in no ſorte nor wyſe to be compared vnto the holi diuine ſcripture which onlye miniſtreth the true Chriſtian comforte in lyfe and death. And though euery manne ought daily to conſider his ende, and at all tymes to make hymſelfe

ready for death, ſeying tha
                  •
                he knoweth not how, where, and whan god ſhal lay hys hand vpō hym: Yet neuertheles at this preſent tyme we haue moe occaſiōs to talke and treate thereof, nowe that almightie god doth wyth diuers and ſundry plages, more greuouſly then here to fore viſite our vnrepentant lyfe, for that he all thys whyle hath perceaued in vs but litle amēdment: neyther nede we to thynke, that theſe, ye raigne, and other plages ſhall ouerleape vs. Cōſidering now yt I (though vnworthy and vnmete) was called by auctoritie, but ſpecially of god, to teache, to exhort and to cō
               fort: I haue, wyth great laboure out of ye holy Scripture, and out of olde and newe authours collected, howe a man ſhoulde prepare himſelfe vnto death, how he is to be vſed that lyeth a dying, & how

they ought to be cōforted, whoſe deare fredes ar departed. Which thynges, as they be orderly ſet in thys boke (righte dearly beloued and louyng reader) I do preſent, dedicate and offer vnto the. And though I can conſyder, that this lytle boke is to ſmall and ſlender a gyfte, becauſe of my perſō: yet is it neyther litle nor to be deſpyſed, for the fountaynes ſake that it floweth out of, and by reaſon of thē mater, wherof it is wryttē. For herein, out of the vnchaūgeable worde of god, are noted the head articles of our laſt conflyct and battayll, wherupō depēdeth eyther eternall victorye, honoure and ioye, or els euerlaſting loſſe and endles payne, of the whiche thynges we canne neuer thynke, talke nor treate ſufficiētly. Wherfore, wheras this litle boke goeth forth vnto thy vſe, that arte an vnfayned

Chriſtian, and to the cō
               fort of al ſuche as are afrayed of death: I praye the (for Chryſtes ſake) not onely to accept it as the teſtymonie of a wyllyng and louyng mynde towarde the, but alſo to haue ſtyll an earneſt deſier to that, that it hath pleaſed god by me at thys time to cōmunicate vnto the: that wyth thy thankfulnes thou mayeſt moue other to the life that can do better, and by thi profet ſtyrre the harueſt lord to ſende more harueſt men into his harueſt. Whych he cānot but do, outcept he coulde deny hymſelfe, that came into the worlde, nother to put out ye flax that ſmoketh, nor to breake the reade that is but brooſed, but to open to thē that knocke to hym.
            ¶Loue god. leue vanitye. and lyue in Chryſt.
            Vale et 
                  •
               i
                  •
               e
                  ••
                cum fortuna.
         
         
            
            
               ¶The contentes of the fyrſte booke
               ☞The firſt Chapter cōteineth: ☞What death is.
folio. 1
               ☞The .2. Chapter. ☞That the tyme of death is vncertayne.
folio. 6
               ☞The .3. Chapter. ☞That it is god, whiche hath layed the burden of death vpon vs.
folio. 7
               ☞The 4. Chapter. ☞That god ſendeth death beecauſe of ſynne.
folio. 9
               ☞The .5. Chapter. ☞That god turneth death vnto good.
folio. 12
               ☞The .6. Chapter. ☞That death in it ſelfe is greuous to the bodi and ſoule.
fo. 13
               ☞The .7. Chapter. ☞That we all commenly are afrayed of death.
folio. 22
               
                  ☞The .8. Chapter. ☞A commoditie of death, whā it delyuereth vs from this ſhorte tranſitorye tyme.
folio. 26
               ☞The .9. Chapter. ☞Another commoditie, whan death deliuereth vs from this miſerable tyme.
folio. 29
               ☞The .10. Chapter. ☞Witnes, that thys life is miſerable.
folio. 37
               ☞The .11. Chapter. ☞That the cōſideraciō of death afore hande, is profitable to all vertues.
folio. 40
               ☞The .12. Chapter. ☞In death we learne the ryght knowledge of our ſelues and of god alſo, and are occaſyoned to geue ouer oure ſelues vnto god.
folio. 43
               ☞The .13. Chapter. ☞That the dead ceaſſeth from ſynne.
folio. 45
               
                  ☞The .14. Chapter. ☞That the dead is delyuered from this vicious worlde: hauīg not onlye thys aduauntage, that be ſinneth no more, but alſo is diſcharged from others ſynnes.
folio. 48
               ☞The .15. Chapter. ☞That the dead obteyneth ſaluacion.
folio. 50
               ☞The .16. Chapter. ☞Similitudes, that death is wholſome.
folio. 52
               ☞The .17. Chapter. ☞Witneſſe, that death is wholſome.
folio. 59
               ☞The .18. Chapter. ☞That death can not bee auoyded. Item of companions of thē that dye.
folio. 62
               ☞The .19. Chapter. ☞Of natural helpe, in daunger of death.
folio. 66
               ☞The .20. Chapter.

☞That God is able and wyll helpe for Chryſtes ſake.
foli. 68
               ☞The .21. Chapter. ☞That god hath promyſed his helpe and comfort.
folio. 79.
               ☞The .22. Chapter. ☞God ſetteth to hys owne helpyng hande, in ſuch wyſe, and at ſuch time, as is beſt of all.
fo. 84
               ☞The .23. Chapter. ☞Examples of gods helpe.
folio. 88
               ☞The .24. Chapter. ☞That it is neceſſari to prepare for thys iourney.
folio. 90
               ☞The .25. Chapter. ☞Prouiſion concernyng temporal goodes, chyldren and frēdes, whyche muſte be lefte behynde.
folio. 92
               ☞The .26. Chapter. ☞Preparacion concerning goſtly maters: wyth what cogitaciō
                  
                     •
                   the mynde oughte moſte to be exercyſed.
folio. 97
               ☞The .27. Chapter. ☞Of repentaunce and ſorowe for ſynne.
folio. 102
               ☞The .28. Chapter. ☞Of trewe fayth.
folio. 103
               ☞The: 29. Chapter. ☞Of hope.
folio. 116
               ☞The .30. Chapter. ☞Of the ſacramentes.
fol. 117
               ☞The .31. Chapter. ☞Of prayer.
folio. 120
               ☞The .32. Chapter. ☞The forme of prayer.
fo. 124
               ☞The .33. Chapter. ☞A forme of prayſe and thākeſgeuyng.
folio. 130
               ☞The .34. Chapter. ☞That the prayer is harde.
fol. 133
               ☞The .35. Chapter. ☞That the word of god is to be practiſed and vſed.
fol. 134.
               ☞The .36. Chapter.

☞Amendment of lyfe neceſſarye.
foli. 136
               ☞The .37. Chapter. ¶Exhortacion vnto pacyence.
folio. 139
               ☞The .38. Chapter. *The original and frute of pacyence.
folio. 145
               *The .39. Chapter. *That a man, whyle he is yet in health, ought to prepare himſelf afore hande.
folio. 147
               *The .40. Chapter. *That the foreſaid things ought by tyme, and in due ſeaſon to bee taken in hande.
fol. 155
            
            
               ¶The contentes of the ſeconde booke.
               *The .1. Chapter. *How the ſicke oughte to be ſpoken vnto, if nede ſhall require.
folio. 164
               *The .2. Chapter. *Of the buriall, and what is to be done towardes thoſe, that are departed hence.
folio. 180
            
            
               ¶The contentes of the thirde boke.
               *The .1. Chapter. *How they oughte to be comforted, whoſe deare frendes are dead.
foli. 186.
               *The .2. Chapter. *That vnto ſuch, as dye, it is profitable to depart out of this lyfe.
foli. 195
               *The .3. Chapter. *What profit the death of frēds bryngeth to ſuch, as are lefte behynde alyue.
foli. 204
               *The .4. Chapter. *Companions that ſuffer like heuines

of hart.
folio. 212
               *The .5. Chapter. *Thorowe gods helpe, all hearte ſorowes are eaſed.
fol. 214
               *The .6. Chapter. *We muſte furnyſhe oure ſelues wyth prayer and pacience.
folio. 217
               *The .7. Chapter. *Enſamples of pacience in lyke caſe.
folio. 222.
               The .8. Chapter. *The commoditie of pacience.
folio. 228
               The .9. Chapter. We oughte ſo to loue our children and frendes, that we maye forſake them.
folio. 231
               The .10. Chapter. *Of the death of yonge perſons in eſpeciall.
folio. 234
               *The .11. Chapter. *Of ye death of the aged.
fo. 24
                     •
                  
               
               *The .12. Chapter. *Of ſtraunge death.
fo. 244
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The firſte boke of death. declarynge what death is.
            
               ¶The .i. Chapter
               HOly ſcripture makethe mencion of foure maner of deathes and lyues.
               1. The firſte is called a naturall lyfe, ſo longe as the ſoule remayneth with the bodye vpon earth. The naturall death is it that ſeparateth the ſoule from the body.
               2. The ſeconde is a ſpirituall vnhappye death here in tyme of lyfe, whan the grace of God, for our wyckedneſſe ſake, is departed

from vs: by meanes wherof, we were deed frō the Lorde our God, and from all goodnes, allthoughe as yet we haue the lyfe natural. Cōtrary vnto this, there is a goſtly, bleſſed lyfe, whā we thorowe the grace of the Lorde our God, lyue vnto hym, and to all goodneſſe.Ephe. 2. Hereof wryteth Paull, after thys maner: God whych is riche in mercy, thorow hys great loue wherewyth he loued vs, euen whan we were ded in ſynnes, hath quickened vs together in Chriſt.
               3. The thirde is a goſtly, bleſſed death here in tyme, whan the fleſhe, beyng euer the longer the more ſeparated from the ſpirite, dyeth away from hys own wycked nature. Contrari hereunto, is there a goſtli, vnhappy life, whā the fleſhe wyth hys wycked diſpoſicion, continuallye breakethe

forth and liueth in al wilfulnes. Agaynſt thys, doth Paul exhort vs, ſaying:Colloſſiās: Mortyfye therefore your members whyche are vpon earth: fornicacion, vnclenneſſe, vnnatural luſt, euil concupiſcēce couetouſnes: &c.
               4. The fourth, that the ſcripture maketh mencyon of, is an euerlaſtyng lyfe & an euerlaſting death: Not that the bodi & ſoule of man, ſhall after thys tyme loſe their ſubſtaunce, and be vtterlye nomore. For we beleue vndoubtedly, that our ſoule is immortal, and that euen thys preſent body ſhal ariſe againe. But foraſmuch as we our ſelues graunt, that life is ſwete, & death a bitter herbe, thys word (lyfe) by a figuratiue ſpeche is vſed for mirth and ioy. Thys worde (death) for heuines and ſorowe. Therefore eternall lyfe, is called eternall ioye: and eternall

death eternall damnaciō.
               Of theſe manyfolde deathes, haue we commenlye a peruerſe iudgement. We abhorre ye death of the body and haſt on a pace to the vnhappy goſtli death, which yet in it ſelf, is a thouſand times more terrible then any death corporall. For whan a man delyteth in hys owne wyckednes, though as yet he lyue vpon the earth, he is neuertheles dead before god, and the ſoule muſt continew ſtil damned for euermore.
               In thys boke, my handelynge is of naturall death, which beefore our eyes, ſemeth to be an vtter deſtruccion, and that there is no remedy wyth the dead (euen as whan a dogge or horſe dieth) and that god hath nomor reſpect vnto them: Yea the world ſwimmeth ful of ſuch vngodly people as haue none other meanynge.

Els doubtles woulde they beehaue themſelues otherwyſe towardes god. Death vereli is not a deſtruccion of man, but a delyueraunce of bodi & ſoule. Where as the ſoule beeyng of it ſelfe immortall, dooeth eyther out of the mouth aſcende vp into heauen, or els from the mouth deſcēdeth into the pit of hel: The body, loſyng hys ſubſtaunce tyll domes daye, ſhall than, by the power of god, bee rayſed from death, and ioyned agayne to the ſoule: that afterwarde the whole man with body and ſoule, maye eternallye inherite either ſaluacion, or els damnacyon.
            
            
               ¶That the time of death is vncertayne.

The .2. Chapter.
               THe body of mā is a very frayle thyng. Sickeneſſe maye conſume it: wylde beaſtes may deuoure it: the fyer may burne it: the water maye drowne it: the ayer may infect it: a ſnare maye choke it: the prickyng of a pynne maye deſtroye it. Therefore whan hys temporall lyfe ſhall ende, he can not tell.
               The principall cauſe, why we knowe not the tyme of death, is euen the grace of god: to the intēt that we by no occaſiō, ſhould lynger the amendemente of oure lyues vntill age: but alway feare god,Luke. 12. as though we ſhould dye to morowe.
               But aſſone as the houre commeth, no man ſhall ouerleape it.

Hereof ſpeaketh Iob,Iob. 14. whan he ſayeth, that god hath appointed vnto man hys bondes, which he cannot goe beyonde.
            
            
               ¶That it is God which hath layed the burden of death vpon vs. The .3. Chapter.
               IT becommeth all Chriſtians not only to ſuffer, but alſo to commende and praiſe, the wil of the heauenly Lord & kyng. Now is it hys wyll, that we dye. For if the ſparowes, wherof two are bought for a farthing fall not on the grounde without god the father, muche leſſe, we men (whom God hymſelfe eſtemeth to be of more value thē many

ſparowes, yea for whoſe ſakes other thīges were created) do fal to the groūd thorowe death, wythout ye wyl of god. Lyke as the ſouldiour tarieth in ye place, wherin he is appointed of ye chef captaine to fyght againſt the enemies, & if he cal him frō thēce, he willingly obeyeth: Euē ſo hath ye heauenlye captayne ſet vs vpon earth,Epheſi. 6. where we haue to fyghte, not wyth fleſhe and bloude, but wyth wycked ſpretes. Therefore if he geue vs leue, and call vs frō hence, we oughte by reaſon to obeye hym. Lyke as one ſhoulde not withdrawe himſelfe frō payeng what he oweth but gentle to reſtore the mony: So hath God lent vs thys lyfe, and not promyſed that we maye alwaye enioye it. Therfore is death deſcrybed 
                     〈◊〉
                   be, ye payment of natural debt.
            
            
               
               ¶That God ſendeth death becauſe of ſynne. The .4. Chapter.
               ACcordyng hereunto, ponder thou the iuſte iudgement of god: For out of ye third Chapter of the firſt boke of Moſes, it is euydently perceaued, that death is a penaltye deſerued, layed vpon vs al for the puniſhmēt of ſinne. As the little worme that groweth out of the tree, gnaweth and conſumeth the tree, of whom it hath hys begynnyng: So death groweth, waxeth oute of ſynne, and ſynne with the body it cōſumeth And ſpecially yt venymous ſickenes whiche they cal the peſtilēce

is ſente of God as a ſcourge for the puniſhment of our naughtynes. Herof ſpeaketh the word of god in the fifth boke of Moiſes, after thys maner:Deut. 28. If thou wylte not harken vnto the voyce of the Lord thy god, to kepe and to doe all hys commaundementes and ordinaunces, which I cōmaunde thee thys day: then ſhal al theſe curſes come vpon thee and ouertake thee: The Lorde ſhall make the peſtilence to cleue vnto thee, vntil he haue conſumed thee frō the lande, whether thou goeſt to enioye it. The lord ſhal ſmyte the with ſwelling, with feuers, heat, burning, wetheryng, wyth ſmyting and blaſtyng. And they ſhal folowe thee, tyll thou peryſhe.
               Yet among the moſt gracious chaſteninges, is the peſtilence rekened of the holy Prophete and kyng Dauid;
                     
                        •
                     . Reg. 14. c. who (after that he

of a pride,1. Par. 22.
                        •
                     . had cauſed the people to be numbred) whan the elecciō was geuē him, whether he would rather haue ſeuen yeares dearth, three monthes ouerthrowe in warre, or three dayes peſtylence in the land, made this aunſwere, I am in a meruelous ſtrayt. But let me fall I praye thee, into the handes of the lord, for muche is hys mercy: and let me not fall in to the handes of men.2. reg. 24. 1. Para. 22. Then ſent the lord a peſtylence into Iſrael that there died of thē .70000 mē. Wherefore if god ouertake thee with this horrible diſeaſe, be not thou angry with Saturnus and Mars, nor with the corrupt aier and other meanes, appoynted of god: but be diſpleaſed with thine own ſynnefull lyfe. And whan any fearefull ymage of death cō
                  meth before thee, remember that thou wyth thy ſynnes, haſte deſerued

muche more horryble thinges, whych god neuertheles hath not ſente vnto thee.
            
            
               ¶That God turneth death vnto good. The .5. Chapter.
               ALthoughe thou haſte deſerued an hundreth thouſande greater plages, yet ſhalte thou comforte thy ſelfe before hande, after thys maner: A father dooth hys childrē good, and not euil. Now is my beleue in god, as in mi gracious father thorow Ieſus chriſt and ſure I am, that Chryſte vpō the Croſſe, hath made a perfecte payment for all my ſynnes, and with his death hath taken away

the ſtrengthe of my death: Yea for me hath he deſerued and broughte to pas, eternall lyfe. Wherefore though death, in the ſyght of myne eyes, and of naturall reaſon be bytter and heauy: Yet by meanes of the paſſyon and death of Ieſus Chriſte, it is not euill, or hurtfull: but a benefyte, a profitable and wholſome thyng: euen an intraunce to euer laſtyng ioye.
            
            
               That death in it ſelfe is greuous to the bodye and ſoule. The .6. Chapter.
               WHat grefe and hurte, death doeth bring with it, I wil nowe declare:

To the intēte that whan we haue conſidered the ſame before trouble come, we maye in oure diſtreſſe, bee the leſſe a frayed, holdyng agaynſt it, the greate commodities of death, that Chryſte hath obtayned for all faythfull. It greueth a man at hys death to leaue the pleaſaunt beholdynge of heauen and earth, hys owne yong bodi and chereful ſtomack hys wyfe and chyldren, houſe & lande, feldes and medowes, ſiluer and golde, honoure and auctoritie, good frendes and olde companions, hys mynſtrelſy, paſtyme, ioye and pleaſure, that he hath had vpon earth.
               Afterwarde, whan death knocketh at the dore, then begynneth the greateſte trouble to woorke. Whan the diſeaſes be fallen vpō the body of man in greater nomber, they are agaynſt al the members

in the whole bodi, breaking in bi heapes with notable grefes ſo that the p
                     •
                  wer of the body is weakened, the mynde combred, the remembraunce aſtonied, reaſon blynded, ſlepe hindred, the ſenſes all to broken. By meanes whereof, the eyes are darkened, the face is pale, the fete are colde the handes blacke, the members out of courſe, the brow hardened the chynne falleth down, ye breth miniſheth, the deadlye ſweate breaketh out: Yea the whole mā is takē in, and diſturbed, in ſuche ſort, that he is now paſt mīding of any other thing. Death alſo is ſo much the more bytter and terrible, becauſe that the feble diſcomforted nature, doth print the horrible ymage of death, to depe in it ſelfe, and feareth it to ſore. And hereunto is the deuyl lykewiſe buſi, to ſet before vs a more

terrible euill death, then euer we ſaw, heard or read of: To the intent that we beyng oppreſt with ſuch imaginacions or thoughtes ſhould fly and hat
                     •
                   death, and be driuen to the loue and carefulnes of thys lyfe, forgettyng the goodnes of god, and to be founde diſobedient at our laſt ende. Moreouer, whoſo of hymſelfe is not thorowly aſſured, & knoweth yet ſynne by himſelfe, he is not aſtonied for naughte, for aſmuche as ſynne caryeth wyth it the wrathe of god and eternall damnacyon. Now, not only the euill, but alſo the good, haue greuous and manifolde ſynnes (yea moo thē they themſelues can thinke vpō) with the which, in daungers of bodye and lyfe, theyr mynd is oppreſt, as it were wyth a violente water that fearcely rageth and guſheth out: yea euen the ſame praiſe worthy

and cōmendable thing which the godly haue practiſed alreadi, that dooe they yet perceyue, not to be perfect, but myxte wyth vnclenneſſe. Herof ſpeaketh Eſaye in thys wyſe:Eſa. 64. we offende & haue been euer in ſynne, and there is not one whole. We are al as an vncleane thyng, & all oure righteouſneſſes, are as a cloth ſtayned wyth the flouers of a woman.
               Dauyd prayed:Pſal. 143. Lorde enter not into iudgemente wyth thy ſeruaunt, for in thy ſyght ſhal no man lyuing be iuſtified.
               Gregory wryteth: wo vnto the commendable life of men, if it be led wythout mercy.
               Item the Apoſtell Peter geueth warnyng: youre aduerſarye the deuil goeth about, as aroring lyen, ſeking whō he may deuour.
               If one that is about to ſhote a gonne, be vnſteady at the letting

of it goe, he myſſeth all together, and all that he prepared for it afore, is in vayne: Euen ſo at the ende of thys lyfe, are the deuyls moſt buſy, to turne vs from the ryght marke, that our former trauayle and laboure maye be loſte, foraſmuche as they knowe that there remayneth but a very ſmall tyme of lyfe. So that if the ſoule eſcape them now, they ſhall afterwarde goe wythoute it for euermore.
               Euen as myghtie enemyes do beſege and lay aſſaulte to a citie: So the deuels compace the ſoule of man wyth violence and ſubtiltie, to take poſſeſſion of the pore ſoule, to apprehende it and bring it to hel. Whan we are yet in proſperitie, the deuils would haue vs to make but a ſmall matter of it, as thoughe we were in no daunger to godwarde, albeit we blaſpheme,

be dronken and committe whordome, breake wedlocke &c. But in the daunger of death they bryng forth thoſe wycked ſinnes in moſt terrible wyſe, putting vs in mynde of the wrath of God, how he in tymes paſte here and there dyd puniſhe and deſtroye wycked doers: to the intente that our ſoules might be hindred, ſnared, ſhut vp, bounde and kepte in priſon, from repētance and faith, and neuer to perceiue any waye how to eſcape, & to be deliuered: And by reaſon therof wholye to diſpayre, and to beecome the deuils porcion.
               Furthermore, good frendes & companyons are loth to departe a ſunder, ſpeciallye ſuche as are new knit and boūde together one to another, as two maryed perſons. Now is the bodi and ſoule nereſt of all bounde and coupled

one to the other: but in ye diſtreſſe of death, the payne is ſo greate, that it breaketh thys vnitie, and parteth the ſoule from the body: for the whych cauſe a man at his death doth naturally ſygh in him ſelfe. Good companyons vpon earth, though they departe one from another, haue an hope to come together agayne: But whā the ſoule ones departeth frō the bodi, it hath no power to returne agayne to the body here in thys tyme.Iob. 14. Whereof Iob geueth two ſimilitudes: A tree if it bee cutte down, there is ſome hope yet, yt it will budde and ſhute forth the braunches agayne. Lykewiſe the floudes whan they be dryed vp, and the riuers whan thei be emptye, are fylled agayne thorow the flowynge waters of the ſea. But whan man ſlepeth, he riſethe not agayne vntill the heauen peryſh.

Thys vnderſtande, that after the commen courſe, one commeth not agayne in thys preſente lyfe: one cannot die twiſe, and after death cannot a man accomplyſhe any more, yt he neglected afore tyme.
               How goeth it now both wyth the body and ſoule after death? Aſſone as the ſoule from the body is departed, the body is ſpoyled of all hys powers, bewtye & ſenſes, and beecome a miſerable thynge to loke vpon. Auguſtyne ſayeth: a man that in his life time was exceadyng bewtiful & pleaſaunt to embrace, is in death, a terrible thing to beholde. How nobly and preciouſlye ſo euer a man hath lyued vpon earth, hys body yet begynneth to corrupte and ſtynke, and becommeth wormes meate: by meanes whereof, the worlde is of thys opinion, that ye body commeth vtterly to naught

for euer. The world alſo knoweth nothyng concernyng the immortalitie of the ſoule: & they whiche already beeleue, that the ſoule is immortall, doubte yet whether it ſhalbe ſaued. Yea they ſay plainly: it were good to dy, if one wiſt what chere he ſhould haue in yonder worlde. To them is death like vnto a miſty & darke hole, where one woteth not what wil become vpon hym.
            
            
               ¶That we al cō
                  monly are afrayed of death. The .7. Chapter.
               BY meanes of the occaſions aforeſayde, certaine heathē men, haue geuen vncomfortable and deſperate iudgement,

concernyng the paſſage of death. In the Poet Euripides in oreſte, one ſayth: It is better to lyue il, then to dye well. Which wordes are very vnchriſtenli ſpoken. Yet are there founde enſamples euen of holy men, that they had a natural feare of death. The holy Patriarke Abraham, thinkyng that he ſtode in daunger of death by reaſon of his wifes beutie, woulde rather ſuffer, all that els was exceadyng heuy and bitter. He iudged it a ſmaler mater, to call hys wyfe hys ſiſter, then to be deſtroyed hymſelfe.
               Ezechias an vpright valeaunt kynge,Eſay. 
                        •
                     . whan the Prophet tolde hym he ſhoulde not lyue, was afraide of death, and praied earneſtly yt his life might bee prolōged. In the newe teſtament, whan the Lorde Ieſus drewe nere to hys paſſion and death, he ſwet bloud

for very anguiſhe, and ſayd: My ſoule is heuy euē vnto the death. And thus he prayed: Father, if it be poſſible,Math. 26. take thys cuppe fro me.
               The Lorde ſayeth vnto Peter: Verely verely I ſaye vnto thee: Whan thou waſt yonge,Iohn. 21 thou girdedſt thy ſelf, and walkedſt whither thou wouldſt: but whā thou art olde, thou ſhalt ſtretche forth thy hādes and another ſhal girde thee, and leade thee whither thou wouldeſt not. Loe, Peter beeing excellentlye endewed wyth the ſpirite of God, and ſtedfaſte in fayth, had yet in hys age, a naturall feare of death, for the Lorde ſaid vnto him afore, that another ſhoulde leade hym whether he woulde not. Therefore wryteth gregory not vnright whā he ſaith Yf the pilours treble, what ſhall the bordes doe? Or if the heauēs

ſhake for ſuche feare, howe wyll that be vnmoued which is vnder That is if famous ſaynctes dyd feare to dye, it is much leſſe to be maruayled at, when we poore Chriſtians are afrayed.
               Experience wytneſſeth, howe febly we ſet oure ſelues againſte death. Many an olde (or otherwiſe vexed) man, can neither liue nor dye: for in hys aduerſytie, he ofte tymes wyſheth death:Note. And whā death approcheth, he would rather ſuffer what ſoeuer els vpō earth, if he mighte therebi eſcape death. Many of vs haue hearde the goſpell a long ſeaſon, and ſtudyed it throughly (ſo to ſay): yet are we ſo afrayed of the death of oure ſelues and of oure frendes, as though there were none other lyfe more to loke for: euen lyke as thei that be of Sardanapalus ſorte, doe imagyn, or els miſtruſt

the promes, comforte and helpe of god▪ as thoughe he were not able, or would not ſuccour and deliuer vs. Yea ſome there be, that if death be but ſpoken of, thei are afrayed at it.
            
            
               ¶The commoditie of death, whan it delyuereth vs from thys ſhorte tranſitorye tyme. The .8. Chapter.
               AL ye aforeſayd diſprofites and grefes, doe iuſtlye vanyſhe, and are nothing eſtemed, in comparyſon of theſe commodities, whan death deliuereth vs from this ruinous miſerable lyfe, frō all enormities and vicious people, and conducteth

vs to eternall ioye and ſaluacion: whyche thyng ſhall hereafter be playnly declared.
               Firſte, a ſhorte tranſitorye and ſhiftyng lyfe, oughte not to make vs ſorye. Though thys lyfe had nothing els but pleaſure, what is yet ſhorter and more in decaye, then the lyfe of man? Halfe the tyme do we ſlepe out: Childhode is not perceaued: youth flyeth away ſo, that a man doth lytle conſider it: Age crepeth on vnwares afore it is loked for. We can reckē well, that whan children growe, they increaſe in yeares and daies but properlye to ſpeake, in theyr growyng are theyr dayes mynyſhed. For let a man liue thre ſcore or foure ſcore yeares, looke nowe howe muche he hath lyued of the ſame dayes or yeares, ſo much is abated of the tyme appoynted.
               Is it not now a foli, that a mā
                  
can conſyder whan hys wyne a miniſheth in the veſſell,A lyuelye ſimilitude. and yet regardeth not howe hys lyfe doth dayly vanyſhe awaye?
               Among all thinges, moſt vndurable and moſt frayle is mannes lyfe, whyche innumerable waies mai be deſtroied.Pſal. 103. It is compared vnto a candle lyghte, that of the wynde, is ſoone & eaſely blowen out. A man in hys tyme is as the graſſe, and floryſheth as a flouer of the felde. For aſſone as the wynde goeth ouer it, it is gone.
               The heathen Poete Euripides called the lyfe of mortall menne, Dieculam, that is a lytle daye. But the opynyon of Phalerius Demetrius is, yt it ought rather to bee called one poynte of thys tyme. Thys ſimilitude ſoundeth not euyll among Chriſtians, For what is the whole ſumme of our lyfe, but euen one poynte, in comparyſon

of the eternitie, that vndoubtedlye foloweth hereafter?Pſal. 90. Dauid hymſelfe ſayeth that oure yeares paſſe away ſodenli. Man is lyke vnto a thynge of naught: hys tyme goeth awaye as doth a ſhadowe.
            
            
               ¶Another commoditie, whan death delyuereth vs from thys miſerable tyme. The .9. Chapter.
               OVr deſyer is to bee free from all werynes and miſerye: Yea ye more we conſider thys preſente wretched lyfe, the leſſe feare ſhal we haue of death which delyuereth vs from all miſchaū
                  ces

and grefes of thys tyme. Heapes of troubles happen vnto vs and vnto other men (yea to ſpeciall perſons and whole nacyons) in body, ſoule, eſtymacyon, goodes, wiues, children, frendes and natiue countryes.
               Bodely health is ſone loſt, but harde to obteyne agayne: And whan it is alreadye gotten, the doubte is, how long it wyll continewe. There bee moe kyndes of diſeaſes, then the beſte learned Phiſicians dooe knowe: amonge the ſame, ſome are ſo horrible and paynfull, that if one do but heare thē named, it maketh hym afraid. As the falling ſickenes, ye gowte, franſy, the ſodayne ſtroke & ſuch like. Beſides ſickenes, a man, thorowe out hys whole lyfe, cōmeth into daunger by a thouſande meanes & wayes. Conſider wyth how great carefulnes the chylde

is caried in the mothers wombe:Mans 
                        〈◊〉
                      lyfe. how daungerouſly it is brought forth into the world. The whole chyldehode, what is it els, but a contynual weping and wailyng? After ſeuen yeares, the childe hath hys tutours & ſcholmaſters to rule hym, and beat hym wyth roddes: whan he is come to mans ſtature, all that he ſuffered in his youth, doth he counte but a ſmal trauaile, in compariſon of it, that he now from henceforth muſt endure. The old man thynketh, that he caryeth an heauye burthen or mountayne vpon his necke. Therfore weye well the miſerable bodye, and the myerie ſacke of thy fleſhe towardes thy helper: and be not ſo ſore afrayed of death, that eaſeth thee of thys wretched carcaſe. Accordynge hereunto is the mynde combered and vexed, thorowe ſickenes and grefes of ye
                  
body, by reaſō that the body and ſoule are ioyned together. And how precyous a thyng (I praye you) is our naturall reaſō? Childhode knoweth nothing cōcerning it ſelfe. Younge folkes take vayn and vnprofitable thīges in hād, ſuppoſyng all ſhalbee golde, and conſider, neyther age to come, neither yet death: and (euen as the commen ſaying is) thus wyll the world be begiled. Wheras a mā, the longer he lyueth, ſhould euer be the more and more wyſe, it cō
                  meth oft to paſſe, that ye more he groweth in yeares the mor he doteth, and afterwarde becommeth euen a very chylde, yea twyſe a chylde.
               
                  The diſquietnes of mans lyfe.The mynde is tempted, ye luſte rageth, the hope diſceaueth, heuynes vexeth, carefulnes is full of diſtreſſe, feare diſquieteth: yea the terrour of death is more greuous,

then death it ſelfe. It can not be expreſſed, howe a man is ſometyme plaged wyth worldly fauour: afterward vexeth he himſelf with care of tēporal thinges. Many one marreth himſelf with vyce and wickednes, getteth him an euil conſcience and a gnawing heart.
               The vertuous alſo, haue their blemyſhes & temptacions, which vnto them are heuier & more hurtfull, then the blemyſhe of the body. Wherfore in ye miſery of this tyme, thys muſte not be eſtemed the leaſte porcion, that we and other folkes doe daylye commytte greuous ſynnes agaynſte God. Whych thyng thorowly to conſider, maketh a good hearted parſō ye more deſirous of death, whiche delyuereth vs from thys ſynfull lyfe. Moreouer, all condicions & eſtates of mē haue their grefes.The grefes of all eſtates
                  
Riches, that wyth great care and trauayle are gathered together & poſſeſſed, bee ſometyme loſte by ſtorme, fyer, water, robberye or theft. He that is in honoure and proſperitie, hath enemyes and euill wyllers. Whoſo hath the gouernaūce and rule of mani, muſt alſo ſtande in feare of manye thynges. And what occupacyon or handy crafte can a manne vſe, but he hath in it, wherof to complayne?
               Not onely hath a man trouble on hys owne behalfe, but a verye ſtony ſtomacke and an yron hart muſt it be, that is not ſory, whan hurte doth happen to hys father and mother, to hys owne wyfe, children, frendes or kynſfolkes.
               Furthermore, the vniuerſall troubles is manyfolde and pyteous, ſpecially now at this preſēt, wyth noyſome diſeaſes, diuiſiōs

warres, ſedicions, vprours. Like as one water waue foloweth vpon another, and one can ſcace auoyde another: Euē ſo oft times commeth one miſchaunce in anothers necke. And in this ſhort life vpon one onely daye to haue no trouble, it is a great aduauntage: therefore ought we to be the leſſe ſory, whan the time of our deliueraunce approcheth.
               Now might one obiect againſt thys and ſaye, that thys preſente lyfe hath many pleaſures and paſtymes wythall.Oure troubles moe thē ioyes. Neuertheleſſe a man muſt open the other eye alſo and behold, that in this life there is euer more ſorowe then ioye behynd. Worldly ioye is myxte, defiled, ſpotted and peruerted with ſorowe and bitterneſſe. It maye well begynne in a ſoroweful matter, to bryng a ſhort fugytiue pleaſure, but ſodenlye it endeth, to a

mans greater heuyneſſe. Not in vayne doth the wiſe manne ſaye: The harte is ſorowefull euen in laughter,Prouer. 14. and the ende of myrthe is heuynes.
               Philip the kyng of the Macedonians, whan he vpon one daie had receaued thre glad meſſages (one, that the victory was hys in the ſtage playe of Olympus: the ſeconde, that his captaine parmenio, had wyth one battayle ouer come the Dardanes: the thyrde, that the Quene his wife was delyuered of a ſonne:) he helde vp his handes towardes heauē, and ſayed: O ye goddes, I beeſeche you, that for ſo great and manyfolde proſperite, ye wyl poynte me a competent miſfortune. The wyſe prudent kyng, feared the in conſtancye of fortune, whych (as the heathen talke therof) enuyeth greate proſperite. And therefore

hys deſyer was, that hys exceadyng well fare myghte be ſauced wyth a litle trouble.
               Experience it ſelfe teacheth vs. Where dyd euer one liue ye ſpace of a moneth, or one whole day in pleaſure and eaſe ſo thorowelye, but ſome what hath offended or hyndred hym? Therfore earthlye ioye is not ſo greate, ſo durable, nor ſo pure, but that ye whole life of man, may wel be called a vale of miſery.
            
            
               VVytneſſe / that thys lyfe is miſerable. The .10. Chapter.
               TEſtimony of ye ſcripture,Iob. 9. mā is borne to miſeri, as the bird is to fly.Iob. 7. The daies of mā are like ye daies of an hired ſeruaunt,

euen a breth, & nothing but vain. Loke thorowe the whole booke, called Eccleſiaſtes, the preacher. Auguſtyne wryteth: Yf a manne were put to the choyſſe, that eyther he muſt die, or els liue again afreſhe, and ſuffer lyke thynges as he had ſuffered already afore: he would rather dye, ſpecially if he thorowly conſider, how many daungers and miſchaunces he ſcace yet hath eſcaped.
               Whoſo now knoweth likewiſe, that God thorowe death, dooeth make an end of miſeri vpō earth: It bryngeth hym greate comfort and eaſe. Yea he ſhall rather deſier death, then feare it. For euē holi Iob himſelfe alſo, whā he was robbed of hys health, ryches and chyldrē, and rebuked of his wife and frendes, wiſhed rather to die then to lyue.
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 19.Helyas, beeing ſure in no place,

deſyred to dye. Tobias, beeynge ſtryken wyth blyndenes and miſintreated of his wife, praid thus: O lord, deale wyth me according to thy wyll, and commaunde my ſprete to be receaued in peace, for more expedient were it for me to dye, then to lyue. If holy mē now by reaſon of their great troubles deſyred death: It is no meruayle if we, that are weaker and of more imperfeccion, be werye of this life. Yea an vnſpeakeable foly is it, a mā to wiſhe for to continew ſtill in the lyfe of miſery, and not to prepare himſelfe to another and better lyfe.
            
            
               
               ¶That the conſideracion of death afore hand, is profitable to al vertues. The .11. Chapter.
               
                  A Very mad and vnhappye man muſte he nedes bee, whych thorowelye conſidereth, that vndoubtedly he muſt depart hence, he knoweth not howe nor whan: (and whether he ſhall than haue hys ryght mynde, directyng him ſelfe to God and deſiring grace, he cannot tell) and wyl not euen nowe oute of hande beginne to feare God, and ſerue hym more dilygently.
               As the pecoke, whan he loketh vpon hys owne fethers, is

proude: but whan he beholdethe hys fete, letteth ye fethers downe: euen ſo doeth manne ceaſſe from pride, whan he conſidereth hys ende. For in the ende he ſhall bee ſpoyled of al temporall bewtye, ſtrengthe, power,Iob. 
                        •
                     
                   honoure and goodes. Naked came I oute of my mothers wombe, and naked ſhall I turne thyther againe.
               Thorowe the conſyderacion of death, maye a man deſpyſe all fleſhelye luſte and worldly ioye.
               For euen the ſame fleſhe, that thou ſo pampereſte wyth coſtly daintyes and vaine ornamentes, muſte ſhortelye bee a porcion for wormes: neyther is there a more horryble caryon, then of man.
               Mani one thorow feare of death geueth almes, exerciſeth charitie, doth his buſines circumſpectly.

To be ſhorte: the conſideracyon of death, is euen as a ſcourge, or ſpurre that prouoketh forwarde, and geueth a man ſuffycient occaſyon to auoyde eternall death, whereof, the death of the bodye is a ſhadowe. Therefore the Niniuites,Ionas. 3. fearing their owne ouer throwe and deſtruccion, repented and fell to a perfecte amendemente.
            
            
               ¶In death we learne the ryghte knoweledge of our ſelues and of God, and are occaſyoned to geue ouer our ſelues vnto God. The .12. Chapter.
               
                  MAny a man in hys lyfe time, can diſſemble and ſhewe a fayer countenaunce: but at the point of death no ipocriſie, or diſſimulacion hath place. There verely ſhall we be proued and tried, what maner of fayth, loue, cō
                  ſcience and comfort we haue, and how much we haue comprehēded out of the doctryne of Chriſt. Then doth god let vs ſe our own ſtrength, howe that all worldly ſtrength is a thouſād times leſſe, thē we euer would haue thought al the daies of our life. Then perceyue we ſeingly and felingly (ſo to ſaye) that we ſtande in the only hande and power of god, and that he alone endureth ſtil lorde and maſter ouer death and lyfe. Then learne we ryghte to fele the worthines of the paſſion & death of Chryſte, and in oure ſelues to

haue experyence of the thynges, wherof we neuer toke ſo diligēte hede afore in our lyfe tyme.
               Then come the fittes of repentaunce for ſinnes committed, that we thynke: O If I had knowen that god would haue been ſo earneſte, I woulde haue lefte many thynges vndone, whyche I (alas therfore) haue commytted. Then were we forced to receiue & loue the goſpel, which els here to fore might not come to ſuch ſtout and ioly yonkers. Then begyn we to runne to god, to call vpon hym, to magnifie and praiſe him, faithfully to cleue vnto hym, and vpryghtly to ſerue hym.
            
            
               ¶That the dead ceaſſeth from ſynne.

The .13. Chapter.
               ALl Chriſtians deſyer to bee free from ſinne: for ſinne and vice doth farre farre vexe the faythful, more then al miſfortunes of the bodye. Nowe though one dooe kepe himſelfe from ſynne: Yet ſtandeth he in a ſlipperye place: the fleſhe is weake, ſtrong is the deuyll, of whom it is eaſelye ouercome: whoſo ſtandeth, let hym loke that he fall not.1. Corin. 10.
               
               Whyle the captayne yet fyghteth, it is vncertayne whether he ſhall haue ye victory & tryumphe: euen ſo thoughe a man doe valeauntly defende himſelfe agaynſt the luſtes of the fleſh & temptacyons of the deuyll, he maye yet fall, and loſe the victorye. Yea if we alwaye lyued, we ſhould doe

more euill: ſynne ceaſſeth not, tyl we come to be bleſte with a ſhuffell. Death cutteth awaye ſynne from vs, and delyuereth vs from vnclene ſēſes, thoughtes, wordes and dedes. For though death in paradiſe was enioined vnto mā
                  ▪ for a penaltie of ſynne: Yet thorowe the grace of God in the merites of Chryſte, it is become vnhurtefull: Yea a medicine to pourge oute ſynne, and a verye workehouſe, wherin we are made readye to euerlaſtyng ryghtuou
                     •
                  
                  neſſe.
               Lyke as terrible Goliath with hys own ſworde was deſtroyed of Dauid: euen ſo, wyth death, 
                     •
                   came by the meanes of ſynne, i
                     •
                   ſynne ouercome and vanquiſhed of Chryſt. Yf it greued vs from our heartes, that we dayly ſe and fynde, howe we continuallye vſe our ſelues againſt the moſt ſwet
                     •
                  
                  
wyll of oure moſte deare father: and were aſſured withal, that in death we ceaſſe from ſynne, and begin to bee perfect & ryghteous, howe were it poſſible, that we ſhould not ſet litel by death, and pacientlye take it vpon vs? Oute of ſuche a feruente gelouſye and godly diſpleaſure, Paul, after he had earneſtlye complayned, that he founde another lawe, whyche ſtroue agaynſte the law of God, ſyghed and cryed:romanes. 7. Oh wretched man that I am, who ſhall deliuer me from the body of this death? Agayne, ſo long as death hath ſo euil a taſt in vs, and we will perforce continue ſtyll in the lyfe of the fleſh: we bewray oure ſelues, that we doe not well, nor ſufficiently vnderſtande our owne defaultes, neyther fele them deepe inough, nor abhorre thē ſo muche as we ſhoulde: Yea that we bee

not earneſt deſyrers of innocency, nor feruent louers of our heauenly father.
            
            
               ¶That the dead is deliuered from his vicious world, hauyng not onely thys aduauntage, that he ſynneth no more, but alſo is diſcharged from other ſynnes. The .14. Chapter
               WHoſo leaueth nothing els worthy behinde him, but that he is quyte from vicious people, may wel be the gladder to depart hence: partly for that he can

bee nomore tempted of them, nor enticed by their euill enſample: partly for that, thoughe he could not be deceaued by others, yet it greueth hym at the heart, to ſee other fo
                     •
                  kes practyſe their wilfulnes. Now hath vice & ſinne eueri where gotten the vpper hande: the trueth is deſpiſed, god hymſelfe diſhonoured, ye pore oppreſt, the good perſecuted, the vngodly promoted to auctorite, Antichriſt tryumphing. Great complaining there is, that ye worlde is euer the longer ye worſe. Foraſmuch thē as thorowe death we be diſcharged of ſo vicious a world, whō ſhould it delite to lyue heare any more? Thys meaning doeth ye preacher ſet forth in ye .4. chapter of Eccleſiaſtes, ſayinge: So I turned me & cōſidered al the violēt wrong yt is done vnder ye ſōne. And behold ye teares of ſuch as were oppreſt: &

there was no man to comforte them, or that woulde deliuer and defende them, from the violence of their oppreſſours. There is at thys daye, by the grace of God, many a worthy Chryſtian, that deſireth rather to dye, then to bee a loker vpon ſuch deuelyſhe wylfulnes, as commonly goeth forwarde.
            
            
               ¶That the dead obtayneth ſaluacion. The .15. Chapter.
               AS for vicious vnrepentant people, whan they dye, I knowe no comfort for thē. Theyr bodyes in dede ſhal ryſe at the laſt day, but foule and marked to eternall payne. Theyr

ſoules ſhalbe delyuered vnto the deuill, to whom they haue done ſeruice. An enſample hereof ſtandeth of the rich man:Luke. 1
                        ••
                     
                   agayn there is thenſample of good Lazarus that al Chriſtians are taken vp of the aungels into eternall ioie and ſaluacion. We muſt not fyrſte be purged in purgatory, but thorow death we eſcape the deuill, the worlde and all miſfortunes, that thys tyme is oppreſte wythall. Yf we nowe ſhoulde loſe oure bodies, and not haue them again, then were death in dede a terryble thyng, neyther precyous nor much worth. But our body is not ſo litle regarded before god, for euen vnto the body alſo hath he alreadye prepared ſaluacyon. Yea euen for thys intente, hath he laied vpon our neckes, the burthen of naturall death, that he myghte afterward clothe vs with a pure

renewed and cleare body, and to make vs gloryous in eternal lyfe. Therefore death alſo, whiche is a begynnyng of the ioyful reſurreccyon, ought to bee eſtemed deare and precyous in our eyes. After death verely is the ſoule in it ſelf clenſed from all ſynnes, and endewed with perfect holynes, wyſedome, ioye, honour and glory for euermore.
            
            
               Similitudes that death is whole ſome. The .16. Chapter.
               IF an olde ſiluer goblet be melted, and new faſhioned after a bewtiful maner, then is it better then afore, & neyther ſpilte nor deſtroyed. Euen ſo haue

we no iuſt cauſe to complayne of death, whereby the body, beeyng delyuered from all fylthyneſſe, ſhall in hys due tyme be perfectly renewed.
               The egge ſhell, thoughe it bee goodly and faire faſhioned, muſt bee opened and broken, that the yong chicken maye ſlip oute of it. None otherwyſe doth death diſſolue and breake vp our bodi, but to the intent that we maye attain vnto the lyfe of heauen.
               The mothers wombe caryeth the child ſeuen or nyne moneths, and prepareth it, not for it ſelfe, but for the world wherin we are borne: Euen ſo thys preſent time ouer al vpon earth ſerueth not to thys ende, that we muſt euer bee here, but yt we ſhould be brought forth and borne oute of the body of the world, into another & euer laſting life. Hereunto behold the

wordes of Chriſt:Ion. 17. a woman whā ſhe trauayleth, hath ſorowe, beecauſe her houre is come. But aſſone as ſhe is delyuered of the chylde, ſhe remembreth nomore the anguiſhe, for ioye that a man is borne into the worlde.
               Namely, lyke as a chylde, oute of the ſmall habitacion of his mothers wombe, wyth daunger and anguiſhe is borne into this wyde world: Euen ſo goeth a man, thorowe the narowe gate of death with diſtreſſe and trouble, out of the earth into the heauenly lyfe.
               For thys cauſe, did the olde Chriſtians call the death of the ſayntes, a newe birth. Therefore oughte we to note well thys comforte, that to dye, is not to periſh but to bee fyrſte of all borne a ryghte.
               The death of the faythfull, formeth in dede, to be lyfe vnto the

death of the vnbeleuers: but verely thys is as great a difference as betwene heauen & earth. Our death is euen as a death Image, made of wood: whyche gyrneth wyth the teeth and feareth, but canot deuour. Our death ſhould be eſtemed, euen as Moyſes braſen ſerpente: whych hauynge the fourme and proporcyon of a ſerpent, was yet wythout bytynge, without mouing, without poyſō
                  yng. Euen ſo, thoughe death bee not vtterly take nawaye. Yet thorow ye grace of god, it is ſo weakened & made voyde, that the only bare proporciō remayneth. Whā the maſter of the ſhip thynketh, he is not wyde from the place, where he muſt land & diſcharge, he ſayleth on forth ye more cherefully and gladly: euen ſo the nearer we drawe vnto death, where we muſt lande, the more ſtowtly

ought we to fighte, agaynſte the goſtlye parels. Lyke as he that goeth a farre iourney, hath vncertayne lodgyng, trauayll and laboure, and deſyreth to returne home to hys own country, to his father and mother, wyfe, childrē and frendes, among whom he is ſureſte, and at moſte quiete: by meanes wherof he forceth ye leſſe for any roughe carefull pathe or waye homewarde: euen ſo all we are ſtraungers and pilgremes vpon earth.Par. 30. c. 
                        •
                     ſa. 39.119. c Peter. 2. b. Cor. 5. a. 
                        •
                     hilip. 3. c. 
                        •
                     c. 11. c. 13. b Cor. 15. Our home is paradiſe in heauen: our heauenly father is god, the earthy father of al men, is Adam: oure ſpirituall fathers are the patriarkes, prophetes and apoſtles, whiche altogether wait and long for vs. Seyng nowe yt death is the path and waye vnto them, we ought the leſſe to fly it, to the intente that we maye come to oure righte home, ſalute our fathers

and frendes, embrace thē,Hebre. 13. end dwel with them foreuer. We haue heare no remayninge citie, but we ſeke one to come.Pſalme. 3. Our conuerſaciō & burgerſhip is in heauē.
               But if any man be afrayed of death, and force not for the country of heauen, onely becauſe of tē
                  poral pleaſures, theſame dealeth vnhoneſtlye: euen as dooe they, that wheras they ought to go the next way home, ſet them down in a pleaſaunt place, or among companions at the tauerne: Where they lying ſtyl forget their owne country, and paſſe not vpon their frendes and kynſfolkes. Howe euill thys becommeth thē, euerye man may wel cōſider bi himſelfe.
               The lord Ieſus geueth thys ſimilitude: except the wheate corne fall into the grounde and dye, it 
                     •
                  ydeth alone, but if it dye, it bryngeth foorthe muche frute.

Lykewyſe, Paull compareth vs men vnto graynes of corne, the churcheyarde,
                     
                        •
                      Corin. 15 to a felde. To dye he ſayeth, is to be ſowne vpon Gods felde. The reſurreccyon, with the life that foloweth after, reſembleth he to the pleaſaunte grene corne in Sommer.
               If a man laie in a darke miſerable pryſon wyth thys condicion, that he ſhould not come forth, tyl the walles of the tower were fallen down, vndoutedly he would be right glad to ſee the walles begynne to fall: our ſoule is kept in wythin the body vpon earth, as in captiuitie and bondes. Nowe aſſone as the body is at a poynt, that it muſte nedes fall, why woulde we be ſory? For by thys approcheth the deliueraūce, whō we, out of the pryſon of miſerye, ſhalbe brought before the moſte amiable countenaunce of god, into

the ioyefull fredome of heauē. Accordynge to thys dyd Dauyd pray:Pſalm. 14
                        •
                     
                   Bryng my ſoule out of pryſon (O Lorde) that I maye geue thankes vnto thy name. Item in many places of ſcripture, to dye is called to ſlepe, death it ſelfe aſlepe. Lyke as it is no grefe for a mā to goe ſlepe,1. Cor. 15. Theſſa. 4▪
                   nor whā he ſeith hys parentes and frendes laye them downe to reſte (for he knoweth, that, ſuche as are aſlepe, doe ſoone awake and riſe again) ſo whā we or our frendes depart awaye by death, we oughte to erecte and coumforte oure ſelues with the reſurreccion.
            
            
               VVytneſſe that death is holſome. The .17. Chapter
               
                  FOr the ſtrengthnyng of ou
                     •
                   fayth, I wyll alledge euydente teſtimonye of Gods worde.Eccleſia. 7. The preacher ſayth▪ The day of death is better, thē ye day of birth. As if he would ſay: in the daye of thy birth, the
                     •
                   arte ſente into the colde, into th
                     •
                   heat, into hūger and thirſt, whe
                     •
                  
                  in is ſynne and wretchedneſſe in the day of thy death thou ſhal
                     •
                   be deliuered from all euil. Agai
                     •
                   we reade:Sapien. 4. thoughe the righteous be ouertaken with death, yet ſhal
                     •
                   he be in reſt.
               
                  Iohn. 5.Verely verely I ſay vnto you, he that heareth my wordes, an
                     •
                   beleueth on him that ſēt me, ha
                     ••
                   euerlaſtynge lyfe, and ſhall no
                     •
                   come into damnacyon, but is ſca
                     ••
                  ed from death vnto lyfe.Rom. 14. a. 2. Cor. 4. b Yf w
                     •
                   lyue we lyue vnto the Lorde: 
                     〈◊〉
                   we dye, we dye vnto the Lorde▪ Therfore whether we liue or dy
                     •
                  
                  
we are the Lordes. Behold, how comfortably thys is ſpoken of all Chriſtians.
            
            
               That death can not be auoyded. Item of companyons of them that dye. The .18. Chapter.
               VPon thys condicion are we borne into the worlde, into thys light, not to continewe alway therin, but (whā god wil) thorowe temporall death, to laye aſyde and put of, the trauayle of thys miſerable lyfe. Wyttie men haue foūde out, how hard ſtones may be brokē & mollified, & how wilde beaſtes may be tamed: but nothing could they inuent, wherby

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
death myght bee auoyded. It is not vnwyſelye ſayd: Goddes hande, maye a man eſcape, but not death.
               Metrodorus wryteth, that againſt bodeli enemies, there may be made fortreſſes, caſtels & bulworkes: but ſo farre as cōcerneth death, all men haue an vnfenſed citie. In other daungers, power, money, flight counſayll and policy mai helpe: But as for death, it can neyther be banyſhed with power, nor boughte wyth moneye, nor auoyded wyth flying away, nor preuented wyth counſayle, nor turned backe wyth polycye. And though thou be now delyuered from ſyckenes, yet wythin 
                     •
                   litle whyle, thou muſte, whether thou wylte or no, departe hence to deathes home: for the higheſte law geuer of all, tolde oure fyrſ
                     •
                   father ſo afore.
               
                  In what daye ſoeuer thou eateſt therof, thou ſhalte dye the death:Gene. 
                        •
                     
                   vnderſtande, that ye death of the ſoule bryngeth with it the death of the body.
               Whoſo now grudgeth and is not contente to dye, what is that els, but that he forgettyng hymſelfe and hys owne nature, complayneth of God in heauen, that he ſuffered hym to be borne, and made hym not an aungell?
               Why ſhould we refuſe ye thing that we haue commen with other men? Nowe doeth death touche, not onely vs, but highe and lowe eſtate, younge and olde, man and woman, maſter and ſeruaunte. As many as came of the firſt mā, muſte laye downe theyr neckes. Death is an indifferent iudge, regardeth no perſon, hath no pitie on the fatherles, careth not for ye poore, diſpēſeth not with ye rich,

feareth not the myghtie, paſſeth not for the noble, honoureth not the aged, ſpareth not the wyſe, pardoneth not the folyſhe.
               For like as a riuer is poiſoned in the well ſpryng or fountayne, ſo was the nature of man altogether in our firſt parētes. And foraſmuch as they themſelues were maymed thorow ſinne, they haue begotten vnright and mortal children.roman. 5. Touching this ſaieth Paul, by one man came death vpon all men.
               Now let vs conſider, what excellent companions and holi feloſhyp they alſo haue that ar dead. Paul wryteth, that we muſte bee lyke ſhapen vnto the ymage of ye ſonne of god. If he nowe, that of nature was immortall and innocent, became mortal for our ſakes, euen Ieſus Chryſte our ſauiour: why would we then, that manye

and ſondry wayes haue deſerued death, continewe here ſtyll and not dye? Abraham the faythful, Sampſon the ſtronge, Salomon the wyſe, Abſalom the fayer one, yea all the Prophetes and Apoſtles, kynges and Emperours, thorowe death departed oute of thys lyfe. A very deintie and tender body muſt that be, whych cō
                  ſydering ſo great multytudes of coarſes, doth yet out of meaſure vexe hymſelfe, beecauſe the lyke ſhall happen vnto him. That wer euen like, as if one woulde take vpon hymſelfe, to be better, then all ryghtuous and holy men, that euer were ſithens the begynnyng of the worlde.
            
            
               
               Of naturall helpe in daunger of death. The .19. Chapter.
               WHoſo wyll helpe hymſelfe from the peſtylēce wyth flying awaye, leauyng his own wyfe, frendes and neyghbours: he declareth vnperfectnes of faith, and ſtandeth not wyth Chryſtian charitie, where we owe vnto others, the ſame, that we in like caſe would gladly haue at theyr handes.
               Graunt that the peſtylence is ſuch an infectuous ſickeneſſe, as one taketh of another. What thā? If one ſtande in battayle raye to fyghte for hys country, muſt not he alſo looke for a gonne ſtonne, to be ſente hym into hys boſome,

to carye home? doeth it therefore beſeme hym to breake the araye, and to fly? Lyke as there the enemyes of the bodye are at hande: So here doe the goſtlye aduerſaryes beſege the ſoule of hym that is a dying, where one Chryſtyan ſhoulde helpe another, wyth worthy talke. Therfore is that a foliſh vnaduiſed counſayll, whan we, wyth neglectynge of oure owne members, wil flie from the wrath of god, thynkyng thorowe ſynne, to eſcape the punyſhmēt of ſynne. Experyence alſo doth ſhew, that ſuch folkes doe ofte peryſh aſwel as other: yea ſoner then they that fled not at al. But phiſicke is permytted of god: as in the tyme of peſtylence, wyth fyers and perfumes to make ye ayer more wholſome from poyſō, and to receaue ſomewhat into the bodye, for the conſumyng of euil humours, and

to hinder the infeccion. Itē whan one is taken with a dyſeaſe, to be let bloud, to ſweate, to folow the phiſicians inſtrucciō: ſuch thīges are in no wyſe to be reprehēded. So yt, whether it turne to deathe or lyfe, the hearte onely and hope hange vpon God. The phyſicion ſhoulde neyther bee deſpyſed nor worſhypped. For to thynke ſcorn to vſe medecyne in ſyckeneſſe, what were that els, but euen to tempt god?
            
            
               ¶That god is able and wyll helpe for Chryſtes ſake. The .20. Chapter.
               
                  SPecially whā death is at hād a man fyndeth no helpe in any creature of heauen and earth, whereby he might fortunatly ſuppreſſe ye exceading greate feare of death, but only in god ye father, in Chriſte hys ſonne, and in the holy ſprete of them both.
               It is god that knoweth the parels of thy death, and can medle wythall. Thorowe hys power ſhalt thou get thorow, and drinke the bitter draught. Though we dyyet liueth god before vs, with vs after vs, and is able to preſerue vs for euer. Chryſt ſayeth: wepe not, the damoſel is not dead, but ſlepeth. Faythles reaſon vnderſtandeth not the miſtery of God and laugheth. But Chryſt, ye true god, hath both ye woorde & worke together, & ſaieth no more but, ariſe, and the ſoule came again to ye bodye, & ſhe aroſe. Oute of thys

and ſuche lyke enſamples, oughteſt thou (faynte hearted man) to vnderſtande the infinite power of god, who can receaue thi ſoule alſo, and preſerue it.
               Not only is god able, but wil alſo helpe graciouſli. Whi ſhould not he lay vpon thee ſome greate thyng, (as death is) ſeyng he addeth ſo greate aduauntage, helpe and ſtrēgth therto,Math. 10. d. Luke. 12. a. Pſal. 34. Pſal. 55. c. 1. Pet. 5. a to proue what hys grace and power maye doe? For he hath nombred all ye heares of our head: that is, he alwai hath hys eies vpon vs and careth euer for vs.
               Yea that he loueth vs more thē we loue oure ſelues, and maketh better prouiſion for vs then we can wyſh, he hath openly and euidently teſtified in his own deare ſonne:Marke. 16. c. Luke. 22. c. whō he cauſed to take our miſerable nature vpon hym, and therein, for the ſynnes of all the

world to ſuffer, to dye, to ryſe agayne, to aſcende vp to heauen,Acre. 7. 
                        •
                      roma. 8. 
                        •
                      Eph. 1▪ c. 4. Philip. 2. a Col. 3. a 1. Pet. 3. c Heb. 1. a, 2, 
                        •
                      10, b, 12, a Pſal. 110, a where he ſytteth at the right hād of god the father almyghtye. Among the whych articles, euerye one doth helpe and comfort ſuch as are a dying.
               The naturall ſonne of god him ſelfe from heauen, became a mortall man,The human
                        ••
                     
                     tie of Chry
                        ••
                     
                   to the intent that mans mortal nature, thorowe the vnityng thereof with the immortall nature of the Godheade, in hys owne onely perſon, myght be exalted to an immortall lyfe.
               He,The paſſion of Chryſt hauyng a natural feare of death, ſaid: my ſoule is heuy euē vnto the death. He prayed alſo: father, if it be poſſible, take thys cup from me. But thys feare and terrour dyd he ouercome,Math, 26, 
                        •
                      Marke, 14, 
                        •
                      Io, 12, c Luke, 22, 
                        •
                     
                   for he addeth thereto and ſayeth: father not my wyll, but thyne be fulfylled. Thorowe thys victorye of

Chryſt, maye al Chryſtyans alſo ouercome ſuch terrour and feare as they be in.
               Item though the Iewes blaſpheme neuer ſo muche, and ſaye: lette hym come downe from the croſſe:Math, 27 Marke, 14, d Luke, 22, c he hath helped other, lette hym nowe helpe hymſelfe: as though they woulde ſaye: There there ſeyft ye death, like a wretche muſt thou dye, and no man is able to helpe thee: Yet dyd ye lorde Ieſus holde hys peace thereto, as if he heard and ſaw them not. He made no aunſwere agayne, but onely regarded the good wil and pleaſure of his father. Therfore though we haue an horrible temptacion of death, as thoughe there were neyther comforte nor help for vs ani more, yet in Chriſt and with Chryſt we may endure all, and wayte ſtyll vpon the gracious good wyll of god.
               
                  He dyd not onely ſuffer the horrour and temptacyon of deathe, but death it ſelfe, yea the moſte horryble death: wherby he tooke from vs the death eternall, and ſome deale mollified and ſwaged our temporall death: yea beſides thys, he made it profytable and wholſome. So that death,2, Cor, 5, 
                        •
                      Phil, 1, c roma, 7, c Hebru, 2, which of it ſelfe ſhoulde els be a beginning of euerlaſtyng ſorowe, is become an intraunce into eternall ſaluacyō. Accordyng to this meanyng are ye wordes of Paul: whā he ſayth, that Chryſt, by ye grace of god, taſted death for all men. Item, he became partaker offleſſh and bloud, to put down thorowe death hym, that had the lordſhyp ouer death, that is to ſay, the deuyll: and that he myghte delyuer them, whyche thorowe feare of death, were al theyr lyfe tyme in daunger of bondage.
               
                  
                  Chryſtes reſurreccyon,Moreouer that Chryſt is the lyuing & immortall ymage againſt death, yea the very power of our reſurreccyon and of lyfe euerlaſtyng, he hymſelfe hath teſtifyed wyth hys owne ioyefull and victoryous reſurreccion: & alſo with that, that in hys reſurreccyon, many other ſayntes that were dead, roſe from death agayne.Math, 27,
               
               Agayne howe full is it of comforte and pure treaſure, that S. Paul ioyneth our reſurrecciō vnſeparably,1, Cor, 15, to the reſurreccyon of Ieſus Chriſt. Lykewyſe doth S. Paul comforte hys diſciple Timothy with the reſurreccion, and ſayeth.2, Tim, 2 
                        •
                     om, 6, b, 8, b If we dye wyth Chryſt, we ſhall lyue wyth hym: if we be pacyent, we ſhal alſo reigne with hym.
               
                  Chryſtes aſcenſyonNo leſſe muſt the frute of the aſcenſion of Chriſt be cōſidered. For the ſonne of god hath promyſed

and ſayd: Father, I wyl, that where I am, they alſo be, whom thou haſt geuen me. Seyng that Chryſt now with body and ſoule is go te vp to heauen, what can be thoughte more comfortable for a man at hys death, then that we Chryſtyans ſhall alſo after death be takē vp into the ioie of heauē?
               In heauen ſytteth Chryſte at the ryghte hande of god,Chryſte ſy
                        •
                     
                     teth at the ryghte hand of god, Lorde and kyng ouer ſynne, deuil, death and hel. Him we haue, in that heauenly lyfe wyth god, an aſſured faythfull mediator and helper. Though we muſt fyghte in extremitie of death, yet are we not alone in thys conflyct or battayl: euen the valeaunt heauenly captayne hymſelfe, who vpō ye croſſe ouer came death and all miſfortune for our ſakes, hath reſpecte vnto vs from tyme to time, goeth beefore vs in oure battayle, and

fyghteth for vs,Deut, 1, c, 20 Exo, 14, c Ioſu, 23. a 1, Pat, 6, a 2, Pat, 20, 32, 4, reg, 
                        •
                     , d Zach, 10, a kepeth vs from all miſchaunces in the way to ſaluacyon: ſo that we nede not care nor feare, that we ſhal ſinke or fal down to the bottome.
               He ſhall cauſe vs, with oure own bodely eyes, to ſee the glorious victory and triumphe in the reſurrecciō of the dead, & to haue experyence therof in oure own body and ſoule. Death is euen as a darke caue in the grounde: but who ſo taketh Chryſtes light candell, puttyng hys truſte in hym, and goeth into the dymme darke hole, the myſre flyeth before him and the darkeneſſe vanyſheth awaye.
               In Chryſte haue we a mighty effectuous ymage of grace, of life and of ſaluacyon: in ſuche ſorte, that we Chryſtyans ſhould feare neyther death, nor other miſfortune. Summa, he is oure hope,

our ſafegarde, oure triumph, our crowne.
               Wrineſſe of ſcripture:Iohn, 1
                        •
                     
                   I am the reſurreccion and the lyfe: he that beleueth one me, yea though he were dead, yet ſhall he lyue. And whoſoeuer lyueth and beleueth on me, ſhall neuer die. Forth wyth after he had ſpoken theſe wordes, rayſed he vp Lazarus: who had lyen fouer dayes in the graue, and beeganne to corrupte and ſtynke.
               As by Adā al die, ſo by Chriſt ſhall all be made aliue,1, Cor, 13, euery one in hys order. Item oure burgerſhyppe is in heauen: from whens we loke for a ſauioure,Philip, 3, euē Ieſus Chryſte: whyche ſhall chaunge oure vyle bodyes, that they maie bee faſhyoned lyke vnto hys gloryous body, accordyng to ye working wherby he is able to ſubdue all thynges vnto hymſelf. Alſo:

Ye are dead,Coloſſiās, 3, and your lyfe is hid wyth Chryſte in god. But whan Chryſt, your life, ſhal ſhewe hym ſelfe, then ſhal ye alſo appeare wt hym in glory. Here dooeth Paul declare, that our life is not in this worlde, but hyd wyth Chryſte in god, and ſhall thorowe Chryſt in hys tyme, be gloryouſly opened. After thys maner ſhould Chriſte be prynted into ye feble, troubled and doubtfull conſciences of the ſycke. And withal diligēce ought the office of Chryſt to be conſidered, how that he, accordyng vnto the ſcripture, comming into thys world for our welth, did alſo, for our wealth, preache, wrought miracles, ſuffred & died, to deliuer vs oute of thys falſe vnhappye worlde, to open vnto vs ye ryght
                     •
                   dore into eternall lyfe, & to bring vs, with body and ſoule, into heauen. Wherin neyther ſinne, death

nor deuill, ſhall be able to hynder vs, for euermore.
               Who ſhall euer be able, ſufficiently to prayſe and magnify, the infinite glori of the grace of god? What would we haue the Lorde oure God to dooe more for vs, to make vs luſtely ſteppe forth beefore the face of death, manfullye to fyghte in all trouble, and wyllynglye to wayte for the delyueraunce?
            
            
               ¶That god hath promyſed hys helpe and comfort. The .21. Chapter.
               OVte of thys exceadynge grace of god for the bleſſed ſedes ſake, proceade gods comfortable promiſes

in the olde and newe teſtament.Pſal, 32 Pſal, 91, Myne eyes ſhall ſtill be vpon thee, that thou peryſhe not. The Lorde ſhall delyuer thee frō the ſnare of the hunter, and from the moſte noyſome death. Wyth hys owne wynges ſhall he couer thee: ſo that vnder hys fethers thou ſhalt bee ſafe. Hys trueth & faythfulnes ſhall be thy ſhylde & buckler: ſo that thou ſhalt neither nede to feare any inconuenyence by nyght, neyther ſwyfte arowe in the daye ſeaſon: neyther the peſtilence that crepeth in darknes, nor yet any hurt that deſtroyeth by day tyme. Though a thouſand fall on thy lefte hande, and ten thouſande on thy ryght, yet ſhall it not touche the.
               Heare dooeth god euydently promyſe, that he wyll gracyouſly preſerue hys own chyldrē. Firſt, from ſuche temptacion, phantaſy

and diſceaueablenes, as come vp on a man by nyghte in the darke. Secondly, from the violence of wycked vnthriftes, and all myſchaunces that ouertake men opē
                  ly in the daye ſeaſon, yea ſometyme ſodenly and vnwares.
               Thirdly, from the peſtylence, yt we nede not to feare it, thoughe there dye of it a thouſande on the lefte hande, and ten thouſand on the ryghte. The peſtilence ſhal either not take vs, or not woūde vs vnto death, or els ſerue to oure euerlaſtyng welfare.
               Fourthlye, from hote feuerous ſyckeneſſes, ſuche as commenlye growe in hote countryes, whan the ſonne ſhyneth moſt ſtrongly. Vnder theſe foure plages, are all miſchaunces comprehended. In the ende of thys Pſalme ſtād theſe words: I am wt him in trouble, I wil deliuer him, and bryng

hym to honour. Whan god ſaith: I am with hym, cōſyder not thou thine own powers, for thei helpe nothing at al. Behold much more the power of him that is with the in trouble. Whan thou heareſt: I wyll delyuer hym, thou muſt not be faint hearted, though the trouble doe ſeme longe to continewe. whan thou heareſt: I wyl bryng hym vnto honour, bee thou ſure, that as thou arte partaker of the death of Chryſte, ſo ſhalt thou be alſo of hys glory.
               
                  Math, 11,Chryſte calleth thee to hym, & cryeth yet ſtyll: come to me all ye that laboure and are laden, and I wyll eaſe you. Take my yoke on you, and learne of me, that I am meke and lowly in hearte, and ye ſhall fynde reſt vnto your ſoules. Agayn: verely vereli, I ſay vnto you:Iohn, 8, If any mā kepe mi ſayinges he ſhall neuer ſee death. Vnderſtande

that the light of life doeth ſhine clearer, then the darkeneſſe of death can blynde. For the faithfull, thorowe hys belefe, is after ſuche ſorte incorporated and ioyned vnto the lord Chryſte, yt true lyfe, that he ſhal not be ſeparated from hym. Thoughe bodye and ſoule departe a ſunder now for a ſeaſon: yet is that done in an aſſured, vndoubted hope of the bleſſed reſurreccion, that veri ſhortlye both bodye and ſoule ſhall come together agayne to eternall ioye. And thus the Chriſtiā beleuer neyther ſeeith, feleth nor taſteth the euerlaſting death of his body and ſoule, that is to ſay, eternall damnacyon.
            
            
               
               God ſetteth to his owne helpyng hande, in ſuche wyſe, and at ſuch time as is beſte of all. The .22. Chapter.
               GOd now thorowe Chryſt dooeth not onely promes moſt graciouſly hys comfort and helpe, but faythfully perfourmeth he theſame in due ſeaſon, ſo farre, & after ſuche ſorte, as is expediente. The verye ryghte tyme vndoutedly doth not he omitte. Death in dede is a narowe way, but god ſhorteneth it. The bitterneſſe of death paſſeth all the paynes that we haue felte vpon earth, but it endureth not longe. Death muſt make quy
                     •••
                  
                  
ſpede wyth vs, as Ezechyas the kyng of Iuda ſayeth:Eſaye, 38 he ſhall cut of my lyfe, as a weeber doth his webbe. And whan the payne is greateſt of all, then is it nere the ende. Hereunto may be applyed that Chryſte ſayde, it is but a modicum, a veri litle while.Iohn, 11 Though it were ſo, yt the troubles of death dyd long endure: Yet towardes the eternitie that foloweth after, is the ſame ſcace as one pointe or prycke, in compariſon of a whole Circle. In the meane ſeaſon, God can more comforte and helpe, thē the moſt horrible death of all, is able to diſturbe or greue. Sometyme taketh he frō vs ye greuous enemy or mortal ſickenes, & ſo deliuereth vs out of the parelles of deathe. Els geueth he ſome eaſe or refreſhyng outwardely: or yf the trouble gooe on ſtyll, he

ſendeth hys ſwete gracious comforte inwardely, ſo as the pacyēt (thorowe then or kyng of the holy goſt) doth fele a taſte, a proufe and begynnynge of the heauenly ioye: by meanes whereof, he is able, wyllyngly to forſake all that earthy is, and to endure al maner of payne and ſmerte, vntyll the ende.
               
                  
                     
                        ••
                     m
                        •
                     , 8,The ſprete of god certifieth our ſprete, that we are the children of god. If we be chyldren, we are al ſo heyres (the heyres I meane of God) and heyres annexed wyth Chryſte: if ſo bee that we ſuffer wyth hym, that we maye alſo be gloryfyed wyth hym. God commaundeth his Aungels, that they wyth hym doe loke vnto thee (O man) whan thou dyeſt, & to take hede vnto thy ſoule, to keepe it, & to receaue it whan it ſhall depart out of the body. Wytnes thys is▪
                  
the aungell of the Lorde pitcheth roūd about them that feare him,Pſal, 34, and delyuereth thē. And:Pſal, 9
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   he hath geuen hys aungels charge concernyng thee, that they kepe thee in all thy wayes, and beare thee in theyr handes, that thou hurte not thy fote agaynſte a ſtone.
               The Aungels,Hebru, 
                        •
                     
                   whiche are many wythout nōber, be miniſtring ſpretes, ſente to dooe ſeruyce for theyr ſakes, whych ſhalbe heires of ſaluacyon. Therfore, a Chriſtian, at his laſte ende, muſte bee throughlye aſſured, that in hys death he is not alone, but that very many eies loke vnto him. Firſt the eies of god the father himſelf and of hys ſonne Ieſus Chryſte: then the worthye aungels, and all Chryſtyans vpon earth.
               Then accordyng to ye cōtentes of the ſacrament of baptyme and of the ſupper of the lord, al Chriſtians,

as a whole body to a mē
                  ber thereof, reſort vnto him, that is a dying: by hauing compaſſiō and prayer to helpe hym by, that at hys death, he maye ouer come death, ſynne and hell.
            
            
               ¶Examples of Goddes helpe. The .23. Chapter.
               IN the tyme of the Prophetes and apoſtles, God raiſed certayne from death: to the intēte that oure weake feable nature myght haue the more helpe, to beleue the reſurreccion & eternal lyfe. For the dead could not haue been rayſed, if death dyd bryng man vtterly to naught. Abraham fell ſicke,Gene, 25, and died in a good age,

whan he was olde and had liued inoughe and was put vnto hys people: that is, hys ſoule came to the ſoules of the other ſaynctes, which died afore, So is it alſo of Iſaac.Gene, 3
                        •
                     
                   Word was brought to kīg Ezechias, that he ſhould lyue no lōger. But after he had made his earneſte prayer vnto God, there were added fiftene yeares vnto lyfe. Whan Lazarus dyed,Luke, 16 hys ſoule was caryed of the aungels into Abrahams boſome. The murtherer vpon the croſſe, hearde in hys extreme trouble, that Chryſt ſayed vnto hym: thys daye ſhalte thou be wyth me in paradyſe.Luke, 23, Dayly experyence teſtifieth, that god forſaketh not hys own. Therfore vndoubtedlye, he that hath begonne hys kyngdome in vs, ſhall graciouſly perfourme and finiſhe it.
            
            
               
               ¶That it is neceſſarye to prepare for thys iourneye. The .24. Chapter
               IF we could fynde in our hert
                     •
                   gladlye for to heare, howe vnhurtefull, yea wholſome and vincible death is become thorow Chryſt: we would not be idell, and lynger ſtyll tyll ye tyme came, that we muſt nedes dye.
               A good houſholder maketh prouiſion for hymſelfe and hys familye, and bieth afore hande, fewel and victualles, and ſuch thynges as he hath nede of, for a whole yeare or for a moneth &c. accordyng as he is able. Muche more oughte a Chriſtian to prouyde yt, whyche concerneth not onely one

moneth or one yere, but an eternitye that hath no ende. Lyke as faythfull ſeruauntes wayte for theyr maſter, ſo ought we to loke for the commyng of Chryſt, whā he ſhall call vs out of thys tyme.Luke, 
                        ••
                     
                   If the houſholder knewe, what houre the thefe woulde come, he woulde watch, and not ſuffer his houſe to be broken vp.math. 24. Therfore be ye alſo ready: for in the houre that ye thynke not, wyll the ſōne of man come.
               Whoſo hath perfecte knoweledge of death, as it is hetherto deſcrybed and ſet forth: he, in makyng prouiſion afore hande, hath fyrſte thys aduauntage, that it is good fyghtynge wyth a knowne enemye. Contrary wyſe on the other ſyde: what ſhall an vnmete warryour doe, that knoweth not the nature, ſubtiltie, weapons and polycy of the enemye?
            
            
               
               Prouiſyon concernyng temporall goodes, children and frendes, which muſt bee lefte behynde. The .25. Chapter.
               AGayne, concernyng temporall goodes: Let the ryche who hath wyfe and children, or other heyres, make prouiſion for them in good ord
                     ••
                   vnder wrytyng, accordyng as i
                     •
                   euery place the cuſtome is. But i
                     •
                   honour and auctoritie, ſubſtaūc
                     •
                   or goodes go to nere thi ſtomack, then conſyder, that they be no
                     •
                   true, but vncertayne, tranſitory
                     •
                   and vayne goods: whyche bryn
                     •
                   more vnquietneſſe then reſt. Co
                     •
                  
                  ſyder alſo, that many moe rych
                     •
                   myghtye Prynces, kynges an
                     •
                   Lordes, muſte bee ſpoyled of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
theyr glorye, and bee faine to contente themſelues with a ſhorte, narrowe place of the graue.
               Thoughe we here loſe all, yet dooe we ſcace loſe one farthynge. And in the other lyfe, we haue not kyngedomes, nor empires, but GOD hymſelfe and euerlaſtynge goodes. In compariſon whereof, all minſtrelſye, paſtyme, pompe, myrthe and chere vpon earthe, is ſcace to bee eſtemed, as caſtynge counters, towardes the fyneſte coynes of golde. Therefore oughte we to learne, ſpecyallye in ſyckenes, to geue all temporall goodes theyr leaue, and to byd them fare wel. And if any manne wyll further more diſquyete and trouble vs, in tellynge vs ſtyll of them, then muſte we requyer hym to depart and let vs alone.
               
                  Whoſo hath a trayne hanging vpon hym, as father, mother, ſiſters, brothers, wyfe, chyldren & frendes: the ſame is the ſorer laid at. For naturally we all are lothe to depart from them.Math, 10 Here muſte we remember ye words of Chriſt: He that loueth father or mother mor thē me, is not worthy of me. And he that loueth ſōne or daughter more then me, is not mete for me. And whoſo taketh not vp his croſſe and foloweth me, is vnapt for me. Therfore muſt thou breke thyne own wil, take vp thy croſſe and geue ouer thy ſelfe vnto the will of god. Specialli foraſmuch as euen they, whom thou art loth to leaue behynde thee vpō earth, ſhall ſhortelye come to thee. And in the meane ſeaſō, whan thou departeſte from thy frendes, thou goeſt the nexte waye and ſpedeſt thee, vnto better and more louing

frendes. And therefore the holye patriarke Iacob ſayed,Gene. 49. whan he ſhould dye: I ſhalbe gathered to my people. Item vnto Moyſes and Aaron, ſayd god: Thou ſhalt goe to thy people and vnto thi fathers. Hereby is it declared, that death is a paſſage to many mooe folkes and better frendes, thē we leaue here. There is God our father, hys ſonne our brother, hys heauen our enherytaunce, and al aungels and ſainctes our brethrē, ſyſters and kinſfolkes, with whō we ſhal enioie eternal goodes for euer.
               Agayne, whoſo leaueth behynde hym, a poore wyfe, chyldren not brought vp, and frendes that are in neceſſitie: muſte alſo dooe hys beſt, commyttyng them to ye protection, helpe and cōfort of god, wyth an earneſt prayer, yt he wyl graciouſly take the gouernaunce

of them. For our wiues, children and poſteritie, doeth the ſeconde commaundement ſette in goddes tuicion, whan it ſaith: mercy and kindnes ſhew I vnto thouſandes of thē, that loue me and kepe my commaundementes.
               
                  Exod. 22. Pſal: 145.Item god wryteth hymſelfe a father of the wedowes and fatherles, and taketh them into his own proteccyon.
               Nowe if thou receaue not thys godly conſolaciō and comfort, then (to thyne owne greate notable hurte) thou diſquietſt thy ſelfe ſo greuouſly, that thou canſte conſider nothīg that is right and iuſt, eternall or heauenly.
            
            
               
               Preparacion concernyng goſtly maters: with what cogitacions ye mynd ought moſt to be exercyſed. The .26. Chapter.
               MOreouer, the ſicke muſt geue all other worldlye matters theyr leue, that the ſoule be not tangled wyth any earthye buſynes, but directed vpwarde into heauen, where it deſyreth euerlaſtingly to liue.
               Heare ſhal it be nedeful, that our mynd haue an aſſured vnderſtandīg of ye holy goſpel. In this cōſideracion

endure thou ſtyll: hang thou thereupon wyth ſtedfaſte faythe, where oute growe theſe fruites: prayer, ryghteouſnes, pacyence and all goodnes.
               After the doctryne of the true goſpell, without thyne owne and religious mens workes, without the merites of ſaynctes, arte thou iuſtified, made ryghteous and ſaued, onely thorowe Chryſt: who alone is thy mediatour, aduocat, helper, ſatiſfaccion, hope, cōforte and lyfe. It is Chryſtes wyll to conueye thee awaye from ſynne, from the world, from the deuyll, and from hell, and to take thee to hys grace into the eternall paradyſe, though all creatures were agaynſte thee. Probacyon oute of the ſcripture.
               
                  Iohn. 17.Thys is the lyfe eternall, that they knowe thee to be the onely true God, and whom thou haſte

ſent Ieſus Chriſt. With this euā
                  gelicall doctrine, & with nothing els, muſt our heart be occupyed, what temptacions ſoeuer happē, whyche vndoubtedly will not tary behynde.
               While we go about yet mery and in health, it bryngethe excedynge great profit, if we exercyſe oure ſelues wyth the cogitacyons of death. But in ſickenes, and whan we muſt dye (that is) whan ye horrible ymage of death would make vs afrayed, we muſt not vnquiet our ſelues, wt heuy remembraūce of death. We ſhould not beholde or conſider death in it ſelfe, nor in our own nature, neyther in them that ar ſlayne thorow ye wrath of god: But principallye in Chryſte Ieſu, and then in hys ſaynctes, whyche thorowe hym ouercame death, and dyed in the grace of god. From thys ſyght, maye not

we ſuffer our ſelues to be dryuē, though all aungels and all creatures (yea though god hymſelfe, in our opinion, would laye other thynges before our eyes) whiche they doe not. Howbeit the euyll ſprete maketh ſuch an appearāce. For Chryſt Ieſus is nothyng els but lyfe & ſaluacion. Yea ye more depely and ſtedfaſtly we do ſet, prynt, and beholde Chriſt before vs, the more ſhal death bee deſpyſed and deuoured in lyfe: ye harte alſo hath the more reſt, and maye quietly dye in Chryſte. Therfore ſayth Chriſte:Ion: 16. In the world (that is alſo in your ſelues) ye ſhal haue trouble, but in me peace. Be ye of good comforte, I haue ouercome the worlde.
               
                  Apoc. 14. Nu: 21: Ion. 3.Bleſſed are thei, that dy in the Lorde. Thys aforetyme, was figured and ſignified: Whan the children of Iſraell, betyng bitten

of fyerye ſerpentes, myghte not ſtruggle wt thē, but behold ye braſen ſerpente: namely Chryſt. So the quicke ſerpentes fell away of themſelues, and vanyſhed.
               Whan we now beholde death and the panges of death in it ſelf wyth our own feble reaſon, with out Chryſt, without gods worde (ſpecially out of ſeaſon, that is to ſay, in the daunger of death) then hath death his whole power and ſtrength in our feble nature, and kylleth vs wyth the greater pain: ſo that we forgette God, and are loſt for euer.
            
            
               ¶Of repentaūce and ſorowe for ſynne. The .27. Chapter
               
                  TO the intent that our wil hearte and mynde, maye ryghte and truly receaue, and apprehende the lorde Chryſte: We muſt fyrſte be throughly ſorowfull for oure ſynnefull lyfe, and confeſſe, that there was no remedy, but of oure ſelues we ſhould haue been damned for euer. Thys ſhryft or confeſſion of ſynnes, muſt not forth with be done to the prieſt, but vnto god, wyth harty ſorow and repentaunce, after the enſample of the poore ſinner. And of the Publycane.Luke. 7. 
                        •
                     . 18. Therefore muſte we alſo acknoweledge, that wyth all our own power and workes, we are able to preuayle neyther againſte death, nor other miſchaunce. For how were it poſſible, yt we pooreſely wormes, feble and weake in body and ſoule, ſhoulde be able to endure the ſtormy waues and

intolerable burthen of death, yf the ryghte hande of god himſelf, were not preſente, to helpe our infirmitie? Ful truli ſpake a certain kyng in Fraunce, whan he lay on hys death bed: I haue been very riche, I haue had exceding much honoure, my power was paſſing greate: and yet for all my ryches, power and frēdes, I am not able to obteyne of death, ſo muche as one houres reſpyte.
            
            
               ¶Of trewe faith The .28. Chapter.
               TO ſuche a confeſſyon, bee longeth the Chryſtian belefe, that we turne oure ſelues awaye from al cō
                  forte of man, yea from all

creatures to the only creator, thorowe Ieſus Chryſt, and to geue our ſelues ouer wholly vnto him. Wyth all our naturall reaſon and wyſdome, ſhal we neuer bee able to comprehende, how it commeth to paſſe, that the ſoule muſte depart out, and yet bee preſerued: ye wormes conſume the bodye, and that theſame yet ſhal ryſe agayne and lyue for euer. Therefore is there required faythe, in Chryſte and in his word. The ſumme her of haue we, in the twelue articles of the olde aunciente vndoubted Chriſtian belefe.
               And though it bee our dewtye alwaye, ſpeciallye at the tyme of death, earneſtly to conſider al the articles: yet pryncipally whā we dye we oughte to exercyſe ye foure laſt articles: The communyon of ſaintes,The Frutes of faith the forgeuenes of ſinnes the reſurreccion of the body, and

the lyfe euerlaſtynge. For theſe foure in themſelues comprehēde al the power, commoditie & frute of faythe. Namelye, whoſoeuer doeth ſtedfaſtly loke for al grace and help at gods hande, thorowe the concepcion and birth, death, & paſſyon, reſurreccyon & aſcenſyō, interceſſyon & merytes of Ieſus Chryſt, and ſtandeth, lyueth and dieth in ye ſame faith: though all ſynnes, deuils, death & hel would fall vpon hym and oppreſſe him, yet canne they not hurt hym. To bee ſhorte, it is not other wiſe poſſible, he muſt nedes haue feloſhyppe wyth God and the elect, and be quite diſcharged from all ſynnes, and ioyfully riſe again to eternal life. Yea what ſoeuer the ſōne of god himſelfe hath, can do and is able, that ſame hath thys beeleuer alſo obteyned: neyther can it goe other wyſe wyth hym

but proſperouſly in lyfe & death, here and in the world to come, tē
                  porally and eternally.
               Wytneſſe. Whoſo hath Chryſt, hath already the true lyfe and all bleſſing: for Chriſt is the life, the reſurreccion, and a plentefull ſufficiency of all good thinges. Thorowe fayth,Epheſi. 3. doeth Chryſte dwell in our hartes. Therfore thorowe fayth we obteyne all conſolacion and bleſſyng.
               That fayth is the true abſolucyon, it may be perceaued by the wordes of Chryſte, whā he ſaith ſo oft in the goſpell: be it vnto the accordyng to thy belefe.
               Item God wyll conſtauntlye ſtand to hys worde and promes: he is of nature the trueth it ſelfe. Heauen and earth ſhall paſſe, but hys wordes ſhall not paſſe.Luke. 21.
               
               What are nowe the promyſes of god?Iohn. 3. So god loued the world

that he gaue hys onelye begotten ſonne, that whoſoeuer beleueth on hym, ſhoulde not peryſhe, but haue euerlaſtynge lyfe. O howe bleſſed a promys is thys, that if we beleue in Chryſte the ſonne of god, we ſhall thorowe hym inheryte eternall lyfe?
               Item:Iohn. 5. vereli verely I ſay vnto you: he that heareth my woordes and beleueth on hym that ſēt me, hath euerlaſtyng lyfe, and ſhall not come into damnacyon, but is eſcaped from death vnto lyfe. Lorde howe comfortable a thing is thys, that a faythfull beleuer, by temporall death, eſcapeth thorow (yea is already eſcaped) into euerlaſtyng lyfe?
               Againe,Iohn. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   this is the will of my father, which hath ſente me, that euery one, whych ſeeth the ſonne and beleueth on hym, haue eternall lyfe: and I ſhall raiſe him vp

at ye laſte day. As though he ſaid: Thys is the moſt gētle good will of god ye father & of god ye ſonne, that ſuch a man, as ſtyll endureth in ſtedfaſte confidence vpon the grace & worde of God, ſhall bee preſerued & ſaued for euer. And euen as litle ſhall ſynne, hell and the deuyll, be able to hurte hym, as they could hurte Chryſte hymſelfe.A pithie ſimilitude Whan ye darknes of ye night falleth down, it couereth ye whole world, dymmeth the coloure and faſhion of all creatures, feareth & diſcomforteth them: yet is it not of ſuch power, as to darken, ſuppreſſe & quenche ye leaſt light of al that is founde in the worlde. For the darker ye night is, ye clearer dothe ſtarres ſhyne: yea ye leſt lyght of a candell, wtſtandeth ye whole night, and geueth light rounde about in the middes of darknes. A litle ſparke alſo of a coale can not

the darknes couer, much les is it able to quēch it.1. Ihon 
                        •
                     
                   Now is god the true, euerlaſtyng & heauēly light. And al they, yt put their truſte in hym, are as a burnīg candle. For thorow fayth doeth god dwell in our hartes, & we ar ye liuing tēple of god, & Chriſts diſciples ar called ye lightes of ye world. Hereout foloweth it, ye though ye prince of ſpiritual darknes thruſt in, wt his noiſome poiſō & plages: Yet ſhal we beholde in faith yt he wt his poiſō & plages, can neyther apprehēd nor deſtroy any true faithful mā or womā, but ſhalbe ſinitten back & dryuen away perforce.
               A lytle vayne of water,An apte ſimilitude breaketh forth out of the groūd ſometyme ſcace a fynger bygge: and whan the water is gathered into a dyche or ponde, it ſpryngeth neuertheleſſe. And though ye water become heuy of certain hūdreth

wayght, and moue about the fo
                     ••
                  tayne, yet can it not dryue backe 
                     〈◊〉
                   fountaine, but it driueth ye whol
                     •
                   waighte of the water backward
                     •
                   and forwarde, and ſpryngeth ſt
                     ••
                   continually, tyll the dyche bee ſ
                     •
                   full, that it goe ouer. And if the other water be foule and trouble
                     •
                   it can not myngle it ſelfe among the freſhe cleare water of the fo
                     ••
                  tayne: but ye ſame remayneth pu
                     ••
                   and fayer, tyll in tyme it com
                     •
                   farre from the head ſpryng.
               
                  Iere. 2. Pſal. 36.Nowe is god, the only plentifull fountayne of all lyfe. An
                     •
                   the faythfull are verye flowyng wels. For Chryſte ſaieth: Whoſ
                     •
                   beleueth on me,Iohn. 7. out of hys body (as ſayth the ſcripture) ſhal flow ſtreames of the water of lyfe. Whyche wordes he ſpake of th
                     •
                   ſprete, that they, which beleue o
                     •
                   hym, ſhould receaue. Thus no m
                     ••
                  
                  chaunce of thys world can ſpoil
                     •
                  
                  
any faythful man of his comfort and lyfe, foraſmuche as god the eternall well ſpryng of life, dwelleth and floweth in hys hearte, and dryueth all noyſome things 
                     〈◊〉
                   awaye from it.
               To the intente now,The exercyſe of fayth. that thou mayeſt be partaker of al ye frutes of faith, thou muſt māfulli ſtriue and exercyſe thy belefe after this maner. If any imaginacion or thoughte, concernynge ſynne or death, wil feare the, though fleſh and bloud tell thee otherwyſe, & though thyne owne naturall reaſon woulde make thee to beeleue none other, and thou thy ſelfe feleſt not the contrari, but ye god of very wrath wyll kyll thee & dāne thee for euer: yet let no diſpayer plucke the noble comforte of the ſauioure out of thyne hearte: let not thy hart wauer in the louing and fatherly promes of god: Let

the terrible cogitacions paſſe, as much as is poſſible. Remember ye comfortable gracious worde of ye lord Ieſu.Bleſſed of godis he that 
                        •
                     ath thys 
                        •
                     ynde. Comprehend and kepe it ſure in a ſtedfaſt belefe, confydence and hope. Plucke vp thi
                     •
                  e heart and ſay: O death, thy falſe feare woulde fayne diſceaue me, and wyth lying cogitacions, pull me awaye from Chryſt, the worthy. I mai not harkē to thy feare, neyther accepte it: I knowe of a deare valeaunt, worthi and victorious man, that ſayd: bee of good comforte, I haue ouercome the world. That is to ſay, ſine, deth, deuyll hell, and whatſoeuer cleaueth to the world. And verely verely,Iohn. 6. he that beleueth and putteth hys truſt in me, hath eternal life. Wyth the whyche wordes, the ſame deare valeaunt, worthy and victorious man doth applye alſo vnto me his victory and power.

With him will I continew, and kepe me to hys worde and comforte, whether I lyue longer, or muſt dy. Here ought we perfectly to be ſure, that ye greater the battayll of death is, the nerer is Ieſus Chriſt, to crown vs with mercy and louing kindnes.
               Euident enſamples out of the new and olde teſtament. Paul reioyſeth and boſteth agaynſte the terrour of death. Death is ſwalowed vp in victory. Death,1. Cor. 15. where is thy victory? Hel, where is thy ſtyng? As though he wold ſay:To the fayt
                        ••
                     full death is a comforte. O death, thou mayeſt wel make one afrayed, as a death image of wood maye doe: but to deuoure, thou haſt no myghte.
               For thy victorye, ſtynge and power, is ſwalowed vp in the victory of Chryſte. And thorow Ieſus Chriſt our lord hath god geuē vs, ye victory agaynſt thee, ſo that

all true faythfull Chriſtians, are become lordes ouer death & hell. Out of ſuche a fayth, is Paul not afrayed to ſay: Whether we liue or dye,Roma. 14. we are the lordes. And agayne thus he ſpeaketh exceadyng comfortably: Chryſte is to me lyfe,Philip. 1. Oh that theſe wordes were printed in our hartes and death is to me aduauntage. For hereby goe we frō labour to reſt, from ſhame to honoure, from heuynes to ioye, frō death to lyfe.1. Iohn. 5. We knowe, that we are tranſlated frō death vnto life Though I walke in the valey of ye ſhadowe of death,Pſal. 23. yet feare I no euyll, for thou lord god arte with me.
               
                  Vnbelefe.Therfore let them feare death that know not Chriſt, neither beleue in hym, euen ſuche as from temporal death, paſſe vnto death euerlaſtynge. For God geuethe charge and cōmaundement, that we ſhoulde receaue coumforte in

the lord Ieſu, as the words ſoūd be of good comforte,How god 
                        〈◊〉
                      blaſphemed by our fear of death. I haue ouercome the world. Whoſo now wil not be comforted wyth the lorde Ieſu, doth vnto god the father & the ſonne the greateſt diſhonour: as though it were falſe yt he byddeth vs, be of a good comforte: & as though it wer not true, that he hath ouercome the worlde.The fearer o
                        •
                      death arme
                        ••
                      the deuyll agaynſt hymſelfe. And by this, whereas the deuil, ſinne and death is ouercome alreadye, we ſtrengthen them, to bee oure own tirannes againſte the faythfull true ſauiour.Truſt in ou
                        •
                      own ſtrēgt
                        •
                      is the way to deſperacyon Hereof procede ſuch wordes as theſe: I wote not how to endure and abyde it: alas what ſhalbe come of me: What is that els, but to haue reſpect vnto our owne ſtrengthe, as thoughe Chryſt were not at hande to take our part, and to fyniſh ye matter? Item, thorowe vnbelefe, a man deſyreth to remayne here longer,

whether god be content with all, or no. In the ſight of the worlde, he is taken to bee no honeſte man that vily forſaketh hys bodelye maſter: doth not be then procure vnto hymſelfe euerlaſtyng ſhame that in trouble of death pyketh hymſelfe away from Chryſt, the heauēly maſter: Witnes: he that beleueth not,Mark. 16. Iohn. 3. ſhalbe damned. He that beleueth not on the ſonne of god, ſhal not ſee lyfe, but ye wrath of god abydeth on hym.
            
            
               ¶Of hope. The .29. Chapter.
               
                  The worke & ſtrēgth of the lyuely fayth.FAyth, though it be no greater then a litle ſparke, gendreth hope, which loketh and wayteth for the deliueraunce to come,

and ſhall vndoubtedlye not come to confuſion. Committe thy cauſe vnto the lord, hope vpō hym,Pſal. 37. and he full wel ſhal bryng it to paſſe. Ipſe faciet, he hymſelfe wyll be the doer.
               The good Patriarck Abraham is ſet forth vnto vs, for an enſample of fayth and hope. Like as he hoped againſt hope, that is to ſay there as nothyng was to hope: euen ſo muſt our hope ſtande faſt and ſure, agaynſt al that our own naturall reaſon or the wycked enemye can obiect or caſt in oure waye.
            
            
               ¶Of the Sacramentes. The .30. Chapter.
               
                  TO ye confirmaciō of faith and hope, ſerue the holye ſacramentes of baptiſme and of the ſupper of the Lord.The vſe or frute of Baptime. Baptime is an vndoubted true token and euidēce of ye grace of god, faſtened euē vpon ye bodi: wyth the which god promyſeth & byndeth himſelfe, that he wil be thy god & father for hys ſonnes ſake, and wyl alſo preſerue the wt hys owne ſprete in thy greateſte parels, for euermore.
               The ſacramente of the body & bloud of Chryſt muſte be exercyſed and practiſed,The place of the ſupper and perſons. onely in ye commyng together of the whole congregacion and church, according to the enſample of the Apoſtles. Therfore let the ſycke ſatiſfy him ſelfe with the generall breakinge of bread, whereof he was partaker wyth the whole congregaciō. But let hym diligently conſyder

the frute therof, after this maner:The frute of the ſupper. god hath promyſed me his grace in Chriſt, and geuē me an aſſured token from heauen in thys ſacrament that Chryſtes lyfe, hath in hys death ouercome my death, & that hys obedyence in hys paſſiō hath deſtroyed my ſynnes. Thys godly promes, token and euidēce of my ſaluacyō, ſhal not diſceaue me. I wyll not ſuffer thys to bee taken fro me, to dy for it. I wil rather deny al the world & my ſelfe alſo, then to doubt in gods token and promes. Here the deuyl tēpteth a man to ſay: yea but thorow my vnworthynes, I may ſpil the giftes of god, that are offered me by the worde & token, and ſo bee ſpoyled of theſame for euer.Our worthynes to communicate. Anſwere: God geueth thee nothynge for thyne own worthynes ſake: yea he buyldeth thee vnworthy, vpon the worthynes of his owne

ſonne. If thou beleue on the ſōne of god, thou art and continueſte worthy before the face of god.
               Item, foraſmuche as thou haſt gone heretofore vnto the ſupper of the lord, thou art thorowe the ſame ſacramēt, incorporated and conioyned wyth al them that are ſanctified in god: and art already come in to the feloweſhyp of the ſainctes, ſo that they with thee in Chryſt dye and ouercome.
            
            
               Of prayer. The .31. Chapter.
               NO man ſhoulde preſume, to exercyſe fayth & hope or other ſpiritual giftes, out of his owne power: but humbly to prai vnto

god for all ſuche thynges,Oure ſufficiency is from god. as are nedeful. And ſeing we haue nede of one mediatour and aduocate, god hath geuen vs hys ſonne Ieſus Chriſt. Neither is ani of our prayers acceptable vnto god,Hebru. 1
                        •
                     . but ſuch as we offer thorowe Ieſus Chryſt. Therfore muſt we wyth draw our ſelues frō al creatures, praying and deſyryng all things at gods hande, onely thorow the name of Ieſu.
               How oughte a man to call vpō god thorowe Chryſte?What is to call vpon god in Chryſte. Wyth belefe, that we doubt not but oure prayer is heard already. To ſuch a fayth and confydence are we occaſioned, in that God hath commaunded vs to pray, and promyſed that he wyl graciouſlye heare vs: knocke and it ſhall bee opened vnto you▪ &c.
               For what thynge oughte we to make our prayer vnto god?

For ye vnderſtandīg of his word, for remiſſiō of ſinnes, for increace of fayth, for loue euen towardes our enemyes, for helpe, pacience, comforte, and all ſpiritual giftes. To pray for health and long lyfe,The moderacion of praier for temporal thynges. is not vnryghte, ſo farre as we cō
                  mitte and referre it vnto the holy wyl of god. For we can not make it better, then the faithful father, that knoweth beſt of all. And to pray for a long lyfe, is oft tymes nothyng els, then to deſyer, to be kept long in miſerye.Eſai. 38. Good Ezechyas yet prayed wyth teares, yt he myght lyue for a ſeaſon.
               Chryſt, the moſt perfect enſā
                  ple of al, did pray: Father, if it be poſſible, take thys bitter draught fro me: neuertheles, not my wyll but thyne bee done. Lyke as he nowe prayed thus, ye ſeconde and third time, moſte earneſtlye: So ought we alſo without ceaſſynge

to cal vnto god. Some appoynte god afore hande, what death he muſt ſuffer them to dye. But they doe beſt of all, that preſcrybe vnto the lord theyr god neyther faſhyon of death, nor tyme, neyther other circumſtaunce: but referre al vnto him, who knoweth what is profitable and good, better then we ourſelues.
               Moreouer we muſt praye for wife and childe, for frende and enemy, and for the whole congregacion of the Chryſtians, yt god may graciouſlye take thē all into hys own proteccion. Vnto praier belōgeth it alſo, cherfulli to geue god thankes, for all bodelye and goſtly benefites.
            
            
               ¶The fourme of prayer.

The .32. Chapter.
               
                  Praier to god the father.
                  O Almightie euerlaſtynge god, mercyful father of heauē, thou haſt created me after thyne owne image, and endewed me wyth exceadyng plentiful giftes.Confeſſyon. Yet not wythſtandyng all thy benefites, I haue many and ſondry wayes contemned and tranſgreſſed thy commaundementes. All my dayes are paſſed foorth with greuous ſynnes. I feare and flye from thee, as from a righteous iudge. Althys, what ſoeuer it be, I freelye knowledge and confes and am ſory for it, frō the ground of my heart.Deſyre of grace. But, O heauenly father, I cry and call for thy large and great mercy: O enter not wt me into iudgemente, remember not the ſynnes of my youth. O

thynke vpon me accordyng to thi mercye, for thy names ſake, and for thy goodnes, which hath ben from euerlaſtyng. Voucheſafe to graunt me thy mercy, which thou according to the contentes of the goſpel, haſt promiſed and opened thorow thy beloued ſōne: in ſuch ſort, that whoſo beleueth on him, ſhal haue euerlaſtyng lyfe. Now is my belefe in Ieſu Chriſt, euen in the only redemer of the whole worlde. I vtterly refuſe all other comforte, helpe and aſſiſtaunce, and my hope is, onely thorowe Chryſte, to haue pardon of my ſinnes & eternal life. Thi wordes are trewe, be it vnto me accordīg to thy wordes: O let me enioye y• paſſion and death of thyne onely begottē ſonne. Take for my ſīnes the ſatyſfaccion and paymente of our lord, Ieſus Chryſte: accordīg to the tenour of my belefe.

Of thys my fayth, thou ſhalt thy ſelfe O Lord be wytneſſe, and al thine elect. My laſt wil alſo ſhall it be, vpon thy mercy to dy in this fayth. Though I now, by occaſiō of pain, lacke of reaſō, or thorowe tēptaciō ſhould happen or would fall awaye: ſuffer me not yet, O lorde, to ſticke faſt in vnbelefe & blaſphemy, but helpe myne vnbelefe, ſtrength and increace my fayth, that ſynne, death, the deuil and hel dooe me no harme. Thou art ſtrōger and mightier thē thei: that is onely my truſt and confydence.
               O lord, the fleſh is feble, & vnpacient: laye not thou my weakenes to mi charge, but burne, ſmit, prycke and plage as thou wylte thy ſelfe:Pacience and lowlynes is the ſigne of a Chryſtyan. only Ibeſech the graūt me pacience and lowelyneſſe of mynde. Be thou ye ſtrength of my ſoule in this farre iournei, which

I haue now to go in an vnknowē lande. Now ſhewe thy ſelfe vnto my poore ſoule ſo, as it may fele that thou art my refuge, my help, proteccyon, defence, comforte, caſtel, my ſure ſtony rocke, my ſafegarde, my treaſure, proſperyte, health and wellfare. I yelde my ſelfe wholy vnto thee with ſoule and body, let me neuer bee confounded. Helpe alſo,Prayer for the enemy. o heauēly father, that accordyng vnto thy cō
                  maundement, I may loue myne enemyes, and pray for them that haue hurte me.Math, 5. c roma, 12, b. c. And bryng to pas thorowe thy holy ſprete, that all thei, whō I haue done harme vnto, may alſo forgeue me, to the cō
                  moditie and health of their owne ſoules. For it reweth me, and ſory I am, that at any time I haue broken Chriſtian loue and charytie, and begiled deſceaued, or offēded any man wyth euill enſample, or

with to fewe benefites. I beſech the O lord, thorow Ieſus Chriſt, forgeue thou all them, that euer haue hurt me, in thought, worde or dede.
               
                  Praier for eueri manTo thy faythfulnes and proteccion, O deareſt father, I commit all that concerneth me, ſpeciallye wyfe, children, frendes & all ſuch as thou haſt put vnder my gouernaunce. Comfort and helpe thou all thoſe, that ly in bandes and ar perſecuted for thy wordes ſake. Haue mercy vpon al ſuch, as are in priſon, pouertie, ſickenes and heuines. O bring thou the whole world to the knowledge of thi holy word, that they may liue accordyng to thy godly wyl, and (thorow out all troubles) to endure & continue ſtyll in ye Chriſtiā faith. O Lorde Ieſu Chryſte,Praier to god the ſonne. I beſech the thorowe thine owne merites, haue mercye vpon me. Seinge

I my ſelfe can not make ſatiſfaccion or ſufficient amēdes towards the father for my ſynnes, I laye thē vpō the, in hope that yu haſte already taken them awaye. For yu haſt payed that we ought, & oure woundes haſt thou healed. O increace thou, in me and other men, fayth, pacyence and conſolacion, what aduerſitie or trouble ſoeuer we be in.
               Thou, lord Ieſu, in thy paſſion diddeſt pray: Father, if it be poſſible, let thys cup paſſe fro me: neuertheles, not my wyll, but thine be done: and that is my praier alſo. Vpō ye croſſe yt dydſt pray: Father, forgeue thē. Euē ſo lord, forgeue I al thoſe, yt euer haue done any thing agaīſt me. Thou didſt cry: my god, my god, why haſt yu forſakē me. O lorde forſake not yu me then, in my deadlye trouble. Vpon the croſſe, yu ſaidſt: into thī
                  
handes I commende my ſprete. Euen ſo now lord, commende I my poore ſoule into thy handes. O thou holy ſprete.Praier to god the holy goſt Great is the anguiſh and diſtreſſe of my hert: haue mercye vpon me for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake. I am afflicted, & ſo are many moe: O vouchſafe thou to illuminate, comfort & ſtrēgthē me and them vnto al goodnes: cō
                  uey thou and bryng vs out of all trouble, and fayle vs not, neither forſake vs for euermore. Amen.
            
            
               ¶A fourme of prayſe and thankes geuyng. The .33. Chapter.
               
                  Thankes geuyng to god the father.
                  O Almightie, eternal, merciful god and father, I laude and

prayſe the, that thou haſt created me a reaſonable man, and as a father haſte preſerued me to thys houre: keping me from great daū
                  gers euer ſithens I was borne, & doing me more good, then euer I was or am worthy. Specyally, I geue thee thankes for thy endles grace, whiche thou ſheweſt vnto me and all faythfull, thorowe thy moſte deare beloued ſonne: In yt he for my ſynnes, would be tempted ſo many wayes, and ſuffer ſo vyle a death: to the intente that I from hence forth, myght be aſſured of faythfull aſſiſtaunce.
               Magnified and bleſſed be thy name, that thou ſuffereſt me not to dye, wythout knoweledge of ye holy goſpell. I thanke thee alſo deareſt father, that thou viſiting me wyth thys ſyckenes and daunger, doeſt not forgette me. For in the meane ſeaſon alſo, thou comforteſt

forteſt and helpeſt, and full graciouſly ſhalt thou bryng the matter to an ende.
               
                  Thankeſgeuing to the ſonne.Honour, prayſe and thankes be vnto thee, my moſt deare lord Ieſu Chriſt, for thy holy incarnacion, for thy martirdom and bytter paſſyon: wherby I am perfectly aſſured, that thou art my redemer and Sauiour. Vpon yt onely ſet I my building: thither warde ſtandeth my hope: there wil I be founde.Rom. 6. b. rom. 8. b. 2. Timo. 2. b Cherefully and gladli wt thy helpe, wil I depart hēce: truſtyng, that as I am partaker of thi troubles ſo ſhall I alſo haue my part in thy euerlaſtyng glorye. Namely, that at ye laſt daye, thou ſhalt raiſe vp this my poore mortall body, takyng my ſoule vnto thee immediatly at my departing hence.Thankeſgeuing to the holi gooſt. O ye holy ſprete, I rēder vn to the prayſe and thākes, for the true vnderſtandyng, belefe, comfort,

pacience, & al giftes, whiche thou graciouſly doeſt miniſter & geue, by the meanes of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               That the praier is harde. The .34. Chapter.
               HEre vnto ſerue al pſalmes of prayer and thankeſgeuing. Howbeit, whatſoeuer cōcerneth prayer, it is all cōprehended wt few wordes in the holy pater noſter, if it be diligētly & earneſtly conſidered. Notwithſtādyng no Chriſtian prayer can be done in vayne, yt it ſhould not be faythfully heard. God ſayth:Pſal. 91. He hath a deſier vnto me, and I wyl deliuer him. Whan he calleth vpō me I ſhal heare hym: yea I am with him in his trouble, whereoute I wyll delyuer hym, and bring him to honour. He knoweth my name therfore wil I defende hym.

Wyth longe lyfe wyll I ſatiſfye hym, and ſhewe hym my ſaluaciō Yea ye whole pſalter is ful of ſuch cōfortable promyſes.Luke. 23. d. Enſample: if yu pray wt the murtherer vpō the croſſe, that Chryſt wil remember thee in his kyngdome, thou ſhalte alſo in thy heart, he are the gracyous comfort: thys day ſhalt thou be wyth me in paradyſe. Neuertheles, whoſoeuer is in trouble, heuines or aduerſitie, ought earneſtly to deſyer, the interceſſions & prayers of faythfull beleuers.
            
            
               ¶That the word of God oughte to bee practyſed and vſed. The .35. Chapter.
               FArthermore, he ought alwaye to haue gods word before his

eyes, and feruētly to exerciſe him ſelfe therin. For wheras he faythfully calleth vnto god, he dooeth it vpon hys worde: and in ye word of god he is taughte howe to behaue himſelfe towardes al, what ſoeuer commeth in his waye. If a man now can not geue hymſelfe true informacion out of the holye ſcripture, whether it be cōcernīg ſynnes committed, or other tēptacyons: then ought he to aſke counſayll of hys learned ſoule ſhepeheard, or of ſome other mē of godly vnderſtandyng. The lord ſaith not for naught: My ſhepe heare my voice, and I know them,Iohn, 10. and they folowe me, and I geue thē eternall lyfe, and they ſhal neuer peryſhe.
            
            
               ¶Amendement of lyfe neceſſarye.

The .36. Chapter.
               THe trewe faith bryngeth wyth it naturally, a ſtedfaſt purpoſe, to liue from hence forth, accordyng vnto all the cōmaundemēts of god.
               Chryſt lykewiſe exhorteth euery man, rightly to exerciſe, and well to vſe the giftes of god. Hereof bryngeth he in a parable. A certayn man, taking a iourney into a ſtraunge countrye,Math. 25. called his ſeruauntes, and deliuered vnto thē, his goodes. And vnto on he gaue fiue talētes: to another, two: and to the third, one &c. Vpon ye ſame doth the lorde appointe the faythful ſeruaunt his reward: and punyſheth the ſlougiſh and euil ſeruaunt. The righteouſnes of faith cōprehēdeth the feare of god, loue of thy neyghbour, pacience, & all

vertue. Of thys feare,Prou. 14. it is wrytten: The feare of god is a foūtain of lyfe, to auoyde the ſnares of death. Neyghbourly loue doeth firſt and principalli require, that we frendlye and vnfeynedlye for gods ſake forgeue all them, that euer haue offended vs: and again to vndertake (as much as lieth in vs) to reconcyle al our enemyes. Then dooeth charitie require, to geue almes, to comforte the heuy hearted, and to practyſe al works of mercy: and loke who hath done the good in thi ſicknes, it is requiſite that thou geue them thankes. Among benefites, this is not the leſt, whan one moueth and exhorteth another, to kepe himſelfe frō al filthines. As for bodeli thīgs, the ſycke ſhoulde dyſpatche thē wyth fewe woordes: but ſuch as concerne nourtour honeſty, ye fear of god, ſafegard in hym, and the

homage, which is due vnto hym, that ought to be done with more deliberacyon. For loke what one ſpeaketh at the poynt of death, ye ſame goeth deper to the hearte of ſuch as heare it: partly becauſe it cannot be thought that a mā on hys death bed, beyng in greateſt trouble, wyl vſe ipocriſye, or diſſemble: partly, for that, whan the ſoule begynneth to be diſcharged of the bodi, it oft times ſheweth ſome token of the fredome & ioy, wyth the which it ſhall (euē now forthwith) be perfectly endewed. Enſample: the deare worthy patriarkes in the olde teſtament, before theyr departyng out of thys lyfe, ſent and called for theyr children and other folkes, inſtructīg and exhortyng them, to ſubmitte themſelues vnto the law of god, and diligently to walke therein. How faythfully dyd Mathathias

at hys death,1, Mach. 
                        •
                     
                   ſpeake to his noble ſonnes, comfortyng them out of gods worde agaynſt all theyr enemyes?
            
            
               Exhortacyon vnto pacyence. The .37. Chapter.
               FInally, we can not doe better, than wyth gods helpe beeyng pacient in all aduerſitie, and ſtedfaſt in al temptacions, moſt gently and mekely to geue ouer oure wils into the wil of god. I ſpake not of ſuch a pacience & valeaūtnes, as vtterly to fele no more terrour of death. For that is a verye blockiſhe vnſenſiblenes of wylde madde barbarous people: but al ſuche feblenes as is felte, muſt a

Chriſtē man ouercome, and with faythful confidence vpon ye grace of god, cherefully ſteppe foorthe before the eyes of death.
In ye paſſion and death of Chryſt we haue a perfecte enſample, not onli of pacience, but alſo of eueri other thyng, that hitherto is written concerning preparacion vnto death.
               
                  1. Cor. 1. Coloſſi. 2.For he is geuē vnto vs of god, not only to be oure redempcyon, but alſo to be vnto vs wyſedom, wherby we muſt learne al that is neceſſary for our health.
               The ſeuen words, that the lord ſpake vpon the croſſe, are ſpecyally to be pondered, weied and conſydered.
               The firſt: father, forgeue thē, for they wote not what they doe.
               The ſeconde: woman, loe there is thy ſonne.
               The thyrde: thys daye ſhalte

thou be wyth me in paradyſe.
               The fourth: my god, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me?
               The fift: I am a thirſt.
               The ſixt: It is fyniſhed.
               The ſeuenth: Father, into thy handes I commende my ſprete.
               Thorowe the knowledge of Ieſus Chryſt,Enſamples of ſaynctes. dyd all holye fathers and ſeruauntes of god in the olde and new teſtament geue ouer thē
                  ſelues wyllyngly vnto death, the waye of al fleſhe.Luke. 2. Holy Simeon ſayth: lord now letteſt thou thy ſeruaunt depart in peace, accordyng to thy word. For mine eyes haue ſeen thy ſaluacyon, whyche thou haſte prepared beefore the face of al people &c.
               Seeyinge than that euerye faythfull Chriſtian,A leſſon to learne to dye. dooeth no leſſe ſee Chryſt with the eyes of his heart: he ought, with prayſe

and thankes to ſaye: foraſmuche as I am aſſured, and doe conſtātly beleue, that I am redemed and deliuered by Ieſus Chryſte, and not deſtroyed, but onelye chaunged thorowe the death of the body: I am ryght wyllyng and wel contente to departe hence and to dye, whan ſoeuer nowe it ſhall pleaſe the lord my god.
               The murtherer, vpon ye croſſe, dyd wyllingly ſuffer the death yt he had deſerued: and ſo he obteyned the euerlaſtyng tryumphe of a Martyr.
               
                  Actes. 7.Holy Steuen was content to ſuffer the fearce crueltye of ye enemyes: for in hys laſte trouble he kneled downe, and cryed wyth a loude voyce: Lord Ieſu, receaue my ſprete, lord lay not this ſinne to their charge.
               
                  Philip. 1,Paul, the choſen veſſel of god, ſpeaketh thus very comfortably:

My deſyer is to bee looſed, to departe hence out of miſery, and to be wyth Chryſt, whyche thynge is beſt of all: for Chryſt is to me lyfe, and death is to me aduauntage.
               Theſe, and ſuch noble enſamples of other holi martirs, ſhould (by reaſon) prouoke vs feble ſluggiſhe Chriſtians, to bee the more hardy and ſtoute, and to thynke thus: well goe to. Thou haſte as yet, ſuffered no great thyng for ye lord Chriſtes ſake: therfore now, euē as a lambe, geue ouer thy ſelf cherefullye vnto death for hys names ſake.
               Thou haſte daylye made thy prayer,Prayer requireth paciēce. as Chryſte hath taughte thee, that god wyll take thee oute of thys wycked worlde into hys kyngedome,Mathe. 6. and that his wyll be done. Now if he wyll gracyouſly conuey thee into his kingdom,

thou oughteſt frō the botome of thy heart to reioyſe, and, as hys owne chylde, willinglye to obeye them.
               Foraſmuch as the famous heathen man Socrates, being before the ſeate of iudgement, where ye mater touched his body and life, deſyred no aduocate, neyther ſubmitted hymſelfe to the Iudges, but valeauntly diſputed beefore them, and proued that there is no euil in death: It ſhould ſound very euil, If we (which oute of the infallible worde of God are inſtructed cōcernyng a better lif) ſhoulde forſake thys lyfe of miſery, with les paciēce, and with more vnquietnes of mind, thē dyd the heathen mā.
            
            
               
               The original and fruyte of pacyence. The .38. Chapter.
               TO the intēt that the feblenes of our nature (which quaketh at death, as at a thyng terrible) may ſhew Chriſtiā paciēce, we muſt cleaue vnto Ieſus Chryſte wyth true fayth, which ſhal warme our hartes, to haue a loue and deſyre after the heauenly glori and euerlaſtyng ſaluacion: Yea rather to loſe an hundreth bodies (if it wer poſſible) then to bee deſtitute of the holy goſpell, wherby we are aſſured of deliueraūce from ſīne, deuil & hel, by meanes of ye bloud ſhedding of Ieſus Chryſte.

Vnpaciēt folkes, grudge againſt god, pouryng out al vnthankefulnes, for that they wer not created immortal, and ſo imagen thei in thēſelues a terrible cruell god:Gene. 13. b, roman. 4. Galathi. 3. a. Gene. 12. c 10. a. & .26. a. b Yea al maner of vices grow oute of impaciency. Abraham who other wyſe is ſet forth for an enſā
                  ple of fayth and ryghteouſneſſe, fearyng death to ſore, ſynned greuouſly, denying Sara to be hys wyfe.
               
                  Note thys wel What Chriſtē hart can read this withoute 
                        •
                     eares.In theſe later dayes (ye more pitie, god bee mercyful vnto vs) it is become a commen thynge, for feare of death, to cary the true belefe, only in hart ſecret. outwardely to deny the holi goſpel & wt mouth, behauour & geſture, to ſerue Antichriſt.
            
            
               
               ¶That a man / whyle he is yet in health, oughte to prepare hymſelfe afore hande. The .39. Chapter.
               THis preparacion ought no man to lynger or dyffer tyll another tyme (thoughe he beē neuer ſo whole and ſounde) but euery one forthwyth and dayly, to begynne to make hymſelf for death, to the intente that at all houres he maye be founde ready. Lyke as a ſtoute and valeaunte ſouldier, whan he muſte bee vp and fyght wyth the enemyes, ouerſlepeth not hym ſelfe, but kepeth hys ſtandyng, and hath his weapons and harnes alreadye vpon

hym: ſo muche more oughte we Chriſtiās, at al tymes to wait vpon our heauēly captayne, whā he bloweth the trompe, that we mai be readi to pas forth wt him. Let your loynes be girded about and your lyghtes brennyng,Luke. 12. and ye your ſelues lyke vnto me, that wayte for theyr maſter, whan he wyll returne from the weddyng: that aſſone as he commeth and knocketh, they may opē vnto him immediatly. Happy are thoſe ſeruauntes, whom the lord, whā he commeth, ſhal fynde wakinge.
               Wyth thys ſimilitude doethe Chryſt exhorte euery man, that at all tymes we prepare our ſelues agaynſt his comminge, whan he knocketh thorowe ſycknes and other daūgers, whan he calleth vs out of thys lyfe, and whan he ſhal come agayne out of hys heauēly palace, to iudge the lyuīg and the

dead. The ryghte preparacyon is true faith, feruent loue and charitie, the cleare ſhyne of al vertues, and ſpecially, a gentle wyllynge mynde to open vnto the lord, to let hym in, and with him to paſſe forth into hys royal and matrimonial palace of the euerlaſtyng ioifull kyngdome.
               The preacher ſayth: remember thy maker in thy youth,Eccle. 11. or euer ye dayes of aduerſitie come, and afore the yeares drawe nye, when thou ſhalt ſaye: I am wery of my lyfe. Agayne we reade: examine & correcte thy ſelfe,Sirac. 1
                        •
                     . afore the iudgement come: ſo ſhalte thou fynde grace in the ſyght of god. Hūble thy ſelfe afore thou be ſycke, and declare in ſeaſon that thou wylte ceaſſe from ſinne. Be not hindred to pray in due tyme, and differre not thy amendement vntil death.

No man knoweth the time, place or maner, how he ſhall ende this lyfe. Many one hopeth yet longe to liue, & thynketh: I am yet yōg, I wil folow ye world. Whā I am olde, or haue a wife & kepe houſe, then wyl I begynne to frame my ſelfe. But o thou fooll, who hath promyſed thee, that thou ſhalt be an old man, yea yt thou ſhalt lyue to morow? As nothynge is more certayn then death, ſo is nothing more vncertayne then the houre of death, whiche the Lorde hath not opened to hys beſt frendes. Therfore euery daye thynke thou none other in thy mynd, but that thy glaſſe is runne out:A frendly warnyng. let euerye day be vnto thee the laſt day, ſeyng thou woteſt not whether yt ſhalt lyue tyll to morowe. Learne to beware by ye example of other men, vpon whom ſtretche legge came ſodenly, and ſlewe them, euen

whan they thought nothing leſſe then to dye.
               Yea of death ought we to thinke, as of that, whiche is preſente: for we haue death by the fote, and carye hym aboute wyth vs in oure whole body.
               Lyke as one in a ſhyppe, whether he ſyt, ſtande, awake or ſlep, is euer ſtyll borne and caryed forwarde, althoughe he marke it not greatly, neyther fele it: ſo our life in a continuall mocyon, dooeth euery twynklyng of an eye ſteale forth, and priuely crepe to ye end, thoughe we marke not howe the tyme paſſeth. Dauid ſayeth oure tyme goeth foorth ſwiftlye,Pſal. 90. as though we did flie As if he wold ſaye: there can nothyng runne or flye awaye more ſwiftlye. And Sirac ſayeth:Sirac. 14. remember ye death taryeth not.
               Paul ſayeth: I dye dayly.1. Cor. 15. For

euen in the middeſt of lyfe ar we in death: yea death, dayly aſſone as we are borne, taketh awai ſom what of our life. After thys meanīg writeth Auguſtine: The time of thys lyfe, is nothyng els, but arounyng vnto death.
               Moreouer death is daylye ſet before our eyes: we heare ye ſighing and lamentable voyces of thē that dye: we ſee the coarſes caryed to the buriall: we gooe by the graues of the dead: we bee ſtyll talkyng of thoſe that ar dead and buryed.
               If the enſample of others, touch vs but a litle, then lette vs conſyder our ſelfes. Where is there one of vs, that hath not ſomtyme ben in daunger of lyfe, either thorow tempeſt, ſicknes, peſtylence, murthur, warre or other miſfortune? Therefore ſeeyng death waiteth for vs on euery ſide: we doe wiſely,

whan we alſo on euery ſyde wayte for him, that he take vs not vnprepared, or catche vs ſodenly. Though a man perfectly know (as no man doth in dede) that it ſhould belonge afore he dyed: yet were it exceadyng daungerous to differ the preparaciō til thā. And more profitably could not one hā
                  ble the matter, then by tyme and in due ſeaſon to directe himſelfe vnto that place, where he deſireth euerlaſtynglye to remayne. For vncertayne he is, (whan the laſte houre cōmeth,) whether he ſhall conuerte hymſelfe to God, and whether he ſhal haue hys ryhgte mynde or not.
               Thoughe he bee not robbed of hys ryghte mynde: yet in deadlye ſicknes he hath ſo muche to doe wyth the trouble, that it is heard than for hym to learne,

that he hath not comprehended & learned afore. The vnſpeakeable payne of the bodye, the horryble ſyght of thyne owne ſynnes, the terrible feare of gods iudgement and the cruell temptacyon of the deuill, come altogether vpon one heape in the perturbaunce and cō
                  braunce of death, and hynder exceadyng much in euerye thynge, that one ought to thynke, ſpeake or doe. Yf thou now haſt lightly regarded al warning, and ſo dieſt in thy ſynnes, thou ſhalt not bee able after death to amende any more. Al repentaunce & ſorowing from that tyme forth, ſhall bee in vayne.Prou. 11. Whan the vngodly dyeth, hys hope is gone. Foraſmuch thē as it is ſo, that in death we muſt abyde the ſoreſt and moſt daungerous cōflict and battayl: euery reaſonable man may wel perceue that we ought by tyme and in ſeaſon

(yea all our lyfe tyme) to prepare afore hande agaynſte the ſayd battayll.
            
            
               ¶That the foreſayed thynges oughte by tyme and in due ſeaſon to bee taken in hande. The .40. Chapter
               THy laſte wyll and teſtament,The frute of makyng thy teſtamente in tyme of health. beyng made while thy bodye is whole and ſounde, cauſeth not thee to dye the ſoner (as oure feble vnderſtanding ymagineth) but is an occaſion that thou dieſt the more quietly, and that yu then goeſte not firſte aboute ſuche thornes, whā thou lieſt vpon thy

death bed. Well don is it, whan one yt dyeth, dooeth reſtore euyll gotten goods. But vnto god it is an hundreth tymes more acceptable, if yu reſtore it thy ſelfe, while thou art whol and ſoūd in body. It is wel don, to beſtow one porciō of goods for the relief of the poore. But yet is it a muche more acceptable offerynge vnto God, whan one hymſelfe in hys lyfetyme geueth vnto ye poore. For yt, whych yu vpon thy death bead apoynteſt for them, is not alwaye diſtributed: and though it be, yet is it nomore thyne. Some do euē as ye wyfe, yt would geue none of her potage to any body, tyll her pot was ouerthrown: then called ſhe yt pore vnto it.
               It is well done, in the ende to forgeue all men and to pray vnto god, that he alſo will forgeue all thyne enemies▪ but much more cō
                  mendable

is it to forgeue them afore, while thou haſt thy health: and not doe it for feare of death, but for the very loue of Chryſte. As for other wayghtye makers, wherewyth thou arte wrapped, concernyng wyfe, children, neighbours, debtes, frendes or enemyes: thoſe lykewyſe oughteſte not thou to differre, tyll the laſte daye: wherein thou haſte inough to dooe wyth the worlde, whych thou arte lothe to forſake: wyth deathe, whom naturallye thou hateſte: wyth the deuyll, who practyſeth all hys crafty falſhod and ſubtyltie: wyth the feare of hell, the terroure whereof is horrible. By meanes of ſuch things, an vnprepared manne dooeth oft forgette the grace of GOD, and the ſouls health. For if thou, hauynge alwaye a louynge frend in eſtymacyon, dooeſte contrarye

wyſe litle regarde a poore neyghbour: It were no wonder, if thou ſhouldeſt forget the ſame neyghbour in the meane ſeaſon, whan thy deare frende is departed. Euen ſo whan one now hath alway caſt what maye dooe the bodye good (howſoeuer it goeth wyth the ſoule) no meruayll, that the ſoules health is neglected, whan the body fayleth.
               After thys meanynge, dooeth holy Auguſtine earneſtly threatē ſayinge: with this penaltye is a ſynner puniſhed, that whan he dieth, he forgetteth hymſelfe, who in hys lyfe tyme thought not vpō God. Therefore whyle a man is in his floures of health, he ought in ſuch ſort to learne the comfortable ſayinges of the goſpel, that in his trouble, they may of themſelues fall into hys mynde: or if other men aduertiſe hym of thē,

he maye be the better aquaynted wyth them, and haue them on his fyngers endes, as them that he hath knowne, exerciſed, and vſed before.
               Moreouer, fayth, wherby we ouercome death and hel, hath her begynning, increace and ſtrēgth, and is direct, not only aboue, but alſo agaynſt al the naturall reaſō of man, that the infinite eternall god, ſhould frely of a very gracious fauour thorow his dear ſōne take our part yt are moſt greuous ſynners. Therfore by tymes and in due ſeaſon, thorow ye preachīg of the worde, thorowe the prayer and ſacrament, ſhould faith in vs be planted, increaced, practyſed and made perfecte.
               In the meane tyme as long as we lyue, ought we to praye and beſeche god, of a gracious houre and bleſſed ende. And whan the

end draweth nye, to put God in remembrance of the ſame prayer as wel, as of his commaundemēt and promes: in yt he hath not only charged vs to pray, but promiſed alſo that he wil graciouſlie heare vs.
               
                  Oh, moſte gracious god geue vs grace to doe thys & wyth vnfayned heartes to put it in practiſe.Dailie ought we to haue remorce of conſcience, where as we haue failed, to repent and be ſorye, to craue of God forgeuenes, and to take vpon vs immediatlye, to amende al ſuch thynges as are amiſſe. For in the ſight of god, it is a thouſande tymes more acceptable, to ceaſſe from euil by tyme in due ſeaſō, afore trouble come, thē that preſente daunger and feare ſhould force vs to amendmente. He that is fallen into a depe foggy wel, and ſticketh faſt in it, wil he not ſtrayght way call vnto euery mā, to helpe hym out, one way or other? Wyll he not make a ſoremone,

howſoeuer men haſt to delyuer hym: Out of doubt, he that goeth aboue with ſynne and vice, hangeth by a bare weake threade (ſo to ſaye) aboue the pit of hell: yea he is now in hel alreadi, foraſmuch as he turneth not from ſīne to the grace of god.
               Then muſte it nedes bee an horrible, deuelyſh and obſtinate blindneſſe, whan one ſticketh faſte in ſuche a ſtate of lyfe, as is altogether curſed, and yet wyl appoint a day, a greate whyle hence for to come, and therein thynke to begynne to geue the deuyll hys leaue: whē he knoweth not himſelfe, whether he ſhall lyue tyll that daye, and whether he ſhall then haue a mynde to conuerte. For to haue a wyll vnto true repentaunce, is a free gyfte of god, whyche oughte of hym daylye to bee deſyred: that the commen

prouerbe bee not verified in vs: vicious lyfe, vnhappye death: he that wil lye wel and ſofte, muſte make hys bed thereafter. Yet for al thys, it is not my mynd to ſhut vp the grace of god into a narow ſtrayte, or to byd any manne diſpaire. Whā an euil diſpoſed mā, that feareth not god, lyeth vpon hys death bed, beyng afrayed of hel and damnacyon, he may happen to deſyer of god longer lyfe, for thys intente, that he mai afterwarde amende, beecome a better man, and more directed to dye. But let not ſuch vayn thoughtes trouble thee. For though yu ſhouldeſt lyue yet an hundreth yeares longer, thou mighteſte, thorowe thyne own perfectneſſe, deſerue nothyng towardes god: But bee thou of thys aſſured wythout all doubt, that there can no true repentaunt come to late. Turne thee

yet, euen thys preſent daye, vnto god: be hartely and vnfaynedlye ſory for thy ſynnes: be of a good mynd and whole purpoſe, that if god help thee vp agayne, yu wyle amende al thyngs. Neuertheles comforte thy ſelfe by that onelye meane, whyche God hath preſcrybed: namely the Lorde Ieſus. So ſhalte thou bee ſure, with the murthurer vpon ye croſſe, to haue gracyous fauoure for euer.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The ſeconde booke of death.
            
               ¶Howe the ſicke oughte to be ſpoken vnto, yf nede ſhall require. The .1. Chapter.
               HEtherto haue we declared, how one oughte to vſe hymſelfe in the daungers of body and lyfe. Now foloweth, how we ſhuld behaue our ſelfes towards

them that be in lyke caſe. Hereof hath dauid ſung theſe wordes in the .40. Pſalme: bleſſed is he that conſidereth or thynketh vpon the poore, for in the tyme of trouble, the Lorde ſhal delyuer him. The Lord ſhall preſerue him and ſaue hys lyfe: he ſhall make hym proſper vpon earth, and ſhal not delyuer hym into the wyll of hys enemyes. Whan he hymſelfe lyeth ſycke vpon hys bedde, the Lord ſhall refreſhe hym. Yea thou lord makeſt hys bed in al his ſicknes. Item, he that is iudge of vs all, ſhall at the latter daye pronounce thys ſentence: come ye bleſſed of my father, poſſeſſe the kingdom, that hath been prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. For I was ſick, & ye viſited me. O what a wicked vnbelef is thys, yt we ar more afraid at a litle aduerſite & vncertaine daūger, then encouraged

by ſuche a Godly, ſure and faythfull promes?
               Therfore among the greateſte workes of mercy, thys is rekened to viſite the ſicke, to haue compaſſion on them, to geue them good counſayll, and to comforte them. Which thyng muſt be done with reaſon and diſcrecyon, to the intente that neyther to litle, nor to muche, be medled withall. To litle were it, to cauſe the ſicke ſtyll to beleue, yt he ſhall ſhortlye come vp agayne and recouer. For ſuch fonde hope haue men already of theyr owne nature, and thereby ſometime they ouer ſee thēſelues.
               Agayne, it were to muche, to deale roughly wyth one, that is weake of fayth, and ſodenlye to feare hym wyth death: that were euen as much, as to breake ye bruſed rede,Eſay. 42. Math. 12. and vtterlye to quenche the ſmokyng flax, contrary to the

enſample of Chryſt our Lorde.
               A whole inſtruccyon oughte to be geuē vnto ſuch ſicke perſōs, as haue nede therof, to make thē ſtrong and wiling vnto the croſſe and death. And ſo ſhould they alſo be put in mynde, what deathe is, whence it came and wherfore, what it doeth thorowe the grace of god for Chriſts ſake: bi whoſe ſprete and power the moſt horrible death of all is ouercome. Her of is ſpoken ſufficīentlye in the Chapters goyng before.
               Out of the whych foundaciō, it maye thus be ſpoken vnto the ſycke: thou haſt the almighty god thy deare father, & Ieſus Chriſte thyne interceſſour and ſauioure, who hath taken all thy cauſe in hande: let hym alone wythall, he wyll not ſuffer the to peryſh, but geue thee hys holy ſprete, which ſhall conducte thee, into eternall

ioye and ſaluacion. Onely direct thou thy ſelfe euen nowe at thys preſente, and prepare thee to depart, geuyng all temporal things ther leaue, hauyng a ryght vnderſtandyng of the holy goſpell, and exerciſing the true belef therof by feruente prayer, charitable loue and pacyence.
               Turne thee for gods ſake, frō all creatures, to the creator and maker, turne thee from wyfe and chylde, turne thee from temporal goods and honour, conſyderyng that none of them can helpe the, neyther from ſīne, nor frō death. All that thou leaueſt behynd the, the lord, accordyng to his almighty prouidēce, ſhal wel and fatherli take care for thē. He yt hath created thy wyfe and children, ſhal alſo prouide them a lyuing, as he hath ſente vnto thee al thyngs neceſſary, euē vnto thys houre.

Afterwarde ought not the minde of the ſick to be diſturbed or pointed hether & thether, vp & down (as, the more pitie, they vſe to do in the Papiſtry) but onelye vnto God the father thorowe Ieſus Chryſt, accordyng to the cōtētes of the whole ghoſpell, after thys meanyng:The ſpirituall comfort
                        ••
                     
                   Doeſt thou beleue and confes from the grounde of thy heart, that there is but one onely god, who hath geuen thee bodye and ſoule, meate and drynke, lodgyng and clothyng, with al other neceſſaryes, & graciouſly helped thee out of many greuous miſchā
                  ces and miſeryes?The ſicke. Then lette the ſyck ſay: yea, that I knoweledge and confeſſe.
               Doeſt thou alſo confeſſe,The cōforte
                        •
                     
                   that thou oughteſt aboue al thynges, to haue feared and worſhypped this thy gracyouſſe maker and father, and to haue loued hym

wyth al thy heart, wt al thy ſoule, wyth al thy ſtrēgth, and, for his ſake, thy neyghboure alſo as thy ſelfe? Hath not god deſerued yt at thy hande?The ſicke. Then let hym ſaye: O Lorde god, I ſhoulde in dede haue done ſo.
               
                  The comforter.Knowledge thou lykewyſe, yt thou oft and many a tyme, haſte wyttyngly and willingli, of very vngraciouſnes, done againſt god and thy neyghboure: by meanes wherof, thou haſt iuſtli deſerued the euerlaſtyng wrath, plage and indignacion of god in bodye and ſoule? Then let hym ſaye: Oh ſir, it is al to true,The ſicke. I yelde my ſelf giltie, and confeſſe it before God. Well,The cōforter greater and more horrible ſynnes then theſe, couldeſte not thou doe, if thou wouldeſte ſtyll not regarde the wrath and rigorous iudgement of god, as thou haſte done heretofore. How arte

thou mynded? Doeſt thou deſier and pray from the grounde of thy heart, that God wyl preſerue the from ſuch ſlender regardynge of thyne owne ſynnes, and of hys iuſt wrath and iudgement? Deſireſte thou alſo, wyth thy whole hearte, that God wyll not deale wyth thee after hys diuyne iudgement and iuſtice, but accordīg to hys fatherly mercye, and that he wyll remitte and forgeue thy ſynnes and treſpaces? Then let hym ſay: Yea that is my deſyer,The ſicke. from the botome of my hearte.
               God from heauen dyd ſende vnto thee hys deare and only begotten ſonn,The cōforter who toke vpon hym the nature of manne, and in hys death vpon the croſſe he bare, not only our treſpace, but ye paine alſo and puniſhment due for the ſame, makyng ful payment and ſatiſfactiō for vs. Iohn the Baptiſt with

hys fynger poynteth vnto Chriſt and ſayeth: lo, thys is gods lābe, that taketh away the ſynne of the world. And Iohn the Euangeliſt ſayth:1. Iohn. 1. The bloud of Ieſus Chriſt clenſeth vs from all ſynne.
               Doeſt thou now confeſſe, that Ieſus Chryſt the ſonne of God dyed and roſe agayne for thee alſo: And wylt thou as one parcell of the world, one brokē rede, one pece of ſmoking flax, and one loſt ſhepe, caſt al thy ſīnes vpō him: embracyng thys comforte of the goſpell in thy heart, and comprehendyng it wyth a ſtrōg ſtedfaſt belefe? Then let hym ſay: O lord Ieſu,The ſicke my heartes deſyer is, of the to be healed, cōforted and refreſhed. And thankes be vnto God for euermore, yt I maye haue him my mediator and redemer. I wyl wholly committe and yelde my ſelfe vnto hym.
               
                  Then vpon thys,The cōfo
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   the Lord Ieſus Chryſt by hys godlye worde and goſpel, ſendeth thee this meſſage: Thy ſinnes are forgeuē the, and in hys ſyght all are taken away: not onely the ſynne, but the payne alſo due for the ſame: namely euerlaſtyng death, hel and dā
                  nacyon. So that thou ſhalte be receaued agayne as a deare acceptable chylde, and heire of eternal lyfe. Beleueſt thou thys comfortable promes of Ieſu Chryſte? Then let hym ſaye: yea,The ſicke but O mercyfull god, ſtrength thou my weake belefe.The cōfort
                        ••
                     
                   The ſumme of all thys, is conteyned in the articles of the Chriſtian belefe, whyche wyth the aforeſayed interpretacion, maye bee rehearced vnto the ſycke.
               And to the intente that thy hearte maye bee ſette at reſte,

and ye aſſured in thy fayth, therefore hath Chryſt inſtituted his holy ſupper and ſacramēt of his body and bloud: wherein he dooeth ſignifie, wytneſſe and put to hys ſeale, that euen thou alſo art one of thoſe many, for whom he gaue his body, and ſhed hys bloude. Now whan ſynne, death, hel, deuill and gods wrath tēpteth and turmoileth thy conſcience, yu muſt wyth the ſame ſacrament, as wt the word of god, comforte thy cōſcience: that Chryſt Ieſus wt hys body and lyfe, is thy ſuertye: and that hys ſoule and bloud, and all that he is, ſtandeth for thee and on thy ſyde, agaynſte al bodelye and goſtly enemyes.
               Moreouer, thou muſt byd the ſick call vpon god for fayth, pacience, and other ſpirituall giftes,
               Some tyme recite before hym the Lordes prayer, with a ſhorte

expoſicion, that he may direct his prayer the better.
               Exhorte alſo al ſuche as ſtād about the ſick, to praye for hym, conſideryng that our lorde hath made a rich and faithful promes: Where two or three are aſſēbled in hys name, he hymſelfe wyl be in the myddes among them, and graunt them their deſyer.
               And for aſmuch as al inſtructions muſt be taken of the word of god, therfore before the ſick theſe parcels folowyng may bee read. The .6. Pſalme which begineth: Lord rebuke me not in thyne anger. &c.
               The .22. Pſalme: Mi god my god &c.
               The .25. Pſalme: Vnto thee O Lorde. &c.
               The .27. Pſalme. The lord is my lyghte. &c.
               
                  The .42. Lyke as the harte longeth. &c.
               The .51. Haue mercye vpon me &c.
               The .91. Whoſo dwelleth. &c.
               The .116. I am well pleaſed &c.
               The .139. O lord thou ſearcheſt me. &c.
               The .143. Heare my prayer, O Lorde. &c.
               The prayer of kyng Ezechias. Eſay. 38.
               The Pſalme of Simeon: Nūc dimittis. Luke. 2.
               The .11. Chapter of Iohn: Of Lazarus.
               The .14. and .17. of S. Iohns goſpell.
               The paſſion of Chryſt, and ſpecyally concernyng the one of the two murtherers.
               The .8. Chapter to ye Romaines The .1. Corinthians. 15. Al which places ſerue to make the prayer

feruente, and to ſtrengthen true belefe.
               Furthermore, the ſicke oughte to be told of the fruites of fayth, becauſe of prouokyng thankefulnes for the vnſpeakable grace of god: wyth exhortacyō to forgeue hys enemyes, to doe euery man good accordyng to hys power, & in euery point to amend his own lyfe and conuerſacyon: but ſpecyally wyth a pacyente, gentle, quiete and good wyllyng mynde, to wayte for delyueraunce.
               Namly, thou mayſt ſay thus: Take vp thy croſſe vpō thy necke pacyentlye and folowe Chryſt, thy Lorde. Remember and beholde Chryſte, hangynge in great Martyrdome vpon the croſſe. He ſuffered pacyently, vntyll hys fathers wyll was fulfylled in him. Euen ſo thou alſo, holde ſtyll vnto the Lorde

thy god, that he maye perfourme hys wyl in the: if it be hys good pleaſure, now to take the ſtinkīg tranſitory fleſhe from thee, to purifie it, and to make an eternall gloryfyed body of it, thou haſte great cauſe to reioyes.
               
                  At the pointe of death.Whan the ſick is drawynge a way, and ſpecheles, hauynge yet vnderſtandyng, thou maiſt ſpeke vnto hym theſe wordes: fyght valiauntly as a worthy Chriſtian, & diſpayer not: be not afrayed of ye rigorous iudgement of god: hold thee faſte to the comfortable promes of Chryſt, there as he ſayth: I am the reſurreccion and ye lyfe. He that beleueth on me, ſhal liue though he were dead: and whoſo lyueth and beleueth on me, ſhall neuer dye. In hym is thy belefe▪ therfore, ſhalt thou liue with him for euer. Chryſt thy ſauiour ſhall neuer forſake thee. There can no

man plucke thee out of hys hand.Iohn. 10. Heauen an earth ſhall paſſe, but gods worde endureth for euer. Haue thou therefore no doubte,Luke. 21. thou ſhalt, after thys batayll, receaue the crowne of euerlaſtynge lyfe.
               Aſke now the mā, whether he vnderſtande and beleue: deſyer a token of hym, and crye vnto hym fayer and ſoftly: good brother, vpon thy ſoules health depart not, ſhrencke not awaye from Ieſus Chryſt, committe thy ſoule vnto thy faythfull god and louyng father. Speake from thy heart rote wyth Chryſt thy brother vpō the croſſe: Father, into thy handes, into thy proteccyon and defence, I commit my ſprete.
               Whan hys vnderſtandyng is paſte, committe hym vnto god. Make thy prayer alone, or wyth others, that god wyll take thys

ſicke man into eternall lyfe, and graunte hym a ioyfull reſurreccion at the laſte daye, onely for the Lorde Ieſus Chryſtes ſake. Amen.
            
            
               ¶Of the buryall and what is to be done towards thoſe, that are departed hence. The .2. Chapter.
               THe ſoule of the dead, aſſone as it is departed frō hence, cōmeth into a ſtate there as prayers (if one woulde make thē for him afterward) haue no place, and ar eyther vnprofitable or els vayn: yea, offēſyue alſo and hinderāce, to our Chryſtyan belefe.
               
                  The body of hym, that is departed, ought reuerently and ſoberly to bee conducted vnto the earth and buryed. For that is the laſt ſeruice, that we can dooe for ſuche as are departed, and therbi mai we declare our charitable loue towardes them. In ye meane ſeaſon, whan we reuerently commit the body (as the wheat corn) vnto the earth, we teſtifie our belefe of ye reſurrecciō for to come. The ſcripture alſo commendeth thoſe, that faythfully wyll haue to doe wyth burying of the dead after the enſample of Tobias. Of miſordring the bodies of the dead, wryteth Plato, the heithen Philoſopher. Lib. 7. De repub.
               Is it not a bonde, gredye and voluptuous thyng, to ſpoyle the deade coarſe, and to rage againſte the bodye as an enemy, whan the enemy that fought

in the body, is departed awaye? What differre they frō dogges, which bite the ſtone that is caſte at them, and let hym goe fre that caſt it: There is no dyfferēce. Of ſuch points ought we to be ware, for they bryng hurt vnto victory. Of gorgeous graues and ſepulcres, it is wrytten in the Poete Euripides: mennes myndes are mad, whan they beeſtowe vayne coſt vpon dead bodyes. For if we conſider ye matter ryght, we muſt nedes greatly meruaill, that euer a man ſhould fall into ſuche a frē
                  ſy, as to vſe pryde after death.
               Touchyng the place of Burial it is to be noted, that by ſuch ordinary meanes, as be permitted vs, we are bounde to auoyde ſicknes and all hurt. Now out of graues there come naturalli euil ſauours or vapours, which alter & chaung the ayer, and increaſe the diſeaſe

of the peſtilence, whā the church yarde or place of burial ſtandeth in ye myddes of Cities or townes. Therfore both the Iewes heathē and Chriſtians, were wonte to haue theyr Burials wythout the Cities. For what tyme as Chriſte rayſed the wedowes ſonne from death, ye Euangeliſt ſaieth: Whā he came nye vnto the gate of the Citie, beholde, there was caryed out one dead, who was the only ſonne of hys mother,Luke. 7. ſhe beeyng a wedowe, and much people of ye Citie wyth her. Moreouer the ſepulcre of our Lorde Ieſu Chryſt was wythout the Citie. But the Pope and hys adherentes, wyth theyr money market, found here a treaſure bagge, otherwiſe perſwadyng the people: as though to lye here or there, dyd further or hynder ſaluacyon.
               Afterwarde, let the dead reſt

quietly, no euill beyng ſpoken of them of malice but good,Good counſayll. though they were our enmyes (of malice I ſay) for otherwyſe muſte vyce and ſynne, aſwel of the dead as of the liuing, be declared and rebuked, that others may beware. The olde Poete Mimnermus wryteth: we al are enclyned to enuye an excellent famous mā, but after death to prayſe hym. Therfore doe they not onely agaynſte Chriſtiā charitie, but alſo agaīſt mans nature, that diſdayne to geue vnto the dead, theyr due prayſe and commendacyon.
               Specially whā one, that hath ſhewed vs frendſhype and kindnes, is departed, we oughte neuer to forget hys benefytes, but to declare our thankfulnes to his kynſfolkes or frendes. But if we cary the remembraunce of them to the graue, and bury it with the

coarſe, thynkīg nomore vpō their gentlenes: Then are we like vnto wilde beaſtes, that are hote and burnyng in deſyer, but aſſone as the thyng deſyred is out of ſight, the loue is quenched. Herof cō
                  playneth the Poete Euripides: ſeldome are there founde faithful conſtaunte frendes after death, thoughe afore tyme they were ioyned neuer ſo nere together. The thankfulnes, that is ſhewed to him yt is preſēt, paſſeth away and vaniſheth, whan one is caryed out of the houſe.
            
         
         
            
            The third booke of death
            
               How they oughte to bee comforted, whoſe deare frendes are deade. ¶The .1. Chapter
               NAturallye we mourne, wepe and lament, whan our kynſfolkes & frēdes departe. Whan father & mother dyeth, the ſonne and ye daughter remēbreth, howe many a fote ſtep the elders went

faythfully and worthely to prouide them their liuinge: yea if it had been poſſible, they woulde haue ſhewed the chylde theyr owne ſoule, and geuen them the hearte in theyr body.
               Againe, the parentes conſider, howe good obediente chyldren they haue had of theyr ſonnes or daughters: and what honoure and ioyefulneſſe more thei might haue had of theyr chyldrē, if they ſhould haue lyued longer.
               The ſiſters and brothers remember, that they came of one father, beyng borne vnder one motherly hearte, broughte vp in one houſe, eating and drinking at one table. If it were els a mans companion, he thynketh: he was my faythfull deare frende, he dyd no man hurt nor harme, but deſired to doe euery mā ſeruice, and that ſo honeſtlye, that a man myghte

haue truſted hym with his owne ſoule.
               If he were a good ruler, we thynke: he was to hys owne natyue country, trew and faithfull, and excellently well enclyned to the welfare therof who hath not then good cauſe to be ſory for his departyng: Thys is the cauſe, yt the bloud naturally gathereth together, ſo that we are ſorier for ye death of ſuche one, then of another priuate man.
               Suche heuyneſſe, pitie and compaſſion, dooeth GOD alowe. For he hath not created vs to bee ſtones and blockes, but hath geuen vs fyue ſenſes, and made vs an hearte of fleſhe, that we myghte haue feling, and loue oure frendes, beeyng ſorye whā they ſuffer trouble and dye: Yea GOD hateth vnfrendlye and vnmercyfull people: and whoſe

heartes are not moued, whan theyr frendes are vexed or taken awaye from them. Therefore the holy Patryarck Abraham,Gene. 23. lamented and mourned for Sara his wife whan ſhe was dead.
               Good Ioſeph made great lamentacyon for Iacob hys father.Gene. 50.
               
               Paull lykewyſe,Philip. 
                        •
                     . wryteth thus: My helper and felow ſouldyar Epaphroditus was deadly ſycke: but GOD had mercye vpon hym, and not onelye vpon hym, but alſo vpon me, that I ſhoulde not haue one heuynes vpon another.
               But as in all thynges, ſo in thys there oughte a meaſure to be kepte, that we continue not in fleſhly vnordynate heuynes, but ſtyll reſyſte the ſorowe, and cō
                  forte oure ſelues with thys accoūpt folowyng: what dooe we meane thus to mourn and lamēt?

What wyll we dooe? The Lorde is great, and doeth no man wrōg. And theſame is an honeſte good wyll, that conformeth it ſelfe to the wyll of god.
               
                  A notable ſaying.For the good heathen mā Seneca, wrote vnto his ſcholar Lucillus after thys maner: a mā ought to bee contente with euery thing that god is pleaſed wythall, only becauſe it pleaſed god.
               Nowe is euery thyng ordred by the prouidence of god, as holi Auguſtyne de ciuitate dei ſaieth:Lib. 5. cap. 11 without an orderly diuiſion and conueniente ioyning together of the partes, hath not God lefte ſo much as the bowels of any beſt, how vile or ſmal ſo euer the ſame be, nor the fethers of a birde, nor the floure of the herbe, neyther ye leafe of the tree: ſo that there can nothynge bee founde, that is not ſubiect to the prouidence of god,

neyther can there any litle birde dye, wythoute his deuice, charge and commaundemente.
               Yf god now haue ſo diligent reſpect to ſuch ſmall things, how then could thy frende (whō thou mourneſt for) departe awaye by death, wythout the prouidence of god? Therefore if we ſpeake againſt the lordes works, and cry agaynſt hys wyll, what is yt els, but euen as though we therefore lyued vpon earth, yt we as lordes & rulers, ſhould preſcrybe lawes for the almightie? Which thyng to thynke (I wil not ſay to ſpeak) were yet horrible.
               Whan thou geueſt foorth thy chyld to a nource, & ſhe hath kept it long inough, yu takeſt it home agayne: the nourſe hauīg no reaſonable cauſe to complayne vpon the, for takyng agayn thine own. Yet muche les cauſe haue we to

grudge againſt god our creditor, whā he by death taketh his own agayn. For as for father and mother, brother and ſiſter, wife and childe, frende and louer, yea and all other thynges that we haue, what are they els but lent goods and free gyftes of god, whych he hath cōmitted vnto vs, & whiche we, as long as he lendeth vs thē, ought to eſteme as aduaūtage.
               Whan a Lorde hath lente vs a fayer coſtelye table, whether ſhould we gladly wyth thankes reſtore it hym agayne, whan he requireth it, or braull wyth hym after thys maner? O thou terryble lord, how happeneth it, that thou haſt robbed vs of ſo coſtly a table? How cōmeth it, yt thou haſt taken it from vs agayn ſo ſodenly? Vpon ſuch a complaynte might not he with good ryghte, anſwer: Is that now mi reward

for lending you ſo coſtly a table, whyche I did of loue (vndeſerued on youre parte) yt ye mighte haue commoditie & pleaſure ther of a while? Yea the more worthi the gift was yt I lent you to vſe, the more thākful ſhould ye be vnto me. Yea with rougher wordes myght god iuſtly rebuke vs, that bee ſo vnpaciente. When ye houſe fell vpon Iobs x. lyuing childrē, vii. ſonnes & .iii. daughters, and whan his .vii.M. ſhepe wer brēt wyth fyer from heauen, and his enemyes caryed awaye hys fyue hundreth yoke of oxen, and fyue hundreth aſſes, as the other enemyes droue away three hūdreth Camels, & ſlew alſo his ſeruātes in al this miſery & hurt, Iob comforteth h̄imſelf & thanketh God, who had lent him ſuch thynges, and taken them away again. The lord (ſaith he) hath geuen thē, the

lord hath takē thē: euē as it hath pleaſed ye lord, ſo is it com to pas: bleſſed be the name of the lorde. Let vs therefore alſo ſaye wyth Iob: the Lorde gaue vs this father, that chylde, ſuch a frende: the Lord hath taken hym agayn: bleſſed be hys name,
               But whā thou ſhouldſt laude and prayſe god, it hyndereth the exceadyngly, if thou feare, that god of a wrath and enemitie agaynſt thee, hath taken away frō thee thy ſonne or thy wyfe. &c. Such an opinion cōmeth not of god, but is euen a practyſe of the deuyll. And herewyth agreeth our feble nature: what ſoeuer is ſong or ſayed, we thynke in trouble, that god is angrye, and that our wyll is good and profytable and not gods wyll.
               Contrary hereunto, are we inſtructed by holy ſcripture, that

thoughe we knowe not perfectly, for what cauſe God ſendeth vs thys or that puniſhmente, yet ought we to bee ſatiſfied in this, that god is gracious and fauourable vnto vs, for hys beloued ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſtes ſake. Neuertheles to the intente that we maye both the better vnderſtande, and be the more glad to receaue the good wyl of God. I wyll declare what profite ſuch a death bryngeth to hym, that departeth, and to thoſe that remain.
            
            
               ¶That vnto ſuch as dye, it is profitable to departe oute of thys lyfe. The .2. Chapter.
               
                  IF thei that be dead from hēce, hadde not ſuffered trouble in thys world whan thei were alyue, it were no maruaill, to ſe vs mourne out of meaſure for theyr departyng. As for all their ioye and paſtyme vpō earth, thei are ſcace to be accōpted dreāes, in comparyſon of the true ioyes and treaſures aboue. Agayne: who wyll vndertake to nomber the aduerſities, that al menne, of what eſtate ſo euer they be, muſt be poſſeſſours of: We may well ſay wyth Iob: man that is borne of a woman, lyueth but a ſhorte time, and is repleniſhed with many miſeries. Agaynſt the whych there helpeth nether gold nor ſyluer, nether power nor nobilitie, nether policy nor natural wytte. To day we are whole & ſound, tomorowe ſick: to day mery, to morow ſory: to day rich, to morowe

poore: to day honored▪ to morow deſpyſed: to day alyue, tomorow dead.
               Moreouer vice cōmenly hath ſo the vpper hande, that none can lyue vpon earth, but he muſt diſpleaſe eyther god or man, or els them both. Therefore ſeeyng thy louing frend is gotten out of the myre, and gone out of the ſweate bath that thou yet ſitteſt in: arte thou ſory now, yt he is releaced & vnburdened of ſo much miſery? Thou ſhouldſt rather geue thāks and prayſe vnto god for it: ſpecyally foraſmuche as death dooeth vtterly deſtroye nether bodi nor ſoule, nether honeſty nor vertue, wherin, he that is now departed dyd here exercyſe hymſelfe in tyme. For loke what good thīg on hath done, it ſhal not be quēched out thorow death: but the prayſe

and commendaciō therof, among al ſuch as are good, doth rather increaſe then miniſh after death. The ſoule departing in true faith paſſeth ſtrayghte to the ioye of heauen.
               The leſt parcell of the bodye doth not vtterly peryſhe, but the whole body ſhal at the laſte day, be called to immortalitie, where our frendes ſhalbe a thouſande tymes better, richer, more pleaſaunt and more bleſſed, then euer they were vpon earth: whan we all ſhall come to them agayn, ſee them, knowe them, and haue perpetuall company wyth them and all ſaynctes. After this ſort, dyd Adam and Eue truſt, that Abel, who was ſlayne, ſhould bee reſtored agayne vnto them, beecauſe of the ſede that was promiſed.
               A ſimilitude: if a great Lorde

had called the and thy ſonne, and promiſed you much welth & good ſhouldeſt thou wepe whan thy ſonne goeth to hym, and thou thy ſelfe wylte ſhortly folowe after? No verely, but thou wouldeſt order thy matter ſo, that thou mighteſt be there out of hande. Why vnquieteſt thou thy ſelfe then ſo ſore, for the death of thy ſonne or frende? The almightie Lorde hath called hym and thee to hys eternall kyngdome, to place thee and hym amonge the prynces of heauen. Thy ſonne paſſeth hence thorowe the gates of death, he ſhall ryſe againe to honour. Why vexeſt thou then thy ſelfe? Why ordreſt not thou thy ſelfe, ioyfully to folowe him? For thou haſte not loſte hym, but only ſent hym afore.
               If it were poſſible, that thy ſonne knewe of thy vnmeaſurable

waylyng and howlyng, and could ſpeake vnto thee, wythout all doubt he hymſelfe would rebuke it and ſay: why will ye vexe your age with vnprofitable, yea wyth vnreaſonable mournyng? Wherfore wil ye blame god, his ordinaunce and prouydēce? Will ye enuy me the greate honor and ioye, that I am promoted vnto? Thinke ye, it is a thyng to be bewayled and lamented, that I am brought out of daunger into ſafgarde, out of miſery into welfare and oute of the wycked worlde into the cōpany of angels? I wil goe ſome what nerer vnto you: I pray you, if it lay in your ſtrēgth and power, to ſende for me into ye tēporal lyfe agayn, would ye calme down agayn into ye miſery of yours? With what greate faulte haue I deſerued ſuch vnfaithfulnes at youre handes? And if ye

ſhoulde not call me agayne, why mourne ye then ſo and lamente? Vpō ſuch words, we muſt nedes be aſhamed of our vnmeaſurable ſorow & heuynes. That we ought thus to iudge of faythfull Chryſten men that are departed, we may learne bi ye words of Chriſt, who teſtifieth vnto Martha: I am the reſurreccion and the lyfe.Iohn. 1
                        •
                     . He that beleueth on me, ſhal liue although he dye. And he that lyueth and beleueth on me, ſhal neuer dye. How deare & precious,Pſal. 11
                        •
                     . in the ſight of the lord, is ye death of hys ſaintes? Vnderſtand that god doth faythfulli take them in to hys proteccyon, and hath reſpect vnto their ſoules, to receaue them into eternall lyfe.
               Nowe ſayeſt thou: Alas, if I knewe, that my wyfe, chylde or frende were ſaued, I coulde the better awaye wyth hys death.

As for a thefe, he nede not to be glad whan he is caryed from priſon to the galows. Thys manne hath been all hys lyfe a chylde of the world: he neuer feared God, but dyed in ſynne happly wythout repentaunce, and peraduenture from the carte of thys miſerye, he is yoked in the charet of eternall fyer.
               Anſwere: no man can tel, how he behaued hymſelfe at hys laſt ende: happly he repented, and is pardoned. We ought euer to hop the beſt, tyll we haue ſuffycyent euidences, that the man is loſt.
               Secondly: though his damnacyon were open and manyfeſte, yet ought a faythfull man to reioyce in the righteouſnes of god. The rauens muſte haue dogges garbage, partriches muſt be ſette vpon the borde beefore lordes: a murthurer muſte be laied vpon a

whele. It is as mete for Iudas to ſitte in hell, as for S. Peter to be in heauen.
               Thirdly thou ſaieſt: if he had lyued longer, he would peraduē
                  ture haue amended. Whereupon take thys anſwer: he might haue happened aſſoone to ben worſe. A prudente mā loketh for no better, but feareth the worſe in thys blaſphemous worlde.
               S. Iohn. Chriſoſtome teſtyfieth playnly, that aſſoone as God taketh away a mā thorow death, the ſame man from thence forth, ſhoulde neuer haue been better.
               Verely God is to bee prayſed and thanked, whan he taketh awaye the vngodly. For the more a man heapeth vp ſynne vpon ſynne, the greater punyſhmente muſte he ſuffer afterwarde, for gode rightuous iuſtice ſake. The vngodly ſynneth euer the longer

the more vpō earth: but by death doth god plucke him down from hys ſynnefull lyfe: thoughe not ſpiritually and inwardly, yet wt exterior members, the ſame muſt ceaſſe from ſynne. Therefore to ſuch as are hard hearted and diſordered, there is nothyng better, then to dye the ſoner.
            
            
               ¶Vvhat profyte the death of frendes, bryngeth to ſuche as are lefte beehynde alyue. The .3. Chapter.
               THat the death of the vngodly doeth profyt other men, it is eaſy to perceiue: for therby

are the wycked vpon earth ſome what miniſhed and ſwepte out, and other poore wretches faer the better.
               But that the death of the righteous ſhoulde bryng any commoditye to ſuche as remayne alyue, it ſoundeth ſtraung in our eares: therefore ſhall it be declared.
               Whan a man, endewed wyth excellent gyftes, is made an idol: Almightie God cannot ſuffer it. For God hymſelfe wyll bee he, of whom all good thynges vndoutedly muſt be hoped and loked for: and vnto hys dyſhonour it ſerueth, if the heart cleane not only vnto hym. And bleſſed is ye man, that ſetteth hys loue, comforte and hope vpon the Lorde. Agayne, curſed be the manne (as the Prophete ſayeth) that vpon man doeth put hys truſt.

Now commeth it lightly to pa
                     •
                  , that we ſet to muche by riche parentes, by fayer children, honourable frendes, and men of good propertyes. Therefore god plucketh them away frō vs, to draw vs awaye from creatures, and yt we myght perceaue hys feruente loue towardes vs, in that he is gelous ouer vs, that he taketh oute of our ſight, whatſoeuer we gape vpon beſydes hymſelfe. And alſo, to the intente we myghte perceaue, that whatſoeuer is in the worlde, it is but temporall, and laſteth but the twynklyng of an eye: and that onelye the father of heauen wyll, can and maye helpe in all troubles.
               Moreouer, what a number is there of thē, that of an inordinate loue towardes theyr chyldren, parentes and frendes (to make prouiſion for them, and to bring thē
                  
aloft) iopard theyr ſouls for thē, fall into greate vnquietnes, and fret within themſelues, beeynge vnmercyfull, couetous, brybers, vſurers, lyers, diſceauers. Franciſcus petrarcha wryteth: Thou haſt loſt thy ſonne, yea but thou haſte loſte wyth hym alſo muche feare, and an infinite matter of careful ſorowes: by reaſon of the whych cares, that thou mighteſt be deliuered from thē, it behoued either thee or thy ſonne to die.
               Therfore geue god thākes for hys grace, whan he diſchargeth thee of thoſe thynges that hinder thee in hys free ſeruice: and whā he taketh frō the thy wyfe, child, frende or others, vpon whō thou haſte hanged to muche, and for whoſe ſakes thou haſt done wrōg many a tyme.
               That thou mayeſt vnderſtād thys thyng the better, take for enſample

mercye towardes the poore. We ſee that they, whoſe children and frendes are departed, geue almes richlye, whyche, whyle theyr wyues, childrē and frendes were aliue, woulde not haue geuen one penye, for feare that their frendes, after their death ſhould haue had nede, and ben deſtitute of mony thēſelues. Yea rich folkes, whych (as God ſometyme appoynteth) haue no chyldren nor heyers of their own bodyes, become fathers and vpholders of many poore men. Whych thing vnto them, and vnto al Chriſtēdom, is more profitable and more worthy of commēdaciō, thē .x. ſōnes of a naughty lyfe, ſuch as cōmenly there be many: among whom ſcace one of x. ſpedeth wel, I meane of thoſe that inherite their fathers riches and goods: for ſhamefullye they

waſte and conſume them, to the hurt of themſelues and of others
               Item, though one know, that he ought to loue no man in ſuche ſorte, as to diſpleaſe god for his ſake: yet many a tyme is one moued, thorow hys frendes, to doe agaynſt hys owne conſcience, if he wyl not diſpleaſe them. Therfore graciouſlie doth God pluck awaye thoſe frendes, whoſe preſence ſerueth vnto thy deſtruccyon.
               Moreouer thou ſayeſt: howe ſhoulde not I mourne, ſeeyng I am nowe robbed of ſuche helpe and ſucour, as I ſhould ſtil haue if he were yet alyue. Anſwere: ſuche complayning commeth not of a free loue towardes ye dead, but of a ſeruyle and bonde ſtomack, ye loketh & hath reſpect to it ſelfe, and deſireth to woorke hys own profit wt another mās hurt.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
Now if thy ſonne or frende, that myght haue been thy comforte in thyne age, be departed, god may ſende thee others in their place: Yea there be ſome at hande alredy, yt offer theyr helpe & coūſayll to the and thyne, & wyl not fayle thee at thy nede. And thoughe it were ſo, that thou hadeſt none other chylde nor frende in theyr ſteade, but werſt deſtitute of all bodely helpe, yet haſt thou a gracyous god thorow Ieſus Chriſt, wyth the ſpirituall giftes, which ſhall continue wyth thee for euer.
               But ſome ſay (and ſpeciallye great yonkers) mi mourning and ſorow is, becauſe my kīred, name and ſtock, myne armes & badge peryſheth, now that I leaue no heyres of my body behynde me. O thou great ydiote, thou lamē
                  teſt, that thy name and honoure

peryſheth in thys tranſytorye worlde, and forceſt litle, how thy name and honour may continue for euer more in the kyngdom of heauen.
               What is become of the mighty kynges & emperours, whyche foughte for the greateſt honour and magnificence, yt they mighte neuer be forgotten vpon earth? The memoriall of them is paſte long ago, they haue their reward already, as our lord ſayeth. Contrarye wyſe: the deare worthy ſaynctes, whych deſpyſed al glorye of thys mortall lyfe, haue at thys day greater honoure, praiſe and commendacyon, then they yt trauayled to obteine the glori of thys world. Now therfore wyll god helpe thee, not to paſſe vpon temporall honoure and pompe: but moſt of all to care, howe thy name may remayne in remembraunce

before god, wyth thoſe, that vnto him haue done faithfull ſeruyce.
            
            
               ¶Companyons that ſuffer lyfe heuyneſſe of hearte. The .4. Chapter.
               IF any thyng were practyſed agaynſt thy chylde or frend, that neceſſaryly muſt not com to pas, ſo that he mighte well haue eſcaped it, then haddeſt thou iuſte cauſe to howle and lamente. But now behoued it him, as a mortal man, to end this lyfe, euen accordyng to the firſt ordinaunce of God. Thou haſt thouſandes & thouſandes of companyons, whoſe deare frendes departed

hēce by death. Why wilte thou then diſquiete thy ſelfe? What tyme as Abrahā was cō
                  maunded of god to ſacrifice hys own onely beloued ſonne, what mynd had he (thīkeſt thou) whā he now drew ye ſwerd, & thought to ſlay his ſōne? greater ſorowe had he for hys ſonne yt yet was aliue, thē yu for thi ſōne yt is dead. In what caſe was the holy patriarck Iacobs heart, whan tidings came to him, that hys deare ſōne Ioſeph was torne of wild beſts? Where was there euer father in greater heuines, then euen Dauid, whan by hys own ſonne Abſalom (whom he yet exceadingly loued) he was expelled frō hys kyngdome? Doubtles he was in none other caſe, then as though ye hert in his body ſhronck and melted lyke waxe. Theſe & ſuche lyke enſamples, oughteſte thou to ſet

before thyne eyes: wherby thou ſhalt perceaue that thy ſorowe is to be eſtemed but ſmall towards theſe: and therefore thorowe the contemplacyō therof vndoubtedly it ſhalbe aſſwaged.
            
            
               ¶Thorowe gods helpe, all hearte ſorowe is eaſed. The .5. Chapter.
               VNhandſome phiſicians are they, that well can ſe the greatnes of the ſickenes, and braule wyth the pacyent for hys exceſſe, but can not ſhew a remedy, wherby the blemyſhe may be healed. Therefore nowe that I haue hetherto reproued vnmeaſurable ſorow

& heuynes, I will not leaue the matter ſo bare, but declare now alſo a medicine, wherby vnreaſonable mournyng (if it bee not cleane takē away) may yet be eaſed and miniſhed.
               The tyme of it ſelfe, maketh al combraunce lyghter. For there be many men and women which in tymes paſt haue ſet fynger in the eye, knocked vpō ther breſts, pulled the heer out of their own heades, ranne agaynſt the wall, diſfigured their whole bodyes, and horribly howled for ye dead. But now they haue their paſtim in all kynde of minſtrelſye, as thoughe they neuer had ayled any thyng. Not wythſtandynge to wayte ſtyll tyl heuines forget it ſelfe, is a wyniſhe thynge: and agayne, to brydle it by tymes, be ſemeth the naturall reaſon and ſobernes of a man.
               
                  What is thē to be done? It lieth not in thy power, wythout ye ſpeciall helpe of god, to expel ſorowful mourning. Firſt & principalli ponder thou the power & grace of god. The power: in that the almighty is able many hundreth wayes, faythfully to eaſe thee of thy ſorowe. The grace: in that he is willyng & ready (for the worthynes of hys ſonne) to make the ioyfull agayne, here and in the world to come, ſo as is moſte for thy profit and welth. Adā & Eue had vnſpeakable ſorowe, whan their obediēt and rightuous ſōne Abel was murthured. God than did wel put them in remembrāce of their ſynne. But they, beeyng alſo myndfull of the promes of ye bleſſed ſede, were therby erected and comforted agayne: howbeit in ſuch an exceadyng heuynes, it was very hard to withſtand deſperacion,

and to ouercome al miſchaunce. Therfore let vs cōſider, that thoughe we Chryſtians bee not altogether called to the pleaſures of thys tyme, but ſtoutli to ſtryue and valeauntly to fyghte agaynſt them: yet ſhal not Chriſt leaue vs comfortleſſe, but accordyng to his promes, he ſhal faithfully be with vs vntill the ende of the world.
            
            
               ¶Vve muſt furniſhe oure ſelues wyth praier and pacience. The .6. Chapter.
               TO ye intent yt god may aſſiſte vs wt his mighte & grace, we muſt erneſtly pray vnto him that wt hys holy ſprete, thorowe hys godly worde, he wyll comforte

vs, yt we may render thākes vnto hym, whan he hath delyuered our frendes from the daylye battayll of the ſoule, agaynſt the fleſhe, the deuill and the worlde, and from all diſcommodities of thys vayle of miſerye.
               For lyke as one, that hath fared well at a dynner, doth thāke hys hooſt, thoughe the hoſte let hym departe agayne, yea yt geſte reioyſeth afterwarde to remember it: euen ſo, foraſmuch as god for a ſeaſon, hath lente vs wyfe, chylde and frendes (whyche is more then he oughte vs) though he ſuffer them to departe, we ought neuertheleſſe to geue him moſt hygh thankes.
               Specyally there is requyred a willing and ſtoute mind: wherof holy S. Paul hath writtē this very comfortably. I woulde not brethren,2 Theſſa. 4. that ye ſhould be ignorant

concernyng them whyche ar fallen a ſlepe, that ye ſorow not as other do which haue no hope. For if we beleue that Ieſus died and roſe agayne, euen ſo them alſo, whych ſlepe by Ieſus, wyll god bryng agayne wyth hym.
               By theſe wordes may we perceaue, that there bee two maner of mourners for the deade. The heathen and vnbeleuers mourne wythout hope of the reſurrecciō: theyr opinion is, that ſeing their nere frendes are dead, there is no more of them, but that they haue vtterly loſt them for euer. Thys heathnyſhe ſorowe, wyll not S. Paul haue of Chriſtians.
               The Chriſtians mourne alſo, but wyth a lyuyng hope of the ioyfull reſurreccyon. For lyke as god the father lefte not Chryſte the lord in death, but rayſed him vp agayne, and placed hym in eternall

life: Euē ſo vs that beleue ſhall not he leaue in death, but bryng vs oute, into euerlaſtynge lyfe. For thys cauſe doth the Apoſtle ſpeake of the dead, as of thoſe that ſlepe, which reſt from all trauayll and labour, that they may ryſe agayne in better caſe.
               Lyke as the floures wyth all theyr vertue, ſmell and bewty, lyeth al the winter in the roote, ſlepyng and reſting, tyll they be awaked wyth the pleaſaunt tyme of may, whan they come foorthe wyth al their bewty, ſmel & vertue: Euen ſo oughte not we to thynke, that our frendes whyche be departed, are in eny combrāce or ſorowe, but ther ſtrength and vertue, beyng drawen in, lyueth in god and wyth god. They lye & reſt tyll the laſt daye, whan they ſhall awake agayne, fayre, bewtiful and glorious in ſoule & bodi.

who wyll not nowe reioyce at thys comforte of Paul, and ſet aſyde all vnprofitable ſorowe, for thys exceadyng ioyes ſake. Faith, that is confeſſed wyth the mouth, muſt not be deſtroyed wt a contrary dede. Now is our belefe ſette thus: I beleue forgeuenes of ſynnes, the reſurrecciō of the body, and the life euerlaſtīg. Therefore remayneth there nothyng behynde, for the whych ye ſoule of the faythfull ſhoulde be tormented in the world to come, or ſhut out from euerlaſting ioy. In the law .13.9.2. vbicūque, it is noted: vnſemely heuynes for the dead, ſpryngeth out of diſpaire of the reſurreccyon for to come: & rather of fayntnes of minde, then of mercy or godlyneſſe.
            
            
               
               ¶Enſamples of pacience in lyke caſe. The .7. Chapter.
               IF the wyſe famous heathen could be numbred, which toke the death of their frendes and chyldren in good parte, and wyth a ſtoute ſtomack, ſhould it not be compted a ſhame vnto vs Chryſten menne, that declare leſſe conſtancye in that behalfe?
               Pericles, the captayne of the Athenians (who for hys wyſedome and vertue, was called Olympius, one of heauen) whā he had loſt hys two ſonnes Paralius and Zantippus wtin the ſpace of foure dayes, was no more ſorye nor vnquieted in the ſame ſodayne

chaunce, but that on yt day folowynge, he came clothed in whyte before the whole multitude, and conſulted of the preſēt warres: ſo diſcretely and manfully, that euery man wōdred at him and honoured hym.
               Xenophō a diſciple of Socrates, whan he vnderſtode that his only ſonne Grillus had foughtē valiauntlye, and vpon the ſame was ſlayne of the enemyes, he ſayd vnto thoſe that brought him the meſſage: I made my prayer vnto the gods, not yt they ſhould geue me an immortall ſonne, or yt he myght be a long lyuer (for I knew not whether that were profitable for hym) but that of my ſonne they woulde make a good man, and a louer of hys own natyue country: whyche prayer (as I perceyue) they haue graunted, and therefore I thanke them.

Yf thou haddeſt rather heare enſamples of the romaynes, thē cō
                  ſider Paulus Emilius (who ouercame the Macedonians and triumphed gloriouſly ouer thē. Whan he within ſeuen dayes, had loſt both hys ſonnes, he was not therefore brokē mynded, but as he went forth to the multitud without both his ſonnes (which afore tyme alwaye led hym, and ſtayed hym, the one on the right hande, the other on the lefte) the people of Rome, hauyng pitie on the olde honourable man, began to lament and wepe. But he, being nothyng moued, ſtode there and ſayed: I beſought ye godes, if our commēwealth, for ye great proſperitie therof, haue any euill wyll among thoſe whiche bee in heauen, that I my ſelf, and not ye whole multitude, myght recompence and beare it. And ſeyng it

is ſo, I geue god great thankes. M. Fabius Maximus alſo, not wythout iuſt cauſe, belongeth vnto the nomber of deare worthye men. Whan he vpon a tyme had to doe wyth the office of ye mayſter of woorkes, there came vnto hym a meſſage: firſt, yt his houſe was fallen downe, and had alto bruſed hys wyfe a vertuous honourable woman: ſecondly ſlain hys mother, who in waighty affayres had oft geuen hym good counſayll, which he folowed to ye greate cōmoditie of the commen wealth: Thirdly, it was told him theſame day, yt hys yong ſōne, of whō he had an expectacyon and hope of al goodnes, was dead in Vmbria. The frēdes & louers of thys Fabius, yt ſtode about hym, whan they heard thys, wepte very ſore. But he alone being vnmoued, wēt forward ſtoutly in ye buſines yt concerned ye cōmē welth.
               
                  Here becauſe of ſhortneſſe, I leaue out a multitude of enſamples, of ſondry mē, named Galli, Piſōes, Sceuole, Metelli, Scauri, Marcelli, whō in ſuch pointes to folowe, it is laudable, & worthy of commendacyon.
               I wyll yet ſhewe one enſample of the vertuous woman Cornelia, whych was daughter vnto Scipio Aphricanus. Whan ſhe vnderſtode, that her two ſōnes, Tiberius Gracchus and C. Gracchus (who beyng Magiſtrates, had honourably and well behaued themſelues) were ſlayn, and ſhe of her frendes was called miſerable, ſhe ſayed: I wyll neuer thynke my ſelfe a miſerable womā, foraſmuch as I haue broght forth ſuch men.
               Thys woman now ouercame her owne naturall feblenes and motherly heart: ſhould not thē a

man (whyche woorde noteth the ſtronger kynde and more valeāt ſtomack) declare hymſelfe euen as ſtout? That an heithniſh vnbeleuynge woman coulde deſpyſe, ſhould that make a faythful Chriſten man ſo vtterly faynt herted? That ſhe wyllyngly gaue againe vnto nature, wilt not thou ſuffer god to haue it, whā he requireth it of thee? She toke vpon her, wt an vnbroken mynde, the death of many childrē: and wilt not thou, that forgoeſt but one chyld, be cō
                  forted agayne? The heathny ſhe womā knew none other, but that after death there remayneth nothyng behynde: yet made not ſhe an vnmeaſurable howlīge. Thou knoweſt, that after thys tyme, there remayneth an euerlaſtynge lyfe: ſo much the worſe then beſemeth it a Chriſten man, to vnquiet hymſelf wyth exceſſe of heuynes.
            
            
               
               ¶The commoditie of pacyence. The .8. Chapter.
               VNſemely ſorow, for thee ſakes that are dead, is vnprofitable and hurtfull. Vnprofitable: for aſſone as ye ſoule is once departed out of the bodye, it commeth either into heauen, or into hel, and wyth no crying ſhall it bee called back agayne, or altered. Neyther canſte thou ſerue the dead wyth any thyng more, then, that hys remembraunce be deare and had in honoure wt thee. The heithniſhe Poete Sophocles writeth: if ye dead might wt teares be called agayne, thē ſhould wepīg

be cōpted more worth thē golde. But O my good olde mā, it may not be, yt he which once is buried ſhould come agayne to ye lyghte. For if weping myght help, mi father had ben aliue agayn. Hurtful: herof hath the heithniſh poet Philemon written ryght wiſely: many of them, thorowe ther own fault, increace miſfortune to thē
                  ſelues, & make the ſame more greuous, then it is of nature. Example: whan one hath hys mother, chyld or frēd dead, if he thought thus: he was a man, and therfore he dyed: thys aduerſitie ſhould be no greater, then nature bryngeth wyth it. But if he cry: I am vndone, I ſhall ſee hym no more, he is gone & loſte for euer: ſuche one heapeth vp yet more ſorow, to that he hath already. But who ſo conſydereth euery thyng with diſcrecion, maketh the aduerſity

to be leſſe vnto hymſelfe, and obteyneth the more quietnes.
               It were a veri ſcornful thing, if, whan a man hath hurt on fote, he would therfore marre ye other alſo: or if, whan one part of hys goodes is ſtollen away, he wold caſt the reſt into the ſee, and ſay, that he ſo bewayleth hys aduerſitie. No les folyſhly dooe they that enioy not ſuch goodes as ar preſente, and regarde not theyr frendes that be alyue, but ſpyl & marre themſelues, becauſe theyr wyues, chyldren or frendes bee departed.
               Though one of the huſbande mans trees doth wyther awaye, he heweth not down therfore al the other trees, but regardeth ye other ſo much the more, that they maye wynne the thynge agayne, whyche the other loſte. Euen ſo learne thou in aduerſitie, wyth

ſuche goodes as are lefte thee, to comforte and refreſh thy ſelfe agayne.
            
            
               ¶Vve oughte ſo to loue oure chyldren and frēds, that we maye forſake them. The .9. Chapter.
               AL ſuche thynges oughte of vs to be conſydered, taken in hande, and exercyſed, while our wiues and frendes are yet aliue. Namely, if thou haue father or mother, huſbande or wyfe, chyld or frēdes, lay not thyne heart, loue and affeccyon to much vpon thē, how good, profitable and honeſt

ſo euer they be:
                     Loue thy frendes beecauſe god hath commaunded the to loue them and not for affeccyon to them, and thē wylt thou be contented wyth gods good wyll and pleaſure
                     Note the ſaying of an heathen man gretly to our ſhame.
                   but remember alwaye, that they are tranſitorye thynges, which thou mayeſt loſe and forgoo, whā time requireth. Loue him moſt of all, whō thou canſt not loſe, euen thy redemer, who (to drawe the vnto his loue and to delyuer the from the loue of the world) ſtretched oute hys armes, and ſuffred the moſt vile death for thee vpon the croſſe. Seneca ſayeth not vnwyſely: I lende my ſelfe vnto the thynges of the world, but I doe not geue my ſelfe vnto thē. He ſaith more ouer that nothyng is poſſeſſed as it ought to bee, except one be ready at all tymes to loſe it.
               But if we faſten our heartes (ſo to ſay) vpon our children and frendes: that is, if we loue them to muche, and not god aboue all thynges, then hath our ſorow no meaſure, as ought as they are altered

or taken awaye. Therefore if thou haſt not prepared thy ſelf to aduerſitie by tymes, and arte once ouertaken wyth vndiſcrete heuynes, then let it be vnto the a warnyng from hēce forth, to kepe thee from the greater loue of trā
                  ſitorye thynges, whyche hath brought thee into ſuch heart ſorow: to the intent that at other tymes thou mayſt take ye deth of thi wife and childrē, in good parte and wyth more conſtanci of mind.
            
            
               
               ¶Of the death of younge perſonnes in eſpeciall. The .10. Chapter.
               AFter the generall inſtruccyon concernynge death, muſt certayne obiecciōs be anſwered, that hetherto are not reſolued. If a yong man, or if a yong daughter dye, Lorde, what a greate mournyng begynneth there to be: alas he is taken awaye in hys younge dayes afore hys tyme, he ſhoulde fyrſt haue been maried, and had a good wyfe vpon earth, and in hys laſt age haue dyed in peace, and reſt. Herof commeth it, that we thynke the death of chyldren

to be vnnaturall, euē as whā the flame of fyer thorow water is violently quenched. The death of the aged we thinke to be natural, as whan the fyer quencheth of it ſelfe, accordyng to the ſaying of Cicero.
               Item the death of young perſons, is compared to vnripe apples, that wyth violēce ar pluckt of from the tree: the death of the aged, is thoughte to be, as whā rype apples fall downe of themſelues.
               Item, As it is hard to vndoo two bordes newly glewed together, but olde ioininges ar lightly broken a ſunder: ſo we cōplain that young folkes dye with greater payne then the olde: Yea it greueth the fathers and mothers heart, whan (as they counte it) ye mater is turned vpſe down, that chyldrē depart out of this world

afore olde folkes. The anſwer is taken oute of the fore rehearced grounde.The wyll of God. Yf god (who hath al in his owne power) had promyſed euery one a long lyfe, then mighteſt thou complayne, at the ſhortnyng of the lyfe of thy ſelfe or of thy frendes agaynſte gods promes. Now hath god compared & clothed the ſoule wyth the body, that what day, or what twinklīg of an eye ſoeuer, he cōmaundeth it to depart, it kepeth ye ſame time, wherin one finiſheth his courſe. Therefore hath no man cauſe to complayn of an vntimely death, but loke whatſoeuer one hath lyued ouer and beſide the firſt day of hys birth, it is an increace.
               Moreouer, god knoweth much better then thou and we al, whan it is beſte for euerye one to dye. And ſo faithful is he for the lord Ieſus Chryſts ſake, that he in no

wyſe wyll be to haſty vpon vs.
               Secondli,The ſhortne
                        •
                      of this tyme▪
                   though we remain a long ſeaſon, in thys fickle tranſitory lyfe, yet is al our tyme but ſhort, ſpecially towards the endleſſe eternitie. Therefore it hath but a ſlender differēce, to depart hence in youth or in age.
               Thyrdly,Miſery. thorowe death is a yong perſon wythdrawen away fro many troubles, whyche els were at hys dore. For commenly the longer a man liueth, the more miſerable is he.
               Take enſamples oute of olde ſtoryes. Yf Themiſtocles after the moſt gloryous victory agaīſt Xerxes (whan all the Grekes aknowledged and cōmended him for their redemer and delyuerer) had dyed, ſhoulde it not haue ſerued hym to a perpetuall prayſe and honoure?
               
                  Then ſhoulde not he afterwarde haue been rated, as a betrayer of Grekelande: then neded not he to haue been in bōdage, not to haue fallen downe at the foote of the kyng of Barbarye (as beefore a god) whom he before had dryuē out of grekelande. Howe thrall and vile a thyng was it to be eſtemed before the world, that The miſrocles muſt nedes come beefore kyng Xerxes?
               What is to be ſaid of Marcus Cicero? who confeſſeth hymſelfe that if he had died ſooner, he had eſcaped exceadīg great troubles. And foraſmuche as he ſo ſayed whyle the mater was yet tolerable, howe woulde he fyrſte haue thought and lamēted in his age, to ſee wyth his eyes the drawne ſwordes ouer the ſenatours and Citizens heades, and whan the moſte principall mennes goods

were parted among murtherers,Catilina was a ſedicious man. yea whā wheras afore tyme ther was one catilina, the citie was now become full of ſuche ſedicious perſons?
               The enſamples of dayly experience declare ſufficiently before our eyes, whereby we maye euidently perceyue, yt death (though they call it vntimeli) deliuereth yet from great miſfortune and aduerſitie.
               Fourthlye, the innocency and clennes of youth, is of their own nature and thorowe euyll enſamples, defyled and ſtayned with the life and cōuerſacion that foloweth after. Auguſtine ſayeth: the older the worſe.
               Therfore whan a yonge man falleth on ſlepe, knowe thou that God ſheweth greate grace vnto hym, in that he ſuffereth him not (as many other) to remaine long

in thys blaſphemous worlde, to the intente he ſhould no more bee hyndered and defyled wyth it, but hath called hym from hence to a right good ſtate,He ſpeaketh of Henoch. that wyth hymſelf and al ye electe, he might poſſeſſe the kyngdome of heauē. Witnes of the ſcripture: Sapience. 4.ſodenly was he taken away, to ye intēte that wickednes ſhoulde not alterhys vnderſtandyng. Hys ſoule pleaſed god, therefore haſted he to take hym awaye from among the wycked.
               Similitudes. He that is vpō the ſea, and wyth a good ſtronge wynde, is caryed ſoone to ye hauē or lande, where he woulde be, is happier then he, that for lacke of wynde, is fayne to ſayll ſtil many yeares and dayes vpon ye ſea, with much trouble and werines. Euē ſo, ye more happy is he, whō death taketh awaye from ye ſtormy

and raging ſea of this world. Seyng there is ſet before vs, an vniuerſal natiue country, and he that is long in goyng thyther, obteyneth nomore, then he that is ſpedely gone thither before hād, ſhould not one wiſhe, that he had ſoone ouercome the foul daungerous way, that leadeth to ye heauenly harborow?
               The ſooner one payeth hys debt, ye better it is. If there were none other remedi, but yu with an hundreth moo muſt nedes be beheaded, and thou arte the fyrſte that is put to execucion: art thou not then the fyrſte that is diſpatched of the payne?
               Fynally, if thou conſyder the miſchaunces of other folkes thou haſt the leſſe cauſe to complaine. One dyeth in the mothers wōbe afore he be borne. Another dyeth in the very birth.
               
                  The thirde in hys floriſhynge youth, whan he fyrſt delyteth to lyue, falleth away as a bewtiful roſe. Among a thouſand is there not one, that commeth to the perfect age.
            
            
               ¶Of the death of the aged. The .11. Chapter.
               VvHā old aged folkes are gredye of thys wretched life, they doe euen as thoſe, ye whan the wyne is all ſpent, wyll nedes drynke out the wyne lyes alſo. Whoſo dwelleth in an olde rotten houſe that ſynketh down, nedeth not lōg to ſeke proppes to vnder ſet it, but

ſhould rather be glad to get him out of it: euen ſo, old aged folks, by reaſon of theyr decaied body, ſhould rather be cōtēt to departe from it. And thys aduauntage they haue, that their death is not ſo fearce and paynful, as ye death of yong folkes.
               Thys is chefely to be conſidered, that the lord our god wil not haue vs carefull (whyche thynge belongeth vnto hym alone) but to be faythfull and true, and diligently to laboure. Olde fathers and mothers, are not able to trauayll any more: and yet wyth erneſte carefulneſſe, they thynke to bryng all thynges to pas. Thys ſpecial fault they haue, that they thynke, they ſhal euer lacke. Therfore vnto them verely it is beſte, that god take them away from al care, ſorowe and trouble, & place them in quiete reſte, wyth other

faythfull Chryſten folkes.
            
            
               ¶Of ſtraunge death. The .12. Chapter.
               VvHoſo is taken with the peſtilence, or dyeth els of ſycknes in hys bed, ought gladly to ſuffer the hand of god, for euery bodi hath deſerued a farre worſe death. And a very ſmall rod is thys, towards it that god ſendeth ouer the vngodlye, yea ofte tymes ouer hys own deare children, whan one is beheaded,Pſal. 44.1. Roma. 8. c. 
                        •
                     . Cor. 4. b. another burnt, ye third drowned &c. where they altogether may ſyng wt Dauid: for thy ſake are we kylled euery day and cōpted as ſhepe, appoynted to be

ſlayn. But if one dye an vnwont death (as one is deſtroied by the hangmā, another dyeth a ſodain death, ye third, as happly a mans chylde, falleth down dead frō an hyghe place) thys take we for aterrible death, & cannot tell els what to ſay of it, as though eueri kind of death in it ſelfe were not terrible vnto the nature of man. Though one dyeth vpon ye whele for murther, there is ſome tyme more hope of hym, that he hath founde grace at gods hand, then of many one yt dyeth at home in hys bed. Enſāples alſo are to be cōſidered: for a great ſort of gods elect died not a ryghte death, as we vſe to terme it. Abel was murthured of his own naturall brother. The prophet beeyng ſent to Hieroboam, was deſtroied of a Lyon. Eſaye was ſawne a ſonder thorowe the myddes.

Hieremy (lyke as Steuen alſo) was ſtoned to death. Iames, being thrown downe from the pulpet, was ſlayne of a fuller. Peter at rome was faſtened to a croſſe. Vpon Paul was execucion done wyth the ſworde: ſuch like enſamples haſt thou.Heb. 11.
               
               Item, the moſt excellent heithē men came miſerably out of thys world. The good Socrates was poyſoned: Euripides was all to torne of dogges: Sophocles was choked wyth a litle ſtone of a grape bury: very ſorowfull combraunce dyd fret out the heart of Homerus. Innumerable enſamples declare, that there happeneth no new thing vnto vs, what death ſoeuer we or oure frendes dye.
               Specially let vs obſerue this rule: death is terrible to thē that haue no god: but of vs which ar

gods children, ought not the horible ymage of death to be feared but to bee welcome vnto vs. For god himſelfe comforteth vs with theſe wordes folowyng: I lyue,Iohn. 14. and ye alſo ſhall lyue. Of this ar we aſſured in Chriſt Ieſu, who vpon the croſſe, dyed ye moſt horrible deth for our ſakes, to whō with the father & the holy goſte be all honor and glori for euer and euer. Amen.
               ¶Onely vnto God geue the praiſe.
            
         
         
            
            An exhortacion wrytten by the Lady Iane, the night before ſhe ſuffred, in the end of the new teſtamente in Greke, whych ſhe ſent to hir ſiſter Ladye Katherine.
            I Haue here ſent you, good ſiſter Katherin, a booke: whych although it be not outwardly trymmed with golde, yet inwardlye it is more worth then precyous ſtones. It is the booke, deare ſiſter, of ye law of the lord: it is hys teſtament & laſt wyll, whyche he bequethed vnto vs wretches, whyche ſhall leade you to the path of eternal

ioye. And if you wt a good minde reade it, and with an earneſt deſier folowe it, it ſhal bryng you to an immortal and euerlaſting life. It wil teache you to lyue, & learn you to dye: it ſhall wynne you more, then you ſhoulde haue gained by the poſſeſſions of youre wofull fathers landes. For as if god hadde proſpered hym, you ſhould haue inherited his lādes, ſo if you apply diligentlye thys boke, ſekyng to directe your lyfe after it: you ſhalbe an inheritour of ſuche ryches, as neyther ye couetous ſhal wythdrawe frō you, neyther the thefe ſhall ſteale, nether yet the mothes corrupte.
            Deſyer wyth Dauid, good ſiſter, to vnderſtande the lawe of the Lorde your God. Liue ſtyl to dye, that you by death maye purchace eternall lyfe: or after your death enioie the life purchaced you by Chriſtes death.

And truſte not, that the tendernes of youre age ſhall lengthen your life. For aſſone, if god call, goeth the yonge, as the olde: and labour alwaye to learne to dye, deny the world, defye the deuyll and deſpyſe the fleſhe, and delite your ſelfe only in the Lorde. Be penitent for your ſynnes, and yet deſpayre not. Be ſtrong in faith, and yet preſume not. And deſyer wyth S. Paul, to bee diſſolued & to be wyth Chryſte, wyth whom euen in death there is lyfe. Bee lyke the good ſeruant, and euen at midnight be waking: leſt whā death commeth and ſtealeth vpō you like a thefe in the nyght, you be wyth the euill ſeruaunt found ſlepinge, and leaſte for lacke of oyle ye be founde lyke to the fine folyſh wemen, and like him that had not on ye weddyng garment, and then be caſt out from the maryage. Reioyce in Chryſte as I

truſt ye doe. And ſeyng ye haue the name of a Chryſtian, as nere as ye can folowe the ſteppes of your maſter Chryſt, and take vp your croſſe, laye your ſynnes on hys backe, and alwayes embrace him. And as touching my death, reioyce as I dooe (good ſiſter) yt I ſhalbe deliuered of this corrupcyon, and put on vncorrupcyon. For I am aſſured, that I ſhal for loſyng of a mortall lyfe, wynne an immortall lyfe. The whych I praye god graunt you, ſende you of his grace to liue in his feare, and to dye in the true Chryſtyan fayth: From the whyche, in gods name I exhorte you, that ye neuer ſwarue, neyther for hope of lyfe, nor feare of death. For if ye wil deny hys trueth to lengthen your lyfe, god wyll denye you, and yet ſhorten your dayes. And if ye wyll cleaue to hym, he wil prolonge your dayes to your cō
               forte

and hys 
                  〈…〉
                ye whyche glory god bring me now, and y
                  •
                hereafter, whan it ſhall pleaſe God to call you. Fare well, good ſiſter, and put youre onely truſt in god, who only muſt helpe you. Your louing ſiſter, Iane Dudley.
            
         
      
   