
      
         
            
            
            THE Late Commotion of certaine Papists in Herefordshire.
            
            Occasioned by the death of one Alice Wellington, a Recusant, who was buried after the Popish maner, in the Towne of Allens-Moore, neere Hereford, vpon Tuesday in Whitsun weeke last past.
            1605.
            With other excellent matter thereby occasioned.
            
               Truely set forth.
            
            
               AVT NVNC AVT NVNQVAM
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Imprinted at London by S. S. for I. Chorlton, and F. Burton.
            1605.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, to satisfie thy minde, and to stop the mouths of the multitude, who listening after euery idle report, are easily induced to beleeue, whatsoeuer bee by vncertayne fame bruted abroad, I haue caused these seuerall Letters, with a true discourse therein contayned, of the beginning and proceedings in these late Popish actions, to be diuulged: and I haue the rather bene thereunto induced, because I know certaynly, that not a few, for their better satisfaction, are very desirous to vnderstand the truth thereof.
            
               
Furthermore, in perusall hereof, the vulgar people, & such as are wauering in Religion, by reading his Maiesties protestation, for the mayntenance of Religion, herein contayned, and publikely vttered in the Starre-chamber, by the mouth of the L. Chauncellor of England, vpon Thursday the xx. of Iune last past, shall hereby bee incouraged to go on in the Christian profession of the Gospel, so long time by Gods mercies, and the constancy of religious Princes mayntayned amongst vs, and not bee discouraged by any idle perswasions, which seditious and trecherous Papists, who haue vowed themselues vnto the seruice of the Pope, shall closely and vndermyningly (thereby seeking to alienate the hearts of his faythfull subiects, from their dutifull allegeance)▪ buzze into their eares. So that if any Papist hereafter should seeke to perswade any of his Maiesties subiects, that the tymes are like to alter, and that a Toleration should bee graunted, (thereby wronging his Maiesty exceedingly, who is so fully settled in the

Trueth) they may answere them, Auoyd, false and lying Varlets, your words are vayne, and your hopes are more vayne; see here his Maiesties protestation to the contrary.
            
            Neither can I here omit to giue notice vnto the world, of that excellēt speach, which mine owne eares heard vttered vpon Munday the fifth of August last past, at Paules Crosse, by the right Reuerend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London, in his Sermon there; because it serueth for a strengthening and confirmation of that, which in the ensuing Letter you shall read. His words tended briefly to this effect:
            
               That his Maiesty had made a protestation before God and his Angels, that he was so constant for the maintenance of the Religion publikely in England professed, as that hee would spend his owne dearest bloud in the defence therof, rather then the Truth should be ouerthrown: and that if he had ten times as many more kingdomes as he hath, he would dispend them all for the safety and protection thereof: and likewise,

that if he had any childrē that should out-liue him, if they should maintayne or vp-hold any other Religion, he desired of God, that hee might see them brought to their graues before him, that their shame might be buried in his life time, neuer to be spoken of in future ages.
            
            Oh worthy speeches, and worthy so noble and religious a King! Shall we therefore that are his subiects, be discouraged, hauing so couragious a King? No, God forbid.
            Thus wishing thee to iudge none otherwise hereof, then as proceeding from one, that tendreth the good of his Prince and country, and is willing to satisfy all such, as desire to be informed in the truth hereof, I rest a wel-willer to all that meane well.
            
               Tho. Hamond.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Letter from a Gentleman in London, to his friend in Hereford.
            
               ❧ To his most affected and kinde friend, Mr. E. R. in Hereford.
            
               KInd Mr. E. R. the former proofes that I haue already had of your loue to meward, causeth me agayne to presume vpon your further curtesies. The matter is thus: There hath bene lately noysed abroad very commonly in London, a strange report, concerning the proceedings of some Papists in your parts, and as fame goeth, not far from you: much haue I heard thereof, and that diuersly: whereupon being desirous to be

satisfied with a certayne truth of that matter, (because my mind cannot rest contented with an vncertayne Relation thereof) I repayred vpon Thursday last, being Starre-chamber day, vnto Westminster, there expecting to heare something concerning those causes: neyther was I altogether deceyued in my expectation, although not fully satisfyed in any particulars of this matter, how the maner thereof was: for being there, vpon the same day, after that the Lords were set, and that one or two matters, concerning some former misorders in those partes formerly committed, had bene heard, the right Honourable, the Lord high Chauncellour of England, as from his Maiesties owne mouth, beganne a most excellent speach, and deliuered the matter after such an vnexpressable maner, as it is impossible for me to come neere vnto, eyther the words, or perfit substance thereof, it was so pithy, so excellent, and so admirably

couched together: and yet acknowledgeing that he himselfe was vnable to declare it vnto them in such maner, as his Maiesty had deliuered it vnto him.
            But I will onely heerein relate vnto you, as neere as I can remember, such things as were vttered by his Lordship, concerning these present matters: for his Lordship, after that he had spoken somewhat largely, concerning some other poynts, sayd, That there had now happened a present occasion (meaning this late Commotion in your partes) which did administer much matter worthy of consideration.
            Then he began to shew how certainely his Maiesty was informed, That the number of Papists in England was mightily increased, since his Maiesties comming, and that Popish Priests and Iesuites (factors for the Pope) lay lurking in many corners of this land, to seduce his Maiesties subiects from their due and lawfull allegeance

vnto their rightfull Prince, to the acknowledgement of a forrain power and authority, namely, the Pope of Rome.
            
            
               Then also, that his Maiesty maruayled, how it happened, that Papists could so increase daily, or Priests and Iesuites be intertayned within his Kingdomes, considering, that his Lawes are in force against them.
            
            And thereupon entring into a consideration of the estate of this Land, and seeking by all meanes possible to finde where the fault might be; after the examination of diuers supposed causes, he alleadged, that none was greater then this, viz. That Iustices are too slacke and negligent in their places; it being a thing impossible, that Priests and Iesuites should swarme so thick as they doe in any partes of England, or VVales, vnlesse Iustices of Peace in those parts where they frequented, were carelesse of their place and office.
            
            Hereupon also he said, that his Maiesty

was informed, That many, who were in place of Iustice, to punish others, either were themselues so affected, or atleast wise, for speciall respects, fauoured them that were.
            
            Then spake he vnto the Iudges, and such as were to go their Circuits, remembring vnto them, how carefull his Maiesty had bene for the good and happy gouernment of these his Kingdomes; how studious for the mayntenance of the true Religion, professed and maintayned by the Church of England; how often his Maiesty had held consultation with his Councell and Cleargy, for the sure establishment of matters in Religion; and how loth to alter, change, or disanull any of the Lawes of England: because hee found, that there was no more perfit forme of gouernment in the world, nor any Church that came so neere vnto the very substance of the trueth in euery poynt, as the Church of England doth: and because that Religion is the surest

bond to knit mens hearts in vnity, he recited how great paynes, and what often cares his Maiesty had taken for a perfit vnity in Religion, and diuine worship, that not euery one should bee at liberty to serue God after his owne fashion, but all should ioyne in one true worship of God; which, if euer any Nation in the world had, we now haue.
            Further also, giuing vnto the Iudges a straight charge, that in their Circuits they should haue an especiall care to inquire for all such as were Priests, Iesuites, or Recusants, and to take such order, that they might be punished; and more especially, for inquiry of all such Iustices of peace, as were either, themselues, their wiues, children, or seruants, Papists; or knowne themselues to be fauourers of Papists.
            Hereupon further alledging, that there were some Iustices, who although they themselues would not be seene to giue any entertaynement or countenance vnto

Priests, Iesuites, or Recusants, yet such should finde welcome at theyr Wyues hands.
            And therefore his Maiestyes pleasure was, That all such Iustices, as can bee knowne to be as aforesayd, should haue their names sent vp, that they may be remooued out of the Commission for the Peace, as being vnfit members to hold such places.
            And as this his Maiestyes charge extended vnto the punishment of such, as were obstinate Papists: so, more especially, for the punishment of such, as were become Papists since his Maiesties comming: and yet a more strict charge for those parts about you, because they were alwayes most infestious and troublesome.
            Then hee put the Iudges in minde, how long a time they now had for search into these matters, and what directions

they had receyued for their proceedings, assuring them, that as his Maiesty had signified vnto them before their going, what course they should obserue: so at their returnes, hee would call them vnto an account, what they had performed therein.
            And amongst many other matters of speciall moment, he entred into a deepe consideration of this Land, the estate therof how blessed it was, how much bounden vnto GODS Almighty goodnesse, for that he hath sent vs so gracious a King: A King, that did so constantly professe CHRISTES true Religion established in the Church of England: a King, by whose happy commaund we were free from many cares, many dangers, many perills.
            Moreouer also, he shewed, that Papists in diuers places, (as his Maiesty was certaynely informed) did bragge in words, That they were in a good hope of

a Toleration: hereunto adding a speach of his Maiestyes, concerning the folly of Papists, how they were besotted, yea; and more then bewitched, to suppose any such matter, wondering, whereupon they should builde their false hopes; adding thereunto also, that his Maiesty was so surely perswaded of the truth of his Religion, so firmely grounded vpon the cercertainty thereof, and so constantly bent for the mayntenance thereof, as that he yowed vnto his Priuy Councell, that if he did know that any of his children after him (which I hope neuer will be) would goe backe from the Religion which hee now professed, and maintayne any other, that vpon that childe hee would lay his curse.
            These and many other matters (which not a little ioyed me to vnderstand, how constant his Maiesty is for the mayntenance of the Gospell) I heard with mine owne eares, whereof I thought it not amisse

to certify you: but because I cannot here know of the particular matters, and maner how those things fell out in your parts, I make bold to request your paynes, in learning, as neere as you can, the truth therof, and to let me vnderstand thereof by your Letters. London, the 22. of Iune. 1605.
            
               Your friend assured,
T. H.
            
         
         
            
            An Answere vnto the former Letter.
            
            To his most approued good friend, Mr. T. H. in London.
            
            
               
                  BEcause Reports are many and variable, and the world is giuen to inquire after nouelties, according as the saying is, Est natura hominum nouitatis auida; and also, because the further a tale goeth, the more it is made: for, Fama crescit eundo: and lastly, because by your Letters, you seeme to be so importunate, to know the truth in these late stirres and Commotions in our parts. I

haue (though vnwillingly, but onely for your sake, vnto whome I acknowledge my selfe many wayes beholding, and whose request in any matter lawfull, is vnto me a strong commaund) taken some paynes in collecting the trueth thereof, as neere as I could, without putting in of any thing, vnlesse it were credibly reported to bee true, or were matters of coherence with these actions.
            
            
               Accept therefore these few lynes ensuing, as a further pledge of my vnfayned loue vnto your VVorship; and as occasion shallserue, if any other matters worthy the writing doe happen, I will not fayle to performe whatsoeuer belongeth vnto a trusty friend, and one that wisheth all happinesse and prosperity vnto your fortunes.
            
            
               Neyther may I heere omit to render you most kynde thanks, for your paynes taking, in writing so largely vnto me in your

letter as you haue done.
            
            
               And besides that, the substance of your Letter is so welcome vnto mee (because I know, that had it not beene true, you would not haue written it) as that it causeth my heart to leape for ioy within me, as often as I remember, how constantly his Maiesty hath auowed to maintayne and vphold the truth of the Gospell, which is now in England publikely preached.
            
            
               Neyther doth the remembrance thereof seldome tymes with ioy affect me: for so many causes doe daily administer matter, to bring mee into the remembrance thereof, as that I am alwayes replenished therewith; especially, when I bethinke me of Papists, how vayne their hopes are, and how like vnto smoake they vanish away.
            
            
               God omnipotent, of his infinit mercy and goodnesse blesse vs all, and make vs heere

faythfull seruants vnto himselfe, and the King, that after our seruice here on earth, we may all rest with Christ Iesus in the kingdome of heauen. Hereford, the nyne and twentyeth of Iune. 1605.
            
               Yours to commaund,
E. R.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ A true Relation of the late Commotion in Herefordshire.
            
               
                  THere is a little Uillage in Herefordshire, called by the name of Allens Moore, distant from the City of Hereford, two little myles. In this Parish (as also in many other thereabouts) the Priestes of Rome haue so bestirred themselues, that with their doctrine, they haue so poysoned and made many drunke, with the dregges of the fornication of the Whoore of Rome, as that they are become obstinate Recusants, to repayre to the Church, and to participate of our Churches Sacraments, the true and vndoubted Pledges of our saluation.
            
            
               
               And amongst the rest, without any further digression (to come to our present purpose) one Alice Wellington, wife of Thomas Wellington, of Allens-Moore, in the aforesayd County, Peoman, being but a simple woman, and voyd of any true grounds of Learning or Diuinity; but onely being seduced by the witcheries of Baals Priests, continued so obstinate in her erronious peruersnesse, that she, contrary vnto his Maiesties Lawes, would by no meanes nor perswasions, bee induced to repayre vnto the Church, according to his Maiesties Lawes in that case prouided. Whereupon, by the censure of the Church, shee rested excommunicate.
            
            
               It pleased GOD, to visit this Alice Wellington with sicknesse, and to lay his hand so heauy vpon her, that she dyed excommunicate, not hauing submitted her selfe vnto our Church.
            
            
               Whereupon, the Uicar of the Parish being asked whether he would bury her? Hee the sayd Uicar (knowing that the Law would not admit those to be buryed, according to the order of our Church, being dead, who liuing, refuse to submit

themselues thereunto) refused the performance thereof, alleadging; that hee should incurre the penalty and daunger of the Lawe, if hee should yeelde therevnto.
            
            
               Hereupon, many Papists being aduertised of her death; and drawing themselues together, they so determined, that among themselues, come what come would thereof, it should bee performed after their maner.
            
            
               Whereupon it was agreed, that vpon the Tuesday following, being Tuesday in Whitsun weeke in the morning, it should be done.
            
            
               Understand by the way, that the Uicars house being close to the Church-yard, as hee lay in his bed, about sixe of the clocke in the morning, some houre and halfe after Sunne rising, he heard the sound of a little Bell; and being vnacquaynted with such a sound, and wondring what it might be, hee started vp, and looked out at the wyndow, from whence he espyed (as he gessed) some fourty or fifty persons accompanying a Coarse round about the Church, one of which company had a
               
Saints-bell, another bare a Crosse, fastened (as it seemed vnto him) vpon the end of a staffe; before the coarse some carryed Tapers burning, and other such trumperies: The rest of them being weaponed, some with Billes, some Staues, some Swords, & other weapons; some of which men the Uicar himselfe knew, and some he knew not.
            Hereupon, the Uicar (as soone as hee could) arrayed himselfe: but before hee was dressed and come vnto them, the body was layd into the ground, and their Ceremonies welneere ended. Whereupon, the Uicar drawing neere, spake vnto them, blaming them for their boldnesse. But they little regarding his words, gaue him many reuiling tearmes, and bade him get him gone, if he tendered his owne life, and not to disturbe them, nor approach neere them.
            The Uicar being but himselfe alone, and seeing so many weaponed in offensiue maner, thought it bootles to say any more, or to make resistance against so rude a company, and thereupon returned into his house.
            
               
After that the company was dissolued, the Uicar gaue the right Reuerend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Hereford, then lying at the Palace in Hereford, to vnderstand thereof, both the maner how, the time when, and the names of some persons, whome he had seene and knowne in the said Action.
            Whereupon, his Lordship hauing an especiall care, for the suppressing of such tumults and disorders, and also knowing how much hurt the wincking thereat might easily procure; and withall, being zealously bent against their profane customes, directed a Warrant vnto the high Constable of that Hundred, George Wenlond, for the speedy search for, and apprehension of such as were knowne to be Actors therein.
            The high Constable hauing receyued the Warrant, with other petty Constables, speedily repayred vnto the shoppe of one Iames Cowle, a Weauer of Hungerstone, neere thereunto adioyning, where the sayde Iames Cowle was, and also one Chadnor, a Weauer like wise,

who wrought in another roome adioyning, both of them being in the Warrant, the sayd high Constable, George Wenlond, caused them both to be apprehended, by vertue of the sayd Warrant.
            But they beganne to striue and struggle, and would not goe with them, according to the purport of the Warrant: In which contention, the sayd Chadnor escaping, some pursued him, the rest remayned with Iames Cowle: but Cowle, contrary to the Kings Peace, desperately strooke at a Gentleman, named Master William Gough, with a short knife, which Weauers commonly vse to cut off their threeds, and there with grieuously wounded the sayd Master William Gough vpon the chynne. At which time also, one William Rogers, one of the Constables, was hurt in seuerall places vpon the hand.
            It happened, that as they were thus contending, one Leonard Marsh, of Kynson, who had likewise beene in the former Action, and was also one of the men named in the Warrant, came into the sayd Shoppe, where the same Iames Cowle
               
was.
            Whereupon the sayd Leonard Marsh was likewise apprehended; and in their striuing, the Constable being hurt, and Master Gough likewise, the sayd Iames Cowle escaped also; in so much that none, saue onely the aforesayd Leonard Marsh, remained in their power.
            The rest hauing escaped, and wilfully indangered themselues, by committing such vyle misdemeanors against his Maiesties sworne Officers, the high Constable tooke the sayd Leonard Marsh with him toward Hereford; and by the way as hee passed, he charged diuers such as he met with, in his Maiesties name, to bee assistant vnto him, in conducting the Prisoner vnto Hereford: in so much, that hee had to his ayde some fifteene or sixteene men, euery one taking with him such weapons as they could come presently by, and as the haste required; whereby they were but very meanely and slenderly weaponed.
            In this maner marching towards Hereford City, suite was made vnto the high Constable, by a brother of the sayd

               Leonard Marsh, that he would stay his course with the Prisoner, vntill such time, as Master William Morgan of Treble Parke had spoken with him.
            But the high Constable following the wordes of his Warrant, aduisedly replyed, That hee might not stay his course; for his Warrant was to the contrary.
            Whereupon, William Marsh, brother vnto the sayd Leonard Marsh, called vnto his brother, and bade him not to goe with them.
            Thereupon, the sayd Leonard began to draw backwards; but being himselfe alone, he was by strength forced forward softly.
            Thus, hauing gone on softly some two miles, when as they came within a quarter of a myle of Hereford City, suddenly they espyed themselues beset on euery side the way with men (in number as they gessed, some forty or fifty) weaponed, some hauing Bowes & Arrowes, some Billes, some Long-staues and Pikes, some Swords; And so inclosing the high Constable, and his company, they demaunded,

whither he conuayed the Prisoner? He answered, That his Warrant was to carry him to Hereford. Thē they demaunded, For what purpose? He answered, That when he came there, they should know. At which words, one of them set a Iauelin to his brest, and charged him, vnlesse he meant to see his owne guts, to let goe the Prisoner.
            The high Constable perceyning in what danger hee was; and also knowing how far too weake his company was to make resistance, being (as before is said) but some fifteene or sixteene persons, and those also, (as not mistrusting so bold a rescue) but very meanely weaponed; yea, welneere as good as altogether without weapons, after he had reasoned with those vnreasonable persons, and shewed them the danger that they had thrust themselues into, by making so rebellious a rescue (seeing no meanes of resistance, let goe the Prisoner, who as soone as he was loose, had a Byll presently by some of the company deliuered vnto him: and then in most bold and presumptuous maner beganne to threaten diuers of those, that were with the high Constable to ayde him.
            
               
Presently, as soone as the sayd Leonard Marsh was rescued, came the aforesayd Master William Morgan of Treble Parke (who is now with some others sent vp to London) vnto the high Constable: vnto whome the high Constable spake some words, as blaming him for the rescue, and that hee should be the cause thereof, and that his comming in afterwards, was but only to colour the matter. All which, the sayd Master Morgan denyed, excusing himselfe, that hee came onely to speake a word or two with him, not knowing any thing at all of the rescue.
            The Prisoner being thus rescued, the high Constable gaue present notice thereof vnto the Bishop of Hereford: wherevpon, the Priuy Councell was presently with all speed informed thereof: and suddenly were sent for vp to London, some such as were knowne, to be chiefe Actors therein.
            Upon which businesse, Sir Herbert Croft was dispatched into the countrey. And after inquiry made, certayne Gentlemen were sent vp to London, to answere the matter.
            
               
Upon which occasion, diuers Iustices in this County haue bene since that time put out of the Commission of the Peace, as knowne to bee too much leauing vnto the Popish faction.
            Thus haue I briefly related vnto you, the true maner of the Papists proceedings in these late Actions: if any other matter of moment ensue hereupon, I wil not faile (God willing) but certify you thereof by my Letters. Hereford, the nyne and twentieth of Iune. 1605.
            
               Yours (as before) to commaund,
E. R.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Copie of a second Letter from Hereford, concerning some further proceedings in the former Actions.
            
            
               ALL promises, that with honesty may bee kept amongst men, ought to bee obserued, and especially amongst those that by loue and inward affection are so neerely obliged each to other, as wee both are.
            I remember well, that by my last Letter, I bound my selfe vnto your seruice, if any materiall accident worthy the obseruation, concerning the late broyles in our parts, should happen; and although

I must needs confesse, that my style in penning, be very blunt and harsh, yet know I this also, that the matter and substance of my lynes are true. which may in some sort counteruaile the glosing eloquence of some Rhetoricians, who study more for sine and fyled phrases, then for the truth of matter: for vnlesse I be much deceyued, the thing that you most desired, was the truth, and that also was the end, whereunto my thoughts tended, and principally aymed at: and therefore, I hope, that you will rather accept of nudam veritatem, without eloquence, then of eloquence without the truth.
            Within fewe dayes after that I had written my last Letter (dated as I remember, the nyne and twentyeth day of Iune) vnto your worship, the Right Honourable, the Earle of Worcester, came downe vnto his Place of Ragland in Munmouthshire, with full authority from his Maiesty, of present Iustice to be executed vpon such as had beene Actors in these causes.
            Now, albeit that the matters were far gone, and diuers misorders committed,

yet seeing it booted not to withstand any further, hauing waded too farre already, most of the principall of them came in, and yeelded themselues vnto his Lordship.
            Whereupon, such as his Lordship in his wisedome thought fit to be proceeded with somewhat sharpely, after examination, he caused to be committed to prison, vntill his Maiesties further pleasure be known, where diuers of them yet remayne: with others, who were lesse obstinate, and onely carryed away by false perswasions of Popish Factors, being of themselues inclinable to accord vnto the trueth, if their consciences might be thereunto perswaded. His Lordship tooke a more milde course, seeking to wynne them vnto the trueth, by reasons grounded vpon Gods Worde, which is the onely Rocke, whereupon the conscience must build. And so effectually hath his Honour dealt in this case with many of them, as that from stiffe Recusants, they are conuerted, and become new Scholers in Christes▪Schoole, and I trust will proceed rightly, and in a rightful course hereafter.
            
               
I could name diuers of good account, who haue reconciled themselues vnto our Church, by his Lordships honourable proceedings with them, and do now dutifully repaire vnto the Church.
            What will become of those that are yet Prisoners, I know not, as yet they onely remayne in durance, vntill his Maiestyes pleasure be knowne.
            The Countrey is now quieted (God bee thanked) and all things, by his Lordships honourable carriage, well settled. God graunt the continuance thereof.
            Thus, hauing performed my promise in what I know, I rest, as euer before, your friend in all obsequiousnes,
            
               E. R.
               Hereford, the third of August. 1605.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ A necessary and godly Prayer.
            
               O Most merciful Lord God, and louing Father, wee thy children and sheep of thy pasture, hūbly prostrating our selues at the foote of thy diuine Maiesty, do here confesse, that we are not worthy of the least of those innumerable benefits, which thou in mercy, for thy Sonne Christ Iesus sake hast bestowed vpon vs; neyther are we worthy to be called thy children, but only in & through

him, in whom thou art well pleased: for wee haue disobeyed thy will, broken thy Lawes, contemned thy Precepts, and cast thy Commaundements behind vs: if thou shouldest call vs to account for our liues misspent, for our deeds misdone, and for our maniford trāsgressions which we haue commited, we are not able to answere thee one for a thousand, it is impossible that we should stand in thy sight: Nay, Lord, if thou shouldest but marke what is done amisse, why then, who were able to abide it?
            We were not, and thou of thy goodnesse madest vs to be; and when we were, we fell away from thee, and forsooke thee: But thou (who before wee were, causedst our being) when we were, wouldest not▪ suffer vs to be lost for euer; but didest send thy Sonne Christ Iesus to redeeme our soules out of the hands of Sathan, who otherwise would haue seyzed vpon vs, and greedily haue deuoured vs.
            
               
Not long since, O Lord, we sate in darknesse, and in the shaddow of death; we slept in ignorance, not knowing the precious sweetnesse of thy holy Word; we liued in blindnesse, not knowing whither we went, but as we were led; and withall, our leaders were blind, in so much, that the blind leading the blind, (hadst not thou sent vs a guide to conduct vs) we had both fallen into the ditch.
            Thy holy word, O Lord, is a Lanthorn vnto our feet, and a light vnto our pathes: thy holy Spirit is the guide to lead vs vnto the light; and the light, which is thy holy word, is that which leadeth vs vnto saluation. O Lord, take not this light from vs, but let it euer shine as bright vnto vs, as the Sun at noone day. And for this cause, O Lord, we render vnto thee most humble and hearty thanks, for the long, happy, glorious, and prosperous raigne of our late dread Soueraigne, Queene Elizabeth, vnder whose blessed and happy gouernment

so many yeeres together, we inioyed the light of thy holy word, and by whose constancy the truth thereof was euer since the beginning of her Raigne, mightily maintayned. We thanke thee, O Lord, for all those blessings, that by and through her thou diddest conferre vpon vs thy vnworthy children: as namely, the practice and profession of thy holy word: The quiet possessing of that we had, (euery man vnder his owne Vyne, peaceably eating the labour of his owne hands:) The great number of many paynefull, learned, and faithfull Preachers, which vnder her gouernment thou diddest send into thy Vineyard: The graue, wise, and honourable Counsellours, that by thy gracious goodnesse, thou didst appoynt vnto her: Their true, faythfull, and dutifull seruice, that (guided by thy grace) they performed vnto her: The preuention of many euils & dangers (entended to haue bin wrought by the

hands of villaynes) which, had they taken effect, might haue bin the vtter ouerthrow and ruine of our whole Countrey: The quiet and peaceable end, that (protected with thy Shield, maugre the malice of all her enemies) after the common course of Nature, peaceably dying in her bed, she made, leauing (as in right they did belong) her imperiall Crownes vnto our now gracious and renowmed Soueraigne Lord King IAMES, by thy grace, of great Brittayne, Fraunce and Ireland, King, Defender of the same true, Catholike and Apostolike fayth, which she formerly did.
            Lord, we humbly againe, and againe, vpon our bended knees, from the very bottome of our hearts pray and beseech thee, that, as of thine especiall loue and fauour vnto vs, thou hast giuen vs so gracious and religious a King: so thou wilt of the same thy louing mercy, protect and defend him, in all dangers and perilles whatsoeuer.
            
               
Guide, O Lord, his going fotth, and his comming in: blesse him in all the actions that he shall take in hand. Put (O Lord) into his heart good desires, strengthen him with thy continuall grace, and in the end, bring him to thy euerlasting kingdome.
            As he is; so, O Lord, continue him, a faithfull professor of thy Gospel; a zealous and religious confessor therof; a true and mighty defender thereof; a barre and obstacle, to hinder all the courses and proceedings that either Papists (or other enemies of thy Gospell whatsoeuer) shall go about to inuent for the suppressing of the truth. Discouer them, O Lord, and let their deuices, if they perseuer in wickednes, redound vnto their owne shame and confusion. Protect and defend him, O Lord, in all his wayes; counsell him in all his consultations; let all his thoughts, wordes and workes, tend vnto the honour and glory of thy holy name, and his owne endlesse ioy and comfort.
            
               
Continue him a true maintayner of the truth: Establish and confirme thy truth in his heart: Root out Antichrist, and pull downe his pride: Let Religion (as now it doeth) alwayes flourish in this kingdome: Suppresse the power and might of Sathan: Cause an vnity in the Church: Graffe vs all into one stocke, and let vs be all composed into one body, whereof thy Sonne Christ Iesus is the head.
            And because, O Lord God Almighty, that Kings and Princes, as they are here on earth, in highest Offices and authority vnder thee, so are they chiefe markes for Sathans Instruments to shoot at, wee meekely pray and beseech thee, that thou wilt blesse and defend his Royall Maiesty from all the desperate & wicked attempts, whatsoeuer Sathan, or wicked Traytors, his ministers, shall vndertake. O Lord, let them all (who wish him any harme) suddenly be consumed, perish, and come to a fearefull end. Blesse, O Lord, our gracious

Queene Anne, our noble Prince Henry, and all the rest of the King and Queenes royall Issue: Let their Posterity neuer fayle; but let them continue Kings and Queenes of this Land, to maintayne the Trueth vnto the worlds end.
            Disperse, O Lord, all the mists of error and superstition; Let those that are blinde, and fayne would see the Light participate with vs in the Truth: Settle all misorders whatsoeuer, that are any where in these his Maiesties kingdomes, either in Church or Common-wealth. Let peace dwell in our quarters, and let not the name of Warre be heard amongst vs. Conuert those vnto thy truth, that are yet vnconuerted; and establish those in the Truth, who are already conuerted.
            Finally, O good God, blesse and preserue all and euery particular member, and members of this thy Church of great Brittaine: make vs all ready to serue thee, and faithfull subiects vnto his Maiesty.
            
               
These, and all other blessings, whatsoeuer thou in thy wisdome shalt thinke necessary for vs, wee begge at thy mercifull hands, for his sake, in and through whome thou first louedst vs, euen Christ Iesus our Lord and alone Sauiour.
            Amen.
            God saue the King.
            FINIS.
         
      
   