
      
         
            
            
            A PITHIE, SHORT, AND METHODICALL opening of the Ten Commandements. BY Maſter William Whately, Preacher of the word of God at Banburie in Oxford-ſhire.
            LONDON, Printed by IOHN HAVILAND for Thomas Pauier and Leonard Greene. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               HEre is for thee (Chriſtian friend) Gods ſacred and pure Law, perſpicuouſly and orderly vnfolded, the extent of thoſe glorious beams more now then euer enlarged, though we haue many that haue done excellently. For in this ſhort and pithie Treatiſe, if thou pleaſeſt ſeriouſly to be acquainted with it, as alſo make an holy vſe of it, there will iſſue three bleſſed benefits of ſpeciall and weighty importance.
            Firſt, hereby thou maiſt more clearely know thy ſelfe, and diſcouer thy cold faintneſſe, thy leane and idle ſeruices, and crooked

diſpoſition, and that ſnakie brood of ſinne that lurketh in thy euer-vitious nature: for it is the Lawes office to detect ſin, as a looking glaſſe to bewray ſpots, and as the Sunne to diſcouer euen little motes. Whence is it men ſee not their miſled liues, but becauſe they are vndiſciplin'd in the Lords walkes? Can there be a worke of greater conſequence then a large opening of theſe holy rules, which although the full ſplendor thereof is reſerued for the glory aboue, yet open thine eyes to the bleſſed brightneſſe which ſhines out of this Treatiſe, to diſcouer thy darke ignorance, thy infidelitie and ſtubborne pride, how rich thou art in follie, how poore in grace, and how conſcience hitherto hath beene ſealed with a curſed brand: here wee may be ſad ſpectators of our froward waywardneſſe, our wandring and groueling thoughts, our barren memories, our raging diſcontented paſsions, and dull edg'd leaden affections, yea the diſorder of the whole man, turning face to Satan and backe to God.
            
               Secondly, it lends powerfull aide in the ſeruices and worſhips of God. This will bring thee with a hunger-bitten ſoule and heauy heart to behold the Lords ſhining face in the preaching of the word, and bends thy will to it with abſolute yeelding. This is a notable touch-ſtone to try thy ſelfe to the heart root when thou art to receiue that ſacramentall meat, and will furniſh thee with much ſtore and varietie for prayer. Wouldst thou confeſſe against thy ſelfe? behold here a large field: Or wouldst begge graces of God? ſee here a ſampler: here is matter for meditation, for Chriſtian parlees; this will enable thee to catechize and inſtruct thy familie, and enlightens thy vnderſtanding in reading the Scriptures, and for dayes of humiliation, times of pretious worth with Gods people; this worke thorowly lookt into, ſhall cauſe thee to fall out with thy ſelfe, and ſhall ſend thee with penitent eyes to bewaile thy wretched eſtate, and powre out thy ſoule into the boſome of Chriſt, and will put ſuch marrow and ſtrength into thee, that

humbly and hotly thou maist wraſtle with God.
            Laſtly, this ſhall direct all thy paths, and wiſely conduct thee through this thornie life; it will cauſe thee thinke well, ſpeake well, and liue well, and furniſheth thee with knowledge, faith in God, humble deiectedneſſe, ſpirituall wiſdome, a well tuned conſcience, a ſtooping will, heauenly thoughts, a right fraught memorie, and ranks in order thy loue, feare, ioy, confidence, and all the reſt of thoſe ſubordinate faculties of the ſoule, bending them to purſue what is good, and ſtand ſtifly armed againſt euery euill. And as for being vnſpotted of the world, and to liue vnblameably, wronging neither thy ſelfe, nor any man, in ſoule, bodie, eſtate, name, or place, take this booke for thy counſellor. Feaſt thine eyes then with a ſubiect neceſſarily vſefull, and ſo exactly compiled, that it cannot but winne eſteeme with euery knowing man and gratious heart. For I muſt tell thee, diuers friends of exquiſite iudgement, hearing that this worke was in my

hand, did earneſtly ſollicite me to turne it to common good. Amongst the reſt, a learned worthy vnderſtanding Diuine, Maſter R. Bolton, hauing peruſed it, commended it vnto mee in theſe termes: Me thinkes, in ſhort and little roome, it opens & repreſents the marrow and myſteries of that adored depth, the banks and bottome whereof, no wit of man ſhall euer be able fully to fathom and comprehend, while the world laſts, with more cleare, exact, and compendious dexteritie, then I haue diſcouered in others, though they haue alſo done excellently. And he perſwaded with the Author, and ſince alſo with me, to let it paſſe abroad more publikely. Let then the more then ordinarie parts of the workman, and of ſuch as haue commended it, as alſo the great paines of our pen-man, who hath told me, he had a long harueſt for this handfull of corne, together with the pretiouſnes of the ſubiect, and the goodly meeds thou maiſt gaine by it, let theſe perſwade thee to read it, and that vnpartially: In the meane

time, my prayer and hearty deſire is, that thou maiſt right plentifully proſper by it, and ſo I reſt,
            
               
                  From Blaſton

                     4. of Septemb.
               
               Thine in the Lord Ieſus, RICHARD LEE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A PITHIE, SHORT, AND METHODICAL OPENING OF THE TEN COMMANDEMENTS.
            
               THE Law of God conſiſting of ten diſtinct commandements, is a perfect platforme of our obedience, acquainting vs with our dutie to God, either

                  1. Immediatly.
                  2. Mediatly.
               
            
            1. Immediatly in regard of himſelfe both

                  1. Principall, in the firſt commandement.
                  2. Leſſe principall, both
                        1. For the ſorts and kinds of ſeruice, which are two.
                              1. Solemne worſhip in the ſecond commandement.
                              
                                 2. Common worſhip, in the third commandement.
                           
                        
                        2. For the dedicating of a ſet and ſolemne time, viz. one day in ſeuen to holy and religious exerciſes, in the fourth commandement.
                     
                  
               
            
            2. Our dutie to God mediatly, in regard of our neighbour

                  1. Seuerally.
                  2. Ioyntly.
               
            
            1. Seuerally, in regard of

                  1. Speciall duties to ſome, in the fift commandement.
                  2. Common duties to all for their

                        1. Perſons.
                        2. Things.
                     
                  
               
            
            1. Perſons in regard of their

                  1. Safetie, in the ſixt commandement.
                  2. Chaſtitie, in the ſeuenth commanment.
               
            
            2. Things pertaining to their perſons, either

                  1. Goods, in the eight commandement.
                  2. Good name, in the ninth commandement.
               
            
            2. Now follow thoſe mediatly which are in regard of our neighbour, or iointly, for

all theſe, ſo far as reſpecteth the diſpoſitions and firſt motions of the ſoule, in the tenth commandement.
            
               
                  The firſt Commandement is, Thou ſhalt haue no other Gods but me, or before me.
               IT inioyneth the principall worſhip of God; that is, the making of him our God, by yeelding vnto him all ſuch reſpect as appertaineth to him in regard of his being our Creator, and the firſt fountaine of all being. This is a totall and generall ſubiection of the whole man in all the powers of it vnto him, called in Scripture, a being holy as God is holy. Of this commandement we conſider,

                     1. The affirmatiue part, that is to ſay, the ſpeciall duties it requireth of vs.
                     2. The negatiue part, that is, what euils it forbiddeth and condemneth in vs.
                  
               
               The duties required herein are of two ſorts.
               1. Duties of dependance, whereby we make him the chiefe and principall obiect of all the powers of our whole man, ſo farre as they are capable of him.
               
                  2. Duties of conformitie, whereby we order all our powers towards other things in that manner and meaſure that he doth require, and ſo become ſubiect to that authority, power and command, that he hath ouer vs, as a creator: who becauſe he made all things, muſt needs haue right to appoint how all things ſhould bee ordered, vſed, and diſpoſed.
               Duties of dependance are of two ſorts.
               1. In the principall faculties, called reaſonable, becauſe they are all perfected, and doe performe their ſeuerall operations, by diſcourſe. The reaſonable faculties, which may be exerciſed vpon God, as their obiect, are two, viz. the Vnderſtanding and Will.
               1. Vnderſtanding, which is the power of acquainting our ſelues with the natures, beings, properties, and differences, by the acts of apprehending, diſcerning, applying, and in generall diſcourſing. In this facultie are required three cardinall and principall vertues.
               
                  1. Perfect knowledge of God.
                  2. Faith.
                  3. Humilitie.
               
               1. Perfect knowledge of God, which is a conceiuing and apprehending of him

to be ſuch an one as he hath reuealed himſelfe in his word and workes, and that, according to the meanes, age and capacity, of euery man, for meaſure and degree fully.
               2. The ſecond cardinall and principall virtue is faith, which is double.
               
                  1. Faith to God.
                  2. Faith in God.
               
               1. Faith to God, which is an aſſenting to the truth of all that he ſhall declare vnto vs, vpon his bare and ſole autority, beleeuing becauſe he ſpeaketh, without any further reaſon, ground or proofe.
               2. Faith in God, which is an applying of his loue and fauour vnto euery mans ſelfe, according to the tenour of that couenant that he doth pleaſe to make with vs. The former is called beleeuing God, the latter beleeuing in God.
               3. The third cardinall or principall virtue is Humilitie, which is a right diſcerning of the infinite diſtance and difference that is betwixt him and vs, acknowledging his vnſpeakable excellencies aboue vs, and our moſt vild baſenes in cōpariſon of him.
               The ſecond reaſonable faculty is the Will, which is the power that the ſoule hath, to moue it ſelfe to or from any thing

by ſetling this concluſion in it ſelfe: I will haue or not haue, doe or not doe, ſuch a thing, or that ſuch a thing bee or not bee.
               The duty of which is, to be caried and moued towards God, with the ſtrongeſt of all its inclinations and motions, willing his being and glory aboue all things, becauſe that is in it ſelfe, and ſimply the beſt of all things, and his fauour and grace to vs aboue all other things, becauſe it is to vs the beſt of all things.
               Hitherto of the duties of dependance in the principall faculties will and vnderſtanding. Now follow thoſe in the leſſe principall faculties.
               2. Leſſe principall faculties, ſuch as may be perfected, and performe their ſeuerall operations without diſcourſe, and therefore are all (excepting one) common to vs with the bruit creatures. Theſe are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Inward.
                  2. Outward.
               
               1. The leſſe principall faculties inward are alſo two:

                     1. The ſenſes.
                     2. The affections.
                  
               
               The ſenſes called inward are two.
               
                  
                  1. Imagination.
                  2. Memorie.
               
               1. Imagination, or the thinking power, which receiuing the obiects from the ſenſes doth order, moue and diſpoſe them according to its owne liking: and the duty of this is, to be thinking of God continually, more plentifully, largely, conſtantly, then of all other things. For though he be not ſubiect to ſenſe, yet from things ſubiect to ſenſe wee are bound to forme in our ſelues thoughts of his excellencies (according to our abilitie of conceiuing,) viz. of his power, goodneſſe, mercie, wiſdome, &c. So as the minde of man ſhould more abundantly buſie it ſelfe in ſuch conceits and thoughts of God, then of any other thing in the world, yea of all other things laid together.
               2. The ſecond ſenſe called inward is Memory, which is a power of making that thing preſent to the ſoule, which is abſent from the ſenſes. And the duty of mans ſoule, ſo much as concernes this facultie, is a perpetuall and continuall remembring of God; that is, a repreſenting of him to it ſelfe as preſent, though to the ſenſes hee doe not appeare, and

that, ſo as we remember nothing ſo firmely nor ſo often as him.
               2. Leſſe principall faculties inward are called affections, which are powers of the ſoule, in the reaſonable creature, ſubordinate to the will, whereby the ſoule worketh it ſelfe to the ſeeking and obtaining of good, and ſhunning and auoiding of euill. Now of theſe affections there are 4. which may and muſt be ſet vpon God, and that with all their ſtrength, and with the fulneſſe of their working, and farre more then vpon any or all other things.
               1. The firſt affection is Loue, whereby the ſoule is moued and inclined to be one with any good thing; and becauſe God is the beſt thing, euen goodneſſe it ſelfe, therefore ſhould the ſoule bee moſt frequently and earneſtly filled with ſuch motions and inclinations towards him.
               2. The ſecond affection is Feare, whereby the ſoule is moued from euill, with a kinde of ſhrinking and fainting, declining from it, when it is comming. Now becauſe God conſidered as angry and diſpleaſed, is to the creature the greateſt euill (of miſery) that can be conceiued of, therefore

ought it decline his anger and diſpleaſure, with the moſt frequent and earneſt motions, aboue all other euill things, not daring ſo much as once to make any offer of incurring his diſpleaſure, yea ſhunning and abhorring it, more then all other miſeries of puniſhment, that may be poſſibly ſuffered. Now this compoſition of Loue and Feare is called reuerence.
               3. The third affection is Ioy whereby the ſoule doth receiue comfort and content in a good thing, and is moued to embrace and enioy the ſame. And becauſe God is the chiefe good, therefore ought the ſoule to be moued with more vehement and often motions of gladneſſe for his excellent glory and happineſſe, in himſelfe, then for any other thing, and more for his loue, fauour and good will, then for any other thing beſides his glory.
               4. The fourth affection is Confidence, whereby the ſoule is moued to reſt and ſtay it ſelfe vpon any thing, for the obtaining the good it willeth. And becauſe God is of infinite power, and all power is his, neither hath any creature any abilitie to doe any thing without him, therefore muſt the ſoule reſt it ſelfe wholly and only

vpon him, according to the truth of his promiſe, for the attaining of all good things both ſpirituall and temporall.
               2. The leſſe principall facultie outward, is alone the facultie of ſpeaking, the Conduit of the imagination, and the Interpreter of the vnderſtanding. For no outward facultie, except only this of ſpeech, can be in any ſort exerciſed vpon God, as its obiect, but this may: and its dutie is to be continually exerciſed as any occaſion is offered, in ſpeaking good of God. A man is bound to talke much more of God and his excellencies, to the ſetting forth of his glory, then of any other thing, yea then of all things beſides: both becauſe hee is moſt fully repleniſhed with all excellencies; and alſo becauſe the affection of loue which cannot but rule the tongue, ought to be moſt ardent towards him.
               Hitherto of duties of dependance. Now follow the duties of conformitie, theſe alſo are to be found in all the powers of man.
               1. In the chiefe faculties called reaſonable, which are three.
               
                  1. The vnderſtanding.
                  2. Conſcience.
                  
                     3 The Will.
               
               1. The vnderſtanding, whereof the chiefe graces are three.
               
                  1. Perfect knowledge.
                  2. Perfect faith.
                  3. Spirituall prudence.
               
               1. Perfect knowledge of the reuealed will of God, according to the meaſure of age, gifts, and meanes, that euery man enioyeth, ſo that the minde muſt apply it ſelfe more to the ſearching out of his reuealed will, then of any other things. And the matter of this knowledge is the truths reuealed of God, concerning our duty in precepts and prohibitions; and the reward of doing our duty in promiſes, or of not doing it in threats, in vnderſtanding of which, the minde muſt buſie it ſelfe more then in all other knowledge, after the knowledge of God himſelfe.
               2. The ſecond chiefe grace of the vnderſtanding is Perfect faith to and in the promiſes and threats of God, (vnder which is alſo contained faith in his prouidence, the gouerning of all things, and that for the good of his, being one of the things that he hath vndertaken) whereby we doe ſtedfaſtly and fully aſſent vnto them and apply

them each vnto himſelfe, according to their nature, and as there is cauſe and vſe.
               3. The third chiefe grace of the vnderſtanding, is Spirituall prudence, or wiſdome, which is the grace whereby we are able to order our ſelues, and all our actions aright, for the attaining of the true ends of our being, according to the reuealed will of God. It is a readines & nimblenes of minde to make continuall vſe of diuine truths reuealed to vs. A fruit of the feare of God, which is deriued from the knowledge of him. It hath two parts. Firſt, conſideration whereby the minde doth ſeriouſly ponder and conſider of the truths knowne. Secondly, heedfulneſſe, warineſſe, or obſeruation, whereby it attendeth to all its owne actions, and all other neceſſary occaſions, for its ſpirituall good.
               2. The ſecond chiefe facultie called reaſonable, is Conſcience or a knowing with God, which is a power of the ſoule, whereby it is inabled to diſcerne of its own eſtate and actions, in regard of Gods liking or diſliking the ſame. A power to iudge whether God approue and fauour me or mine actions, yea or no: that is conſcience, of which we muſt conſider two things.
               
                  
                  1. The acts it is to performe.
                  2. The rule which it muſt follow in performing theſe acts.
               
               1. The acts it is to performe are twofold,

                     1. In regard of our actions.
                     2. In regard of our eſtate.
                  
               
               1. The acts it is to performe in regard of our actions are threefold.
               
                  1. Good.
                  2. Bad.
                  3. Indifferent.
               
               1. Good acts are twofold.
               1. Before the doing to call vpon vs and admoniſh vs to doe them.
               2. After the doing to beare witneſſe to them, and approue them as well done.
               2. Bad acts twofold.
               1. Before the doing to curbe, reſtraine and bridle vs from the doing, inwardly telling vs that wee ſhould not doe them.
               2. After the doing, to checke vs, and reproue vs, and vrge vs to confeſſe, and humble our ſelues to God for the ſame.
               3. Indifferent acts, to leaue them to our wills as indifferent, and to grant vs liberty

of doing or not doing them, as occaſion ſhall ſerue.
               2. The acts performs in regard of our eſtate, to ſpeake peace vnto vs, to excuſe vs, to pronounce vs fauoured & loued of God.
               2. The ſecond thing is the rule which it muſt follow in performing theſe acts, that is the reuealed will of God, both for the matter, and manner, and meaſure of working, and not the will of any creature whatſoeuer.
               3. The third chiefe faculty called reaſonable, is the Will, the vertue of which is flexibleneſſe to the will of God, and that in regard of
               1. Things by vs to bee done and auoided, that is obedience, which is a full purpoſe to doe all that God requireth, and leaue all that hee forbiddeth for his ſake.
               2. Things receiued, or to be receiued from him, immediatly or mediatly, whether the things we receiue be

                     1. Good, or.
                     2. Euill.
                  
               
               1. Good and comfortable, and this is thankfulneſſe, a firme purpoſe to require and acknowledge his loue by

growing ſo much more conſtant in louing and ſeruing him.
               2. Euill and miſerable, and this is Patience, being a full purpoſe with all quietneſſe and without any reluctation of will, though the ſenſes and appetite cannot but feele a repugnancie to ſuſtaine any euill that he will inflict vpon vs.
               Hitherto the graces of conformitie in the ſuperiour faculties, vnderſtanding, conſcience, and will: Now follow thoſe that are in the
               2. Inferiour and leſſe principall faculties, and they are either

                     1. Inward, or
                     2. Outward.
                  
               
               1. Inward, which are three.
               
                  1. The ſenſes called inward.
                  2. The affections.
                  3. The appetite.
               
               1. The ſenſes inward, which are two,

                     1. Imagination.
                     2. Memorie.
                  
               
               1. Imagination, which is bound in regard of

                     1. The obiect of its working.
                     2. The meaſure of its working.
                  
               
               1. The obiect of its working twofold.
               
                  1. To ſtirre vp readily and nimbly all manner of good thoughts concerning good things, and to be ſtedfaſt and ſtable in purſuing the ſame.
               2. To keepe out and reiect all manner of euill thoughts, that they ariſe not out of the ſoule, and to repell them immediatly being from without ſuggeſted.
               2. The meaſure of the working of the imagination, to be more abundant and ready, and ſtable in thinking of things heauenly, ſpirituall, and diuine, then of things earthly, and temporall, and momentanie here below.
               2. The ſecond ſenſe called inward is the memorie, the graces of which are in regard

                     1. Of the obiect of its working.
                     2. Of the meaſure of its working.
                  
               
               1. The obiect of its working conſiſts in two things.
               1. To retaine ſtedfaſtly, and readily to recall all good things (as Gods commandements, promiſes, threats, benefits, corrections, &c.) for good at the inſtant of making vſe of them.
               2. To blot out and extinguiſh, at leaſt to keepe backe and not to recall any euill thing that may infect the ſoule, or any good

thing vnſeaſonably to the hindrance of its dutie.
               2. The meaſure of the working of the memorie to ſerue the ſoule more readily in things ſpirituall, and for ſpirituall purpoſes, then for earthly and temporall.
               2. The ſecond leſſe inward principall facultie are the affections, which are in all, or at leaſt in chiefe (not to ſtand vpon a more accurate diuiſion of them) ſeuen paire.
               
                  1. Paire.
                  1. Loue, which is as before.
                  2. Hatred, which is an affection of diſlike, and auerſeneſſe from any thing counted euill.
               
               
                  2. Paire.
                  1. Feare, which is as before.
                  2. Courage, an affection of reſiſting imminent euill danger, not ſhrinking at it, but riſing vp againſt it.
               
               
                  3. Paire.
                  1. Ioy, which is as before.
                  2. Sorrow, whereby the ſoule feeles the hurt of any euill preſent.
               
               
                  4. Paire.
                  1. Hope, which is a paſſion of waiting, expecting and looking for a good thing to come.
                  
                     2. Deſpaire, which is a paſſion quite contrary.
               
               
                  5. Paire.
                  1. Anger, a paſſion of puniſhing any thing that doth bring euill or hinder good from vs.
                  2. Kindneſſe, a paſſion of vſing well him that procureth good or hindreth euill from vs.
               
               
                  6. Paire.
                  1. Shame, a kinde of irking diſlike within and againſt our ſelues, becauſe of ſome euill or vndecent thing committed by vs.
                  2. Boldneſſe, a kinde of contentfull and reſolute liking of our ſelues within our ſelues, becauſe of the abſence of things vndecent, and preſence of the contrarie.
               
               
                  7. Paire.
                  1. Reuerence, a dutifull reſpect to all other in whom we ſee good things.
                  2. Contempt, a baſe and careleſſe diſpoſition towards one for the euill things we ſee in him.
               
               Now the vertues of the affections are twofold.
               
                  1. For their obiect.
                  2. For their meaſure of working.
               
               1. For their obiect that is twofold.
               
                  1. Thoſe vertues that tend to good, and are moued by good, be moued and wrought vpon only by things that are indeed good.
               2. Thoſe vertues that are moued by or againſt euill, be wrought vpon alone by that which is euill indeed.
               2. For their meaſure of working that they be exerciſed vpon is twofold.
               1. Vpon ſpirituall or

                     Good
                     Euill
                  
things more or leſſe.
               2. Vpon temporall good things as they are more or leſſe good, that is to ſay, helpfull to vs in the ſeruing of God and aſſurance of his fauour.
               And accordingly muſt the particular dutie of euery affection be deſcribed, which for breuities ſake I ſurceaſe to doe.
               3. The third leſſe principall and inward facultie, is appetite, which is a power of being inclined to ſuch things as content the bodily ſenſes, and of being auerſe and backward from things that diſpleaſe them. This is bound to two duties.
               1. Dutie to be moued alone towards lawfull contents and delights, euen ſuch as God doth allow and warrant vs to enioy.
               2. To be moderately carried euen to

thoſe lawfull contents, as from the contratie, euen in ſuch meaſure, as that the motions of our will to things of a better and higher nature be not interrupted or hindered thereby.
               So much of the inward faculties; Senſes, Affections, Appetite. Now follow the outward inferiour, and leſſe principall faculties, which are alſo three.
               1. Speech, which muſt be ſpeaking,

                     1. Only and conſtantly of good things.
                     2. More readily and plentifully of ſpirituall then temporall goods.
                  
               
               2. The ſecond outward inferiour and leſſe principall facultie is the fiue ſenſes, which we muſt exerciſe two waies.
               1. Alone vpon good obiects and lawfull, ſuch as may not prouoke vs vnto ſin, but rather to good deeds and deſires.
               2. More nimbly for ſpirituall then for naturall purpoſes.
               3. The third outward inferiour and leſſe principall facultie, is the locomotiue facultie, which muſt be vſed alone for good and lawfull actions, and muſt be with more life, conſtancie, and vnweariſomneſſe

exerciſed, in workes that tend to ſpirituall good then to the naturall.
               So much of the affirmatiue part: the negatiue followes, containing a deſcription of the things condemned in this commandement. The ſinnes againſt this precept are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Of Omiſſion.
                  2. Or Commiſſion.
               
               1. Sinnes of omiſſion are by the want and abſence of the forenamed graces, which are twofold.
               
                  1. Totall, when one is vtterly deſtitute of them, not hauing them at all.
                  2. Partiall, when one is defectiue in either of them, and that two waies.

                        1. For matter extenſiuely.
                        2. For meaſure and degree intenſiuelie.
                     
                  
               
               2 Sinnes of Commiſſion, when a man makes the deuill and himſelfe his owne God, as Satan is called the god and Prince of this world, and ſome men are ſaid to make their bellie their god. This is done two waies.
               1. By erecting fained and counterfeit Deities, as the Gentiles are ſaid to worſhip deuils, when they made gods of Iupiter,

Iuno, Pallas, Apollo, Mars, Venus, &c. And the Iewes in offering their ſonnes to Molech, are charged to haue offered them vnto deuils.
               2. By being vnholy, as Satan is vnholie, poſſeſſed with corruptions contrarie to the forenamed graces, according to the will of Satan, and for our owne carnall content. Theſe vices are of two ſorts.
               1. In reſpect of dependancie, whereby our depending on God is denied, and a kinde of ſelfe-dependance challenged, in that we carrie our ſelues as if we were our owne, which in very deed we are not.
               2. The ſecond ſort of vices are in reſpect of conformitie, whereby our ſubiection to Gods authoritie and will is denied, and we carrie ourſelues as if we were to be not at his, but at our owne diſpoſing.
               Sinnes againſt our dependance on God, are to be found in all the faculties of our whole man.
               
                  1. In the chiefe and principall faculties.
                  2. In the leſſe principall and inferiour faculties.
               
               1. In the chiefe and principall faculties, viz.

                     
                     1. In the vnderſtanding.
                     2. In the will.
                  
               
               1. In the vnderſtanding, contrarie

                     1. To knowledge.
                     2. To faith.
                  
               
               1. To knowledge, there are faults

                     1. In defect.
                     2. In exceſſe.
                  
               
               1. In defect two waies.
               1. By a careleſſe neglect of the knowledge of God, when one ſets not his minde on worke to know him.
               2. In blindneſſe, darkneſſe, and vncapableneſſe of true knowledge, though he hath vſed all meanes, which hath two degrees.
               1. Naturall, common to all.
               2. Aduentitious, proper to thoſe that by reſiſting the meanes, winke with their eies, refuſing and ſcorning to know.
               2. The ſecond fault of knowledge in exceſſe, which is called curioſitie, and ſeemes to be double, viz.

                     1. A buſie prying into the ſecrets of Gods natures and workes.
                     2. A turning of our ſearch after him into meere diſputes and idle ſpeculations.
                  
               
               
                  2. Now followes the ſecond thing, which the vnderſtanding is contrarie to, viz. faith in two reſpects,

                     1. In defect.
                     2. In exceſſe.
                  
               
               1. In defect two waies.
               
                  1. The firſt is called Atheiſme.
                  2. Miſ-beleefe of God.
               
               1. Atheiſme is the vice of denying God, which is twofold.
               
                  1. Secret.
                  2. Open.
               
               1. Secret and in the bud, when a man is out of the faintneſſe of his conſent to the truth ouer-ruled with this vice, though he forme not ſuch a propoſition in his minde.
               2. Open and expreſſe, when a man maintaineth that conceit (that there is no ſuch God as there is) expreſſely in his minde.
               2. The ſecond defect in faith is, miſbeleefe of God, whereby a man conceiueth falſely of Gods nature or attributes, conceiuing him to be other, then he hath ſhewed himſelfe, as Anthropomorphotes, &c.
               2. The ſecond thing wherein vnderſtanding is contrarie to faith is in exceſſe,

by miſapplying of Gods mercie, or preſumption, whereby a man beareth himſelfe ſo ouer-bold of Gods goodneſſe, as that he robbeth him of the glorie of his iuſtice.
               3. The third fault in the vndeſtanding againſt our dependance vpon God contrarie to humilitie, is pride, being a lifting vp our ſelues aboue and againſt God, ouer-valuing our ſelues and vnder-valuing him, of which there are three degrees.
               1. Cloſe and ſecret, when like a King that keepes within, yet it rules and beares ſway, a mans cariage witneſſing that he ſets more by himſelfe then God, ſo all naturall men are proud.
               2. The ſecond degree is, when being fatted with wealth it dares ſhew it ſelfe, and a man thinkes himſelfe ſome bodie, concealing yet that part of it which ſtands to abaſe God, this is high-mindedneſſe.
               3. The third degree, when a man vtters all his euill fancies to himſelfe, dreaming that he is God, as they that durſt ſay, I ſit as God, and what God can deliuer you out of my hands?
               2. Sinnes againſt our dependance on

God, which are found in the Will, are twofold.
               1. Selfe-willedneſſe, whereby a man moueth his will only to himſelfe, inclining to his owne naturall or carnall content, more then to Gods glorie or fauour.
               2. A nilling of God, a willing that there were no God at all, out of ſelfe-guiltineſſe, as a theefe wiſheth there were no Iudge, a traitor that there were no King.
               2. Sinnes againſt our dependance on God, are to be found in the leſſe principall and inferiour faculties, which are twofold.
               
                  1. Inward.
                  2. Outward.
               
               1. Inward twofold.
               
                  1. In the ſenſes.
                  2. In the affections.
               
               1. In the ſenſes.
               
                  1. In the imagination.
                  2. In the memorie.
               
               1. Imagination.
               1. By putting away the thought of God out of ones minde, ſaying to God, depart from vs.
               2. By entertaining hard, euill, and blaſphemous conceits againſt God, as they that ſaid, Where is the God of iudgement?
               
                  2. In the memorie, a forgetfulneſſe of God, whereby one ſets himſelfe not to conceiue of Gods preſence, ſaying the Lord ſhall not ſee it.
               2. Sins againſt our dependance on God are found in the affections, viz. in all of them that are named before, viz. contrarie,
               1. To the loue of God, and that in two reſpects.
               1. By louing of other things, as pleaſure and profit more then God, ſo couetouſneſſe is Idolatrie.
               2. By hatred of God charged vpon all men, Rom. 1.30.
               2. Contrary to the feare of God in two reſpects.
               1. Fearing men and other things more then him, the feare of man doth bring a ſnare, ſaith Salomon.
               
               2. By deſpiſing him, ſetting light by his anger, and being as it were couragious againſt it, which is ſecuritie, when a man ſaith he ſhall ſee no euill though God ſeeme angrie.
               3. Contrary to the ioy in God in two reſpects.
               1. By reioycing in other things more then in God.
               
                  2. Greeuing that there is ſo great power and excellencie in God, and a very enuying of him and his felicitie.
               4. Contrarie to the truſt in God in two reſpects.
               1. By truſting in the arme of fleſh, reſting vpon outward things as riches, friends, &c. for any good thing.
               2. By diſtruſting in God, wauering and ſhaking, out of doubt of obtaining that good from him that he hath promiſed.
               2. Sinnes againſt our dependance on God, are to be found in the leſſe principall and outward facultie, viz. in the power of ſpeaking and that in two regards.
               1. By talking of other things more and oftner then of God.
               2. By ſpeaking and vttering hard, wicked, diſgracefull, reproachfull, and blaſphemous things againſt him.
               So much of ſinnes againſt dependancie: theſe againſt conformitte follow.
               
                  1. In principall powers.
                  2. In leſſe principall.
               
               1. Principall powers.
               
                  1. In the vnderſtanding.
                  2. In the conſcience.
                  
                     3. In the will.
               
               1. In the vnderſtanding, contrarie

                     1. To knowledge.
                     2 To faith.
                     3. To wiſdome.
                  
               
               1. To knowledge of the will of God.
               
                  1. In defect.
                  2. In exceſſe.
               
               1. In defect, which are two waies.
               1. Not to ſeeke and know the reuealed will of God though one hath meanes, which maketh ignorance wilfull and affected.
               2. Dulneſſe and ſlowneſſe to conceiue of the truth.
               
                  1. Naturall in all.
                  2. Augmented by winding and ſtriuing againſt the light.
               
               2. The knowledge of the will of God in exceſſe by curioſitie.
               
                  1. In ſearching into ſecret things not reuealed.
                  2 In inquiring after needleſſe and idle fables, and queſtions for diſputations ſake.
               
               2. The vnderſtanding contrarie to faith to and in Gods word and will.
               
                  1. In defect.
                  
                     2. In exceſſe.
               
               1. In defect.
               1. Doubting and vnſetledneſſe, when one is not rooted and grounded in the truth, but wauers.
               2. Flat infidelitie, when a man vtterly denies the truth, aggrauated by wilfulneſſe.
               2. In exceſſe, and that
               1. By beleeuing lies, and falſe doctrines and errors, which if it belong and ſtrong, is called preiudice.
               2. Wreſting and miſapplying the promiſes of God, without any heed to the threats and precepts.
               3. The vnderſtanding contrary to wiſdome.
               
                  1. In defect.
                  2. In exceſſe.
               
               1. In defect, folly, which is a peruerting of things to ones deſtruction, turning all things into matter of making a mans ſelfe leſſe good, more euill, and that hath two maine branches.
               
                  1. Vanitie.
                  2. Headineſſe.
               
               1. Vanitie, which hath alſo two euill heads.
               
                  1. Couſening ones ſelfe with falſe and fained reaſonings, iudging after the appearance and ſhew, as the Gentiles vaniſhed in their reaſonings, and became ſtarke fooles.
               2. Hauing meane things in high eſteeme, and high things in meane account.
               2. Headineſſe, which is a mixture of raſhneſſe in venturing vpon things vnaduiſedly, and without due deliberation, and of ſtifneſſe in obſtinate perſiſting in them, what euer come of it.
               2. In exceſſe, and there are two faults.
               1. Conceit of wiſdome, when a man imagines himſelfe wiſe enough to pleaſe God and be ſaued, though he be ſo fooliſh that he will take no direction.
               2. Naughtie wiſdome, which is
               1. Worldly, when a man hath his minde ſo attentiue to all opportunities of getting the things of this life, that he is made careleſſe of heauenly things, chiefly if any oppoſition come betwixt them.
               2. Fleſhly, when a man is attentive to take all aduantages and opportunities of ſeruing his ſinfull and corrupt luſts, and paſſions, being wiſe to doe euill.
               
                  3. Deuilliſh wiſdome, when a man hath his wits about him to defend and maintaine ſinne, and to infect himſelfe and others more and more, by a maruellous kinde of reaching inuention.
               2. The ſinnes againſt conformitie in the principall power of the conſcience are twofold.
               
                  1. In regard of ones actions.
                  2. In regard of ones eſtate.
               
               1. In regard of ones actions they are threefold.
               
                  1. In exceſſe.
                  2. Defect.
                  3. In mixture both of exceſſe and defect.
               
               1. In exceſſe, by a kinde of erroneous proceeding.
               1. In indifferent things, by troubling a mans minde with vnneceſſarie ſcruples, making him to ſhunne them as ſinnes. This is the fault of many a ſanctified but ouer-tender conſcience, and the world ſcoffs at it vnder the name of a ſpiced and ſtraight-laced conſcience.
               2. In needfull things, by condemning them as if they were ſinnes, and troubling a man for doing that he ought to haue

done; as for perſecuting a malefactor, or giuing in a iuſt verdict or teſtimonie, as if it were cruelty and a ſhedding of his bloud.
               3. In ſinfull things, and that two wayes.
               1. By ſinfull excuſes to maintaine them, as if they were not ſinnes.
               2. By ouer-vehement checking for them, driuing a man from God by deſpaire, not to him by humiliation, as appeares in Iudas, if we compare his conſcience and Peters together.
               2. In regard of our actions there is defect, by deadneſſe and ſecredneſſe of conſcience, when it is as it were gagged and tonguetied, and neuer doth trouble a man for any ill deed.
               3. In regard of our actions there is a mixture of both exceſſe and defect, by guiltineſſe, when it troubles a man for a ſmall matter, and giues him reſt for a greater euil, as the Phariſees could ſwallow a camell, and ſtraine at a gnat, durſt not come into the Iudgement Hall before the Paſſeouer, yet durſt hire falſe witneſſes, and become themſelues falſe witneſſes againſt the bloud of Chriſt Ieſus.
               2. Sinnes againſt conformitie in the conſcience

in regard of ones eſtate are diſcerned by two things.
               1. Guiltineſſe, when it accuſeth bitterly, and tells him God hates and will damne him, which it will doe when it begins to looke vpon ſinne, vnleſſe faith in Chriſt come betwixt.
               2. When it giues a man falſe comforts, and makes him beleeue that all is well, crying peace, peace, and lulling him aſleepe, with a falſe conceit, that God fauours him, and that he ſhall be ſafe for all his ſinnes.
               3. Sins againſt conformitie in the third principall power called the Will, contrary to Gods will in two regards.
               
                  1. In regard of things to be done by ones ſelfe.
                  2. In regard of things to be receiued from God.
               
               1. In regard of things to be done by our ſelues.
               1. By rebellion, a flat badneſſe, when a man knowing ſuch a thing to be commanded, ſhifteth it off, and ſaith he cannot, but indeed out of ſome carnall reſpect will not doe it, or knowing any thing to be forbidden, excuſeth himſelfe, ſaith he muſt

needs doe it, and ſo concludes that he will doe it. This is the ſinne of the vnregenerate alone.
               2. By hypocriſie, which is a counterfait goodneſſe, when a man is willing to ſeeme good by doing ſome good things, and leauing ſome euill, for his owne ſake, or for ſiniſter and ſelfe-regards.
               2. The will is contrary to Gods will, in regard of things to be receiued from God, and that either in

                     1. Aduerſitie, or
                     2. Proſperitie.
                  
               
               1. In aduerſitie, by impatience, when a mans will ariſeth againſt either God, or the inſtrument, with a kinde of violence, and he will not beare this, and why ſhould he beare it?
               2. In proſperitie, by vnthankfulneſſe, when a man giues himſelfe ouer to deuoure Gods benefits, and makes himſelfe thereby more ſtrong in his wickedneſſe.
               Now follow the faults of the leſſe principall faculties, and they are two.
               
                  1. Inward.
                  2. Outward.
               
               1. The leſſe principall faculties inward are three.
               
                  
                  1. The Senſes.
                  2. The Affections.
                  3. The Appetite.
               
               1. The inward Senſes are twofold.
               
                  1. The imagination.
                  2. The memorie.
               
               1. In the imagination.
               
                  1. In regard of the obiect of its working.
                  2. In regard of the meaſure of its working.
               
               1. In regard of the obiect of its working in two reſpects.
               
                  1. In reſpect of good things.
                  2. In reſpect of euill & ſinfull things.
               
               1. In reſpect of good things.
               
                  1. It is dull and dead, and doth not ſtirre them vp on iuſt occaſions.
                  2. Fickle and diſtracted, and purſueth them not, being ſtirred vp.
               
               2. In reſpect of euill things.
               
                  1. It is very nimble and ready to ſtir them vp on ſmall occaſions.
                  2. It is ſtedfaſt and earneſt in purſuing them, and will not giue ouer.
               
               2. In regard of the meaſure of its working, when it is moſt ready and earneſt and abundant in ſuing and following thoughts

of things earthly more then heauenly.
               2. In the ſecond inward ſenſe, viz. the Memorie, and that alſo in two regards.
               
                  1. For the obiect of it.
                  2. For the meaſure of working.
               
               1. For the obiect of it.
               
                  1. In regard of euill and polluted things.
                  2. In regard of good and profitable things.
               
               1. For euill and polluted things, when it
               1. Retaines them ſtedfaſtly, and long, and will not ſuffer them to die.
               2. When it recals them readily and miſchieuouſly, when they doe moſt hurt, and moſt hinder good things.
               2. In regard of good and profitable things, when
               1. It vtterly puts them out of minde, for want of attending, ſo that they be as if they had neuer beene ſeene or heard.
               2. It caſts them careleſly away, and as a thing negligently laid vp, which one cannot finde when he ſhould vſe it, euen concealing them when hee ſhould doe good.
               2. The meaſure of working, when it ſerues a mans turne more readily for things

temporall and earthly then for things ſpirituall.
               2. The leſſe principall inward faculties are the affections, euen as thoſe ſeuen paire formerly mentioned, which are alſo faultie in a twofold regard.
               
                  1. In regard of the obiect of their working.
                  2. In regard of the meaſure of their working.
               
               1. In regard of the obiect of their working in two reſpects.
               1. When thoſe that are made to be ſet on good obiects, they ſet vpon euill, or vpon that, that is but fainedly good: as if a man loue, delight in, hope for, be couragious for, or be kinde for, or be bold in, or reuerence one for, an euill thing, or that, that is but in appearance good.
               2. When thoſe that are made to be ſet againſt euill things, if they be exerciſed vpon imaginarie euils, or vpon good things: as if a man hate, grieue for, be in deſpaire of, feare, or be couragious againſt, or be angry withall, or deſpiſe one for that that is good, or but in ſeeming euill, as to deſpiſe one for pietie or pouertie, to be angry with one for admonition or plainedealing, &c.
               
                  2. The meaſure of working of the affections, when they be exerciſed more plentifully vpon things naturally good or euill, then vpon things ſpiritually ſo.
               Only let it be noted, that in hope three things are to be conſidered.
               1. The thing hoped for.
               2. The grounds of hoping.
               3. The perſons and things from whom, or by whoſe meanes the thing is hoped for.
               And hope is to be only for good things, to ground it ſelfe wholly vpon Gods word, and to looke vp alone vnto God, as the foundation of it; and in this reſpect it is called confidence.
               And the faults of hope are foure.
               1. When it looketh for euill things; as I hope to ſee thee hang'd, ſaith ſome man in his anger.
               2. When it is built vpon inſufficient grounds; as I hope to liue merrily, becauſe I haue ſo good friends.
               3. When it doth not worke according to Gods word, but quite contrary; as I hope to haue heauen, though I liue wickedly.
               4. When it is more earneſt for things

temporall then heauenly, as for goods more then grace.
               3. Sinnes of the leſſe principall inward facultie are in the appetite, which offends two wayes.
               1. In the obiect, when it longeth for vnlawfull contents of the ſenſes, as for another mans wife.
               2. When it longs ſo eagerly after lawfull contents of the bodie, as to diuert the minde from ſeeking after things more worthy: as a man is ſo carried to ſports, that he neglects prayers, &c. both theſe ſins are called ſenſualitie or voluptuouſneſſe, and it is a making of ones belly his God.
               2. Faults of the leſſe principall faculties outward, viz.
               
               
                  1. Of ſpeech.
                  2. Of ſenſes.
                  3. Of the locomotiue facultie.
               
               1. Of ſpeech, in a twofold regard.
               
                  1. Of the obiect.
                  2. Of the meaſure.
               
               1. Of the obiect, when for

                     1. Good.
                     2. Euill.
                  
                  
                     1. For good,

                           1. When it is vnready to it.
                           
                              2. When its wearie of it.
                        
                     
                     2. For euill, when

                           1. Its nimble to it.
                           2. Conſtant in talking of it.
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. The meaſure of the ſpeech, when we be more plentifull in ſpeaking of things earthly and carnall, then of things heauenly and ſpirituall.
               2. Faults of the leſſe principall faculties outward are of the ſenſes, as principally

                     1. Of the eye.
                     2. Of the eare.
                  
               
               1. Of the eye are three.
               
                  1. In looking after vanitie.
                  2. Turning aſide from beholding that that might helpe to good.
                  3. Looking more earneſtly when the bodie requires then when the ſoule.
               
               2. The faults of the eare are 3 alſo.
               
                  1. When it liſtneth after euill ſpeeches.
                  2. When it turnes away it ſelfe from God.
                  3. Its more attentiue to heare things naturally good then ſpiritually.
               
               3. The faults of the leſſe principall outward facultie, called Locomotiue, are in two regards.
               
                  
                  1. Of the obiect of it.
                  2. Of the meaſure.
               
               1. For the obiect of it, when a man is

                     1. Liuely, in vſing it for euill purpoſes.
                     2. Weary, in vſing it for good things.
                  
               
               2. For the meaſure of it, when it is leſſe liuely, and more weary in things ſpirituall then in things naturall, to goe to a market then a Sermon.
               Hitherto the firſt Commandement.
               The ſecond followes.
            
            
               Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any grauen Image, &c.
               
               THE ſumme of it is to order vs in the ſolemne worſhip of God, or exerciſes of diuine ſeruice, called vſually, religious exerciſe. That any thing may be called an act of diuine ſeruice, three things are required.
               1. That it be done with immediate reference to God, in that himſelfe or ſome thing in his ſtead is the obiect of it.
               2. That it doe tend to the doers intention

directly and of it ſelfe to the getting or increaſing of ſome or all the chiefe graces required in the firſt Commandement, by winning and obtaining them, or ſome of them from God, when they hope to pleaſe and content him by ſuch an act.
               3. That there be a ſeparating of ones ſelfe from all other buſineſſes, to be imployed in ſuch acts wholly and altogether. And euery exerciſe of religion or of diuine ſeruice, hath diuers particular actions that be as parts of the whole, and in the orderly vniting of which, the whole it ſelfe is accompliſhed, and whatſoeuer is done in ſuch exerciſe of religion for the end and purpoſe of pleaſing God, and getting grace with reſpect of conſcience to him, as eſteeming that he muſt and will haue it ſo, or elſe thy ſeruice ſhall not be ſo well-pleaſing and acceptable vnto him. This is a part of worſhip or of diuine ſeruice: for example, to offer a young bullocke was an exerciſe of religion, becauſe the Prieſt did intend to offer it vnto God with an intention of ſhewing faith and obedience, and that directly. The doing of it in ſuch a place, with ſuch garments, with ſuch rites, were parts of this worſhip, or religious exerciſe, becauſe in all

theſe the intention of the doer was carried to God, accounting the ſeruice not to be acceptable to him without them, and hoping and purpoſing by the due obſeruation of all theſe things to pleaſe God, to exerciſe faith and obedience, and other graces, as much as by the very offering it ſelfe.
               So the ſumme of this ſecond Commandement is to order vs in diuine ſeruice, and the parts thereof. This Commandement hath two parts.
               
                  1. The affirmatiue.
                  2. The negatiue.
               
               1. The affirmatiue, ſhewing what God requireth at our hands.
               2. The negatiue, ſhewing what the Lord forbiddeth.
               1. The things commanded are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. For the performance of diuine ſeruice.
                  2. For preſeruation of it.
               
               1. For the performance of diuine ſeruice, that it be done according to Gods commandement, which is the true rule thereof, and that for two reſpects.
               
                  1. For the matter of it.
                  2. The manner of it.
               
               
                  1. The matter of it, in regard

                     1. Of the obiect or thing worſhipped.
                     2. The parts or kindes of worſhip.
                  
               
               1. The obiect or thing worſhipped muſt be
               1. The liuing God alone.
               2. God conceiued of in the pure apprehenſion of the minde, not repreſented to the eye or ſenſes by any figure or repreſentation.
               2. The parts or kinds of worſhip, that they be by him appointed. And the ſeruices by him appointed are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Ordinarie.
                  2. Extraordinarie.
               
               1. Ordinarie, ſuch as are to be done conſtantly and in a ſetled courſe, which are threefold.
               
                  1. Publique.
                  2. Priuate.
                  3. Indifferent.
               
               1. Publique, and theſe are two.
               1. Preaching of the word, which is the expoſition & application of the Scriptures, or any points of doctrine therein contained, by a Miniſter, vnto the people that muſt attend thereto.
               2. The adminiſtration of the Sacraments,

or ſeales of the couenant of grace, either

                     1. Baptiſme.
                     2. The Lords Supper.
                  
               
               1. Baptiſme, which is the ſeale of our ingraffing into Chriſt by the Spirit in the waſhing with water.
               2. The Lords Supper, which is the ſeale of our nouriſhing in and by Chriſt, through the giuing and receiuing of bread and wine, conſecrate and broken for that end.
               2. The ordinarie ſeruices by him appointed in priuate are two.
               
                  1. Conference.
                  2. Meditation.
               
               1. Conference of any part of Scripture, or point of doctrine therein deliuered, betwixt two or moe, for their fuller edification therein.
               2. Meditation, which is a ſerious conſidering and applying to each ones ſelfe ſome point of doctrine or place of Scripture for a mans owne edification.
               3. The ſeruices by him appointed, which are indifferent, are ſuch as muſt be done both publiquely and priuately of a Congregation together, or of a few, or of one alone, and theſe are foure.
               
                  1. Prayer, which is a calling vpon God in the name of Chriſt, with petitions and thankſgiuings, ioyned with confeſſion of ſinne and deprecation of puniſhment.
               2. Reading the Scriptures, or other good bookes increating of diuine matters.
               3. Catechiſing, which is a plaine and eaſie inſtructing of the ſimple in the grounds of Chriſtian doctrine by briefe and familiar Queſtions and Anſwers, either by the Miniſter in publique, or the gouernours in priuate, or ſome able bodie in their place.
               4. Singing of Pſalmes, that is, vttering of holy matter in muſicall numbers and tune, either with voice alone, or inſtruments and voice.
               2. Extraordinarie ſeruices by him appointed are ſuch as are to be done now and then vpon ſpeciall occaſion, which are 3.
               1. Faſting, which is the beſtowing of an artificiall day or more in exerciſe of humiliation and reconciliation to renew and increaſe repentance and faith, for the remouing or ſanctifying of ſome puniſhment, or obtaining of ſome benefit at Gods hand.
               2. Feaſting, which is the beſtowing of a like time in exerciſe of reioycing for the

teſtifying and increaſing of thankfulneſſe for ſome ſpeciall benefit.
               3. Vowes, which is a binding of ones ſelfe to God by a ſolemne promiſe, or rather oath, to doe or not to doe ſome thing lawfull, poſſible, and vſefull for our increaſe in godlineſſe.
               Hitherto for the matter of diuine ſeruice: now for
               2. The manner of the performance of diuine ſeruice, which is threefold.
               
                  1. A due preparation before.
                  2. A right cariage in them.
                  3. A right making vſe thereof after.
               
               1. A due preparation before, for the heart being vnfit for them, as the vntuned inſtrument to play vpon, muſt be ſet in tune: and this preparation is twofold.
               
                  1. Common.
                  2. Speciall.
               
               1. Common to all religious exerciſes, which is fourefold.
               1. Knowledge of the nature and vſe of that ſeruice out of Gods word.
               2. Repenting or renewing our repentance for our ſinnes, which is waſhing the hands in innocencie.
               3. Some ſhort prayer or lifting vp

the heart to God for his aſſiſtance and bleſſing vpon the ſame.
               4. Preconſideration of God that is worſhipped, of our ſelues that worſhip, and of the fruit and benefit of the worſhip, that is to be performed vnto him by vs.
               2. The due preparation before, ſpeciall to ſome, is fourefold, viz.
               
               1. The word, an hearing eare, that is, labouring to renew in our ſelues a firme purpoſe of knowing and doing the whole will of God that ſhall be reuealed vnto vs.
               2. Prayer, calling to minde our owne wants, ſinnes, and benefits, and Gods promiſes, and power to performe his promiſes.
               3. The Sacraments.
               
                  1. Examining and iudging of our ſelues.
                  2. Premeditation of Chriſts ſufferings.
                  3. Stirring vp an hungring and thirſting after Chriſt and his benefits.
               
               4. A vow, a ſpeciall deliberation concerning the lawfulneſſe and fitneſſe of the thing vowed, that it may not intangle vs, and doe vs more harme then good.
               2. The ſecond manner of performing diuine

ſeruice, is in a right cariage in them, that they be done in theſe foure reſpects.
               1. Truly and ſincerely vpon the right mouing cauſes, Gods commandement and will, and our owne dutie and need, and for the right ends, viz. the pleaſing of God, and procuring of grace, and increaſe of vertue in our ſoules.
               2. Reuerently, with a ſpeciall apprehenſion of Gods preſence and greatneſſe, and the louing and awfull ſtooping thereto.
                     1. In our inward man of the heart.
                     2. In our outward demeanour of the bodie.
                  
               
               3. Faithfully, with a beleeuing of Gods truth therein, and the promiſing to our ſelues the bleſſing he hath promiſed.
               4. Deuoutly, that is, with a diligent attention of the minde to the words and matter and whole worke in hand, and a kindly worke of the ſeuerall affections, according to the nature of the exerciſe and its ſeuerall parts.
               3. The third manner of performance of diuine ſeruice, is a right making vſe thereof after, which is done two wayes.
               
                  1. Common to all.
                  2. Speciall to ſome.
               
               
                  1. Common to all, that we ſee and obſerue how we grow thereby in all the graces of the inuer man, commanded in the firſt Law.
               2. Speciall to ſome, viz. to foure.
               1. To the word, that we doe call our ſelues to an account after, what we remember, meditating vpon it, and applying to our ſelues, and if we haue occaſion, conferring it with others.
               2. To prayer, that we wait vpon God, obſeruing whether he grant our requeſts, and heare vs yea or no, and quietly tarrying his leiſure, and fitting our ſelues for hearing.
               3. To the Sacraments, that we haue conſtant recourſe to them in all temptations to confirme our ſelues in obedience and faith.
               4. To vowes, that wee be carefully mindfull of them to fulfill them.
               Hitherto of that that is commanded for the performance of Gods ſeruice. Now for the preſeruation of the ſame.
               2. The ſecond ſort of the things commanded, is preſeruation of diuine ſeruice in its puritie and honour, for which end are required two things.
               
                  
                  1. Church maintenance.
                  2. Church diſcipline.
               
               1. Church maintenance, where note
               1. Who muſt yeeld it. All thoſe that are taught in the word, and are to ſerue God.
               2. What they muſt yeeld, viz. Tithes of their ordinarie increaſe ordinarily, and offerings of their extraordinary bleſſings and increaſe vpon ſpeciall occaſions.
               2. The ſecond thing required, is Church diſcipline, which reſpects

                     1. The Miniſterie.
                     2. The whole Congregation.
                  
               
               1. The Miniſterie, and is an aſſigning of fit men to fit offices by thoſe that are intruſted with this worke, ſo that here we muſt know three things.
               
                  1. What officers are required in the Church.
                  2. What men muſt be aſſigned to theſe offices.
                  3. By whom and in what manner.
               
               1. what officers are required in the Church, mentioned in Scripture, ſeeme to me fiue, I meane in the New Teſtament, which are theſe.
               
                  1. Apoſtles.
                  
                     2. Euangeliſts.
                  3. Prophets.
                  4. Paſtors.
                  5. Deacons.
               
               1. Apoſtles.
               2. Euangeliſts, viz. the 12. and the 70 called by Chriſt to be Teachers firſt of Iewrie, after of all the world, and to conſtitute and rule the Churches called. Now theſe in regard of the latitude of their iuriſdiction, and ſome extraordinarie gifts, were extraordinarie; but in regard of the parts of their function, viz. preaching, adminiſtring the Sacraments, gouerning the Churches, they were not extraordinarie, for theſe things are ſtill to be done, and therefore to them in theſe parts of office, doe Biſhops (as the word is now commonly vſed) lawfully by a warrantable and needfull conſtitution of the Church ſucceed, being men appointed to doe the ſame things ordinarily in ſome precinct or Dioceſſe, that they were to doe extraordinarily in all the world.
               3. Prophets, which were 1. extraordinarily endued by diuine inſpiration with power of foreſeeing things to come, or interpreting harder places of Scripture, who had no power of gouernment aboue other

Miniſters. 2. Ordinarie men, by ſtudie enabled with gifts to preach the word of God, and accordingly allowed thereto, without any aſſignement to any ſpeciall charge, and ſuch are our Students in Diuinitie, Preachers, Vniuerſitie Diuines, Lecturers, &c.
               4. Paſtors, called alſo Biſhops, Presbyters, Teachers, and Elders, for all theſe names are of one officer, being men aſſigned according to the orders of the ſeuerall Churches, to attend the worſhip of God, and ſaluation of men, in ſome one ſetled Congregation.
               5. Deacons, called alſo I ſuppoſe, helpers, being men aſſigned to the helping and ſeruing of the Paſtors, in ſuch parts of the Miniſterie as they could diſcharge, but without power of gouerning, and therefore called in a ſpeciall manner, ſeruants, becauſe they were common ſeruants of the Paſtors and people in what publique ſeruices of the Church they ſhould be appointed, as reading, baptizing, if they were able, preaching, gathering & diſtributing almes, and the like.
               2. The ſecond thing we muſt know, is what men muſt be aſſigned to theſe offices, viz.
               
               
                  1. To the higher offices of Paſtors or Biſhops, men vnſpotted of criminous faults in their liues, and of learning and knowledge in the Scripture, to teach, exhort, and confute the gaine-ſayers in ſome ſuch meaſure as is not required of all common Chriſtians.
               2. To the inferiour office of Deacons, men of vnſpotted life and ſound in faith.
               3. The third thing we muſt know, is by whom and in what manner, that is, with what ſolemnities, and in what degrees they muſt be aſſigned. And here I ſuppoſe the Scripture hath preciſely determined nothing, but left it to the diſcretion of the ſeuerall Churches to take fit wayes for their owne beſt commoditie: for there is no precept expreſſed in Scripture, ſaying, Let ſuch men in ſuch orders aſſigne Miniſters or conſecrate them, nor any equiualent that can be deduced out of Scripture. And as for examples, that goe ſingle without precept, they ſhew what may be done, and are a good allowance, they cannot proue what muſt be done, neither are any obligation to the conſcience, for only by the Law comes the knowledge

of ſinnes, and where there is no law there is no ſinne. Now in theſe particulars there is neither any law, nor any vniforme example: wherefore in theſe caſes, there is neither neceſſitie nor ſinne, but a libertie of taking different courſes in diuers places, as ſhall ſeeme beſt to the Churches and Chriſtian gouernours; for God knew in his wiſdome, that it was not fit to tie all kindes of Ciuill Eſtates and Gouernments to one order in this behalfe, and therefore hath he laid no ſuch tie vpon man. And its a raſhneſſe in men to tie themſelues or others, where God hath not tied.
               This is one part of Church diſcipline, reſpecting the Miniſterie, viz. the aſſigning of fit men to fit offices. A ſecond is the depoſing of the vnfit (viz. thoſe that runne into ſcandalous conuerſation, & teach falſe and dangerous doctrine) from theſe places, to be done by the ſame that aſſigned them.
               Hitherto that part of Church diſcipline, that concernes the Miniſterie. Now followes that which reſpects
               2. The whole Congregation, and is twofold.
               
                  1. Priuate.
                  2. Publique.
               
               
                  1. Priuate, concerning euery member of the Congregation in a twofold regard.
               1. In regard of a mans ſelfe, if he haue ſinned to the ſcandall of the Church, to confeſſe his fault, and giue ſatisfaction to the Congregation, ſubmitting himſelfe to cenſure.
               2. In regard of each other mutually, and that three wayes.
               1. To admoniſh thoſe that ſcandalouſly offend, both alone and with another, or two.
               2. To complaine to the Congregation publiquely of them, that will not by ſuch priuate admonitions repent.
               3. To ſhun the familiaritie and ſocietie of ſuch as refuſe to ſhew repentance and amendment after theſe meanes vſed.
               2. The Church diſcipline is publique pertaining to the gouernours and rulers of the Church, which is threefold.
               
                  1. To admoniſh.
                  2. To excommunicate.
                  3. To receiue the repentant againe into the communion of the Church.
               
               1. To admoniſh the offenders that are publiquely ſcandalous, and offenſiue.
               
                  2. To excommunicate: now of excommunication it is neceſſarie to ſhew,

                     1. What it is.
                     2. For what offences it muſt be executed.
                     3. In what manner it muſt be pronounced and executed.
                     4. By whom it muſt be done.
                  
               
               1. What it is, it is the ſentencing and cenſuring of an offender (as one that in the iudgement of charitie, can be accounted no better then in the ſtate of damnation) to be excluded the externall communion of the Saints.
               2. For what offences it muſt be executed, viz. for ſinnes that are,

                     1. Scandalous and publiquely offenſiue.
                     2. Groſſe, plaine and palpable.
                     3. Stood in impenitently againſt admonition.
                  
               
               3. In what manner excommunication muſt be pronounced and execured.
               1. Solemnly and publiquely in a very ſerious faſhion.
               2. Leiſurely and with great deliberation, after much waiting for the repentance of the offender.
               
                  4. By whom this excommunication is to be done. I anſwer by the Gouernours of the Church, or ſuch as they ſhall commit their power vnto. For the power of the keyes is the Churches, and queſtionleſſe they who haue authoritie to preach and adminiſter the communion are fitteſt to exclude the vnworthy from the communion.
               3. The third part of Church diſcipline publique pertaining to gouernours is to receiue the repentant againe into the Communion of the Church, and to confirme their loue vnto them by publique approbation.
               So much of the affirmatiue part of this commandement: the negatiue followes. Now this commandement is broken,

                     1. By omiſſion.
                     2. By commiſſion.
                  
               
               1. By omiſſion of any of the things commanded, either in whole or in part, either for matter or manner.
               2. By commiſſion of things quite contrary, and that two waies.
               
                  1. Directly.
                  2. Indirectly.
               
               
                  1. Directly.
               
                  1. For the performance of worſhip.
                  2. For the preſeruation of it.
               
               1. For the performance of worſhip.
               
                  1. By falſe worſhip.
                  2. By abuſe of the true worſhip.
               
               1. By falſe worſhip inuented by man,

                     1. In regard of the thing worſhipped.
                     2. In regard of the worſhip it ſelfe.
                  
               
               1. In regard of the thing worſhipped, when worſhip (that is, any religious ſeruice appointed by God to be done to himſelfe, or any like act in the imitation thereof) is yeelded,

                     1. To any creature.
                     2. To the Creator vnder any ſenſible picture.
                  
               
               1. To any creature that is not God, whether

                     1. To the deuill, as Witches and Magicians doe.
                     2. To Angels or Saints true or falſe.
                     3. To the Sunne, Moone, or Starres, or the like.
                     4. To Images and pictures of any thing whatſoeuer.
                  
               
               2. To the Creator, vnder any ſenſible picture or repreſentation made by mans hand.
               
                  2. Inuented worſhip it ſelfe, when its not appointed by God, but inuented by man, which is called will-worſhip, as the former (where there is a miſtaking in the obiect) is called Idolatrie.
               2. Abuſe of the performance of true worſhip, and that

                     1. For the matter of it.
                     2. For the manner.
                  
               
               1. For the matter of it, and that two waies.
               1. By detracting of thoſe parts, which God hath appointed.
               2. By adding of new parts of mens heads without Gods appointment. Now a part of worſhip is added, when ſome act is by mans appointment performed, together with thoſe that God hath appointed, out of a religious conſcience for the pleaſing of him, and getting of grace from him: otherwiſe acts of ſolemnitie, in the manner of celebrating any ſeruice, not done with reſpect of religious conſcience to God, nor with intention of pleaſing him, and getting grace from him, but alone for ſolemnitie and orders ſake, are not to be eſteemed addition to the worſhip.
               2. The abuſe in the manner of the

performance, when Gods worſhip is done, is fourefold.
               1. Impenitently, men liuing in their ſinnes.
               2. Rudely and vnreuerently, with a contemptuous behauiour of bodie and minde.
               3. Hollowly, for meere outward reſpects, or one cannot tell why, alone for cuſtome.
               4. Formally, with reſpect alone to the outward acts themſelues, not regarding the vſe, fruit and power thereof to the ſoule.
               Hitherto for the performance of it.
               2. Directly, forthe preſeruation of worſhip, when it is not preſerued and honoured, but diſcredited and deſtroyed, and that two waies.
               1. By ſacriledge, in peruerting the holy goods, tithes, and offerings, to common and prophane purpoſes.
               2. By abuſe of diſcipline in a twofold regard.
               
                  1. Of the miniſterie.
                  2. Of the congregation.
               
               1. In regard of the miniſterie foure waies.
               1. When a falſe miniſterie is eſtabliſhed, that is, a function of doing ſuch things,

as God hath not appointed to be done.
               2. When wicked Miniſters and inſufficient, are admitted and tolerated.
               3. When good and painfull Miniſters are excluded for contentions ſake.
               4. When men not at all aſſigned to any miniſterie, are ſuffered to performe, and doe performe the miniſteriall actions.
               2. The abuſe of diſcipline, in regard of the congregation, and that is two waies.
               
                  1. In regard of priuate men.
                  2. In regard of the Gouernours.
               
               1. In regard of priuate men, when they contemne and deſpiſe the Church cenſures, and are obſtinate againſt either priuate or publique admonition or excommunication.
               2. When they doe freely and familiarly conuerſe with obſtinate offenders, chiefly the excommunicated.
               2. Abuſe of diſcipline, in regard of Gouernours, is twofold.
               
                  1. The abuſe of excommunication.
                  2. The abuſe in exceſſe of rigour to the penitent.
               
               1. The abuſe of excommunication is, when it is pronounced and exacted foure waies.
               
                  1. For no iuſt cauſe, as for trifles and ſmall matters, much more for well doing.
               2. Againſt thoſe that are humble, and readie to ſhew their repentance.
               3. By thoſe that haue no power, or authoritie to intermeddle therein. As thoſe that are not Miniſters of Gods word.
               4 Careleſly and raſhly, hand ouerhead and in priuate chambers, as it were in hugger mugger.
               2. The abuſe of excommunication, in exceſſe of rigour to the penitent, by reiecting them from publique entertainment in the communion of the Church, though they doe relent and humble themſelues, and profeſſe repentance. Or on the other ſide, by receiuing them in for rewards ſake, that ſhew none or but a very ouert and ſlithy kinde of repentance.
               Hitherto the direct breaches of this commandement: It is alſo broken,
               2. By commiſſion of ſinnes, quite contrarie: Indirectly two waies.
               
                  1. By occaſions of falſe worſhip.
                  2. By appearances of falſe worſhip.
               
               1. By occaſions of falſe worſhip two waies, firſt either

                     1. To others.
                     
                        2. To our ſelues.
                  
               
               1. To others.
               1. By making or retaining inſtruments of Idolatrie, as Idols and the like.
               2. By commending, maintaining, or perſwading any falſe worſhip, much more inforcing vnto it by commandements, threats or puniſhments.
               2. To our ſelues, by familiar ſocietie, leagues, and vnneceſſarie couenants with Idolaters, and an vncautelous venturing vpon their bookes, or going to their ſeruice.
               2. The ſecond way, by appearances of falſe worſhip two waies.
               1. By all kinde of allowance by word, or writing, or ſilence when there is iuſt cauſe of ſpeaking, through feare or lucre, or the like, though one in heart meane otherwiſe.
               2. By ioyning with them, in the externall acts of falſe worſhip, pretending or intending to keepe his heart to himſelfe, and not to meane as they meane.
               Hitherto the ſecond Commandement: the third followes.
            
            
               
               Thou ſhalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine.
               THis Commandement enioynes that, which for diſtinctions ſake, may be called the common worſhip of God, that is, the right carriage of our ſelues, for his honour in all our common affaires, ſo far forth as we haue any thing to doe with him therin. For God being euery where preſent & in all actions, we hauing perpetual occaſion of a kinde of conuerſing with him, and thoſe things that are his, it is meet that in all theſe, as well as in exerciſes of religion, we ſhould ſhew our due reſpect of him.
               The name of God ſignifies two things.
               1. Himſelfe, by any meanes manifeſted vnto vs.
               2. All thoſe things, by which (as it were ſignes) he pleaſeth to make himſelfe knowne vnto vs. All which are referable vnto two heads.
               1. Common to all, as the great workes

                     1. Of creation.
                     2. Prouidence, vpholding and ruling all things.
                  
               
               
                  2. Peculiar to his Church two waies.
               
                  1. His Scriptures.
                  2. His workes of grace, and ſpeciall goodneſſe.
               
               1. In his Scriptures, comprehending vnder them three things.
               
                  1. His doctrine of life and ſaluation, called vſually, the religion of the Church.
                  2. His titles whereby he is called.
                  3. His attributes, whereby he worketh.
               
               2. In his workes of grace and ſpeciall goodneſſe, as predeſtination, redemption, iuſtification, ſanctification, &c.
               To take the name of God, is to haue any occaſion of vſing, or mentioning any of the fore-named things, in our common actions of life. In the ſolemne worſhip of God, we are taken vp of Gods name, ſequeſtring our ſelues from all other things, and giuing our ſelues wholly thereto, but in the common acts of life we take them vp, vpon diuers occaſions, vſing them in and with our other affaires.
               The parts of this commandement are two.
               
                  1. Affirmatiue.
                  2 Negatiue.
               
               1. Affirmatiue, ſhewing what things

are required in this commandement.
               2. Negatiue, ſhewing what things are forbidden.
               The duties required, are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. A due and orderly vſing of holy actions.
                  2. The right behauing of our ſelues to Godward, in our common affaires and buſineſſes.
               
               1. A due and orderly vſing of ſuch holy actions, as come to be performed in and with our common buſineſſes, by which God is called after a ſpeciall manner, to inter-meddle with the ſame. For an holy action is that, whereby God is the immediate and next obiect, and by his appointment tendeth directly to the exerciſing of holineſſe, in part or in whole. Now there are two ſuch holy actions, which are of frequent vſe, in and with our common affaires, viz.
               
               
                  1. An oath.
                  2. A ſacred or diuine lot.
               
               1. An oath, of which we muſt know,

                     1. The nature.
                     2. The vſe.
                  
               
               1. The nature, by conſidering three things.
               
                  
                  1. The perſon to be ſworne by.
                  2. The parts of this oath.
                  3. The purpoſe or vſe thereof, to which theſe actions are to be applied.
               
               1. The perſon to be ſworne by, or the obiect of the oath, which muſt be God alone, Thou ſhalt ſweare the Lord liueth.
               
               2. The parts of this oath, or the ſeuerall actions included and implied in it, which are foure.
               1. An aſſertion, by way of affirming or denying, either barely or with obligation to or from ſomething.
               2. An acknowledgement of Gods omniſcience, omnipotence and iuſtice, and other like attributes.
               3. An inuocation of him, to beare witneſſe to the truth, of what we ſay.
               4. An imprecation againſt our ſelues, if we doe ſpeake falſly, that is, a referring ouer of our ſelues, and offering our ſelues into his hand to be puniſhed by his power and iuſtice.
               3. The third thing to be conſidered, is the purpoſe or vſe, to which theſe actions are to be applied, that is the ending of a controuerſie, that cannot otherwiſe be ended conueniently. So that an oath is a

religious ſeruice of God, whereby we referre our ſelues vnto God, as a competent and fit witneſſe, and Iudge of the truth and falſhood of our ſpeeches, about a matter controuerted, for the ending thereof.
               2. We muſt know the vſe of an oath, in regard of two things.
               1. Of iuſt occaſions of vſing it, viz. in a matter of ſome weight or moment, either in it ſelfe, or in the conſequents or effects of it,
               1. For the ſatisfying of another, that requires and will accept it.
               2. Binding of ones ſelfe either to another, or only to himſelfe, as Iacob cauſed Ioſeph to ſweare, and Ionathan and Dauid ſware to each other, and Solomon ſware that Adonia ſhould die.
               2. We muſt know the iuſt manner, in regard of vſing it vpon ſuch an occaſion, which is either in

                     1. Iudgement.
                     2. Truth.
                     3. Righteouſneſſe.
                  
               
               1. In iudgement, that is, in a ſerious conſideration of the cauſe of our ſwearing, and greatneſſe of the name of God, by which we ſweare,
               
                  2. In truth, that is, a perfect agreement betwixt the meaning of the words of him that ſweareth, and betwixt both theſe and the things themſelues of which the ſpeech is, and that agreeably alſo to the intentions of him to whom the oath is tendered, ſo farre as he ſhall manifeſt his intentions to him that ſweareth.
               3. In righteouſneſſe, that is, with reuerence to God, care of doing good, not hurt vnto our neighbours, by our ſwearing, and aiming at the right end, euen the determining of a doubt quietly, by interpoſing Gods name, to ſhew our high opinion of him. For now God and man hath his due, and that is righteouſneſſe in euery act, that euery one whom it concerneth, may haue that which is due to him therein.
               2. A ſacred or diuine lot, which being of the ſame nature with an oath (as concurring with it in the efficient cauſe Gods appointment, who ſaith, the lot ſhall cauſe contention to ceaſe, and in the matter an acknowledgement of certaine holy attributes of God, and our ſubiection thereto, and in the end, to ſettle quietneſſe amongſt men, by making God their vmpire)

muſt needs be accounted no otherwiſe of, then an holy thing: And of this conſider we alſo two things.
               
                  1. The nature of it.
                  2. The vſe of it.
               
               1. The nature, for the conſtituting of which, there are three things required.
               1. A matter in doubt and controuerſie, not yet agreed vpon.
               2. A caſuall act, that is, an act, the falling out of which, depends meerely vpon the diſpoſition of Gods prouidence (which is fooliſhly called, lucke or chance) and not at all vpon the wit, will, skill, or actiuitie of man, as Solomon faith, the whole iudgement or diſpoſition of the lot, is of God.
               3. The referring of that matter in doubt, to be decided by the euent of that caſuall act, either by agreement of parties, or appointment of ſuperiours, wherein are neceſſarily implied and contained three things.
               1. An acknowledgement of Gods Soueraigntie and wiſdome, to diſpoſe of all things.
               2. An inuocating of God to vſe his power, and wiſdome, for the ending

of the preſent controuerſie.
               3. A tying of our ſelues to ſubmit our ſelues to his determination, ſo that a lot, is the referring of a matter in doubt vnto God to determine, by the ſpeciall diſpoſition of his prouidence, ordering the euent of a caſuall act, and we may conceiue it to be nothing elſe, but an actuall compendium of a prayer.
               2. The vſe of it, to which end we muſt know two things.
               
                  1. Vpon what occaſions to vſe it.
                  2. In what manner to vſe it.
               
               1. Vpon what occaſions to vſe it. Now there is no vſe of it, but deciding of a matter in controuerſie; All controuerſies or doubts are of ſome of theſe three things, either

                     1. Of things paſt.
                     2. Of things preſent.
                     3. Of things to come.
                  
               
               1. Of things paſt, which a lot ſerues not for, viz. to finde out who hath done this or that.
               2. Of things preſent, which cannot neither be determined by Lot.
               3. Of things to come, which are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Contingent, doubtfull and vncertaine euents and accidents, as Hamon vſed a lot to finde, whether his deuice againſt the Iewes ſhould proſper, for which a lot now ſerueth not at all.
               2. The diſpoſitions, or diſtributions of rewards, puniſhments, labours, offices, &c. and for theſe a lot ſerues, witneſſe Salomon, that ſaith, it makes diuiſion among the mightie. Only controuerſies about ſuch matters are either
               1. Made and counterfeit, by the vanitie of man, when in nature no ſuch thing doth need to be, God hauing alreadie put the matter out of controuerſie, as the caſe is in all Lotteries, and ſure God will not allow vs to make a knot for him to vntie.
               2. Reall and exiſtent in nature, and theſe are either

                     1. Triuiall, or
                     2. Weightie and of moment.
                  
               
               1. Triuiall and ſportfull, which God will not haue put to him to end, for it were an abaſement vnto him.
               2. Weightie and of moment, either in themſelues or the effects, and conſequences of them, and theſe, God that loues concord amongſt men, is willing to decide.
               
                  2. Is required, in what manner to vſe it, when ſuch occaſion is offered, viz.
               
               1. With due obſeruation of Gods prouidence in it.
               2. With a willing ſubmiſſion vnto his prouidence in the diſpoſition thereof.
               So much for the due vſe of holy things, that come often-times to be ioyned with our common affaires.
               2. Now followes the right behauing of our ſelues to God-ward in our common affaires and buſineſſes themſelues, ſo farre as they doe any way touch God: that is twofold.
               
                  1. Inward.
                  2. Outward.
               
               1. Inward twofold.
               
                  1. In regard of Gods actions.
                  2. In regard of our owne actions.
               
               1. In regard of Gods actions, that he doth before, whether generall or ſpeciall, common or particular, of iuſtice or mercie, to our ſelues or others.
               1. The ſeeing of him in them, that is, obſeruing and taking notice, that they be his workes.
               2. The making a right vſe of them, to build vp our ſoules in knowledge of

him, and in all holy affections of loue, feare, &c. towards him. And here are eſpecially required two things: for
               1. Benefits which our ſelues receiue, a making them meanes of ſtirring vs vp to thankfull obedience.
               2. Corrections laid vpon our ſelues, a making vſe of them to increaſe our patience and repentance.
               2. In regard of our actions of any kinde which we doe, viz. a liuing to God and not to our ſelues, and referring them to him by an actuall intention of pleaſing and glorifying him, for whatſoeuer we deliuer: eating and drinking by Paul is ordained to be done to the glory of God.
               2. The right behauiour of our ſelues towards God outward in regard of 2. things.
               
                  1. Of our ſpeeches.
                  2. Of our deeds and actions.
               
               1. Of our ſpeeches and words 4. wayes.
               1. By good ſalutations ſincerely and reſpectiuely vttered, as betwixt Boaz and his reapers.
               2. By a reuerent mention of Gods titles and attributes vpon any occaſion, that it may appeare we feare the glorious name of God.
               
                  3. By conferring together of his works and of his word, as we goe about our other buſineſſes, to ſtir vp our ſelues and others the more to ſerue and praiſe him.
               4. By making confeſſion of his truth, and ſtanding to defend it againſt cauils according to ones abilitie.
               2. The right behauiour of our ſelues towards God outward is in our deeds and actions, and that two wayes.
               
                  1. Generally.
                  2. More particularly.
               
               1. Generally by two wayes.
               1. By walking as becommeth the Goſpell of Chriſt, vrging our ſelues to a very preciſe and wiſe cariage of our ſelues, that the name of God by our meanes may not heare ill, but well.
               2. By reſolute ſuffering for the names ſake of Ieſus Chriſt, and for righteouſneſſe ſake, which if it be to bloud is called martyrdome.
               2. More particularly, by a ſanctified vſe of any of Gods creatures, or of any thing whatſoeuer that we doe, to which end foure things are required, viz.
               
               1. Knowledge out of the word of

God concerning the lawfulneſſe of our doing ſuch things or enioyning ſuch, for all things muſt be ſanctified to vs by the word, as a good ſeruant will venture on nothing, but what he knowes will pleaſe his maſter.
               2. Crauing Gods leaue bleſſing in the vſe of meat, drinke, mariage, or any thing, as we take no mans goods out of his houſe, but firſt we aske him leaue.
               3. Returning of thanks to God for his goodneſſe, as we thanke our neighbours, if we bring home ſome borrowed thing.
               4. Moderation in the vſe of them, by proportioning the meaſure to the end, as a ſeruant being ſent to his maſters coffer, takes out ſo much as will diſpatch the appointed buſineſſe and no more.
               Hitherto of the affirmatiue part of the third commandement: the negatiue followes, ſhewing the ſinnes by which this commandement is broken are 2.
               
                  1. By ſinnes of omiſſion.
                  2. By ſinnes of commiſſion.
               
               1. By ſinnes of omiſſion, in not doing any of the things required (either for matter or manner, either in whole or in part)

when iuſt cauſe of doing them is offered.
               2. By ſinnes of commiſſion, in doing things contrary to thoſe that are commanded, and that in a twofold reſpect.
               1. By abuſing thoſe holy actions that are to be admixed with our common affaires.
               2. By diſorderly cariage of our common deeds.
               1. By abuſing thoſe holy actions &c. which are two.
               
                  1. An oath.
                  2. A lot.
               
               1. An oath, which is abuſed two wayes.
               
                  1. For the taking thereof.
                  2. For the keeping thereof.
               
               1. For the taking thereof in regard of

                     1. The matter.
                     2. The manner of vſing when it is taken.
                  
               
               1. The matter.
               
                  1. For the obiect.
                  2. For the ſubiect.
               
               1. For the obiect or thing ſworne by, if it be an Idoll or a creature.
               2. The ſubiect or thing ſworne to in an
               
                  1. Aſſertiue oath, when the thing ſworne to is light and triuiall, too meane for an oath to be vſed in it, or plaine and euident, not needing an oath.
               2. In a permiſſiue or obligatorie oath, if the thing be either

                     1. Impoſſible, and cannot be done.
                     2. Vnlawfull, and cannot be done but ſinfully.
                  
               
               2. Followeth the manner of vſing an oath, when it is taken

                     1. Ignorantly, a man not being informed of the nature of an oath.
                     2. Cauſleſly, without any iuſt inducement thereto.
                     3. Irreuerently, without apprehenſion of Gods greatneſſe.
                     4. Ragingly, in the bitterneſſe of paſſion.
                     5. Maliciouſly, with intention of hurting any man.
                     6. Falſly, and the falſhood of an oath is either
                  
               
               1. Vnwittingly, when a man ſweareth as he conceiueth and thinketh, but not as the thing is.
               2. Wittingly, and that either

                     
                     1. Open and manifeſt.
                     2. Cloaked and coloured.
                  
               
               1. Open and manifeſt in an oath,

                     1. Aſſertorie.
                     2. Obligatorie.
                  
               
               1. Aſſertorie, when one doth either

                     1. Know it to be falſe.
                     2. Conceiues it to be falſe, though it be not ſo.
                  
               
               2. Obligatorie, when a man neuer hath a purpoſe to fulfill it, but ſeeketh to ſerue his preſent turne.
               2. Cloaked and coloured by aequiuocations and reſeruations, whereby one ſeeketh to delude him to whom he ſweareth.
               2. An oath abuſed in regard of the keeping it two wayes.
               1. When one doth neglect to fulfill a lawfull oath for feare, lucre, or any like cauſe.
               2. When one proceeds to fulfill an vnlawfull oath for vaine-glory, or a falſe conſcionableneſſe of it.
               2. A ſecond holy action abuſed, that is, admixed in our common affaires, is a lot, which is abuſed two wayes.
               
                  1. In regard of the matter.
                  
                     2. In regard of the manner.
               
               1. In regard of the matter, when it is applied to end

                     1. Made and counterfeit differences.
                     2. Sportfull and trifling differences.
                  
               
               2. It is abuſed in regard of the manner, when it is vſed
               1. Ignorantly, without information of its nature.
               2. Colludingly, with making a ſhew of lottery, when a man hath a cloſe tricke to diſpoſe of the act, ſeeming caſuall, at his owne pleaſure.
               3. Profanely, without any regard of Gods prouidence in it, and with chafing againſt the euent.
               2. Abuſing theſe holy actions, by diſorderly cariage of our common deeds, and that in a twofold reſpect.
               
                  1. In inward deeds.
                  2. In outward deeds.
               
               1. In inward deeds,

                     1. In regard of Gods workes.
                     2. In regard of our owne workes.
                  
               
               1. In regard of Gods workes,

                     1. When we attribute them to other cauſes, either

                           1. Falſe at all, as to fortune and chance.
                           
                              2. True, too eagerly, ſo as to neglect God, as

                                 1. To our friends, if there be good done by them.
                                 2. To our foes, if they be aduerſe from them.
                                 3. To our ſelues and our owne induſtry, &c.
                                 4. To the courſe of nature.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     2. When wee peruert them to euill purpoſes, as in particular,

                           1. Good & proſperous things.

                                 1. To harden our ſelues in ſinning.
                                 2. To nouriſh pride and conceit of our ſelues.
                              
                           
                           2. Aduerſe and euill.

                                 1. To murmur againſt God and fret.
                                 2. To waxe obſtinate in our ſinnes, for all that he doth correct vs.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. In regard of our diſorderly cariage in our owne workes, when we doe wholly ſeeke and ſerue our owne profit, pleaſure, credit in them: but worſt of all, if we ſeeke in them the fulfilling of our ſinfull affections.
               2. Our diſorderly cariage outward, and

that in a twofold regard,

                     1. Of our words.
                     2. Of our deeds.
                  
               
               1. In regard of our words contrary to foure things.
               1. To good ſalutations.
               1. By good wiſhes, vttered 2. waies.
               
                  1. Alone formally, without any good deſire of heart.
                  2. Falſly and fainedly, with a wiſhing of euill in heart.
               
               2. By bad wiſhes or curſes of all kindes, ſpecially wherein the deuils name is interpoſed, which is as it were an inuocation of Satan.
               2. Contrary to the reſpectiue mentioning of Gods titles and attributes by two wayes.
               1. By heedleſſe and formall mentioning them.
               
                  1 In admiration, as, good Lord.
                  2. In intreaty, as, for Gods ſake, not thinking of God.
                  3. And all ſuch like.
               
               2. By blaſphemous, ſcornefull, abuſiue mentioning of them, tending to reproach and diſgrace the name of God.
               3. Contrary to good conference of

Gods word or workes.
               1. By iangling and wrangling ſpeech of any good thing, meerely for contention, oſtentation, victorie.
               2. By ieſting at any phraſe or place of Scripture, or any ſpeciall worke of God.
               3. By miſalledging or miſapplying either the workes of God, or the Scriptures, and that in three reſpects.
               1. In ſpels and charmes, which is to ſerue the deuils turne with them, and make them as it were ſacraments of the deuill.
               2. In maintaining any wicked practiſe or falſe opinion.
               3. In maintaining euen a good deed and the true opinion, whereto they doe not ſerue without wreſting.
               4. By cauilling againſt the word of God, or any of his workes; in ſeeking to impute falſhood, iniuſtice, &c. vnto the ſame.
               4. Contrary to confeſſion of Gods truth foure wayes.
               
                  1. By denying the truth through feare or lucre againſt ones conſcience.
                  2. By oppugning the truth, though it be through blindneſſe and ignorance, but moſt of all if it be wittingly and wilfully.
                  
                     3. By ſcoffing and deriding the truth of God with taunts to diſgrace.
                  4. By maintaining, defending, diſputing for and gracing falſhood.
               
               2. Diſorderly cariage outward in regard of our deeds.
               1. Generally, by a wicked, ſcandalous, and careleſſe mocking of them that profeſſe religion.
               2. Particularly, two wayes.
               
                  1. By perſecuting any for righteouſneſſe ſake.
                  2. By a wicked and vnſanctified manner of doing any thing, and that in 4. reſpects.
               
               1. Againſt ones conſcience, whether it be a doubting conſcience, or a conſcience fully reſolued, whether truly or erroneouſly.
               2. Prophanely, without prayer or thankſgiuing.
               3. Superſtitiouſly, and that 2. wayes.
               1. By putting holineſſe or vnholineſſe, ſinfulneſſe or neceſſitie of religion in a thing indifferent, which is ſuperſtition.
               2. By applying things whereto

God hath neither in nature, or by ſpeciall inſtitution appointed them, as

                     1. By diuination of things to come, as in Iudiciall Aſtrologie, Pyromancie, &c.
                     2. To finding out of hidden ſecrets.
                     3. To cure diſeaſes and expell deuils.
                     4. To ſatisfie Gods iuſtice, and merit remiſſion of ſinnes, and life euerlaſting, and ſuch like.
                  
               
               4. A wicked and vnſanctified manner of doing any thing immoderatly in exceeding the meaſure required for the attaining of Gods ends, and vſing an ouerlarge quantitie to ſatisfie our luſts, as 1. In gluttonie. 2. In drunkenneſſe. 3. Vaine attire. 4. Sportfulneſſe, &c.
               So much of the third commandement:
               The fourth followes.
            
            
               Remember the Sabbath to keepe it holy, &c.
               
               IT appoints the conſecrating of a ſpeciall time, viz. one day in ſeuen (without nominating any date of time whence the computation

muſt begin, for that muſt be knowne to vs by ſome other meanes, and is a thing alterable, not vnalterably ſetled by the commandement) giuing ſix to worldly affaires, and conſecrate the ſeuenth following thoſe ſix to exerciſes of religion and pietie. The full ſumme is, After thou haſt beſtowed ſix dayes in ordinarie and common buſineſſes, thou ſhalt beſtow the ſeuenth day in exerciſes of pietie and religion.
               This commandement hath alſo 2. parts, namely,

                     1. The affirmatiue, ſhewing what is enioyned to doe.
                     2. The negatiue, ſhewing what is prohibited to doe.
                  
               
               The things commanded in this precept are two.
               
                  1. Preparation to the Sabbath.
                  2. Celebration of the Sabbath.
               
               1. Preparation to the Sabbath in the word Remember, which is done two wayes.
               1. All the weeke long by

                     1. Diligence in the labours of our calling.
                     2. Foreſight in the labours of our calling.
                     3. Moderation in the labours of our calling.
                  
               
               2. On the ſixt day towards the end of

it, by a ſeaſonable breaking off our labours, and betaking our ſelues to make all things ready for the Sabbath, and ſo to reſt our bodies.
               2. The ſecond thing commanded is the celebration of the Sabbath two wayes.
               
                  1. By ſome things common to all.
                  2. By ſome things proper to gouernours.
               
               1. By ſome things common to all.
               
                  1. For the matter.
                  2. For the manner.
               
               1. For the matter two wayes.
               
                  1. By reſting.
                  2. By ſanctifying.
               
               1. By reſting, of which we muſt know three things.
               
                  1. Who muſt reſt.
                  2. How long they muſt reſt.
                  3. From what they muſt reſt.
               
               1. Who muſt reſt, euen all both

                     1. Men,

                           1. Gouernours.
                           2. Seruants, and thoſe that they gouerne.
                        
                     
                     2. Cattell, and Mils, and things of like nature.
                  
               
               2. How long they muſt reſt, viz. for the full ſpace of 24. houres, beginning the day

and ending it according to the vſuall account of other dayes in ſeuerall Commonwealths, for to begin at Euen was the Iewes ordinarie computation for all dayes, and ſo meaſure out the Sabbath as well as other dayes by a peculiar conſtitution. But in the commandement is alone required that there be an whole ſeuenth day, not nominating the periods.
               3. From what they muſt reſt, viz.
               
               1. From the buſineſſes of their particular callings, as a Trades-man from ſelling, Husbandman from plowing, Lawyer from pleading, &c. In which note 2. things.
               1. How farre this reſt muſt extend, and that muſt be to three things.
               
                  1. To thoughts of heart.
                  2. To words of the tongue.
                  3. To deeds of the hand.
               
               2. The ſecond thing is with what limitations and exceptions it muſt be limited; except in caſes▪
               
               1. Of mercy, for the releeuing of man or beaſt in diſtreſſe.
               2. In caſes of neceſſitie, for the preuenting of imminent & (vnleſſe preſent reſiſtance be made) vnpreuentable danger.
               3. In caſes of neceſſarie comforts

for the bodie, and its conuenient ſtrengthning by food and cloathing, for a man might lead his Oxe to water, Chriſt ſaith, and need not fetch in water for him ouer night.
               2. The ſecond thing from which we muſt reſt, is from all manner of profane ſports, paſtimes, and recreations, which are more contrary to pietie then labour in calling.
               2. A ſecond thing in regard of the matter is ſanctifying the Sabbath, and that two wayes.
               
                  1. Publiquely.
                  2. Priuately.
               
               1. Publiquely, in two things.
               
                  1. Comming to publique aſſemblies in due ſeaſon.
                  2. Continuing at them with carefull attention to the end.
               
               2. Priuately, in two things.
               
                  1. In things reſpecting the publique.
                  2. In things without that reſpect to the publique.
               
               1. In things reſpecting the publique.
               
                  1. For preparation.
                  2. For making vſe thereof.
               
               
                  1. In preparation thereto by three things.
               
                  1. By riſing betimes in the morning, as ſtrength will giue leaue.
                  2. Renuing our repentance and waſhing our hands in innocencie before we compaſſe the Altar.
                  3. Praying to God ſpecially for a bleſſing on ourſelues, the Miniſterie, and aſſembly.
               
               2. For vſe making thereof two wayes.
               
                  1. By conferring with others (chiefly euery gouernour with his familie) the word of God we haue heard.
                  2. By meditating of it euery man by himſelfe, that he may ſee what he remembers, and make vſe of it to himſelfe.
               
               2. Priuately, in things without that reſpect to the publique, viz. 3. wayes.
               
                  1. By reading of the Scripture and godly bookes, chiefly in the want of publique preaching.
                  2. Singing of Pſalmes of praiſe to God.
                  3. Meditating of Gods great workes of creation, prouidence, redemption,

and of the eternall reſt which we ſhall haue in heauen.
               
               2. The ſecond thing commanded in the Sabbath common to all, is the manner of doing all cheerefully, conſecrating the Sabbath vnto the Lord as a delight.
               2. Some things commanded in the celebration of the Sabbath proper to gouernours are theſe, namely, that they be diligent in looking to their inferiours, that they may at the leaſt outwardly keepe the Lords day.
               Hitherto of the affirmatiue part of this commandement: the negatiue followes, forbidding ſinnes
               1. Of omiſſion, in the neglecting of any of the things commanded, either in whole or in part.
               2. Of commiſſion, in doing the contrary in two regards.
               
                  1. Before the Sabbath come.
                  2. When it is come.
               
               1. Before the Sabbath come in 2. things.
               1. In an vniuerſall careleſneſſe of it all the weeke, and ſo by careleſneſſe or immoderateneſſe, ſo ill diſpoſing of buſineſſes, that they interrupt vs in ſanctifying the Sabbath, which fore-ſight, diligence,

and moderation might haue preuented.
               2. Immoderate toyleſomneſſe and watching the day before, to the hindring of one from doing the workes of the Sabbath through ſleepineſſe and wearineſſe.
               2. When the Sabbath is come.
               
                  1. In regard of all men.
                  2. In regard of gouernours.
               
               1. In regard of all men.
               
                  1. For matter.
                  2 For manner.
               
               1. For matter two wayes.
               
                  1. Againſt reſting.
                  2. Againſt ſanctifying.
               
               1. Againſt reſting.
               
                  1. Inward by thoughts,
                  2. Outward by

                        1. Words.
                        2. Deeds.
                     
                  
               
               1. By words either

                     1. Of our ordinarie buſiſineſſes out of the forenamed exceptions.
                     2. Of ſports and paſtimes.
                  
               
               2. Againſt ſanctifying

                     1. Publiquely.
                     2. Priuately.
                  
               
               1. Publiquely in three things.
               
                  
                  1. A ſlow and vndue comming to Church.
                  2. Sleeping, drowzing, or like misbehauiour at the Church, as talking &c.
                  3. Running away from the Congregation diſorderly afore all be concluded, vnleſſe vpon ſome neceſſarie occaſion.
               
               2. Priuately, in ſpending the time

                     1. Idlely, in ſlugging & ſlothfulneſſe, as ſitting at doore, or in the chimney corner, and doing iuſt nothing.
                     2. Prophanely, in ſurfeting, drunkenneſſe, riot, reuelling, and the like.
                  
               
               2. In regard of the manner, by being weary of the day, and wiſhing it ouer as a thing burdenſome.
               2. When the Sabbath is come in regard of Gouernours, if they command their inferiours to worke or play, or without iuſt cauſe to be abſent from the word or ſacraments.
               And yet one way there is a more generall breaking of this commandement, by denying the moralitie of this law, and caſhiering it among other Leuiticall ceremonies. Indeed the Sabbath is in part ceremoniall, figuring both our reſt of ſanctification

here, and glory hereafter, but that contradicts not the perpetuitie of it. For it is not a ceremonie leading to Chriſt, and at his comming to determine, as appeares Mat. 15.17. I came not to diſſolue the Law: and verſ. 19. who ſhall breake the leaſt of theſe commandements: where each commandement of the ten commandements is ratified, and conſequently this fourth: Luk. 23.56. They reſted according to the commandement. And Luke writ that diuers yeeres after the reſurrection of Chriſt, the things were done after his death, when all Leviticall inſtitutions loſt their power of binding. Iam. 2.11. He that keeps the whole Law and breakes one commandement is guiltie of all. Therefore the whole Law and each principle thereof, doth binde vs vnder the Goſpell; alſo the time of firſt inſtituting a particular date of time for the beginning of the Sabbath, of the old Law, viz. in innocencie. 2. The writing of it in Tables of ſtone. 3. Putting of it into the Arke proued morall.
               So much of the commandements of the firſt Table, enioyning our dutie to God. Now follow the precepts of the

ſecond Table, concerning our dutie to our ſelues and our neighbours, and firſt of the fifth commandement.
            
            
               Honour thy father and thy mother, &c.
               
               THis Commandement enioynes the performance of all ſuch duties as appertaine to men in regard of their place, that is, that reſpect a ſpeciall reference which paſſeth betwixt ſome men more then others in ſome ſpeciall and peculiar bond binding them mutually one to another.
               Theſe duties are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Such as concerne euery mans ſelfe.
                  2. Such as reſpect others.
               
               1. Such as concerne euery mans ſelfe, which are foure.
               
                  1. To take notice of his place, and the ſeuerall duties thereof, that he may the better performe the ſame.
                  2. To labour for all ſuch graces and vertues, as are requiſite for the diſcharge of theſe duties.
                  3. To maintaine the dignitie of his place.
                  4. To be ſatisfied and contented with

the preſent place wherein God hath ſet him, and with the dignitie and honour thereof.
               
               2. Such duties as reſpect others in regard of ſpeciall bonds and obligations tying them together.
               Theſe bonds are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Naturall.
                  2. Spirituall.
               
               1. Naturall, taken from things naturall in this preſent life, and theſe are twofold.
               
                  1. Arbitrarie.
                  2. Neceſſarie.
               
               1. Arbitrarie, ſuch as it is in a mans power to haue or not to haue, according to the freedome of his owne choice and election: and this is called friendſhip, whence we are denominated friends.
               2. Neceſſarie, ſuch as are by God and the courſe of nature eſtabliſhed, and depend not meerely vpon the choice of will, and theſe are two.
               
                  1. Kinred.
                  2. Degree.
               
               1. Kinred or neereneſſe of bloud, whence men are termed kinſmen.
               2. Degree whereby one is ranked in a certaine order towards others.
               
                  Degree is twofold.
               
                  1. Of equalitie, whence men are called equals.
                  2. Inequalitie, wherein one is aboue another or vnder him, and this is

                        1. Superioritie, wherein one is preferred before another.
                        2. Inferioritie, wherein one ſtandeth vnder or behinde another.
                     
                  
               
               2. The bonds of ſpirituall things are taken from things that doe concerne the eſtate of another life hereafter. And theſe are all or the chiefe bonds that doe paſſe betwixt man and man, tying them to each other, and cauſing them to become indebted in ſpeciall duties towards ſuch perſons, which are not owing in common to all. Now let vs conſider the duties themſelues depending vpon each of thoſe reſpects.
               1. Of friends.
               Friends are thoſe that are tied together by the bond of friendſhip. Friendſhip is a ſpeciall obligation of amitie or good will, vniting the hearts of men together in a greater neereneſſe and deareneſſe then ordinarily is, or is required of all men.
               Now friendſhip (and ſo friends) is of two kindes.
               
                  1. Common and imperfect, being amitie confirmed and ſtrengthned, and raiſed to an higher degree then vſuall, in regard of long and familiar liuing, abiding, dealing, or conuerſing together.
               2 Perfect & more peculiar, which is amity in the higheſt degree that can be wrought, through the mutuall acknowledgement of each others vertues vpon ſome good time and acquaintance, and eſtabliſhed and ratified by ſome ſolemne couenant, promiſe, or oath taken each to other, as is to be ſcene in the example of Ionathan and Dauid.
               
               The duties of friends are twofold.
               
                  1. Common.
                  2. Proper.
               
               1. Common to both kinds of friendſhip.
               1. To chuſe and accept none into friendſhip, but vertuous, honeſt, and religious perſons: for what communion can there be betwixt light and darkneſſe, vertue and vice?
               2. To carry themſelues friendly to each other, and that two wayes.
               1. By auoiding all thoſe things that may alienate their hearts one from an other, as vnkindneſſe taking, ſuſpitions, iealouſies, &c.
               
                  2. By doing all things that may more and more ſhew affection each to other, and winne the ſame, and that moſt abundantly and plentifully, each ſtriuing to exceed other, and theſe offices are twofold.
               
                  1. Leſſe neceſſarie.
                  2. More neceſſarie.
               
               1. Leſſe neceſſarie, in curteſies, ſalutations, gifts, viſitations, and the like points of a certaine kinde of honeſt complement, that as little chips being kindled ſet the greater wood on fire, ſo doe cauſe the more needfull ſeruices to be more welcome and better accepted.
               2. More neceſſarie offices, which are chiefly three.
               1. Helpfulneſſe in the day of aduerſitie, by a free, willing, ſpeedy, and plentifull vndertaking of paines and expences for their eaſe, refreſhing, and deliuerance; for a friend is borne for aduerſitie.
               2. Plainneſſe and freedome of ſpeech in a louing and with all open admoniſhing each other of the ſinnes and faults they commit, if they be any thing palpable, and offenſiue, and well entertaining ſuch admonitions.
               3. Truſtineſſe in all things, by

each other committed vnto each others care, and that is twofold.
               1. In ſecrets reuealed vnto them, by keeping them faſt and cloſe as it were vnder locke and key, without futilitie and blabbing.
               2. In affaires and buſineſſes to their loue and care commended by a diligent endeuour of effecting them, according to the friends deſire, and for his moſt aduantage, honour, and comfort.
               2. The duties of friends proper to the latter and more perfect kinde, viz. to be to each other euen as each others ſoule, as the Scripture ſaith, (thy friend which is as thine owne ſoule, Deu. 13.6.) and that in 2. things.
               1. In an vniuerſall openneſſe and communicating of all ſecrets, counſels, intentions, purpoſes, ſo that a friend ſhould not feare to reueale any thing to his friend of himſelfe, that himſelfe knowes, be it good or euill. For this friendſhip is as it were a communion of ſoules, or a kinde of intermingling their very ſpirits.
               2. In in vniuerſall participating of goods, labours, counſels, and all that each hath to other, euen to ſuffering of death each for other, ſo far as may be done without

ſinne againſt God, and without breaking any of his commandements.
               Hitherto of the arbitrarie bond which is at mens choice to tie themſelues withall if they will, but being tied they muſt doe theſe duties; and in tying themſelues they muſt follow the firſt rule. Now followes the ſecond branch of naturall bonds, and that is neceſſarie. And firſt of

                     1. Kinred.
                     2. Degree.
                  
               
               1. Kinred is a bond ariſing from the participation of the ſame bloud or nature in ſome knowne and apparent neereneſſe. This is twofold.
               
                  1. Proper.
                  2. Improper.
               
               1. Proper, in that that is called conſanguinitie betwixt brother and brother, couſin and couſin, vncle and nephew, and ſo in the reſt: and the duties of kinſmen or kinſwomen are two.
               1. To loue each other with ſo much larger and move feruent loue, by how much they are more neerer in bloud, ſo that as nature doth tie them by more bonds, ſo they muſt be affected to each other with more

and more vehement amitie; brothers and ſiſters moſt; vncles, aunts, nephewes, and neeces next; couſins and couſins next, and ſo in order; but yet ſo ſtill, that ſpeciall graces, vertues, and benefits may adde to the quantitie and feruencie of their loue.
               2. To be more abundantly carefull of expreſſing this their loue in all good offices and ſeruices of curteſie, and chiefly of helpfulneſſe in aduerſitie, by comforting, releeuing, ſuccouring, giuing, lending, and taking paines, and vndergoing danger each for other.
               2. Improper bond, in regard of mariage, which is as it were a reſemblance of kinred, and a legall or ſecondarie kinred. And the duties of thoſe that are vnited in affinitie, is to be to thoſe that are thus tied vnto them, euen as if they were their naturall kinſmen, both in loue, and in the effects of loue. For ſeeing in that one matter of mariage I muſt ſtand diſpoſed to theſe legall kinſmen as to my naturall, (for example, a man may no more marry his wiues ſiſter or mother then his owne) it followes by proportion, that the like account muſt be made of them in all other matters.
               
                  So much of kinred. Now for degree, and firſt that of equalitie.
               Equalitie is a kinde of paritie or euenneſſe betwixt party and party, ariſing from the abſence of any notable, euident, and apparent difference in them, either by any function or endowment, or the like.
               The dutie of equals is threefold.
               
                  1. To thinke better of their equals then themſelues, and to eſteeme of them aboue themſelues.
                  2. In giuing honour to goe one before another.
                  3. To be glad and well ſatisfied at the raiſing and aduancement of their equals to places aboue themſelues.
               
               Next followes inequalitie.
               Inequalitie is an euident difference betwixt man and man, in regard that the one hath more of ſomething deſeruing eſteeme and account then another hath.
               This inequalitie is twofold, as the cauſes of it are double, for the difference is barely in regard of certaine endowments or qualities, or elſe in regard of ſome function, office, or eſtate. From the firſt men are called betters or leſſers: from the ſecond, Gouernours and gouerned.
               
                  The firſt inequalitie is

                     1. From age.
                     2. From gifts.
                  
               
               1. From age, when there is ſuch difference betwixt one another that they might in courſe of nature be parent and childe each to other. Not all difference of age makes them betwixt whom it is, vnequals, but ſuch a difference whereby one might be the childe, the other the parent in regard of age, and here
               1. The duties of the aged are two, viz.
               
               1. To be of a comely, graue, ſober cariage, abounding in knowledge and vertue, as in dayes and yeeres.
               2. To be able and ready in regard of their experience to giue wiſe, diſcreet, and ſound aduice in matters difficult.
               2. The duties of the younger in age are twofold.
               
                  1. To ſhew honourable reſpect in cariage three wayes.

                        1. In riſing to them.
                        2. Giuing them the firſt roome.
                        3. The firſt words, &c.
                     
                  
                  2. They muſt conſult and aduiſe with them in doubts, preferring their aduice to their owne greene conceits.
               
               
                  2. The ſecond inequalitie is from gifts, and that is twofold.
               
                  1. Where thoſe are that are better gifted.
                  2. In regard of the leſſe gifted.
               
               1. Thoſe that are better gifted are bound

                     1. Generally, whatſoeuer their gifts be

                           1. To be of a lowly minde and cariage to thoſe that are leſſe gifted, for all their gifts.
                           2. To imploy their gifts willingly and humbly to the ſeruice of others.
                        
                     
                     2. They are bound ſpecially if their gifts be
                  
               
               1. Of minde, in wit, learning, & vnderſtanding, bearing with the dulneſſe and ignorance of others, to informe, teach, aduiſe them the beſt they can, as they haue occaſiō.
               2. Of bodie, with the paines of their bodie to helpe thoſe that are weake and feeble.
               3. Of eſtate, either in parentage or wealth, to countenance and releeue the meaner and poorer, being rich and great in good workes, and ready to diſtribute, according to the eminencie of their eſtate and meanes. Great and rich men muſt practiſe,

                     
                     1. Bounty.
                     2. Munificence.
                  
               
               2. The leſſe gifted are bound to two things.
               
                  1. To acknowledge their gifts with all due and reſpectiue cariage towards them agreeable thereto in all ciuilitie and curteſie.
                  2. To be willing to be beholding vnto them, and to enioy helpe and aſſiſtance from their gifts, as occaſion ſhall be offered.
               
               Hitherto of vnequals without gouernment. Now of thoſe with gouernment becauſe the difference betwixt them ariſeth from ſome office or eſtate which the one hath more then the other.
               Their duties are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Mutuall.
                  2. Seuerall.
               
               1. Mutuall, ſuch as they are reciprocally, and theſe are three.
               1. A ſpeciall degree of loue each to other, according as they are more neerely combined in their eſtates. The parent owes a parentall loue, the yoke-fellow a matrimoniall loue, and ſo in the reſt, each muſt

haue a more earneſt, plentifull, and ſtedfaſt affection to other in regard of their places.
               2. A particular mentioning of each other in their prayers vnto God.
               3. A ſpeciall care of each others comfort and credit, and endeuour to procure it more then to other men.
               2. Their duties ſeuerall, ſuch as are peculiar to either.
               
                  1. To Gouernours, towards them that are gouerned.
                  2. To gouerned, towards them that gouerne them.
               
               1. The duties of Gouernours are twofold.
               
                  1. Common to all Gouernours.
                  2. Peculiar to each kinde of Gouernours.
               
               1. The duties common to all Gouernours are two.
               1. To keepe reuerence and reſpect to themſelues in the hearts of thoſe that are vnder their gouernment, by a vertuous conuerſation, and by giuing themſelues examples to them in all goodneſſe.
               2. To exerciſe their authoritie ouer them, to which end it muſt be declared, and that in three reſpects.
               
                  
                  1. What be the parts of power and gouernment to be exerciſed.
                  2. What is the next end that all muſt aime at in their gouernment.
                  3. The manner of vſing that authoritie.
               
               1. What be the parts of power and gouernment to be exerciſed, and thoſe are towards

                     1. All vnder their gouernment.
                     2. To the different kinds of them.
                  
               
               1. Towards all vnder their gouernment, two wayes.
               
                  1. To direct them in their wayes.

                        1. By minding lawfull and fit things.
                        2. By forbidding the contrary.
                     
                  
                  2. To defend them from the iniuries that might be offered them by any other of the common inferiours chiefly.
               
               2. The ſecond part of power and gouernment to be exerciſed, is towards the different kindes of them.
               
                  1. To the good.
                  2. To the euill.
               
               1. To the good and obedient.
               
                  1. By praiſes and commendations.
                  
                     2. By rewards and recompences.
               
               2. Towards the euill and diſobedient.
               1. By reproofe and reprehenſion.
               2. By chaſtiſements and corrections, according to the difference of faults and places differently.
               2. The ſecond dutie to be declared is, what is the next end that all men muſt aime at in their gouernment, viz. the welfare, good and happineſſe of thoſe vnder their gouernment, as well as and together with, their owne welfare and content.
               3. The third dutie to be declared, is the manner of vſing their authoritie to this end, by the practiſe of foure things.
               
                  1. Iuſtice.
                  2. Prudence.
                  3. Mildneſſe.
                  4. Courage.
               
               1. By the practiſe of iuſtice in a twofold regard.
               1. Of perſons towards whom gouernment is exerciſed, by being indifferent and vnpartiall, the ſame to all, in the ſame caſes.
               
                  2. In regard of the ſpeciall acts of power, and that in two regards.
               1. By commanding nothing but what is lawfull to be done in regard of conſcience to God, and forbidding nothing but what may be omitted without ſinne againſt God.
               2. By correcting and reprouing for nothing but a fault, praiſing and rewarding for nothing but a vertue, and that according to the proportion and quantitie both of vertues and vice.
               2. By the practiſe of prudence or diſcretion two wayes.
               
                  1. By obſeruing the different diſpoſitions of thoſe that are vnder ones gouernment.
                  2. By making choiſe of two things.
               
               1. Fit things to command and forbid, and fit kindes of reproofes, corrections, praiſes, rewards, agreeable to the difference of the perſons diſpoſitions with whom one hath to deale.
               2. By making choiſe of fit times and places, wherein to exerciſe any part of authoritie, both
               1. In regard of ones ſelfe that commandeth, reproueth.
               
                  2. In regard of them that are commanded, reproued, &c. The fitteſt time is, when neither are tranſported with paſſion or diſtemperance.
               3. By the practiſe of mildneſſe to ſhew it ſelfe two wayes.
               
                  1. In commandements.
                  2. In reproofes and corrections.
               
               1. In commandements two wayes.
               1. By abſtaining from hard, difficult, and painfull commandements, vnleſſe in caſe of neceſſitie.
               2. By mollifying commandements with louing, familiar, ſweet and perſwading ſpeeches different according to the diuers kindes of inferiours.
               2. In reproofes and corrections, by giving them
               1. Moderately, for kinde and meaſure, ſo that the reproofe and correction neither exceed the fault, nor the power and ſtrength of the corrected.
               2. Compaſſionately, and with demonſtration of loue and pitty, for the manner chiefly, when neceſſitie calls to ſome roughneſſe.
               4. By the practiſe of courage and reſolution in going on forward to performe what

is fit, notwithſtanding

                     1. Any importunitie, intreatie, and ſuit.
                     2. Ill ſpeeches or ſhew of danger.
                  
               
               Hitherto of duties common to all ſuperiours in gouernment. Peculiar duties of ſeuerall kindes of gouernours both in the

                     1. Familie, of the Maſter, Dame or Miſtreſſe do follow.
                     2 Common-weale. do follow.
                  
               
               The Maſters dutie is twofold.
               
                  1. To all his familie ioyntly.
                  2. To the ſeuerall members of his familie.
               
               1. To all his familie ioyntly, as lie is a common ruler of that ſocietie wholly conſidered, and ſo he muſt regard 4. things.
               1. That Gods name be called vpon and worſhipped in his familie; for the families are curſed that call not vpon the name of God.
               2. He muſt haue regard to catechize them in true religion, and bring them all vp in information of godlineſſe.
               3. He muſt haue regard to prouide things neceſſarie for them.
               
                  1. In health, [Food, and the like.
                  
                     2. In ſickneſſe

                        Attendance.
                        Phyſicke.
                     
                  
               
               4. He muſt haue regard to ouerſee their wayes and cariage: and

                     1. Set them to fit imployments.
                     2. To redreſſe and reforme their diſorders.
                  
               
               2. The maſters dutie is to looke to the ſeuerall members of his familie.
               1. To thoſe whom it is in his power to chuſe, as wife and ſeruants, to chuſe vertuous and godly ones, a woman fearing God, and ſeruants fearing God.
               2. To vſe them all well, viz. the

                     Wife.
                     Children.
                     Seruants.
                  
               
               1. The wife, and that two wayes.
               
                  1. By familiar and kinde behauiour towards her perſon.
                  2. By liberall and bountifull allowance of all comforts vnto her.
               
               2. The children, two wayes.
               1. By good education.
               1. In younger yeeres cauſing them to be taught to write and reade, &c.
               2. In riper yeeres, ſetting them to ſome calling according to their capacitie and their parents abilitie.
               
                  2. By good prouiſion for them,

                     1. Of goods and portion, euer remembring the diſtinction of age and goodneſſe, ſo that the eldeſt haue his double portion, and the youngeſt their ſingle portions.
                     2. Of yoke-fellow, husband or wife in due ſeaſon fit for them, one that at leaſt is not impious, nor Infidell.
                  
               
               3. The ſeruants in a twofold regard.
               1. To imploy them moderately in worke, neither toyling them, nor giuing them leaue to be idle.
               2. To reward them liberally with wages and gifts, according to euery mans eſtate, and abilitie, and Gods bleſſing vpon their labours.
               Hitherto the Maſters dutie: the Dames followes, and that is twofold.
               1. Towards her infants, to nurſe them with her owne milke, if it may ſtand with her health, as the law of nature teacheth, why elſe doth God giue breaſts and milke at that time? and as godly women haue done.
               2. Toward the whole familie, to ouerſee their wayes, as the husbands deputie and helper, ſtill according to his good will and

liking, and chiefly to attend to the maidens.
               So much of the gouernours of the familie in priuate. The duties of the publique gouernours follow. Theſe are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. The higheſt and chiefeſt gouernours
                  2. The ſubordinate and inferiour.
               
               1. The higheſt and chiefeſt gouernours, who muſt obſerue theſe foure things.
               
                  1. To eſtabliſh the true religion and worſhip of God in their iuriſdiction, and prohibit the contrary.
                  2. To ſee good, vertuous, and wholeſome lawes made for the welfare and good behauiour of the people.
                  3. To defend their owne country and their oppreſſed neighbours by iuſt warres defenſiue or offenſiue.
                  4. Being a King, to ſit perſonally in the ſeat of iudgment diuers times, yea vſually: for the Kings in Iſrael ſucceeded Iudges.
               
               2. The ſecond ſort of gouernours are ſubordinate and inferiour.
               1. Iudges, truly to adminiſter diſtributiue iuſtice in finding out and ſentencing malefactors with all iuſt ſeueritie and equitie of proceedings.
               2. Other officers of all ſorts, to be

helpfull to the vtmoſt of their power to the execution of all good lawes and orders, according as for the moſt part their oaths doe binde them.
               So farre of the duties of gouernours, next are the duties of the gouerned.
               
                  1. Common to all.
                  2. Peculiar to each.
               
               1. The duties of the gouerned common to all are twofold.
               
                  1. To the perſons of their gouernours.
                  2. To their power and authoritie.
               
               1. To the perſons of their gouernours, reuerence, and that twofold.
               1. Inward, in heart, by ſtanding in awe of them, and not daring to offend them for conſcience ſake to God that hath ſetled gouernours in the world.
               2. Outward reuerence,

                     1. In words and ſpeeches.
                     2. In geſtures and behauiours.
                  
               
               1. In words and ſpeeches three wayes.
               
                  1. To themſelues, that they be ſubmiſſiue and dutifull, mannerly and reuerent, as Sarah called Abraham, Sir.
                  2. To others before them,

that they be neither ouer many, nor loud and vehement, but moderate & temperate.
                  3. To others of them behinde their backs, that they be reſpectiue and loyall, for ſo was Sarahs very thought of her husband.
               
               2. Outward reuerence is in geſtures and behauiours, as bowing the knee, doffing the hat, ariſing vp to them, and all other like reſpectiue cariages.
               2. The dutie of the gouerned common to their power and authoritie two wayes.
               
                  1. By a willing obedience to all their lawfull commandements.
                  2. A due receiuing of all their reproofes and corrections.
               
               1. Submiſſiuely, gently, patiently, though they be vniuſt and ouer-rigorous.
               2. Fruitfully, and with care of reformation, if they be iuſt and cauſefull.
               The peculiar and proper duties are

                     1. Thoſe that are priuate.
                     2. Thoſe that are publique.
                  
               
               1. Thoſe that are priuate in the familie, viz.
                  
                     Of
                     1. The wife.
                     2. The children.
                     3. The ſeruants.
                  
               
               
                  1. The peculiar and proper duties of the wife and yoke-fellow are twofold.
               
                  1. Sociable cariage and cheerefull behauiour to his perſon.
                  2. Huſwifely ſauing and thriftie diſpoſing of the goods of her husband.
               
               2. The peculiar and proper duties of the children are twofold.
               
                  1. To maintaine the parents, if need be, in ſickneſſe and age; yea rather to want ones ſelfe, and that his owne children want, then ſuffer them to want.
                  2. To be ruled by them in the choice of a yoke-fellow, wife, or husband.
               
               3. The peculiar and proper duties priuate of the ſeruants are twofold.
               
                  1. To be truſtie in ſauing and keeping their Maſters goods committed to them.
                  2. To be painfull and diligent in their buſineſſes, as well in the abſence as the preſence of the gouernours.
               
               2. The peculiar and proper duties publique in the Common-wealth are two.
               1. Defence of their perſons againſt all treaſons, conſpiracies, violence offered to them by any, according to their places.
               2. Payment of accuſtomed and iuſt

dues, as tole, tribute, and the like, for their maintenance in their places.
               So much of the duties depending vpon ſpeciall naturall bonds. Now follow ſpirituall bonds, with the duties on them dependant, for there is a ſpirituall life, and things that doe pertaine to the ſpirituall life, and therefore it cannot be but that ſome conſideration ſhould be ſet from them to binde men to diuers ſpeciall duties. Now there is

                     1. A ſpirituall kinred.
                     2. A ſpirituall degree.
                  
               
               1. A ſpirituall kinred betwixt all Chriſtians, members of Chriſts bodie.
               2. Betwixt ſome Chriſtians peculiar.
               1. Betwixt all Chriſtians members of Chriſts bodie, to whom euery other member of the ſame bodie oweth two things.
               1. Brotherly loue, which is an accounting of them ſpecially deare, deſiring their good and delighting in it, and grieuing for the contrary, and taking content in their ſocietie aboue all other kinde of people.
               2. Speciall helpfulneſſe to them in their croſſes and afflictions, doing good

chiefly to the houſhold of Saints.
               2. There is a ſpirituall kinred betwixt ſome Chriſtians peculiarly, whom God hath made eſpecially beholding or beneficiall each to other, as

                     1. The father in Chriſt.
                     2. The ſonnes in the faith.
                  
               
               1. The father in Chriſt is that man by whoſe Miniſterie it hath pleaſed God to conuert another to the faith and to true pietie: he owes three things.
               1. A ſpeciall care to further their proceedings whom he hath brought to goodneſſe, by bold and diligent admoniſhing, comforting, exhorting, and that frequently, as occaſion will ſerue.
               2. Ioy and thankfulneſſe to God for their well-doing and good proceedings in pietie.
               3. Sorrow and ſpeciall humiliation before God for their diſorders, decay or reuolting.
               2. The ſonnes in the faith: they owe two things.
               1. A ſingular thankfulneſſe, ſuch as ſhould make them thinke no coſt nor paines too much to doe them good, making account that they owe to them euen themſelues.
               
                  2. They owe a greater readineſſe to receiue their admonitions & exhortations, as men hauing a ſpeciall power ouer them.
               Hitherto of kinred.
               2. Now of a ſpirituall degree, and that is twofold.
               
                  1. Of gifts.
                  2. Of gouernment.
               
               1. Of gifts, in regard of which ſome are

                     1. Stronger Chriſtians.
                     2. Weaker Chriſtians.
                  
               
               1. Stronger Chriſtians, that haue a greater meaſure of ſanctification, theſe muſt vſe their ſtrength in a milde and gentle manner, by bearing with the weakneſſes of the weake, and ſeeking to heale and edifie them.
               2. Weaker Chriſtians, and of a leſſe degree of gifts of grace. Thoſe muſt

                     1. Reuerence the more abundant graces of God in their brethren.
                     2. They muſt make vſe of them for their owne edification, ſtriuing hard after the marke, and labouring to grow on forward to the ſame degree of grace.
                  
               
               2. The ſecond ſpirituall degree is of gouernment, here is

                     1. The gouernour▪
                     
                     
                        2. The gouerned.
                  
               
               1. The gouernour the Paſtor, whoſe dutie in regard of his flocke is twofold.
               
                  1. Publique.
                  2. Priuate.
               
               1. Publique.
               1. To teach them the word and will of God, and that three wayes.
               
                  1. By reading the Scriptures in the Congregation to them.
                  2. By catechizing the ignorant.
                  3. By preaching to all.
               
               2. To pray to God with them, and become their common mouth.
               3. To adminiſter the Sacraments.
               1. Of Baptiſme.
               
                  1. To any infants tendred to him.
                  2. To Infidels, if any be conuerted.
               
               2. Of the Lords Supper, to men of

                     1. Knowledge, in two things.

                           1. In fundamentall points of Chriſtian Religion.
                           2. In the doctrine of the nature and vſe of the Sacraments.
                        
                     
                     2. To men of life free from publique, ſcandalous, and groſſe euils.
                  
               
               
                  2. The priuate dutie of the Paſtor in regard of his flocke is twofold.
               
                  1. To ouerſee the wayes of all, admoniſhing die vnruly, comforting the tempted, &c.
                  2. To viſit the ſicke, and comfort and inſtruct them, chiefly being ſent for.
               
               2. The duties of the gouerned, the flock, whoſe duties are twofold.
               1. Towards the Paſtors perſon in a twofold regard.
               1. To haue him in ſingular honour and loue.
               2. To afford a rich maintenance, in paying willingly Gods portion the tithe, vnto him, Gods officer to receiue his temporalties as he adminiſtreth his ſpiritualties.
               2. The dutie of the flocke gouerned toward his ſpirituall iuriſdiction is twofold.
               1. To ſubmit themſelues vnto his ouerſight and admonition, with reuerence as to God.
               2. To receiue Gods word of him rather then of any other, if he be faithfull, and that

                     1. Obediently.
                     2. Diſcreetly.
                  
               
               
                  Hitherto the affirmatiue part of the fift Commandement. The negatiue followes, ſhewing the ſinnes againſt this Commandement, which are of two ſorts.
               1. Of omiſſion, in the totall or partiall neglect of any of the things commanded.
               2. Of commiſſion, in doing things contrary thereto, and that either in regard of ones ſelfe, or others.
               1. Ones ſelfe, which is
               1. By denying ones place, in conceiuing ones ſelfe not to be inferiour to thoſe to whom he is inferiour; for no man likely will denie his ſuperioritie ouer others.
               2. By a ſcorning or diſdaining to the duties of ones place, as many a man ſcornes to be ſubiect, though he cannot but confeſſe that he ſhould ſo be.
               3. By nouriſhing ones ſelfe in thoſe vices that hinder him from the duties of his place.
               4. In diſhonouring his place, both

                     1. In exceſſe, by an ouer-loftie conceit and cariage of himſelfe therein.
                     2. By an ouer-baſe and contemptible behauiour in the ſame.
                  
               
               2. Sinnes of commiſſion in regard of

others, and that in regard of bonds, which are either naturall or ſpirituall.
               1. Naturally whether
               1. Arbitrarie, as friendſhip, and the faults of friends, which are both

                     1. Common.
                     2. Proper.
                  
               
               1. Common to both kindes of friends, and that
               1. By making friendſhip with vnholy and openly wicked men, and being friends with Gods profeſſed enemies.
               2. By abuſing of friendſhip with any.
               1. By counterfeiting that loue which one doth not beare; when a mans words are ſoft as butter, and yet they be ſwords.
               2. By treachery and perfidiouſneſſe.
               
                  1. In bewraying their ſecrets to their hurt.
                  2. In betraying their perſons and eſtates to any danger or miſchiefe.
               
               2. The proper faults of friends to the more perfect kinde, in forſaking friendſhip and breaking it off cauſeleſly.
               2. Naturall bonds neceſſarie in regard of

                     1. Kinred.
                     2. Degree.
                  
               
               1. Kinred, whether it be proper or improper.
               
                  1. By a neglect and contempt of our kinred in regard of pouertie, or other like things.
               2. By wronging and oppreſſing them any way for gaine ſake.
               2. Naturall bonds, neceſſarie in regard of degree, are both to equals and vnequals.
               1. To equals.
               1. By a lifting vp our ſelues aboue them, in falſe conceitedneſſe of minde.
               2. By lifting vp our ſelues aboue them in outward cariage, and ſtriuing to take the better of them.
               3. By enuying and hindring their preferment.
               2. Naturall bonds neceſſarie in degree to vnequals.
               1. In regard of endowments.
               2. In regard of power & iuriſdiction.
               1. In regard of endowments alone without gouernment, whether for

                     1. Age.
                     2. Gifts.
                  
               
               1. Age. Here the faults are

                     1. Of the aged.
                     2. Of the younger.
                  
               
               1. Of the aged are,

                     1. To be of a fooliſh, light, and pettiſh

diſpoſition and behauiour.
                     2. To giue bad and naughty counſell to the younger, incouraging them to ſinfulneſſe, or any ill cariage.
                  
               
               2. The faults of the younger are to be

                     1. Scornefull towards their perſons in contemptuous behauiour.
                     2. To be careleſſe of their aduice, and follow ones owne head rather then their directions.
                  
               
               2. The endowments of gifts are here the faults

                     1. In betters.
                     2. Of thoſe that haue fewer gifts.
                  
               
               1. Of betters in gifts, are

                     1. Common to all.
                     2. Speciall.
                  
               
               1. Common to all,

                     1. To ſwell and be conceited, becauſe of their gifts.
                     2. To diſdaine and contemne thoſe that haue leſſe gifts.
                     3. To vſe them with oſtentation, and an arrogant ſetting forth of themſelues.
                  
               
               2. The faults of betters in gifts, in ſpeciall to thoſe that excell

                     1. In wit and vnderſtanding to ouerreach

and deceiue others, or bring them into errour.
                     2. Of bodily ſtrength to hurt and miſchiefe others that are weaker.
                     3. Of eſtate, of wealth, and parentage, to diſgrace, diſcountenance, and oppreſſe others.
                  
               
               2. The faults of thoſe that haue fewer gifts

                     1. To obſcure the gifts of others through enuie, detracting from them, as if they were leſſe excellent then they be.
                     2. To ſcorne to be beholding to them, or to make vſe of their gifts, as occaſion is offered.
                  
               
               2. Endowments were either alone without gouernment, or of power and iuriſdiction with gouernment: with gouernment, whoſe faults are

                     1. Common.
                     2. Seuerall.
                  
               
               1. Common to both ſuperiours and inferiours.
               1. To entertaine a ſpeciall hatred and ill will towards them, euen more then towards others, as oft it falls out.
               2. To curſe them and wiſh euill to them, and pray to God againſt them.
               
                  3. To ſeeke their diſgrace and reproch.
               4. To ſerue themſelues of them without any regard of their good eſteeme & welfare.
               2. Faults with gouernment, which were either common or ſeuerall: the ſeuerall followes.
               Seuerall to each, viz.
                  
                     1. Gouernours.
                     2. Gouerned.
                  
               
               1. Gouernours, whoſe faults are

                     1. Common.
                     2. Proper.
                  
               
               1. Common to all of them.
               1. To loſe the authoritie of their place, and bring contempt vpon themſelues, by a wicked and fooliſh cariage, and bad example of life.
               2. To abuſe the authoritie of their place in regard of

                     1. The end of vſing it, in ſeeking alone their owne content and eaſe, not regarding their inferiours good.
                     2. In regard of the manner of vſing it.

                           1. Vniuſtly.
                           2. Vndiſcree
                                 •
                              ly.
                           3. Rigorouſly.
                           4. Remiſſely.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  1. Vniuſtly, and that

                     1. By partialitie, in hauing a reſpect of perſons in their gouernment.
                     2. By vniuſt commandements, in enioyning them things that are ſinfull, forbidding them things that are lawfull.
                     3. By vniuſt recompences,

                           1. In praiſing and rewarding euill deeds, or leſſe good more then the better.
                           2. In reprouing or correcting for well-doing, or more for ſmaller faults then for greater.
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. The ſecond manner of vſing it is vndiſcreetly, by excuſing any part of their authoritie.
               1. In vnfit times; when either themſelues on inferiours are ill diſpoſed by paſſion or griefe.
               2. In vnfit places, when the place may make their authoritie more difficult; as more publique correcting then is fit, and ſometimes more priuate.
               3. In things vnſutable to the diſpoſition, power, and abilitie of their inferiours.
               3. The third manner of vſing it is rigorouſly.
               1. In condemning hard and difficult

things without iuſt cauſe, or any thing in a rough or boyſterous manner violently.
               2. In reprouing or correcting,

                     1. Exceſſiuely for matter, aboue the nature of the fault, or ſtrength of the ſufferer.
                     2. Paſſionately and furiouſly for manner, with bitterneſſe and acerbitie of ſpeech and countenance.
                  
               
               4. The fourth manner of vſing it is remiſſely, in being ouercome

                     1. By intreaties.
                     2. By fooliſh pittie.
                  
               
               The faults of Gouernours were 1. common, or 2. proper, which follow.
               1. Proper to the ſeuerall kindes.
               
                  1. Priuate.
                  2. Publique.
               
               1. Priuate or the houſholder.
               
                  1. In regard of his whole familie.
                  2. In regard of the ſeuerall parts of his familie.
               
               1. In regard of his whole familie, conſidered as one common bodie.
               1. In performing a falſe idolatrous worſhip among them.
               2. In teaching them a falſe religion to the poyſoning of them with error.
               
                  3. Waſting & conſuming his goods, to the bringing of want of things neceſſarie to them, ill husbandlineſſe.
               4. In letting them doe what they luſt, as Salomon ſpeakes of a childe ſet at liberty.
               2. Faults proper to the ſeuerall parts are

                     1. For chuſing them.
                     2. For vſing them.
                  
               
               1. For chuſing thoſe that he may chuſe, and that

                     1. By making choice of a bad woman to wife, for wealth or beauty ſake.
                     2. By entertaining bad and wicked ſeruants careleſly or wittingly.
                  
               
               2. For vſing them badly, viz.
                  
                     1. The wife.
                     2. The children.
                     3. The ſeruants.
                  
               
               1. The wife.
               
                  1. By churliſhneſſe to her perſon.
                  2. By grudging and nigardice for her allowance.
               
               2. For vſing the children badly, and that

                     1. In fondneſſe of loue to them.
                     2. In miſgiuing their portions, without regard of age or goodneſſe.
                     3. In miſplacing them in mariage for ſiniſter reſpects, euen with idolatrous or

naughty yoke-fellowes.
                  
               
               3. For vſing their ſeruants badly,

                     1. In ouer-burthening them with worke, and toyling them out.
                     2. In pinching them in their wages, not giuing that which is couenanted, or giuing too little.
                  
               
               Theſe are the Maſters faults: the Dames faults are

                     1. To thruſt out her children to nurſe out of niceneſſe and vnwillingneſſe to take paines.
                     2. To be imperious in the familie, in that ſhe muſt haue her owne way without and againſt her husbands good liking.
                  
               
               2. The proper faults of publique gouernours which are in the Common-wealth, whether

                     1. Chiefe, or
                     2. Subordinate.
                  
               
               1. Chiefe and higheſt.
               
                  1. To eſtabliſh a falſe religion.
                  2. To make vniuſt lawes.
                  3. To make vniuſt warres, or lay cauſleſſe burdens and taxations on their ſubiects.
                  4. To peruert the ſeat of Iuſtice.
               
               2. The ſubordinate mans publique

faults are in Iudges or other officers.
               1. In Iudges, by iudging

                     1. Corruptly and falſly for any cauſe.
                     2. For hire and reward.
                  
               
               2. In other publique officers, by hindring the execution of good lawes for fauour, feare, or money.
               Hitherto of faults of Gouernours. Now ſecondly of the faults of thoſe that are gouerned both common and proper.
               1. Common to all, and that

                     1. Towards their perſon.
                     2. Towards their authoritie.
                  
               
               1. Towards their perſon; both inward and outward.
               1. Inward in heart, when they ſet light by them, and care not whether they be pleaſed or diſpleaſed.
               2. Outward, and that in words or geſture.
               1. In words, both

                     1. To them ſnappiſh and ſullen.
                     2. Before them loud and rude.
                     3. Behinde their backs reuiling, curſing, diſgracing.
                  
               
               2. In geſture and countenances of contempt.
               
                  2. The common faults of the gouerned towards their authoritie.
               1. By diſobedience to their lawfull commandements, or obeying their vnlawfull commands.
               2. By reſiſting their corrections and reproofes.
               1. In inward murmuring.
               2. In outward oppoſition, chiefly if they come to blowes againſt them, which to ones parent was death.
               2. Proper faults of the gouerned are proper to ſome, viz.
                  
                     1 Priuate.
                     2. Publique.
                  
               
               1. Priuate.
               1. To the wife, if ſhe be

                     1. Sowre.
                     2. Contentious.
                     3. Waſtefull.
                  
               
               2. To the children.
               
                  1. By marrying without them.
                  2. By caſting them off in age, or cozening them.
               
               3. To ſeruants.
               
                  1. By ſlothfulneſſe & eye-ſeruice.
                  2. By vntruſtineſſe and waſtefulneſſe in their goods.
               
               
                  2. The publique faults of the gouerned are in ſubiects.
               1. In treaſon againſt the life or ſtate of their Prince.
               2. In ſedition or rebellion, in a turbulent going about to redreſſe pretended abuſes, whether it be againſt the Prince or his officers.
               Hitherto of ſins againſt naturall bonds: Now faults contrary to the duties whereto we are bound
               2. By ſpirituall bond, and thoſe of

                     1 Kinred.
                     2 Degree.
                  
               
               1. Of kinred ſpirituall, and that
               1 Betwixt all Chriſtians, which is brotherhood, and that is ſchiſme in rending ones ſelfe from the reſt of the members of Chriſts bodie for any diſlikes, chiefly in regard of petie differences of opinion, and falling to raile, reuile, bite, deuoure, perſecute.
               2. Betwixt ſome Chriſtians.
               1. Betwixt fathers in Chriſt, if they ſeeke to ſeduce them, or make diuiſions to draw followers after them, as ſome did in Pauls time.
               2. Betwixt ſonnes in Chriſt, if they

                     
                     1. Exceſſiuely admire them, ſo as to take all things on their word, and neglect others in regard of them.
                     2. If they grow to diſlike and neglect of them, becauſe of their plainneſſe in admonitions.
                  
               
               2. The degree of ſpirituall bonds.
               
                  1. For gifts.
                  2. For power.
               
               1. For gifts. Here

                     1. The ſtrong doe ſinne.
                     2. The weake.
                  
               
               1. The ſtrong,

                     1. By deſpiſing the weaker, and ſeeking only to pleaſe themſelues.
                     2. Scandalizing them in a wilfull and vncharitable and vndiſcreet abuſe of their Chriſtian libertie.
                  
               
               2. The weake ſinne,

                     1. In enuying their betters gifts, and ſeeking to diſgrace them, as the falſe Apoſtles did Paul.
                     
                     2. In harſh cenſuring them for the lawfull vſe of their Chriſtian libertie.
                  
               
               2. The degree of ſpirituall bonds for power and gouernment. Here

                     1. The Paſtor offends.
                     2. The people offends.
                  
               
               
                  1. The Paſtor offends, for

                     1. Teaching.
                     2. Diſcipline.
                  
               
               1. For teaching.
               
                  1. For matter.
                  2. For manner.
               
               1. For matter.
               
                  1. By falſe doctrine of faith, or manners.
                  2. By miſapplying true doctrine to grieue the good, harten the bad.
               
               2. For the manner.
               
                  1. By vaine-glorious, and flanting preaching, for oſtentation of wit and learning.
                  2. By careleſſe extemporarie preaching.
               
               2. The Paſtor offendeth for diſcipline.
               
                  1. By admitting openly, ſcandalous and wicked men, to the communion, without reproofe and admonition.
                  2. By peruerting the Church cenſures either

                        1. Againſt the good, as Diotrephes.
                        
                        2. Againſt any for malice.
                     
                  
               
               2. The people offend, againſt power and gouernment.
               
                  1. In offending againſt his perſon.
                  
                     2. Againſt his authoritie.
               
               1. Againſt his perſon.
               
                  1. By robbing him of his due and tenths, as chiefly impropriators doe.
                  2 By perſecuting and moleſting him, for his faithfulneſſe.
               
               2. Againſt his authoritie.
               
                  1. Of teaching.
                  2. Of diſcipline.
               
               1. Or teaching, by two things.
               
                  1. By reiecting truth.
                  2. By receiuing lies, or any thing without triall.
               
               2. Againſt his authoritie of diſcipline, by contemning his admonitions.
               Hitherto of the fifth Commandement, enioyning the duties ſpec
                     •
                  ally concerning vs in regard of place: the ſixth followes.
            
            
               Thou ſhalt not kill.
               ANd it enioynes all ſuch common duties, as appertaine to our ſelues and our neighbours, in regard of the ſafety of their and our perſon The ſubſtance is, Thou ſhalt by all good meanes procure, &

by no ill meanes hinder thine owne, or thy neighbours perſonall ſafetie.
               The things commanded are of two ſorts.
               
                  1 Some directly commanded.
                  2. Some indirectly.
               
               Directly in regard,

                     1. Of our ſelues.
                     2. Of others.
                  
               
               In regard of our ſelues.
               
                  1. Loue of our ſelues, true loue whereby we doe truly and ordinately will and deſire our owne good and ſaftie.
                  2. The effects of this loue, which are both inward and outward.
               
               1. Inward.
               
                  1. In regard of our affections.
                  2. In regard of our thoughts.
               
               In regard of our affections by moderating them.
               
                  1. Towards good.
                  2. Towards euill.
               
               Towards the good and deſirable things which are

                     1. To come hereafter, by a good hope of them.
                     2. That are preſent, by cheerefulneſſe at them.
                  
               
               
                  2. Towards the euill and harmefull things that are

                     1. Already vpon vs, by patience, in quiet and willing bearing the ſame.
                     2. Imminent and to come, by courage in a reſolute ſetting our hearts to preuent and reſiſt them ſo farre as may be.
                  
               
               2. The inward effects of loue in regard of thoughts by holding them conſtantly attendant vpon our owne preſeruation in all occaſions.
               2. The outward effects of loue, which are for our naturall and ſpirituall eſtate.
               1. For our naturall eſtate regarding our bodily condition in this preſent life.
               
                  1. In regard of good and needfull things.
                  2. In regard of euill and hurtfull things.
               
               1. In regard of good and needfull things, for the continuance and comfort of this preſent life.
               1. A due and moderate painefulneſſe and vndergoing of labour to get the ſame.
               2. A moderate and temperate vſe of them, for meaſure, both

                     1. Of foode.
                     
                        2. Apparell.
                     3. Reſt and ſleepe.
                     4. Exerciſe.
                     5. Euen ſometimes alſo nuptiall ſociety of generation and the like.
                  
               
               2. In regard of euill and hurtfull things, tending to breake off life, or making it vncomfortable, viz.
                  
                     1. A wiſe and diſcreet ſhunning.
                     2. A reſolute and conſtant reſiſting.
                  
               
               1. A wiſe and diſcreet ſhunning of thoſe that with ſafety of conſcience we may poſſibly ſhun.
               
                  1. By flying.
                  2. By ſuffering.
               
               1. By flying all if it may bee, ſuch are,

                     1. Quarrels and brawles, chiefly priuate combats.
                     2. Infections places.
                     3. Dangerous and miſchieuous ſports, as football, &c.
                     4. Dangerous climing, or waies, or paſſages, or the like.
                  
               
               2. By ſuffering the leſſe to auoid the greater: as cutting off a limme to ſaue the life, &c.
               2. A reſolute and conſtant reſiſting

of them by Art or force.
               1. By Art.
               
                  1. Of Phyſicke, ſome.
                  2. Of law, others.
               
               2. By force in needfull caſes, to which end,

                     1. Wee muſt bee prepared of weapons, &c.
                     2. We muſt vſe them.

                           1. In publike.
                           2. In priuate.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. In publike by warres, both defenſiue and offenſiue.
               2. In priuate for defence againſt preſent & otherwiſe vnauoidable violēce.
               2. The outward effects of loue which concerne our ſpirituall eſtate in regard of another life.
               
                  1. By preuenting.
                  2. By procuring.
               
               1. By preuenting ſpirituall miſchiefe.
               
                  1. By repenting or confeſſing and bewailing ſinnes paſt, ſeeking pardon.
                  2. By ſhunning ſinne and the occaſions of ſinne for the time to come.
               
               2. By procuring our ſpirituall good by conſtancy in all good duties for our ſpirituall proceeding in grace and glory.
               
                  2. Things directly commanded in regard of others.
               1. Loue to him, that is, an entire and earneſt deſire of his good.
               2. The effects of loue, which are

                     1. Inward.
                     2. Outward.
                  
               
               1. Inward.
               1. In regard of the acts of conuerſation paſſing betwixt vs.
               2. In regard of other accidents.
               1. In regard of the acts of conuerſation paſſing betwixt vs for two reſpects.
               1. The accepting and entertaining of his deeds towards vs.
               2. The ruling of our cariage to him-ward.
               1. The accepting and entertaining of his deeds towards vs, whether

                     1. Good.
                     2. Bad.
                  
               
               1. Good and pleaſing.
               
                  1. By kindneſſe, taking all euen the leaſt in good worth.
                  2. By thankefulneſſe, in being carefull to remember, acknowledge, and requite them.
               
               2. Bad and iniurious and diſpleaſing.
               
                  
                  1. By meekeneſſe.
                  2. By forgiueneſſe.
               
               1. By meekeneſſe, which is a calme and quiet diſpoſition towards him in the doing, or when wee heare of or remember the doing of them.
               2. Forgiueneſſe and forgetting them afterwards, yea and readineſſe to requite their euill with good, but not with euill.
               2. The acts of our conuerſation in regard of ruling our cariage to him-ward.
               
                  1. In regard of his hurt.
                  2. In regard of his good and benefit.
               
               1. In regard of his hurt and euill, by innocency, which is an abhorring and loathing that we ſhould be a cauſe of hurt, or wrongfull griefe to any.
               2. In regard of his good and benefit by vertues that make vs apt to procure,
               1. Curteſie or ſeruiceableneſſe, a readineſſe to gratifie him in any kinde office, though not in ſtrictneſſe required at our hands.
               2. Peaceableneſſe, by care to maintaine all good concord and agreement.
               
                  1. Betwixt him and our ſelues.
                  2. Betwixt him and others.
               
               
                  1. Betwixt him and our ſelues.
               
                  1. In preuenting iarres.
                  2. In redreſſing them that are fallen out.
               
               1. In preuenting iarres ſo farre as may be.
               1. By pleaſingneſſe and deſire to pleaſe him, ſo farre as we may reaſonably and lawfully.
               2. By paſſing by and couering his weakneſſes and infirmities as natural diſabilities and morall wants, that are not palpable, in not ſuffering our hearts to be eſtranged from him for them.
               3 By taking his deeds in the beſt part.
               4. By parting with our owne right to him, ſo far as we may without too much hurting our ſelues or wronging our places.
               2. By redreſſing iarres that are falne out,

                     1. By care to make amends to him by all good meanes if wee haue done wrong.
                     2. By willingneſſe to accept of any reaſonable ſatisfaction, if we haue beene wronged by him.
                  
               
               
                  2. We muſt haue a care to haue agreement betwixt him and others, by care and readineſſe to perſwade peace, and ſet them at one.
               Hitherto of the inward effects of loue in regard of the acts of conuerſation.
               2. Now followes the inward effects of loue in regard of other accidents that befall him any way: as,

                     1. Congratulation or reioycing in his good.
                     2. Compaſſion or grieuing for his euil.
                  
               
               Hitherto of the inward effects of loue: now followes
               2. The outward effects of loue, which are,

                     1. Generall, in an amiable and kinde ordering of our countenances and whole cariage.
                     2. Particular.

                           1. For his outward eſtate.
                           2. For his inward.
                        
                     
                  
               
               For his outward eſtate.
               
                  1. In ſpeech.
                  2. In deed.
               
               1. In his ſpeech, milde and good language.
               2. In his deed,

                     
                     1. Defence againſt wrōgs and iniuries.
                     2. Releeuing his miſeries and wants.
                  
               
               2. His particular inward eſtate of ſoule.
               
                  1. In word.
                  2. In deed.
               
               1. In word, in regard

                     1. Of good.
                     2. Of euill.
                  
               
               1. Of good, to doe our beſt.
               
                  1. To ſhew it him.
                  2. To perſwade him to it.
                  3. To encourage him in it.
               
               2. In regard of euill.
               
                  1. Of ſinne.
                  2. Of temptation.
               
               1. Of ſinne.
               
                  1. To ſhew it him.
                  2. To diſſwade him from it.
                  3. To reproue him for it.
               
               2. In regard of temptations and afflictions, to ſtrengthen and comfort him vnder it.
               
                  Hitherto of the outward eſtate: now followes,
               2. The inward eſtate of the ſoule in regard of deed.
               
                  1. By giuing him good Example of life.
                  2. By moderating our ſelues in the vſe of Chriſtian liberty for his ſake.
               
               So much is commanded directly, whereof hitherto.
               Now indirectly ſome things are commanded in regard

                     1. Of men.
                     2. Of beaſts.
                  
               
               1. In regard of men,

                     1. Liuing.
                     2. Dead.
                  
               
               1. Liuing, in preuenting that that may probably doe them hurt: as,

                     1. Liues of mankinde beaſts.
                     2. Incommodious buildings, wels, pits, hie waies, &c.
                  
               
               2. Dead, as comely and decent interring of their bodies.
               2. In regard of beaſts, a mercifull vſing them in giuing food, reſt, and quietneſſe neceſſary for them.
               Hitherto the affirmatiue part. The negatiue followes: which ſhewes how

this commandement is broken.
               1. By omiſſion of any of the former things either in whole or in part.
               2. By commiſſion in things quite contrary.
               
                  1. Directly.
                  2. Indirectly.
               
               1. Directly in regard of

                     1. Our ſelues.
                     2. Others.
                  
               
               1. In regard of our ſelues contrary to the forenamed,

                     1. Loue.
                     2. The effect of Loue.
                  
               
               1. Loue.
               1. In exceſſe, ſelfe-loue, a peruerſe or ouer-earneſt deſire of our owne naturall welfare.
               2. In defect, which is not often ſcene, in a kinde of bitterneſſe, in ill will againſt our ſelues.
               2. The effect of loue is,

                     1. Inward.
                     2. Outward.
                  
               
               1. Inward.
               
                  1. In regard of good.
                  2. In regard of euill.
               
               1. In regard of good, which is either,

                     
                     1. To come, firſt by deſpaire thereof, in defect: Secondly, by a fooliſh hoping for it, in exceſſe.
                     2. Preſent, contrary to cheerefulneſſe.

                           1. In defect.
                           2. In exceſſe.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. In defect, carnall ſorrow.
               
                  1. For our owne croſſes.
                  2. For the good of others, which is called enuie.
               
               2. In exceſſe, by madde mirth and ouer-ioying ofthings carnall.
               2. The inward effect of loue in regard of euill, either.
               
                  1. To come.
                  2. Preſent.
               
               1. To come.
               
                  1. In defect, timorouſneſſe, in dying almoſt for feare.
                  2. In foole hardineſſe, in exceſſe, by an vnneceſſary prouoking dangers.
               
               2. Preſent euill.
               
                  1. In exceſſe, ſtupidity, when a man is like a ſtone and will not feele them.
                  2. In defect; when a man is carried away with fretting and diſcontentment

at them.
               
               2. The outward effects of loue.
               
                  1. For the naturall eſtate.
                  2. For the ſpirituall.
               
               1. For the naturall eſtate.
               
                  1. In regard of the things concerning life.
                  2. In regard of life it ſelfe.
               
               1. In regard of things concerning life.
               
                  1. Good.
                  2. Euill.
               
               1. Good.
               
                  1. For getting them.
                  2. For the vſe of them.
               
               1. For getting them.
               
                  1. By toilſome labouring for them, to the hurting of the bodie.
                  2. By ſlothfull neglect of them.
               
               2. For the vſe of them.
               1. In exceſſe, by taking them exceſſiuely and intemperatly, where is the practiſe of gluttony, drunkenneſſe, and all luxuriouſneſſe and not.
               2. In defect, by niggardly pinching of ones body, for want of neceſſary things.
               
                  2. Euill and hurtfull, in regard of the things concerning life.
               1. By exceſſe, here is hazardfulneſſe in venturing vpon needleſſe dangers, as combats, dangerous ſports, climbing, &c.
               2. By defect, here is timorouſneſſe, and that,

                     1. In not daring to vſe fit meanes for preuenting them that might be preuented out of feare of the euill.
                     2. In not daring to hazard our ſelues to them when our calling requireth.
                  
               
               2. The effects of loue for our naturall eſtate, in regard of life it ſelfe.
               
                  1. In defect, attempting wilfully to take away ones life by ſelfe-murther.
                  2. In exceſſe, in vſing of baſe and vile ſhifts to ſaue ones life.
               
               2. The outward effects of loue, for the ſpirituall eſtate,

                     1. By impenitency.
                     2. By venturouſneſſe vpon the occaſions of ſinne.
                  
               
               So much of the ſinnes againſt our ſelues: thoſe follow that are againſt others.
               
                  
                  1. Againſt loue.
                  2. Againſt the effects of loue.
               
               1. Againſt loue.
               1. In exceſſe, fondneſſe and carnall loue.
               2. In defect, hatred, hauing two degrees,

                     1. Of diſlike of the perſon, not for his ſinne but wrong.
                     2. A malitious deſire of his hurt.
                  
               
               2. Againſt the effects of loue which are in regard,

                     1. Of his naturall eſtate of life.
                     2. In regard of his ſpirituall eſtate of life.
                  
               
               1. In regard of his naturall eſtate, which is,

                     1. Inward.
                     2. Outward.
                  
               
               1. Inward, reſpecting

                     1. The acts of conuerſation.
                     2. O her accidents.
                  
               
               1. The acts of conuerſation paſſing betwixt vs.
               
                  1. For accepting of his deeds.
                  2. For ordering our deeds.
               
               1. For accepting of his deeds.
               
                  1. Good.
                  
                     2. Bad.
               
               1. Good, contrary

                     1. To kindneſſe, in diſdainfulneſſe, and ſcornefull reiecting of kindneſſe.
                     2. To gratitude.
                  
               
               1. By formall thankfulneſſe in words alone.
               2. By vnthankfulneſſe.
               1. By denying or forgetting a good turne done to vs.
               2. By requiting good with euill, which is worſt of all.
               2. Bad, againſt

                     1. Meekneſſe.
                     2. Forgiueneſſe.
                  
               
               1. Meekneſſe.
               1. In exceſſe, being too meeke, ſo that ſinne maketh not one angry.
               2. In defect, by anger for wrongs too ſore, too much, or too long, and it is

                     1. Vnkindnes taking.
                     2. Sullenneſſe.
                     3. Rage.
                  
               
               2. Againſt forgiueneſſe, by reuengefulneſſe in remembring euill

to requite it with the like or worſe.
               2. The act of conuerſation, for ordering our deeds toward him.
               
                  1. Euill.
                  2 Good.
               
               1. Euill, againſt innocency, which is harmfulneſſe and miſchieuouſneſſe (for too innocent one cannot be) in delighting to hurt others.
               2. Good, contrary

                     1. To ſeruiceableneſſe.
                     2. To peaceableneſſe.
                  
               
               1. To ſeruiceableneſſe.
               1. In exceſſe, by charging our ſelues harmefully, for ſuperfluous kindneſſes, ouer-kindneſſe.
               2. In defect, by hoggiſhneſſe and churliſhneſſe, refuſing to doe good.
               2. Good, contrary to peaceableneſſe.
               1. In exceſſe, by being of a man pleaſing diſpoſition, rather ſinning then incurring their diſpleaſure.
               2. In defect.
               1. By fained peace to entrap the ſooner.
               2. Frowardnes and contentiouſneſſe

in cauſing falling out,

                     1. Betwixt our ſelues and others.
                     2. Betwixt ſome of our neighbours and others.
                  
               
               1. Betwixt our ſelues and others.
               
                  1. By procuring jarres.
                  2. By nouriſhing them.
               
               1. By procuring iarres.
               
                  1. Through croſneſſe and thwarting.
                  2. Through miſconſtruction of things indifferent.
                  3. Through prying into each weakneſſe.
                  4. Through rigorous ſtanding vpon ones right.
               
               2. By nouriſhing them.
               
                  1. In ſtoutneſſe, ſcorning to acknowledge and make amends for wrongs.
                  2. In vnappeaſableneſſe, and refuſing to be contented with any reaſonable ſatisfaction.
               
               2 Falling o
                     •
                  t betwixt ſome of our neighbours and others, in deſire to ſow quarrels, and to nouriſh them.
               So much of the effects of loue inward, reſpecting the acts of conuerſation:

now followes in reſpect of
               2. Other accidents, in regard of his naturall eſtate befalling him.
               
                  1. Good, enuie, contrary to fellow reioycing.
                  2. Euill,

                        1. In exceſſe, which is fooliſh pittie.
                        2. In defect.
                     
                  
               
               1. In hard hartedneſſe, in careleſſe neglecting his miſeries.
               2. In crueltie, in reioycing at his ſmart, and reioycing in any euill of his whatſoeuer.
               2. The effects of loue, in regard of his outward naturall eſtate.
               
                  1. In word.
                  2. Countenance.
                  3. In deed.
               
               1. In word.
               
                  1. For matter.
                  2. For manner.
               
               1. For matter.
               
                  1. Mocking, ſpecially at his miſerie.
                  2. Rayling at him, with ill names and vpbraidings.
                  3. Threatning him, with future reuenge.
               
               
                  2. For manner, clamorouſneſſe and crying out, in ouer-loud words.
               2. In countenance and geſture, in a ſowre, fierce, angry, diſcontented looke, and dogged carriage.
               3. In deed, and that

                     1. By attempt alone, as caſting a thing at him to hurt him, as Saul caſt his Speare at Dauid.
                     
                     2. By effect alſo in degrees.

                           1. Inferiour.
                           2. More notorious.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Inferiour, that hurts, but kills not, as

                     1. Oppreſſing.
                     2. Smiting.
                  
               
               1. Oppreſſing and grinding his face with hard dealing of any kinde.
               2. Smiting, wounding, and mayming him.
               2. More notorious, in taking away life.
               
                  1. Manifeſtly.
                  2. Cloſely.
               
               1. Manifeſtly,

                     1. By weapon.
                     2. By poiſon giuen to him.
                  
               
               1. By weapon, whether

                     
                     1. Suddenly in paſſion, or
                     2. Premeditately, as in lying for him, or challenging him.
                  
               
               2. Cloſely, by ſome deuice, as Dauid killed Vriah, and ſo many kill others, by ſending them out to warre in hope they ſhall periſh there, and neuer returne.
               Hitherto of hurting ones neighbours naturall life. Now follow the hurts,
               2. To his ſpirituall life, and that

                     1. In word.
                     2. In deed.
                  
               
               1. In word, in foure kindes of ill ſpeeches.
               
                  1. In poyſoning him.
                  2. Drawing him.
                  3. In diſſwading him.
                  4. In diſcomforting.
               
               1. In poyſoning him, with hereticall and vnſound doctrine.
               2. In drawing him to ſin, whether
               1. To commit it at firſt, which is, inticing to ill, or
               2. To continue impenitently in it, which is, to ſtrengthen the hands of the wicked, as a flatterer doth in commending one for that that is naught.
               
                  3. In diſſwading a man, from beginning or continuing to doe well, by faire or foule words.
               4. In diſcomforting the tempted, or afflicted, with ill and aggrauating ſpecches, and vnfound collections, as Iobs friends did.
               2. Spirituall hurt in deed.
               1. By moleſting and troubling a man, for well doing.
               2. By giuing bad example, eſpecially being the firſt inuenter of a ſinne.
               3. By abuſing of Chriſtian libertie, to the grieuing of ſome, or animating of others in euill, this is to be vnderſtood, if the thing be left at ones owne choice to doe, and he be not enioyned to doe it.
               Hither of direct breaches of this commandement. The indirect breaches are,

                     1. Towards men.
                     2. Towards beaſts.
                  
               
               1. Towards men.
               
                  1. Liuing.
                  2. Dead.
               
               1. Liuing, by doing ſuch things, as in likelihood may endanger them, as

                     
                     1. Keeping cruell and mad beaſts.
                     2. In building ſtaires, or other like things dangerouſly, or ſtiles, &c.
                  
               
               2. Dead, by barbarous and inhumane vſage of the dead corps.
               2. Towards beaſts in two things.
               1. In ouer-working them, without fit hartening of reſt and prouender.
               2. In delighting in their worrying one another for ſports ſake; for a good man is mercifull to his beaſt, therefore it is the part of a bad man to be cruell.
               Hitherto the ſixth Commandement concerning our owne and neighbours ſafetie. The ſeuenth followes.
            
            
               Thou ſhalt not commit adulterie.
               ANd it takes order for the preſeruation of the puritie and chaſtitie of our ſelues and our neighbours.
               The things commanded are

                     1. Direct.
                     2. Indirect.
                  
               
               1. Direct, puritie or chaſtitie, which is, the right ordering of our whole man, in regard of the facultie of generation, and it is twofold.
               
                  
                  1. Out of matrimonie.
                  2. In matrimonie.
               
               1. Out of matrimonie, in ſingle life, by reſtraint of our ſelues, in regard of that facultie, both inward and outward.
               1. Inward, in holding of the deſire it ſelfe in compaſſe, that it be not carried after one, that God hath not allowed to take: this is kept in order,

                     1. By ſpirituall meanes.
                     2. By naturall meanes.
                  
               
               1. By ſpirituall meanes, which is twofold.
               
                  1. Earneſt praying, if need be, ioyned with faſting.
                  2. Meditating on Gods word, both threats and promiſes, that we may feare him, and delight in him.
               
               2. By naturall meanes, which are three.
               
                  1. Temperance in diet, for quantitie and qualitie, both of meat and drinke.
                  2. Diligence, in labouring in a calling.
                  3. Shunning the opportunitie of time, place, and companie, fit to inuite to that ſinne.
               
               2. Outward, in regard

                     
                     1. Of ſpeech, by modeſtie and puritie of ſpeech, putting away mentioning of vncleanneſſe, and all manner of incenſiue ſpeeches.
                     2. In regard of action, both in regard

                           1. Of things inducing to the ſinfull act, by modeſt, ſhamefaſt carriage, free from all ſuch behauiours, as may prouoke and incenſe.
                           2. Of the ſinfull act it ſelfe, by poſſeſſing ones veſſell in holineſſe and honour, and keeping the body vndefiled.
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. The right ordering of a mans ſelfe in matrimonie, which in caſe the fore-named meanes will not ſubdue the deſire, one is bound in conſcience to contract, and therefore ſome duties concerne

                     1. The entring into this eſtate.
                     2. The vſe and enioyment of this eſtate.
                  
               
               1. The duties required, vnto the entring into this eſtate, are two.
               1. A due choice of a yoake-fellow, where ſome things ate to be reſpected.
               
                  1. Of neceſſitie.
                  2. Of conueniencie for the matter.
               
               
                  1. Of neceſſitie, which are three.
               1. That they be ſufficiently diſtant one from another, in regard

                     1. Of bloud.
                     2. Affinitie.
                  
               
               1. In regard of bloud, for the right line vpward and downward, abſtaining from all generations; no man euer marying his mother, grand-mother, great grand mother, &c. and ſo downward.
               2. For the collaterall line.
               1. Vnequall, abſtaining from mariage, betwixt all that haue the place of parents and children, each in reſpect of each other, as the vncle from the neece, ſo the great vncle, &c.
               2. Vnequall, abſtaining from mariage betwixt brother and ſiſter, and further, conſcience ſo farre as I know doth not forbid.
               2. Affinitie, where theſe be the rules,
               1. A man may marie none of thoſe that are ſo neere to his wife in bloud, that were ſhe a man, ſhe might not marie them, and ſo a woman may marie none ſo neere to her husband in bloud, that

had he beene a woman, he might not haue maried them.
               2. Affinitie reſts alone betwixt parties themſelues, betwixt whom it befalleth, and doth not deriue it ſelfe to any other perſon. As I only am neere in affinitie to my wiues ſiſter, ſo is not my brother, or father, or ſonne, or vncle.
               2. Dutie of neceſſitie, that they be of ſufficient ſtrength and age for generation, elſe it is a weake mariage.
               3. Dutie of neceſſitie, that they be both free and vncontracted to any other, elſe it is a nullitie.
               2. Things to be reſpected, in regard of conueniencie for matter.
               
                  1. Of religion, that they ſerue the ſame God, and be of the ſame religion.
                  2. Of ciuill life, that they be
               
               1. Of proportionable qualitie for age, not one too old, or young for the other.
               2. That there be a paritie of parentage and wealth, ſomewhat neere.
               Thus farre of the dutie, at the entrance into the ſtate of matrimonie, a due choice. Now followes the ſecond dutie.
               
                  2. A due proceeding to it, where alſo ſome things

                     1. Of neceſſitie, muſt be done.
                     2. Of conueniencie, muſt be done.
                  
               
               1. Of neceſſitie.
               1. They muſt haue conſent of parents, if they haue parents.
               2. They muſt take each other with an expreſſe couenant and purpoſe of liuing together during their life.
               2. Some things are to be reſpected, in regard of conueniencie, that the couenant be

                     1. Made by degrees.
                     2. Be publiſhed.
                  
               
               1. Be made by degrees.
               1. In eſpouſals, which is a mutuall giuing of the right of each others bodies, by a ſerious and ſolemne promiſe of mariage.
               2. In wedding, by giuing poſſeſſion of each others bodies, in a promiſe of liuing together during life.
               2. That the couenant be publiſhed and ſolemnized, according to the different cuſtome of each countrie.
               2. The duties that concerne the vſe and enioyment of this eſtate.
               
                  1. In regard of the yoake-fellowes.
                  
                     2. In regard of all others.
               
               1. In regard of the yoake-fellowes ſelues, by communicating themſelues,

                     1. Willingly, without grudging or ſhew of diſlike of each other.
                     2. Seaſonably.
                     3. Sanctifiedly with praier.
                     4. Moderately and ſparingly, to aſſwage deſire, not prouoke it.
                  
               
               2. In regard of enioyment of all others, by a totall abſtinence from them, euen in deſire, or any thing that may expreſſe deſire. So much for things directly commanded.
               2. It commands indirectly,

                     1. Shamefaſtneſſe, a vertuous kinde of ſhaming, to doe or ſee any thing that may but carrie an appearance of mouing ſuch conceits.
                     2. Grauitie, and modeſtie in attire.
                  
               
               Hitherto the affirmatiue: The negatiue followes, ſhewing how this commandement is broken, by omiſſion and commiſſion, and that

                     1. Directly.
                     2. Indirectly.
                  
               
               1. Directly.
               
                  1. Inwardly in heart.
                  
                     2. Outwardly.
               
               1. Inwardly in heart, by inordinate luſt, and luſt is inordinate,

                     1. For the meaſure, when it is a burning, an eager and a vehement deſire, bearing downe the whole ſoule, and conſuming all other deſires.
                     2. For the ſubiect, when it wanders towards vnallowed perſons.
                  
               
               2. Outwardly, and that

                     1. In rotten communication.
                     2. In actions that are lewd.
                  
               
               1. Rotten communication.
               
                  1. By prouoking, foule ſpeeches, chiefly ſongs.
                  2. By talking of the lewd deeds of others, or ones ſelfe, with delight.
                  3. By ſoliciting, and tempting any body, as Ioſephs miſtreſſe did him.
               
               2. In actions that are lewd.
               
                  1. Such as leade and induce to the act.
                  2. The act it ſelfe.
               
               1. Such as lead and induce to the act, which is wantonneſſe,

                     1. Of the body.
                     2. Of attire.
                  
               
               1. Of the body it ſelfe.
               
                  
                  1. For the ſeuerall parts of it.
                  2. For the whole.
               
               1. For the ſeuerall parts of it, as

                     1. The eie.
                     2. The eare.
                     3. The foot.
                     4. The hand.
                     5. The mouth.
                  
               
               1. The eie and countenance.
               
                  1. By beholding things.
                  2. By alluring glances.
               
               1. Beholding things incenſiue, as

                     1. Lewd pictures and Images.
                     2. Filthy ſtage plaies.
                     3. The generating of beaſts.
                     4. Nakedneſſe of others.
                  
               
               2. By alluring, and promiſing glances of the eie, in hauing eies full of adulterie.
               2. The eare, by a willing liſtening to filthy tales, ſpeeches and ſongs.
               3. The foot.
               
                  1. Running to places of ill reſort, fit for that ill purpoſe.
                  2. In making ſignes of ill meaning, treading on the toe.
               
               4. The hand.
               1. In geſturing ſorth vncleannes.
               
                  2. In touching and toying by any ouer-familiar touches, chiefly of the ſecret parts, for which a womans hand was to be cut off.
               5. The mouth, in vnchaſte kiſſing.
               2. The whole body,

                     1. In impure imbraces and counterfetting the act of euill.
                     2. Laſciuious dancing or reuelling, which is an artificiall wantonneſſe.
                  
               
               2. The wantonneſſe of attire, and that

                     1. By light and vndecent attire that ſpeaketh out wantonneſſe and vanity, as laying open the breaſt.
                     2. By changing attire, in a mans putting on womans apparell, or contrarily, which God calleth abomination vnto him.
                  
               
               2. The lewd act it ſelfe: which is,

                     1. In ſtrange and vndue abuſes of this facultie.
                     2. In inordinate abuſe of the courſe of nature.
                  
               
               1. In ſtrange abuſes of this faculty, otherwiſe then agrees to the naturall courſe.
               
                  1. With ones ſelfe by committing the ſinne of Er and Onan.
                  
                  
                     2. With others.

                        1. Of the ſame kinde.
                        2. Of other kindes, as man or woman with a beaſt, which is confuſion.
                     
                  
               
               1. Of the ſame kinde, and that

                     1. Of a different ſex.
                     2. Of the ſame ſex, viz. Man with man, or woman with woman.
                  
               
               2. Inordinate act of abuſe of the courſe of nature is either out of mariage, or in reſpect of mariage.
               1. Out of marriage, fornication, which is a mixture of two ſingle perſons, aggrauated

                     1. By the manner of committing.
                     2. By the perſon with whom it was committed.
                  
               
               1. By the manner of committing, if be done

                     1. By violence, ſo its rape.
                     2. By charmes and ſpels, ſo its worſe.
                  
               
               2. By the perſon with whom it was committed, if it be too neare of kin or affinity, then its called inceſt.
               2. Inordinate abuſe of the courſe of nature in reſpect of mariage, and that

                     1. For the owne yokefellow.
                     2. For others beſides.
                  
               
               
                  1. For the own yoke-fellow, and that

                     1. For the entring to it.
                     2. For the vſe of it.
                  
               
               1. For the entring into it.
               
                  1. In regard of choice.
                  2. In regard of proceeding.
               
               1. In regard of choice, if one take

                     1. One that is precontracted.
                     2. One that is too neere a kin.
                  
               
               2. In regard of proceeding, if one enter it

                     1. Without conſent of parents.
                     2. By a forced couenant, or elſe fained, or extorted by fraud.
                  
               
               2. In regard of the vſe of it.
               
                  1. By deniall of ones ſelfe to the yokefellow, chiefly in running away in deſertion.
                  2. By abuſe of the mariage bed, and that

                        1. Vnſanctifiedly.
                        2. Vnſeaſonably.
                        3. Immoderatly.
                     
                  
               
               2. Others beſide the owne yoke-fellow.
               
                  1. In polygamie, which is a couert adulterie.
                  
                     2. In flat adultery with another, not ſo much as in conceit a wife or an husband, which is,

                        1. Single, when one alone is maried, and is the worſe, if the woman be maried.
                        2. Double, when both are maried, and both receiue aggrauations, as fornication did before.
                     
                  
               
               So much of direct breaches, it is alſo broken
               2. Indirectly, and that

                     1. By occaſions of this ſinne.
                     2. By the appearances of euill.
                  
               
               1. By the occaſions of this ſinne.
               
                  1. To others.
                  2. To ones ſelfe.
               
               1. To others.
               
                  1. In coſtly attire.
                  2. In diſcouering ones ſelfe impudently or careleſly.
               
               2. To ones ſelfe.
               
                  1. By idleneſſe and neglecting ones calling.
                  2. By intemperance in food.

                        1. For quality, which is luxuriouſneſſe.
                        2. For quantity, which is gluttony and drunkenneſſe.
                        
                           3. By vnſeaſonableneſſe of meeting,

                              1. In reſpect of place, ſolitary.
                              2. In reſpect of time, in the night.
                              3. In reſpect of perſon, one that one deſireth or hath ſinned with, or is likely to tempt or yeeld.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. Indirectly by the appearances of euill,

                     1. In gariſh attire.
                     2. In light cariage.
                     3. In companie keeping with ſuſpected perſons.
                  
               
               Hitherto of the ſeuenth Commandement: the eighth followeth.
            
            
               Thou ſhalt not ſteale.
               ANd it takes order for the right cariage of our ſelues, in regard of riches or goods of this world.
               The things herein are,

                     1. Inward.
                     2. Outward.
                  
               
               1. Inward, a well ordering of the inward

man towards theſe outward goods in regard of

                     1. The iudgement, by eſteeming meanely of riches, in contemning it, or counting it dung or droſſe in compariſon of heauen, and of little value ſimply, becauſe it can doe no good, but in this baſe and worthleſſe life.
                     2. In regard of the thoughts, that they bee but ſparingly beſtowed in thinking of worldly buſineſſe, euen no more then the neceſſity of our calling induceth.
                     3. In regard of the affections, which are chiefly ſix.

                           1. Loue,
                           2. Deſire,
                           3. Truſt,
                           4. Ioy,
                           5. Feare,
                           6. Griefe; that muſt not be at all, or ſcarſe any whit at all exerciſed about the goods of this life, for S. Iohn ſaith, Loue not the world, and be contented with that you haue; and truſt not in riches; and let the rich man not reioyce in his riches; and care not for to morrow, and let vs vſe the world as though we vſed it not.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. The outward things commanded, are

                     
                     1. In regard of our owne eſtate or goods.
                     2. In regard of the eſtates and goods of others.
                  
               
               1. In regard of our own eſtate or goods.
               
                  1. By a due care of maintaining our eſtate.
                  2. Of enioying and vſing the ſame.
               
               1. By a due care of maintaining our eſtate: and that is,

                     1. By due getting.
                     2. By due keeping.
                  
               
               1. By due getting, to which end

                     1. We muſt haue a lawfull calling, ſomething to imploy our ſelues in for our owne aduantage by the common good.
                     2. We muſt vſe it lawfully, viz.
                        
                           1. To the right end, the intereſting of our ſelues into Gods bleſſings according to his will.
                           2. In a right manner, with practiſe of three vertues.

                                 1. Diligence.
                                 2. Prudence.
                                 3. Cheerefulneſſe.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. By due keeping, which is thrift.
               1. Diligence, is a vertue whereby men doe duly apply themſelues to the

workes of their particular callings: it hath two parts.
               
                  1. Painfulneſſe and laboriouſneſſe, whereby a man doth earneſtly performe the workes of his calling whilſt he is at them, ſetting his head and hand and all to worke therein to ſome purpoſe.
                  2. Conſtancy, whereby a man continues cloſe at them, till there bee a iuſt cauſe of intermiſſion offered.
               
               The iuſt cauſes of intermitting our callings are,

                     1. Spirituall.
                     2. Naturall.
                  
               
               1. Spirituall,

                     1. For the ſanctifying of the Sabbath day.
                     2. For performing religious duties on the weeke day, either

                           1. Priuate.
                           2. Publike.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Priuate, as

                     1. Prayer.
                     2. Meditation of Gods word.
                  
               
               1. Praier.
               
                  1. Alone.
                  2. With the family.
               
               2. Publique, the hearing of the word

of God preached, vnleſſe ſome extraordinary or ſpeciall occaſion of our calling hinder.
               2. Naturall cauſes of intermitting our calling, and theſe are

                     1. Neceſſary.
                     2. Indifferent.
                  
               
               1. Neceſſary, reſpecting

                     1. Others.
                     2. Ourſelues.
                  
               
               1. Others, to doe ſeruice,

                     1. In the workes of an higher calling, as in publique meetings, &c.
                     2. In the workes of mercy, viſiting the afflicted.
                     3. In workes of courteſie, viſiting of friends and feaſting, &c. ſo that it bee moderate, not hurting ones eſtate, and with choyce of fit times.
                  
               
               2. Reſpecting our ſelues.
               
                  1. In ſickneſſe, when God doth force vs to ceaſe from them.
                  2. In health.

                        1. For feeding our ſelues.
                        2. For refreſhing our bodies with fit ſleepe.
                     
                  
               
               2. Naturall cauſes indifferent for ſports and paſtimes: and that we may lawfully

vſe paſtimes or ſports, we muſt,
               1. Aime at the right ends, which are

                     1. Principall, Gods glory, by fitting our ſelues the better to ſerue him in our callings.
                     2. Inferiour, which are

                           1. Refreſhing of the minde in dulneſſe.
                           2. Exerciſing of the body for health.
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. That we may lawfully vſe ſports, we muſt obſerue the right rules for attaining of theſe ends, for

                     1. Our affections to ſports, that we loue them not, that is, ſuffer not our hearts to be ſo ſet vpon them, that wee cannot quietly want them; becauſe we haue brought our ſelues in ſubiection to them.
                     2. The ſports themſelues, concerning

                           1. The matter of them.
                           2. The manner of vſing them.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Concerning the matter of them, three rules muſt be followed in choyce of ſport.
               Rule 1.
               1. That the thing vſed for ſport, be a thing lawfull and indifferent.
               
                  1. In regard of it ſelfe and its owne nature, as not being forbidden by God.
               2. In regard of other conſiderations, taken

                     1. From the Magiſtrate.
                     2. From our ſelues.
                     3. From our brethren.
                  
               
               1. From the Magiſtrate, that it be not by his lawes prohibited.
               2. From our ſelues, that it be not

                     1. Ouer-coſtly.
                     2. Ouer-dangerous.
                  
               
               1. Ouer-coſtly for our eſtates, as taking vp more expence then wee can vſually allow,

                     1. For Gods worſhip to maintaine it.
                     2. For workes of mercy to the poore.
                     3. For workes of mercy to our brethren.
                  
               
               2. Ouer-dangerous to our bodies, as hazarding life or limme in the following of it, as ſome ſports doe.
               3. From our brethren, in that it doth not treſpaſſe and dammage them.
               Rule 2. for choyce of ſports.
               2. That the thing vſed to ſport be ſomeway beneficiall in it ſelfe, not barely ſeruing to content the fancy, elſe its worſe then

an idle word, and ſo a ſinne.
               Rule 3. for choyce of ſports.
               3. That it be a matter ſo meane and low, as may be abaſed to ſo meane an vſe as ſporting, for ſerious and waighty things muſt be handled ſeriouſly.
               2. The manner of vſing ſports, in regard of the principall circumſtances.
               1. Time.
               1. Not beginning before the vſe of body or minde doe require them.
               2. Continuing, and that muſt bee but a little time, euen leſſe then vſually is ſpent vpon duties of religion.
               2. Circumſtance is company, with whom wee ioyne in them, that they bee at leaſt ciuilly and morally honeſt men, not notorious and ſcandalous ſinners.
               3. Circumſtance is of place, that it be

                     1. Somwhat retired, not ouer-publique, for feare of offence and inconueniences.
                     2. Of honeſt note, not infamous.
                  
               
               4. Circumſtance is price, that we play for nothing, ſeeing ſports are not appointed by God to transferre the right of goods from one to another, but acts of our calling, and becauſe this is the procurer of moſt abuſes committed in ſporting through the ſetting

of a greater edge vpon a mans deſires to them then they ſhould haue to things ſportfull, or if wee will needes play for ſomething, the ſumme muſt needs bee of ſuch a nature,

                     1. As the players both of them can well ſpare without any apparant detriment to their eſtates.
                     2. As for the quantity of it, is not fit to ſtirre vp couetous paſſions.
                     3. As in other caſes a man of diſcretion would make none account, nor be no whit at all moued with the gaining or loſing of it.
                  
               
               Hitherto diligence in our callings: the next vertue to be practiſed in our callings is prudence or diſcretion.
               2. Prudence is a vertue of ordering our affaires in ſuch a manner, as we may attaine good and proſperous ſucceſſe therein, or if we be croſſed, it befall not through any default of our owne.
               The rules of wiſdome tend to two heads.
               
                  1. To meet with loſſes.
                  2. To make our buſineſſe thriue.
               
               1. To meet with loſſes and indammagements.
               
                  1. By preuenting them.
                  
                     2. By mitigating them.
               
               1. By preuenting them ſo farre as may bee.
               1. By taking good ſecurity of thoſe with whom we deale: Take a pledge of his hand, for a ſtranger, ſaith Salomon.
               
               2. By ſecrecy: Keepe thy ſelfe ſecret for the wife of thy boſome, ſaith the Prophet.
               3. By a good boldneſſe, to denie vnfit requeſts, chiefly of thoſe that enter into bonds, or bee ſureties for them, vnleſſe it be

                     1. For honeſt men, and ſufficient to our knowledge.
                     2. For our friends and familiars.
                     3. For ſuch ſummes as we can well pay our ſelues, without feeling a great burden to our eſtates.
                     4. By dealing plainly and ſquarely with all men, leſt it fall out that crafty ſnares take his foot that laid them.
                  
               
               Hitherto of preuenting loſſes, now followes
               2. By mitigating loſſes, and making them as eaſie as may be, which cannot be totally preuented, as by reuealing ones debts, &c. to his friends, and crauing their helpe, afore it be too late, as Salomon aduiſeth

in caſe of ſuretiſhip.
               2. Rule of wiſdome is to make ones buſineſſe thriue and proue gainfull, for which end ſome generall rules are giuen in Scripture.
               1. Obſerue and take fit times and ſeaſons, that nature or other occaſions offer, as the Ant that laboureth in Summer, for that is a ſeaſon for all things, as in youth and health to get for age and ſickneſſe, &c.
               2. To know our eſtate, and keepe all our affaires, bargaines, &c. within the compaſſe of it, as Salomon bids, Know the face of thy flocke, Pro. 27.23.
               3. To doe things chiefly of importance in ones eſtate, with deliberation and counſell, for in the multitude of counſellers is peace.
               
               4. To feare the worſt as well as hope the beſt, for ſuſpecting what ill may come, and not only what muſt needs come.
               5. To put all things to ſuch vſe, as much as may be, that a man may liue of his owne and not be euer buying, as Salomon aduiſeth, Pro. 27. laſt.
               3. Duty. Hitherto of wiſdome in our callings; cheerefulneſſe followes, and it is a vertue whereby a man goes forward

in the works of his calling with an vndiſcouraged heart, euen though croſſes come, out of the conſideration of Gods good prouidence in all things, and a dependance vpon his truth to cauſe all worke for the beſt. And ſo much for that part of maintaining ones eſtate which conſiſts in getting. That followes that conſiſts in keeping, and here comes to be practiſed the vertue of thrift.
               Thrift is the vertue of obſeruing due meaſure in expences, and it is done by two things.
               
                  1. By cutting off vnfit expences.
                  2. By moderating needfull expences.
               
               1. By cutting off vnfit expences, which are of two ſorts.
               1. Vnlawfull, ſuch as when the matter whereupon they are beſtowed is repugnant to Gods will, as maintaining of Harlots, Bauds, &c. and an hundred ſuch like.
               2. Needleſſe, ſuch as come not within the limits of a mans vocation, and wherein he followes not God (ſpending becauſe hee ſees God would haue him ſpend) but his owne luſts, ſpending becauſe for ſome carnall end he hath a will to ſpend, whereof

the moſt vſuall are theſe.
               
                  1. By vaine iourneys from place to place.
                  2. By vaine feaſtings, and merry meetings.
                  3. By vaine ſutes in law to vndoe another, or ſeeke reuenge of him.
                  4. By vaine gifts to ones greater, in hope of aſpiring.
                  5. By vaine vndertaking in oſtentation to pay for all when he comes in company, &c.
               
               2. By moderating needfull and vertuous expences, in meate, drinke, apparell, building, houſhold ſtuffe, ſports and the like to theſe, framing them
               1. To the naturall vſe appointed of God.
               2. To a mans owne meanes, gettings, and reuenues, for if more come out then in, there will be emptineſſe at laſt.
               3. To a mans owne eſtate and place, in regard of gouernment, and authority, and ranke where hee dwels: a gentleman muſt not affect to be like a Lord, a Lord like a King, in building and ſuch like.
               Hitherto of maintaining ones eſtate:
               2. Now ſecondly of enioying and vſing

the ſame by applying our ſelues to reape thoſe benefits from them whereto naturally they ſerue, and which God would haue vs to reape by the practiſe of the vertue of liberality or bounty, or in a great eſtate munificence, both in reſpect,

                     1. Of our ſelues, by taking a comfortable portion for our perſons and families, in meat, drinke, cloth, &c. according as God ſhall bleſſe vs.
                     2. To others, and that both

                           1. Publique.
                           2. Priuate.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Publique, in being at charges for the common benefit in building, bridges, hie-waies, free-ſchooles, colledges, almes-houſes, hoſpitals, &c. which is right munificence and a being rich in good workes.
               2. Priuate, and particular.
               
                  1. In mercy.
                  2. In kindneſſe.
               
               1. In mercy to the diſtreſſed.
               
                  1. By lending freely to them that neede.
                  2. By giuing to them that want.
               
               2. In kindneſſe to neighbours and friends, and all men in the practiſe of the vertue of hoſpitality (by a louing and moderate

entertainment of honeſt men that ſhall haue occaſion to come vnto vs) and other like courteſies, onely know that mercy muſt take the vpper hand of theſe curteſies, for Chriſt ſaith, call not thy rich friends to dinner, but the poore, meaning call the poore rather.
               Hitherto of the duties required in regard of our owne eſtate. That followes ſecondly which concerneth▪
               
               2. The eſtate and goods of other men, called particular iuſtice, which is the vertue of giuing to euery man his owne, of which we muſt conſider,

                     1. The generall rules.
                     2. The diuers kinds.
                  
               
               1. The generall rules, which in Scripture are two.
               
                  1. Doe to euery man, at ye would they ſhould doe to you.
                  
                  2. Serue each other in loue, not looking altogether to ſerue your ſelues.
                  
               
               2. The diuers kinds: iuſtice is

                     1. Of words, called truth,

                           1. In aſſertions, denying or affirming as the thing is.
                           2. Promiſes, faithfully reſoluing and endeuouring to the vtmoſt of

our power to keepe them.
                        
                     
                     2. Iuſtice is of dealings and affaires conſiſting of many words and actions, and this is

                           1. Commutatiue.
                           2. Diſtributiue.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Commutatiue, that concerneth affaires that paſſe betwixt man and man in regard of the goods of this world: Inioyning vs

                     1. For parting with that that it in our hands to others.
                     2. For taking from others.
                  
               
               1. For parting with that that is in our hand to others.
               1. To make them ſatisfaction for all treſpaſſes wittingly or vnwittingly done to them in their goods, by our ſelues or beaſts, &c.
               2. To make reſtitution to them of whatſoeuer we haue vnlawfully gotten into our hands, or if the right owner bee vnknowne or gone, we muſt reſtore it to God for the maintenance of his worſhip.
               2. Wee are inioyned for taking any thing into our owne hands of others. Of which conſider,

                     1. The generall rule.
                     
                        2. The moſt eminent and vſuall kindes.
                  
               
               1. The generall rule, which is this, Let no man take any thing but that, nor any more but that, to which hee hath ſure and plaine right and title.
               Right is a reſpect depending betwixt ſome perſons, and ſome good, out of ſome due conſideration, in reaſon, whereby the poſſeſſing of that wealth becomes lawfull for thoſe perſons. Right is of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Diuine.
                  2. Humane.
               
               1. Diuine, ariſing from ſome ſpeciall inſtitution of God in his word, as that of the Miniſters of the law to tithes, and ſo now of the Miniſters of the Goſpell too, which ſucceeding in the worke of attending Gods worſhip, cannot but ſucceed them in the reward of taking Gods portion, that is, the tenth, which hee hath challenged as his owne, of all men increaſe.
               2. Humane, ariſing from the common inſtitution of God, founded vpon ſome ſpeciall things conſiderable in men, and this is alſo double.
               
                  1. Naturall.
                  2. Ciuill.
               
               
                  1. Naturall, that is grounded vpon the light of nature going alone, and that in things of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Such as haue no knowne and certaine owner.
                  2. Such as haue a certaine and knowne owner.
               
               1. Such as haue no certaine and knowne owner, as

                     1. Publique things, the right whereto muſt be taken from tranſaction of publique perſons.
                     2. Common things, as wild-fowle, and which are his that by honeſt labour without treſpaſſing the lawes or ones neighbours, ſhall get them.
                     3. Loſt things, which are his that findes them, vnleſſe the owner ſhall bee knowne, or the lawes diſpoſe otherwiſe.
                  
               
               2. Such as haue a certaine and knowne owner, and in theſe right ariſeth either

                     1. From the perſon that departeth with goods.
                     2. From both parties ioyntly.
                  
               
               1. From the perſon that departeth with goods onely and alone, and that is either
               1. By free will, I ſay, will free from error, deceit, compulſion or force, open or

ſecret, compoſition or conditioning, ſecret or open, and that that is ſo paſſed is gift.
               2. By iniury offered by him to the perſon, goods, name, &c. of the other, according to the quantity or quality of the wrong for matter or circumſtance, and this is ſatisfaction.
               2. From both parties ioyntly, viz. him that parteth with goods, and him that receiueth the ſame too, and that is either

                     1. Some ſpeciall obligation paſſing betwixt them, of neereneſſe of bloud, or duty, or the like, whereupon are grounded inheritances, and the deſcent of lands and goods, and diuers payments and dues to princes and officers.
                     2. Some exchange of one beneficiall thing for another of proportionable value, I ſay beneficiall in it ſelfe, and in it owne nature, as

                           1. Seruice.
                           2. Stuffe.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Seruice, for Stuffe, and ſeruice.
               2. Stuffe, for ſeruice and ſtuffe, according to that ſpeech, do vt des, do vt facias, facio vt des, facio vt facias. And here is the ground of lawfull contracts and bargaines, a lawfull bargaine being nothing

elſe, but the expreſſing of an agreement vpon ſuch an exchange.
               2. Ciuill, humane right, ariſing from the laws of each kingdome, ſtate and ſocietie, (which doe ſo far forth, and no further warrant conſcience, and giue right before God, as they are built vpon the fore-mentioned, either naturall or diuine rights) which are referrable to two heads.
               
                  1. Rewards, priuiledges, fees, &c.
                  2. Penalties, mulcts, puniſhments.
               
               Hitherto the generall rule of commutatiue iuſtice, now followes
               2. The moſt eminent and vſuall kinds, which are fiue paire.
               
                  1. Paire.
                  1. Buying.
                  2. Selling.
               
               
                  2. Paire.
                  1. Setting or letting.
                  2. Taking.
               
               
                  3. Paire.
                  1. Borrowing.
                  2. Lending.
               
               
                  4. Paire.
                  1. Hiring.
                  2. Working for hire.
               
               
                  5. Paire.
                  
                     Partnerſhip.
                  In buying and ſelling,

                        1. The buyer is bound.
                        2. The ſeller.
                     
                  
               
               1. The buyer is bound to ſome things.
               1. In regard of the thing bought, that he buy alone, that that is free for him to buy: no man elſe being intereſſed into it by any precedent cheapning or bargaine.
               2. In regard of the manner of the buying.
               1. For reckonings, that he make ſtraight and true.
               2. For price, that he giue as much as the thing is worth, in his owne eſteeme.
               3. For paiment, that he make it with currant money, and in the appointed time.
               4. For meaſure, that he ſatisfie himſelfe with the due meaſure, and ſeeke no tricks, for procuring an ouer-plus.
               2. The ſeller is bound to ſome things reſpecting
               1. The thing ſold, that it be ſaleable for ſubſtance and qualitie, the ſame that he would haue it taken for, not worſe.
               2. The manner of ſelling.
               1. For reckoning, that he make it iuſt and ſquare.
               
                  2. For price, that he take no more then the worth of a thing, that is, ſo much as it is vſually ſold for, and as may make him a ſufficient gainer in his calling, euen ſo much as he would giue, all things conſidered, if he were to buy.
               3. For the meaſure and waight, that he vſe true ones truly.
               3. The ſeller is bound to ſome things, reſpecting the perſon to whom he ſelleth, that he ſatisfie himſelfe with cuſtomes duly gotten, not by tricks and deuices drawing in any one.
               In ſetting, letting, and taking, the duties

                     1. Of the ſetter.
                     2. Of the taker.
                  
               
               1. Of the ſetter or Land-lord (for the chiefe ſetting is of land, though there be a ſetting alſo of other things.)
               1. That he ſet things at a reaſonable rate, euen as himſelfe would giue, and as the taker may be a gainer.
               2. That he ſet things good and ſufficient for the vſe whereto they be ſet, not ſecretly faultie, as houſes or land, in whom ſome other hath ſome title, or the like.
               3. That he afford to the taker, a quiet vſe, fruition, and enioyment of the things

ſet, according to the conditions agreed vpon, without any oppreſſing him with other ſeruices.
               4. That in caſe of Lands and houſes and the like, he renew the leaſe of his Tenant, (or his eſtate, as it falls our) vpon reaſonable termes, rather then ſet it to any other, ſuppoſing the Tenant to haue beene a carefull and faithfull Tenant.
               2. The taker muſt

                     1. Take that is free from others.
                     2. Keepe that he taketh without ſpoile, or waſte, or hauocke, and vſe it well whatſoeuer it be, horſe or other thing.
                     3. Paie his rent or hire in due time.
                     4. He muſt redeliuer it to him that ſet it, according to conditions, ſafely kept and preſerued.
                  
               
               In borrowing and lending, the duties

                     1. Of the borrower.
                     2. Of the lender.
                  
               
               1. Of the borrower are,

                     1. To borrow but for his need and vſe, when he cannot make any other ſhift, not otherwiſe, for why ſhould hee make himſelfe a ſlaue?
                     2. But reſolue, and care to repay in due ſeaſon.
                     
                        3. Muſt vſe the thing borrowed ſo well, ſuppoſing it to be a thing to be repaid in the ſame indiuiduall thing, as if it were his owne.
                  
               
               2. The lenders duties are

                     1. To lend freely to the poore (that are honeſt, and conſcionable of repayment) ſo much as they can ſpare.
                     2. To lend, but for a moderate gaine, (in caſe they lend to a ſufficient man, that ſhall imploy it to his gaine) at moſt, but for ſo much as that ſumme of money laid out in the purchaſe of Land or an houſe, would yeeld (or if any more, very little, in conſideration of the greater caſualties of money, then an houſe) with the like eaſe. and freedome from all trauell and expence.
                     3. To vſe moderation, in the taking of morgages and forfeitures.
                     4. To be as much as may be, without too much detriment, forbearant in ſuits of Law.
                  
               
               In partnerſhip, the duties of partners are

                     1. To make indifferent and equall conditions of their partnerſhip.
                     2. To vſe due care and diligence in the things that are betwixt them, as their

owne proper goods.
                     3. To purloine, and diuert nothing from the common ſtocke without agreement, but to giue vp an euen reckoning, and make a iuſt diuiſion, according to their couenants.
                  
               
               So much for commutatiue iuſtice. Now
               2. Of diſtributiue iuſtice, ſo farre as concernes the iuſt deciſion of controuerſies about meum and tuum, and the iuſt ſatisfaction of dammages and wrongs in ones goods, in matters

                     1. Ciuill.
                     2. Eccleſiaſticall.
                  
               
               1. Ciuill, ſo farre as concernes

                     1. Priuate perſons.
                     2. Publique perſons.
                  
               
               1. Priuate perſons, that haue cauſes in courts of iuſtice.
               1. That they commence not cauſeleſſe ſuits, grounded on ſpight, or quiddities of law.
               2. That they vſe no diſhoneſt ſhifts nor delaies, to wearie out an aduerſarie, and by name not briberie.
               2. Which concerne publique perſons.
               1. All, in regard of publique lands, &c. committed to them, that they imploy

them faithfully to the publique good.
               2. Thoſe that haue to doe in ſentencing cauſes.
               
                  1. That they content themſelues with lawfull and moderate fees.
                  2. That they further the right, each to his vtmoſt knowledge and power.
               
               2. In matters eccleſiaſticall.
               1. By beſtowing of holy goods on holy things and perſons.
               2. By a free bringing in of fit men to the miniſtery, and the places of charge, which we call benefices, for if the Iudge muſt take no gift, I pray you may the Patron? Will it not alſo blinde his eies?
               So much for the affirmatiue part of this commandement. The negatiue followes, which is broken two waies,

                     1. By omiſſion of any of the things commanded.
                     2. By doing things contrarie thereto, and that

                           1. Inwardly.
                           2. Outwardly.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Inwardly, in the diſorder of the inward man about wealth, viz.
                  
                     1. In the iudgement, in high eſteeming of riches, which is, laying vp treaſure on earth.
                     
                        2. In the thoughts, in minding earthly things, beſtowing many, yea the moſt of our thoughts vpon them, leauing none, or the fewer number, for things celeſtiall.
                     3. The affections to wealth.

                           1. Simplie.
                           2. Reſpectiuely.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Simply, and in it ſelfe: loue, when a man loues the world for the loue of money, is the root of all euill.
               2. Reſpectiuely.
               
                  1. To our hauing them.
                  2. To our wanting them.
               
               1. To our hauing them.
               
                  1. Already.
                  2. Hereafter.
               
               1. Alreadie.
               1. Of confidence, when we truſt in riches, .i. promiſe our ſelues to liue happily, or to ſcape miſerie for them.
               2. Of ioy, when wee are very glad, of hauing gotten much.
               2. Hereafter, deſire, when we couet wealth inordinately,

                     1. For degree of deſiring, in ſuffering the deſire to be earneſt.
                     2. For quantitie of the things

deſired, when we deſire more then enough for neceſſarie vſes.
                     3. For the end of deſiring, when we wiſh them, either only to looke vpon, or to ſet vp our ſelues.
                  
               
               2. Reſpectiue, wanting them

                     1. For the preſent, in carnall ſorrow, whereby we ouer-grieue croſſes and loſſes.
                     2. For the time to come, in carking and caring, which is a mixture of griefe and feare for wants doubted of that they will come.
                  
               
               2. By doing things outwardly contrarie thereto.
               
                  1. In regard of our owne eſtate.
                  2. In regard of others.
               
               1. In regard of our owne eſtate or goods, concerning

                     1. The maintaining of our eſtates.
                     2. The vſing of them.
                  
               
               1. In regard of maintaining our eſtates.
               
                  1. By getting.
                  2. By keeping.
               
               1. By getting, where are two maine ſinnes.
               
                  1. Liuing without a calling, as vagrants,

and moſt Gentlemen and Vſurers.
                  2. Abuſing a calling.
               
               1. For the matter of it, when it is either ſinful or vſeleſſe, as the Beareward, the keepers of cock-pits, dicing houſes, &c.
               2. For the end of following it, when one labours to be rich, propounding a falſe end to himſelfe in his labours.
               3. For the manner of proſecuting it.
               
                  1. In exceſſe.
                  2. In defect.
               
               1. In exceſſe.
               1. By toileſomneſſe, that is, to eager ſetting to the workes of ones calling, that one hath no time for comfortable refreſhing, or exerciſes of pietie.
               
                  1. For himſelfe.
                  2. For his people and familie.
               
               2. By craft and worldly wiſdome, when a man is ſo attentiue to his gaine, that he neglects iuſtice and honeſty, at leaſt the things of a better life.
               3. By too much iollitie and liuelineſſe, when a man hath no life, but for his worldly buſineſſe, becauſe he ſees proſperitie comming.
               2. In defect, by three vices.
               
                  
                  1. Idleneſſe.
                  2. Folly.
                  3. Dulneſſe and lumpiſhneſſe.
               
               1. Idleneſſe is the ſinne of ſlackneſſe in doing the workes of his calling, and hath two parts.

                     1. A careleſſe doing of them, whilſt we tarie at them, working as the Prophet ſaith, till one be cold.
                     2. A cauſeleſſe departing from ones buſineſſe, and beſtowing the time in things vnprofitable, that are ſo

                           1. Simply.
                           2. Accidentally.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Simplie: as

                     1. Vaine twattle, and talke of the lips.
                     2. Vaine bookes and Pamphlets.
                     3. Vaine thoughts and conceits.
                  
               
               2. Accidentally.
               
                  1. In regard of their quantitie.
                  2. In regard of their impertinencie.
               
               1. In regard of their quantitie, becauſe they be vſed too much, as

                     1. Sports, which is ſportfulneſſe.
                     2. Sleepe, which is, ſluggiſhneſſe.
                  
               
               2. In regard of impertinencie, in that they concerne not ones ſelfe, as being a buſie body in others matters.
               
                  2. Vice, folly is the vice of doing things in ſuch an vntowardly manner, as that one hinders himſelfe, and brings croſſes vpon himſelfe, and that foure waies.
               
                  1. By raſhneſſe.
                  2. Heedleſneſſe.
                  3. Too much openneſſe.
                  4. Credulitie.
               
               1. By raſhneſſe, venturing vpon things haſtilie, and of ones owne head.
               2. By heedleſneſſe, in caſting off the conſideration

                     1. Of a mans owne eſtate, how farre it can reach, or cannot reach.
                     2. Of the perils and dangers that may come, in all dealings.
                     3. Of the fit ſeaſons, of doing and getting things.
                  
               
               3. By too too much openneſſe and blabbing.
               4. By credulitie and too much beleeuing, where the maine fault is, ſuretiſhip and careleſſe lending.
               3. Vice, dulneſſe in following ones calling, which is a vice of being heauie, and troubled in ones calling, and vnwilling to follow it, in regard of diſcouragement by croſſes, and wanting of ſucceſſe.
               
                  Hitherto of the faults in getting: now for keeping it, and likewiſe of vſing, for they are neere of a nature, and coincident, the ſame vices croſſing the two vertues of thrift and liberalitie, viz.
                  
                     1. In defect.
                     2. In exceſſe.
                  
               
               1. In defect, nigardice, which is a ſparing more then is fit, both
               1. From ones ſelfe and family, when he cannot afford himſelfe and them fit food and attire for his place and meanes.
               2. From others.
               1. By churliſhneſſe, againſt kindneſſe and hoſpitalitie, when one refuſeth to giue fit entertainment, and performe fit curteſies.
               2. Hard heartedneſſe, when one refuſeth to releeue the neceſſities of the poore, and to doe other workes of mercy according to his place.
               2. In exceſſe, which is twofold.
               
                  1. Waſtefulneſſe, in letting thoſe, as bread, drinke meat, &c. goe careleſly to loſſe.
                  2. Prodigalitie in expences.

                        1. Sinfull, as riot, gaming.
                        
                           2. Superfluous.
                     
                  
               
               1. Exceeding ones place, when he ſtriues to be as hie as any of his ranke, yea, as ſome of an hier ranke.
               2. Ones meanes, in that his expence procures

                     1. Indebtedneſſe, that he goes into the bookes and bonds, more then he can well pay.
                     2. Bareneſſe, in that nothing remaines

                           1. For himſelfe.
                           2. For workes of mercy.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. For himſelfe,

                     1. To beſtow on his children.
                     2. To beare out ſickneſſe or croſſes.
                  
               
               2. Bareneſſe, for workes of mercie, ſuch as his eſtate well husbanded would afford.
               So much of the ſinnes againſt ones owne eſtate: thoſe follow, that are committed againſt the eſtates
               2. Of others, our neighbours, by the practiſe of vniuſtice: vniuſtice is the ſin of deſiring and taking that that is another mans, or of hindering another man from that that is his owne. Vniuſtice is practiſed

                     1. Palpably.
                     
                        2. Colourably.
                  
               
               1. Palpably and plainly, when there is no colour of any cauſe alledged, why a man ſhould haue that that is anothers, yet he will haue it without any, ſo much as a ſeeming right, and that

                     1. By taking.
                     2. Keeping.
                  
               
               1. By taking,

                     1. In ones owne perſon.
                     2. In his beaſt.
                  
               
               1. In ones owne perſon.
               1. By fraud and couſenage, whereof the deuill and men haue inuented a thouſand tricks.
               2. By force and violence, carrying away our neighbours good, cleane againſt his good liking, as in robberies and thefts of all kindes.
               2. In his beaſt, by wilfull treſpaſſing ones neighbour, in cauſing ones horſe or oxe to feed of his graſſe or corne, vnleſſe in caſe of neceſſitie, to releeue a tired beaſt by the way, or ſuch like indammagement witting or vnwitting.
               2. Iniuſtice is practiſed by keeping or detaining things that our neighbour hath right vnto, as

                     
                     1. Things ſtolne by another, where the receiuer is truly accounted worſe then the theefe.
                     2. Things loſt, when the owner is knowne or might be knowne, if one would vſe any fit meanes to finde him out.
                     3. Legacies, or any other thing committed to ones truſt, to beſtow vpon another.
                     4. Ill gotten goods or lands, that ones ſelfe or predeceſſors haue ſinfully come by.
                     5. Due ſatisfaction of dammages and treſpaſſes, wherein one hath wronged his neighbour.
                  
               
               2. Vniuſtice is practiſed colourably, when the vniuſtice is hidden ouer with ſome ſhew of right, whereof

                     1. Generally.
                     2. Particularly.
                  
               
               1. Generally, the maine points are,

                     1. Falſhood.
                     2. Rigor.
                  
               
               1. Falſhood.
               
                  1. In words, by lying in all kinde of dealing, to bring one gaines.
                  2. In deeds, when they be not agreeable to ones promiſes and vndertakings.
               
               
                  2. The ſecond generall rigor or extremitie, when a man will take all that he can make any ſhift, by any quirke or quidditie of law, in extremitie to get or to keepe, for extreme right is extreme wrong.
               2. Particularly. The ſpeciall points are

                     1. In dealings leſſe eminent.
                     2. In dealings more eminent.
                  
               
               1. In dealings leſſe eminent, or the ordinarie paſſages of buſineſſe, betwixt priuate men in bargaining, whereof there are fiue moſt remarkable kindes, viz.
                  
                     1.

                           Buying.
                           Selling.
                        
                     
                     2.

                           Setting and Letting.
                           Taking.
                        
                     
                     3.

                           Borrowing.
                           Lending.
                        
                     
                     4.

                           Hiering.
                           Working for hire.
                        
                     
                     5. Partnerſhip.
                  
               
               2. In dealings more eminent and publique.
               
                  
                  1. Ciuill.
                  2. Eccleſiaſticall.
               
               1. Ciuill.
               
                  1. By priuate men.
                  2. By publique perſons.
               
               1. By priuate men,

                     1. Betwixt buyers and ſellers.
                     2. Betwixt ſetters and letters.
                  
               
               2. Publique perſons.
               1. Betwixt buyers and ſellers, the faults are

                     1. Of the buyer.
                     2. Of the ſeller.
                  
               
               1. Of the buyer.
               
                  1. In regard of the thing that he doth buy.
                  2. In regard of the manner of buying.
               
               1. In regard of the thing that he doth buy.
               1. For quantitie, ingroſſing, when he buyes vp the ſtore that God ſends, and forceth a ſcarcitie, to enrich himſelfe.
               2. For the intereſt ſome other hath vnto it, when he buyes it out of another mans hands.
               
                  2. The manner of buying.
               
                  1. In regard of price.
                  2. In regard of reckoning.
                  3. In regard of paiment.
                  4. In regard of weighing.
               
               1. In regard of price, when becauſe of the ſimplicitie or neceſſitie of the ſeller, he gets it for leſſe then he knowes it to be worth, that is, then other who knew it, and had not ſuch need, but yet were willing to ſell, would vſually ſell the ſame.
               2. In regard of reckoning, when he miſreckons the ſeller, becauſe of his ſimplicitie or forgetfulneſſe.
               3. In regard of paiment, when he paies him falſe coine, or out of the appointed ſeaſon agreed vpon betwixt them.
               4. In regard of weighing or meaſuring, when by ſome deuices he gets more then his due.
               2. The faults in regard of the ſeller, are

                     1. For the matter.
                     2. For the manner.
                     3. For the perſon.
                  
               
               1. For the matter ſold, if it be inſufficient

and vnſaleable, as ſtuffe that is not the ſame for matter and goodneſſe, which it is made to appeare, or land that is intangled by ſome former bargaine.
               2. For the manner of ſelling.
               1. In regard of weights and meaſures, when they be not the ſame for heft, content, and extent, that law doth appoint, and vſually men in dealing doe expect.
               2. In regard of the manner of vſing waights and meaſures, when a man makes ſhew to giue waight and meaſure, but by iogging and other trickes doth cut the matter ſhorter, as in meaſuring three quarters of an Ell for a yard, which lacks about a naile of a yard in meaſure.
               3. In regard of the price, when the ſeller abuſeth the buyers neceſſitie or ſimplicitie, to ſell a thing dearer then he knowes it to be worth.
               4. In regard of reckonings, when the ſeller ouer-reckoneth the buyer, becauſe of his careleſneſſe, forgetfulneſſe, or ignorance.
               3. The ſeller is in fault, in regard of the perſon with whom he dealeth, when he labours by odde tricks to get away another

mans cuſtomer, as by ſelling for a while better cheape then he can afford, that after he may fetch it out againe, when he hath gotten the cuſtomer to credit him.
               2. Faults betwixt them that ſet and let things, and them that take, the faults are

                     1. Of the ſetter.
                     2. Of the taker.
                  
               
               1. Of the ſetter, whether he ſet or let

                     1. Lands.
                     2. Other things.
                  
               
               1. Lands and tenements, and that

                     1. By depopulating of townes and villages.
                     2. By thruſting out tenants cauſeleſly in anger.
                     3. By grinding his tenants.
                  
               
               1. By racking rents to exceſſiue prices.
               2. By letting vpon hard conditions.
               3. By miſconſtruing conditions, ſpecially to depriue him of his bargaine.
               4. By exacting hard ſeruices aboue the conditions, as that a poore labourer muſt worke with him all harueſt for a pennie or two pence a day leſſe then other men would giue.
               
                  2. In regard of other things, which are of other natures, as horſes, apparell, and the like, and that

                     1. By ſetting ſuch things, as are knowne to be naught and vnſufficient for his vſe that hireth the ſame.
                     2. By taking too hard a rate for them, becauſe of the takers need.
                     3. By turning the loſſe, (if any come by Gods hand, not the takers abuſing the thing let) vpon the taker, by any tricks, for the thing hired is loſt to the hirer, if it miſcarie without the fault of the taker.
                  
               
               2. The faults of the taker are

                     1. Taking lands or houſes ouer another mans head, or any other thing out of another mans hand, that is, when he is about to take it, and hath will and meanes, then by offering more then he is in price for, or by preuenting the tenant with offering before him, to get it from him.
                     2. Neglecting to pay the rent, or hire of a thing in due time and quantitie.
                     3. Making waſte in land by cutting the woods, or letting it goe out of heart, or the like.
                     4. Suffering houſes and tenements to goe out of repaire.
                     
                        5. Abuſing other things hired, as horſes by ouer-riding them, and not affording them ſuch prouender, and hay or graſſe as is ſufficient, and as wontedly men doe giue to their owne horſes.
                  
               
               3. Betwixt the borrower and lender, there are ſinnes

                     1. Of the borrower.
                     2. Of the lender.
                  
               
               1. Of the borrower.
               1. If he run in debt careleſly, or through greedineſſe, he that is bold to borrow, dealeth fooliſhly and vniuſtly too.
               2. If he be careleſſe to pay in due time, putting the lender to ſeeke and ſue for his owne.
               3. If he breake and play the banckerupt, only to beguile men, and compound for leſſe then the ſummes which he doth owe.
               4. If he abuſe the thing lent, it being ſuch a thing as may be abuſed, as an horſe, &c.
               5. If he winde others into danger, by drawing them to be ſureties for him, and then leauing them in the lurch.
               2. The lender ſinneth,

                     
                     1. If he rigorouſly exact debts of poore men, and ſuch as Gods hand by loſſes and croſſes hath brought low.
                     2. If he tranſgreſſe in pledges, and in morgages.

                           1. By taking a pledge of the poore, Iob. 24.9.
                           2. By taking of any mans things of preſent neceſſarie vſe for liuing.
                           3. By taking forfeitures with rigor.
                           4. By abuſing and making worſe the things pawned.
                        
                     
                  
               
               4. Betwixt thoſe that hire, and thoſe that worke for wages, there are ſins,

                     1. In the hirer.
                     2. In the hired.
                  
               
               1. In the hirer.
               
                  1. If he pay nothing at all.
                  2. Too little, that the hired cannot liue of it.
                  3. If he pay grumblingly and vnwillingly.
                  4. Vnſeaſonably, and with many delaies.
               
               2. The hireds ſinnes,

                     1. If he loyter and worke by the halfes.
                     2. If he bungle or doe his worke vnskilfully.
                     
                        3. If he purloigne any of the ſtuffe, or matter whereon he is to worke.
                  
               
               5. Partners ſinne,

                     1. If the one put the other to hard conditions.
                     2. If they miſreckon at parting.
                     3. If afore the parting, either peruert any of the common goods to his particular vſe, without priuitie and conſent of the reſt.
                     4. If either be ſlacke and negligent in their endeuours for the common profit.
                  
               
               Hitherto of colourable vniuſtice in dealings, leſſe eminent againſt commutatiue iuſtice: Now of that vniuſtice, which is in more eminent dealings againſt diſtributiue iuſtice in things

                     1. Ciuill.
                     2. Eccleſiaſticall.
                  
               
               1. Ciuill.
               
                  1. Of priuate men.
                  2. Of publike perſons.
               
               1. Of priuate men, in abuſing of law and the courts of Iuſtice.
               
                  1. On the Plaintifes part.
                  2. On the defendant.
               
               1. On the Plaintifes part,

                     
                     1. If he commence wrongfull ſuits, to vexe another, out of hope to beare it out by money and friends.
                     2. If he vſe bribing, and like tricks to beare out his cauſe whatſoeuer.
                  
               
               2. On the defendant, if he doe

                     1. Stand in a wrongfull cauſe, by friends, or trickes of law and delaies.
                     2. If hee vſe bribing and ſhifting deuices.
                  
               
               2. Publike perſons.
               
                  1. Generally.
                  2. Particularly.
               
               1. Generally, by abuſing of publique lands and moneys to their owne or friends priuate aduantage, againſt the true meaning of them that gaue ſuch lands or moneys.
               2. Particularly, in caſes of adminiſtring iuſtice betwixt party and party.
               
                  1. By extortion, in exacting ouerabundant fees.
                  2. By bribery, in taking gifts.
                  3. By peruerting iuſtice: either

                        1. In hindring a right ſentence.
                        2. In furthering a wrong ſentence.
                     
                  
               
               2. Againſt diſtributiue iuſtice, in things eccleſiaſticall.
               
                  
                  1. By ſacriledge.
                  2. Simony.
               
               1. By ſacriledge, turning to common vſes goods ſacred, either

                     1. By mans donation.
                     2. By Gods ſpeciall inſtitution.
                  
               
               2. Simonie, in taking money for preſenting any to benefices, ſpecially vnfit men, or in buying aduowſons.
               Hitherto of the eighth commandement concerning goods: the ninth followeth.
            
            
               Thou ſhalt not beare falſe witneſſe againſt thy neighbour.
               THe ſcope of which is to ſaue harmeleſſe that moſt precious Iewell of a good name.
               A good name is a fruit of goodneſſe, whereby a mans own heart & the hearts of others doe truly entertaine a good opinion of him, as of a good man.
               The duties commanded in this commandement, are of two ſorts.
               1. Concerning our ſelues, and they are

                     1. Inward.
                     
                        2. Outward.

                           1. In word.
                           2. In deed.
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. Concerning our neghbours.
               The duty of euery man concerning his owne good name inwardly reſpects

                     1. His opinion of himſelfe.
                     2. Other mens opinion of him.
                  
               
               1. His opinion of himſelfe and of his owne actions is twofold.
               1. Lowlineſſe or ſober-mindedneſſe, a being little in his owne eies, and eſteeming meanly of himſelfe, accounting others better then himſelfe, wherein to erre is a commendable error, & this lowlineſſe is the moſt gracefull ornament of vertues and commendable ſufficiencies.
               2. A true cenſuring and ſentencing of our owne actions, whether they be
               1. Good, in accounting them ſo, and taking comfort in them, as Paul did in his vpright walking in the miniſtery of the Goſpell, and could profeſſe as much when time ſerued.
               2. Or bad, in eſteeming them bad, and iudging our ſelues, and humbling our ſelues for them as Dauid ſaid, I haue done exceeding fooliſhly, after numbring of the people: ſo, I was a very beaſt, when he had

fretted againſt the proſperity of the wicked.
               2. A mans good name inwardly reſpects other mens opinion of him, which is double.
               1. A deſire to approue ones ſelfe to euery mans conſcience before God, and to behaue ones ſelfe, that all men may haue iuſt cauſe to haue him in good reputation.
               2. A right bearing other mens cenſures, whether they be

                     1. Good.
                     2. Bad.
                  
               
               1. Good, whether

                     1. True, by returning the praiſe to God, not taking it to our ſelues, as Daniel and Ioſeph did: we may take comfort, but the honour muſt be Gods.
                     2. Falſe, to reiect them with griefe, as Paul did their fond conceits that thought he had beene Iupiter.
                     
                  
               
               2. Bad, and that

                     1. True.
                     2. Falſe.
                  
               
               1. True, to be humbled thereby, yet without deiectedneſſe, knowing that there is a meanes left to recouer all againe.
               2. Falſe, either

                     1. For well doing, to reioyce in it, or
                     
                        2. For nothing, either

                           1. To deſpiſe it, as Chriſt did the ſhame.
                           2. To make vſe of it for our humbling in other particulars, as Dauid of Shimeies railing.
                        
                     
                  
               
               So much of the inward duties whereby wee ſhould preſerue our owne good name. The outward follow, and firſt in words.
               
                  1. By reſtraint of ſpeech.
                  2. By vſe of ſpeech.
               
               1. By reſtraint of ſpeech, called ſilence, or taciturnity, to be practiſed

                     1. Vpon occaſion of two things.
                     2. In matters chiefly of two kindes.
                  
               
               1. Vpon occaſion of two things.
               
                  1. The preſence.
                  2. The paſſions.
               
               1. The preſence, either

                     1. Of our betters and ſuperiours in high degree.
                     2. Of our captious enemies.
                     3. Of wicked men and ſcorners.
                  
               
               2. The paſſions that ſtirre

                     1. In our owne hearts.
                     2. In them to whom wee ſhould otherwiſe ſpeake.
                  
               
               
                  2. Reſtraint of ſpeech, in matters chiefly of two kindes.
               
                  1. That exceed our place or capacitie.
                  2. That would be hurtfull to our neighbours or our ſelues.
               
               Hitherto of reſtraint of ſpeech: now followes
               2. Vſe of ſpeech, both

                     1. In generall.
                     2. Speciall.
                  
               
               1. In generall whatſoeuer we ſpeake of,

                     1. For matter of words or the thing ſpoken of, that it be ſuch as we haue to doe withall, and appertaineth to our calling.
                     2. For manner, that our words be

                           1. Deliberate.
                           2. Diſcreet.
                           3. True.
                           4. Modeſt.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1 Deliberate, ſetting the watch of wiſdome before to examine to what purpoſe we ſpeake before we ſpeake.
               2. Diſcreet, fitted and proportioned

                     1. To the perſons

                           Speaking.
                           Spoken to.
                        
                     
                     2. To time and place.
                     
                        3. To the nature of the thing ſpoken of.
                  
               
               3. True.
               
                  1. In narrations.
                  2. In promiſes.
               
               1. In narrations agreeing

                     1. To the things themſelues.
                     2. To our conceits of them.
                  
               
               2. In promiſes, ſeconded with a firme purpoſe and care of keeping them.
               4. Modeſt and ſober, ſpeaking with a kinde of doubting, and reſeruing of the reſpect of them that thinke otherwiſe.
               2. The vſe of ſpeech in ſpeciall when we are to ſpeake of our ſelues.
               
                  1. Of our owne good deeds.
                  2. Of our bad deeds.
               
               1. Of our good deeds, where muſt bee ſhewed,

                     1. Vpon what occaſions wee may ſpeake.
                     2. In what manner.
                  
               
               1. Vpon what occaſions we may ſpeake of our owne commendable actions, viz. foure waies.
               
                  1. By way of apologie againſt ſlanders.
                  2. By propoſing our ſelues (in caſe age and authority will beare it) to the imitation of others.
                  
                     3. In condemning and reprouing ſuch as ſhew groſſe vnthankfulneſſe to vs.
                  4. By way of ouer-entreating that wee may better preuaile in honeſt requeſts.
               
               2. In what manner we are to ſpeake of our owne good deeds, it muſt be done vpon theſe occaſions.
               1. With ſpeeches of mitigation tending to giue away all the glory from our ſelues vnto God.
               2. With profeſſion of our vnwillingneſſe to doe it, when the occaſion is ſo vrgent (as in Iobs caſe) that may well ſaue vs that labour.
               2. Of our owne bad deeds, whether

                     1. Slanderouſly.
                     2. Truly.
                  
               
               1. Slanderouſly or falſely imputed vnto vs, by defending our innocency,

                     1. Subſtantially with ſound proofes.
                     2. Mildly and meekely with a calme ſpirit.
                  
               
               2. Truly laid to our charge and committed by vs, whether they be ſuch as are

                     1. Open.
                     2. Secret.
                  
               
               1. Open and already knowne, and ready to come to light, which we muſt confeſſe.
               
                  1. Plainely.
                  
                     2. Humbly.
               
               2. Secret and kept cloſe alone to our ſelues, which we muſt confeſſe but

                     1. On very iuſt occaſion.
                     2. With due choice.
                     3. With due caution.
                  
               
               1. On very iuſt occaſion, viz. when our ſelues

                     1. Are ſo doubtfull of pardon, that we cannot by our owne endeuours ſettle our faith.
                     2. When wee are ſo weake, that we cannot by our owne labour ouercome the ſinne.
                  
               
               2. With due choyce of a fit perſon to whom we may confeſſe, viz. one that is

                     1. A friend and well-willer.
                     2. Fearing God in good meaſure.
                     3. Of good vnderſtanding to aduiſe.
                     4. Truſty and able to keepe ſecret, which we may if not know by experience, yet neerely gheſſe of, by his not being

                           1. Inquiſitiue.
                           2. Talkatiue.
                        
                     
                  
               
               3. With due and fit caution, binding the perſon to ſilence and ſecrecy by a ſolemne vow or oath: faſt binde, faſt finde, ſaith the prouerbe; and nothing is more needfull

to be faſt bound then a ſecret.
               So much of the ordering of our words: Now of our deeds and actions both

                     1. Generally.
                     2. Particularly.
                  
               
               1. Generally, that they be ſuch as are

                     1. In themſelues good, lawfull, honeſt, and of good report amongſt men.
                     2. In their circumſtances conuenient and expedient.
                  
               
               2. Particularly.
               
                  1. In regard of the choice of our company.
                  2. In regard of our owne cariage.
               
               1. In regard of the choyce of our company.
               
                  1. That we aſſociate our ſelues with good men.
                  2. That wee ſhunne familiarity with bad men.
               
               2. In regard of our owne cariage.
               1. That wee louingly accept admonitions.
               2. That we earneſtly reiect flatteries, and flatterers.
               3. That we keepe our promiſes faithfully (vnleſſe the things promiſed be ſins) or if we be not able, goe to the perſon to

whom wee made them, and ſhewing our caſe craue pardon, if the matter will admit of ſo doing.
               4. Carry our ſelues lowlily, & equall our ſelues with them of the lower ſort, and that,
               1. In countenance, gate, deportment of bodie.
               2. In ornaments of all ſorts, in attire, houſhold ſtuffe, attendance, building, &c. So much of the duties concerning our owne good name: thoſe follow that concerne the good name of our brethren, and they are of two ſorts.
               
                  1. Inward.
                  2. Outward.
               
               1. Inward.
               
                  1. Reſpecting our opinion.
                  2. Our cenſure.
               
               1. Reſpecting our opinion of him in two things.
               
                  1. That we thinke well of him till he deſerue the contrary.
                  2. That we renew our good opinion of him, vpon his repentance and amendment.
               
               2. Our cenſure of his actions, whether they be

                     
                     1. Certaine, or
                     2. Doubtfull.
                  
               
               1. Certaine.
               
                  1. Good.
                  2. Bad.
               
               1. Good.
               
                  1. To acknowledge them.
                  2. To be glad of them.
               
               2. Our bad cenſure of his actions.
               
                  1. To ſee them.
                  2. To be ſorry for them.
               
               2. Doubtfull.
               1. Whether they were done or no, to hope the beſt, and not condemne one vpon light coniectures.
               2. Whether they were well meant or no, to conſtrue things in the beſt ſenſe that may be.
               2. The outward duties concerning our brethren,

                     1. In our ordinary conuerſation both for

                           1. Words, ſpoken, heard.
                           2. Deeds.
                        
                     
                     2. In matters of iudgement.
                  
               
               1. Our words in ordinary conuerſation muſt be ordered well, and that

                     1. By reſtraining ſpeech.
                     
                        2. By vſing ſpeech.
                  
               
               1. By reſtraining ſpeech,

                     1. Of their bad deeds.
                     2. Of their good deeds.
                  
               
               1. Of their bad deeds behinde their backes but

                     1. Vpon iuſt cauſe.
                     2. In good manner.
                  
               
               1. Vpon iuſt cauſe.
               1. If they bee publique and openly knowne to glorifie the iuſtice of God, and edifie others.
               2. If they be priuate and knowne to none, or few but our ſelues, then

                     1. To warne thoſe that might elſe be infected.
                     2. To aduertiſe thoſe that haue authority to redreſſe it.
                  
               
               2. In reſtraining ſpeeches of their bad deeds, in a good manner, that is,

                     1. Sparingly, rather with the leaſt then moſt.
                     2. Pitifully, with compaſſion and louing affection.
                  
               
               2. By reſtraining ſpeech of their good deeds before their face, but

                     1. Vpon good occaſion.
                     2. With manifeſt referring of the praiſe to God.
                  
               
               
                  1. Vpon good occaſion.
               
                  1. Of encouragement, and that

                        1. Againſt temptations.
                        2. Againſt oppoſitions.
                     
                  
                  2. Of thankfull acknowledgement of good receiued.
               
               2. With manifeſt referring of the praiſe to God, that they may not be puffed vp.
               2. Our words in ordinary conuerſation muſt be ordered well by vſing ſpeech,

                     1 In their preſence.
                     2. In their abſence.
                  
               
               1. In their preſence, of their deeds,

                     1. Good, encouragement to proceed.
                     2. Bad, reprehenſion & admonition.
                  
               
               2. In their abſence.
               
                  1. Praiſe, to ſtirre vp others to imitate them.
                  2. Iuſt defence againſt ſlanders and calumniations.
               
               Hitherto of the right ordering of our ſelues in regard of our owne ſpeeches. Now for that that concernes the words which we heare others ſpeake of our neighbours: which is twofold.
               1. In generall, wee muſt examine that that is ſpoken vnto vs, and call for due proofe.
               
                  2. In ſpeciall.
               1. For the euill reported, we muſt

                     1. Be vnwilling to heare it and reiect ſuch tales.
                     2. Vnwilling to giue any credit to it, without very ſufficient proofe, and then ſorrowfull for it.
                  
               
               2. For the good reported, we muſt

                     1. Be glad and willing to heare it.
                     2. Willing and deſirous to beleeue it, if there be any probable proofe that it is true.
                  
               
               So much for the ordering of our words.
               Now for our deeds.
               1. We muſt vſe all ciuill and reſpectiue cariage to our neighbour tending to grace him.
               2. We muſt by all meanes ſtriue to draw him to good and vertuous behauiour, that may deſerue commendation.
               And this for our ordinary conuerſation. Now for matters of iudgement, in it there are vſually amongſt vs foure ſorts of men exerciſed.
               
                  1. The witneſſe.
                  2. The aduocate.
                  3. The jurors.
                  4. The Iudge.
               
               
                  1. The witneſſe, whoſe duty is to declare

                     1. The whole truth, without adding, diminiſhing, or altering for fauour or ill will.
                     2. Nothing but the truth, no intermixture of falſhood is allowable.
                  
               
               2. The aduocate, pleader, or counſeller, who muſt with an vnpartiall eye ſeeke to finde out, and cleare the truth, though it be to the detriment of his client.
               3. The jurors, who muſt

                     1. Indifferently conſider of the euidence, and throughly ſearch it.
                     2. Bring a right verdict according thereto, without fauour anger.
                  
               
               4. The Iudge, who muſt

                     1. Giue free ſcope to the proceedings of iuſtice.
                     2. Paſſe a right and vnpartiall ſentence according to the proofes that ſhall be ſubſtantially produced.
                  
               
               Hitherto the things commanded in this commandement. Now of the ſinnes againſt it, which are

                     1. Of omiſſion.
                     2. Of commiſſion, in regard of the name

                           1. Of onesſelfe.
                           2. Of ones neighbour.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  1. Of ones ſelfe.
               
                  1. Inward.
                  2. Outward, for

                        Words.
                        Deeds.
                     
                  
               
               2. Of ones neighbour.
               
                  1. Inward.
                  2. Outward, for
               
               1. Ordinary conuerſation,

                     1. In words.
                     2. In deeds.
                  
               
               2. For matters of iudgement.
               This Commandement is broken in regard of our owne good name inwardly ſo farre as concerned.
               
                  1. A mans opinion of himſelfe.
                  2. The opinion of other men concerning vs.
               
               1. A mans opinion of himſelfe, and that

                     1. In exceſſe.
                     2. In defect.
                  
               
               1. In exceſſe by two ſinnes.
               1. Selfe-conceitedneſſe, which hath three degrees.
               
                  1. To imagine ones ſelfe to haue the vertues he hath not.
                  2. To thinke that hee hath more then it is.
                  3. To bee good in his owne eies,

becauſe of that hee hath.
               
               The ſecond ſinne in exceſſe is ſelfe-flattery, which hath alſo foure degrees.
               
                  1. A counting ones ſelfe free from the vices, which he is not free from.
                  2. Calling his owne vices by the names of vertues, as prodigality, good neighbourhood, &c.
                  3. Eſteeming his groſſe ſinnes to be infirmities, and ſmall faults.
                  4. Imagining to ſcape reproach for all his great faults, confeſſed ſo to bee, becauſe hee ſaith in his heart, no man ſhall know it.
               
               2. A mans opinion or himſelfe in defect, by two ſinnes,

                     1. Deiectedneſſe.
                     2. Rigorous condemning.
                  
               
               1. Deiectedneſſe is a falſe accuſing of ones ſelfe as an hypocrite (when he is not) becauſe of afflictions and imperfections.
               2. Ouer-rigorous cenſuring ones owne actions, is a condemning of them exceſſiuely as foule, wicked, & naught in extremity, when indeed they be alone weakneſſes and imperfections. Theſe two ſinnes are not ſo vſuall, but the children of God in temptation doe fall into them.
               
                  Theſe things are faults in regard of our owne opinion of our ſelues: thoſe follow which reſpect
               2. The opinions of other men concerning vs, which are,

                     1. Good.
                     2. Bad.
                  
               
               1. Good, and that

                     1. In exceſſe.
                     2. In defect.
                  
               
               1. In exceſſe, where are foure faults.
               
                  1. Hypocriſie, a deſire to make a ſhew of goodneſſe to men-ward, without any care of being ſo indeed.
                  2. Vaine glory, which is an inordinate deſire of praiſe from men, and is of two kindes.

                        1. When we doe our good deeds only or principally to be ſeene of men, which alwaies goes hand in hand with hypocriſie.
                        2. When we deſire to be magnified, for wit, learning, wealth, parentage, and ſuch toyes, that may befall a bad man as well as a good, chiefly when in truth we haue them not.
                     
                  
                  3. The third fault is accepting and reioycing in falſe praiſes, as Herod was content to be magnified as a God.
                  
                     4. Swelling and being puffed vp with true praiſes.
               
               2. Faults which reſpect defect, diſregarding a good name, and not caring whether men thinke well or ill of vs.
               2. The bad opinion of other men, concerning vs, and that alſo

                     1. In exceſſe.
                     2. In defect.
                  
               
               1. In exceſſe in two things.
               
                  1. Falſe ſhame.
                  2. Vexation at falſe reports.
               
               1. Falſe ſhame, in being aſhamed of that that is not ſhamefull, as

                     1. Of ſcoffes & taunts for well doing.
                     2. Of pouerty, a poore coat or houſe, or a poore kinſman, &c.
                  
               
               2. Vexation at falſe reports, and being troubled and led ouer-much by what men will ſay of vs.
               2. The bad opinion of other men concerning vs in defect: as, impudency, when a man is not aſhamed of his ill workes, though all the world talke of them to his reproach.
               Hitherto of inward diſorders about our owne good name. The outward follow, & firſt in regard of our words, and that

                     
                     1. Generally.
                     2. Specially.
                  
               
               1. Generally, which is

                     1. In quantity of words.
                     2. In quality of words.
                  
               
               1. In quantity of words.
               1. In exceſſe, talkatiueneſſe and blabbing, when a man is full of words and ready to tell any thing that is in his minde.
               2. In defect, ſullenneſſe, reſtrainedneſſe of ſpeech, when one will not ſpeake though hee ought, out of his diſcontentment.
               2. In quality of words, and that
               1. By raſh ſpeaking, ſpeaking at all aduentures, not caring to what end and vſe.
               2. By vndiſcreet ſpeeches, disbecomming the ſpeaker, hearer, time, or place, or matter, ſpecially medling with what concernes one not.
               3. By falſe ſpeeches, and that

                     1. In narrations.
                     2. In promiſes.
                  
               
               1. In narrations

                     1. By affirming, Otherwiſe then the thing is.
                     2. By denying, Otherwiſe then the thing is.
                  
               
               2. In promiſes, when one doth giue them for a ſhift, without a ſerious purpoſe of performance.
               
                  4. By peremptory ſpeeches, in eager affirming or denying in things that haue vncertainty in them.
               2. Diſorders in regard of our words, ſpecially when wee ſpeake of our owne deeds.
               
                  1. In exceſſe.
                  2. In defect.
               
               1. In exceſſe, when wee hunt too much after praiſe.
               
                  1. In regard of our good deeds.
                  2. In regard of our bad deeds.
               
               1. In regard of our good deeds.
               
                  1. By boaſting of them, in much large and cauſleſſe mentioning them.
                  2. By fained extenuating them.
               
               2. In regard of our bad deeds, and thoſe

                     1. Falſly imputed vnto vs.
                     2. Laid to our charge.
                  
               
               1. Falſely imputed vnto vs.
               
                  1. By paſſionateneſſe at them.
                  2. By inſufficient diſprouing them.
               
               2. Bad deeds truly laid to our charge,

                     1. By falſe denying them.
                     2. By friuolous excuſing them.
                     3. By chafing at the admoniſher.
                  
               
               2. In defect.
               
                  
                  1. By blabbing our owne faults cauſeleſly, or to vnfit perſons.
                  2. By belying our ſelues for any aduantage or feare.
               
               So much of ſinnes againſt our owne good name in words: thoſe in deeds follow.
               
                  1. In exceſſe.
                  2. In defect.
               
               1. In exceſſe by foure faults,

                     1. By oſtentation of wealth, wit, learning, &c.
                     2. By an hypocriticall good life, ſinning in ſecret, though in publique one ſeeme to be free.
                     3. By inſolent lifting vp of ones ſelfe aboue his brethren, in gate, countenance, taking place before them, or the like.
                     4. By giuing entertainment to flatterers.
                  
               
               2. Deeds in defect by foure things.
               
                  1. By liuing in open groſſe ſinnes, drunkenneſſe, whordome, and the like.
                  2. By breaking lawfull promiſes.
                  3. By diſſembling ones eſtate, and making a ſhew of pouertie, when one is rich.
                  4. By keeping ill companie, and other appearances of euill.
               
               
                  So much of ſinnes againſt a mans owne good name: now of thoſe that tend to hurt the good name of another, and firſt of the inward, in regard of

                     1. Our opinion of our neighbour.
                     2. Our behauiour for his actions.
                  
               
               1. Our opinion of our neighbour, both in

                     1. Defect.
                     2. Exceſſe.
                  
               
               1. In defect, by

                     1. Cenſuring or raſh iudging, when vpon inſufficient grounds wee condemne him, as if he were an hypocrite, &c.
                     2. Continuing to haue an hard opinion of a man notwithſtanding his repentance.
                  
               
               2. In exceſſe, by

                     1. An ouer credulous beleeuing of euery ſmall appearance of goodneſſe.
                     2. Hauing mens perſons in too much admiration.
                  
               
               2. Our behauiour for his actions, which are

                     1. Certaine.
                     2. Doubtfull.
                  
               
               1. Certaine, and thoſe

                     1. Good.
                     2. Bad.
                  
               
               1. Good and commendable.
               
                  
                  1. By captiouſneſſe, in deſiring to picke quarrels with them.
                  2. By enuie, in greeuing at them and his praiſe.
               
               2. Bad and diſcommendable, which are likewiſe two.
               
                  1. Partialitie, hindering a man from ſeeing a plaine fault in a childe, friend, &c.
                  2. Inſultation or reioycing, in the faults and reproach of a ſtranger.
               
               2. Doubtfull, whether they were

                     1. Done or no, euill ſurmiſes, iealouſies and vngrounded ſuſpitions.
                     2. Well meant or no, miſconſtruing, & taking them in the worſe part. Theſe are inward ſins againſt our neighbours good name. The outward are

                           1. In regard of words.
                           2. In regard of deeds.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. In regard of words.
               
                  1. Our owne.
                  2. Other mens.
               
               1. Our owne.
               1. Generally inquiſitiueneſſe and medling with his buſineſſe more then we haue calling.
               2. Particularly, in ſpeaking of him,

                     1. Things tending to his commendation.
                     
                        2. Things tending to his diſcommendation.
                  
               
               1. Things rending to his cōmendation.
               
                  1. In exceſſe, as flattery, when we praiſe him more then truth will beare.
                  2. In defect, and that

                        1. In deprauing, viz. making his good deeds ſeeme ill.
                        2. Detracting, making his good deeds ſeeme leſſe commendable.
                     
                  
               
               2. Things tending to his diſcommendation, and that

                     1. In exceſſe, by vniuſt extenuating his faults, or defending them and him.
                     2. In defect, whether

                           1. Telling his true faults.
                           2. Slandering him.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. By telling his true faults,

                     1. Vnſeaſonably.
                     2. Paſſionately.
                  
               
               1. Vnſeaſonably and cauſeleſly.
               
                  1. By way of ieſting at him for them.
                  2. Railing and vpbraiding.
                  3. Whiſpering or priuie blabbing and tale-bearing.
                  4. Open back-biting.
               
               2. Paſſionately, with extreme aggrauations and words tending to the extreme abaſing

of him, as, hang him beaſt.
               2. By ſlandering him,

                     1. Openly.
                     2. Darkly.

                           1. Open ſlander.
                           2. Cloſe ſlander.
                        
                     
                  
               
               1. Open ſlander is

                     1. By telling.
                     2. By miſtelling.
                  
               
               1. By telling.
               
                  1. Knowne vntruths of him.
                  2. Things vncertaine and of heareſay alone, as if they were certaine.
               
               2. By miſtelling, by

                     1. Additions.
                     2. Diminiſhing.
                     3. Peruerting his meaning.
                  
               
               2. Cloſe ſlander is by darke and inſinuating ſpeeches, and ſtopping in the midſt of them, ſounding ill of him.
               Theſe be the faults in regard of our owne ſpeeches of our neighbours: there be other in regard of
               2. Other mens ſpeeches to vs of him, whether they tell

                     1. Tales tending to his diſgrace, if

                           1. we heare them gladly
                           2. Beleeue them lightly
                        
                     
                     2. Things making for his commendation if we be

                           
                           1. Vnwilling and ſad at hearing of them.
                           2. Hard of beleefe to entertaine them.
                        
                     
                  
               
               So much for words: now for
               2. Deeds: where three things are faultie.
               
                  1. Drawing him to diſgracefull actions, and chiefly of ſet purpoſe.
                  2. Reproachfull carriages, mowing, hanging out the lip.
                  3. Accepting of perſons, vſing a rich man reſpectiuely, though hee be naught, a poore man contemptibly though he be good.
               
               So are the faults in ordinary conuerſation. Thoſe follow that are in matter iudiciall, and they are foure.
               
                  1. Witneſſes.
                  2. The aduocate.
                  3. The jurors.
                  4. The Iudge.
               
               1. Witneſſes, if they either

                     1. Conceale any neceſſarie part of the truth, for feare or fauour, &c.
                     2. If they ſpeake things
                  
               
               1. Vncertaine and doubtfull wherof they haue not ſufficient warrant and knowledge.
               2. If they ſpeake things falſe and vntrue.
               
                  
                  1. Whether openly and in plaine termes.
                  2. Or obſcurely by doubtfull words, equiuocations and reſeruations.
               
               2. The aduocate or pleader, &c. if he pleade

                     1. Falſly.
                     2. Cunningly.
                     3. Fainedly.
                  
               
               1. Falſly, either by denying or affirming otherwiſe then the thing is.
               2. Cunningly, in miſurging or peruerting things,

                     1. To iuſtifie the malefactor.
                     2. To condemne the innocent.
                  
               
               3. Fainedly or faintly, for good cauſes.
               3. The Iurors, if they

                     1. Take their euidence careleſly.
                     2. If they bring in a falſe verdict for hatred, ſpleene or fauour.
                  
               
               4. The Iudge.
               
                  1. If he hinder the proceedings of law.
                  2. If he vrge things in extremitie.
                  3. If he paſſe a wrong ſentence.
               
               Hitherto the ninth commandement: the tenth followes.
            
            
               
               Thou ſhalt not couet thy neighbours houſe, &c.
               ANd it reſpects all thoſe things ioyntly, which the former aimed at ſeuerally, in regard of the very firſt vndeliberate, vnaduiſed, and vnallowed (at leaſt not conſented to) motions of the heart. Here

                     1. The things commanded.
                     2. Things forbidden.
                  
               
               1. The things commanded are foure.
               
                  1. A iuſt, righteous, and charitable inclination toward our neighbour, whereby we ſtand prone and apt to doe our dutie to him.
                  2. The ſtirring vp of all good motions that may induce vs to doe him any good, vpon any iuſt occaſion.
                  3. A cheriſhing of all good motions to his good, that are by God or man put into our mindes.
                  4. Perfect contentation with our owne things.
               
               2. The things forbidden in this commandement are

                     
                     1. Of omiſſion of any the fore-mentioned things, or the ſtrength or power of them.
                     2. In commiſſion.
                  
               
               1. By a bad inclination of heart againſt others, of which the Scripture ſaith, The frame of the heart is euill.
               2. By bad motions, tending to hurt him in his place, perſon, ſafetie, chaſtitie, goods, good name, whether thoſe motions ariſe
               1. From our owne corrupt hearts, either

                     1. Sleeping, in dreames.
                     2. Or waking, in fancies of our mindes.
                  
               
               2. Or be ſuggeſted from Satan, if we entertaine them with any the leaſt delight or pleaſure. If we doubt how naturall imaginations may be diſtinguiſhed from the aduentitious, we muſt know that the conceits of our hearts are either

                     1. Mixt.
                     2. Simple.
                  
               
               1. Mixt, where the deuill and the fleſh concurre in ſtirring them vp, and in thoſe we are euer faultie, becauſe we ioyne, or rather Satan ioynes with vs.
               
                  2. Simple, wholly and only
               1. From our ſelues, and here we alone are in blame.
               2. From the deuill, which if they ſtay and procure any delight, we are acceſſarie to them; if they be preſently with deteſtation reiected, we are guiltleſſe. And theſe ſimply deuilliſh imaginations ſhew themſelues manifeſtly
               1. By their ſuddenneſſe and independancie vpon other thoughts or obiects preſent, comming in as it were by the head and ſhoulders.
               2. They ſhew themſelues by their violence, and ſtirring, in that they doe as it were ouer-whelme with their force, multitude, continuance, and are more vehement and diſtempered then the naturall.
               For the further vnderſtanding of the law, it muſt be knowne that euery commandement and branch of a commandement is broken in regard

                     1. Of our owne actions.
                     2. In regard of our intereſt into the deeds of other men.
                  
               
               1. In regard of our owne actions, and that

                     1. Directly.
                     
                        2. Indirectly.
                  
               
               1. Directly, in regard

                     1. Of the matter.
                     2. The cauſes.
                     3. The meaſure.
                  
               
               1. In regard of the matter of the act,

                     1. By commiſſion of a thing forbidden.
                     2. By omiſſion of a thing commanded.
                  
               
               2. In regard of the cauſes,

                     1. Mouing, if it be a ſelfe-reſpect, and not deſire of pleaſing God.
                     2. Finall, if we arme at our ſelues alone, not at Gods glory.
                     3. In regard of the meaſure of doing, if we faile of the ſtrength and perfection required.
                  
               
               2. Indirectly, by things of themſelues not condemned, but ſuch as to vs proue

                     1. Occaſions of euill.
                     2. Appearances of euill.
                  
               
               2. Euery commandement is broken, in regard of our intereſt to the deeds of other men, which are either

                     1. Good.
                     2. Bad.
                  
               
               1. Good, and that

                     
                     1. Inwardly.
                     2. Outwardly.
                  
               
               1. Inwardly.
               
                  1. If we doe not allow them, nor reioyce in them.
                  2. If we doe either diſlike them, or be greeued and angrie at them.
               
               2. Outwardly, if we

                     1. Neglect what might

                           1. Draw them thereto.
                           2. Confirme them therein.
                        
                     
                     2. If we practiſe any thing that might

                           1. Hinder them therefrom.
                           2. Diſcourage them therein.
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. Our intereſt into the deeds of bad men, and that likewiſe

                     1. Inwardly.
                     2. Outwardly.
                  
               
               1. Inwardly, either

                     1. If we doe not

                           1. Condemne them in our iudgement.
                           2. Be greeued and angrie at them in our affections.
                        
                     
                     2. If we doe

                           1. Allow them in iudgement.
                           2. Reioyce in them in affection.
                        
                     
                  
               
               2. Outwardly.
               
                  
                  1. By neglecting any thing.
                  2. By practiſing any thing.
               
               1 By neglecting any thing that may

                     1. Keepe them from committing the ſame.
                     2. That may draw them to repentance and amendment.
                  
               
               2. If we practiſe any thing

                     1. That may draw and induce them thereto.
                     2. That may harden and confirme them therein.
                  
               
               Men are to be drawne to well doing.
               
                  1. By words.
                  2. By deeds.
               
               1. By words of exhorting, and (in a ſuperiour) commanding.
               2. By deeds.
               
                  1. By giuing good example.
                  2. In rewarding.
                  3. In ioyning with them.
                  4. In procuring for them

                        1. Leaue.
                        2. Fit inſtruments.
                        3. Conuenient opportunities.
                     
                  
               
               And by the contrary they muſt be kept from euill.
               Men are to be confirmed in well doing,

                     
                     1. By words tending to iuſtifie, and commend them.
                     2. By deeds, tending to countenance and reward them. And by the contrarie they muſt be drawne out of euill.
                  
               
               Men are hindered from well doing,

                     1. In word, by diſſwading, forbidding, threatning.
                     2. In deeds, in withdrawing leaue, inſtruments, opportunities, and by the contrary they are furthered to euill.
                  
               
               Men are diſcouraged in well doing,

                     1. By words tending to deride, calumniate and diſgrace them.
                     2. By deeds, in puniſhing them, or cauſing others to doe it, and by the contrarie they are in euill deeds confirmed.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   