
      
         
            
            
            THE
HONORABLE
REPVTATION
of a Souldier:
With a Morall Report, of the Vertues,
Offices, and (by abuse) the
Disgrace of his profession.
            
            Drawen out of the liues, documents, and disciplines,
of the most renowned Romaine, Grecian,
and other famous Martialistes.
            By George Whetstone, Gent.
Malgre de Fortune.
            Imprinted at London, by Richard Iones: dwelling
neere vnto Holburne Bridge. 1585.
         
         
            
            
            To the most worthy Gent.
Sir William Russell, Knight, accomplishment
of his honorable desire.
            
               
                  SIR, hauing (I may truly saye) with
much labour compiled a booke, Intituled.
The English Mirour: the first part setting

                  •
               orth, The Conquests of Enuy: cōtaining,
ruine and subuertion of the auncient M
                  •
               
               narchies
and common weales, &c. The
second part, shewing Enuy to be conquered by Vertue: publishing
the peaceable victories of her Maiestie, to Gods 
                  •
               ye
glorie and vniuersall wonder. The third part, intituled, A
Fortresse against Enuy: wherin euery good cōmon wealthsman,
may see the true offices, vertues, and (by abuse) the
disgrace of his profession: But because, the booke is of some
volume, I cannot haue it speedily printed: and for that occasiō
now (at this present) maketh passadge for this Subiet,
being a member or si
                  •
               all parcell of the fore-recited booke:
Therefore, as a testimonie of the zeale which I beare to
your worship, and euery worthy person, whose profession is
Martiall, I reuerently submit my trauell, to be censur'd by
your able iudgement, which medleth no whit with Millitarie
execution, but altogether with Morall goue
                     •
                  nmēt, necessarie
for a perfect Souldier. For, if I my selfe, which haue
béene brought vp among the Muses, in our English (onely)
peaceable and happy gouernmēt, should take vppon mee to
set forth the order of battailes, th'aduantages of places, the
benifits of stratagems, with many other Millitary regards,
both offenciue and defenciue, I might for my hyre iustly receaue,
the scoffe that Hamball gaue vnto the Philosopher
Phormio: who (vpon such an indiscrete discriptiō) 
                  •
               ould him

that, The Art millitarie was sooner learned of Souldiers in
the brode fields, thē of Philosophers in close scoles. And certainly,
Haniball aunswered more like▪ Philosopher, then
Phormio reasoned like a Souldier: for, Experiēce is ye true
Teacher of all Artes: and therefore (that honorable part of
a Souldier, which containeth Martiall execution) I leaue
to the report of the well experiēced Captaine: and no doubt,
among the worthie English Capt
                  ••
               nes, there are some, that
can vse both Caesars pen and sword. My trauell (which worketh
betweene fire and frost (as I haue saide) onely containeth:
The Moral vertues & honorable Reputatiō of a Souldier.
And certainly, two of the greatest partes therof, Caesar
setteth forth, i
                  •
                that which bee calleth his chiefest glorie,
which was: Mamillus, vpō occasiō asked Caesar, what thing
hee had done, wherein hee held him selfe most honored?
I sweare vnto thee MAMILLVS, by the immortall
Gods (sayd CESAR) that I haue done nothing whereof
I hould my selfe so much honored and happy: as, for that I
haue liberally rewarded those which haue serued mee, and
mercifully haue forgiuen such as haue offended me. Words
and vertues, beseeming Caesar, and without which, Caesar
could neuer haue beene Monarcke of the whole worlde: for
the Captaine that lib
                  •
               rally rewardeth his Souldiers, shall
haue his souldiers resolute in execution, and who showeth
mercy to his Enimie, shal conquer millions with loue.
            The Spainiard is so insolent, and outragious where he
ouercommeth, as hee is hated to death of those which 
                  •
               baye
him for f
                  •
               are: I haue séene ample experience therof, both in
the Duchy of Millaine, and kingdome of Naples. And (your
god fauour and patience desired) I shall show no impertinent
example. In the yeare 1580. in which year the Pope
and his confederates, hoped to haue had a great day in Englande,
whose expectation God alwayes frustrate, my selfe
with one other English Gentleman (who in this commendation
will haue his name concealed) were at Thurin intertained
into the companie of a worthy Gentleman of
Picardie, named Monseur Dobart, who was then ready to

trauell into Italy: and being all lodged one night in a Garrison
town, in the Duchy of Millain, neare vnto the Riuer of
Poo, at the middest of supper, a haughtie proude Spaniard,
came and sat him downe by vs. Monseur Dobart (bearing
an affectionate zeale vnto her Maiestie, & the state of England,
as well for that he was an earnest protestant, as for
that his sister and other frends, were honorably vsed in the
Court of England, in the former troubles of Fraunce) demaunded
of the Spaniard, what might bee the cause, that
the King of Spaine had that yeare raised so great an Army?
The Spaniard forthwith made this proude & insolent aunswere:
Ah Sir, the time nowe draweth neare, that we shall
haue the spoile of rich England▪ that we shall embrace their
faire wiues, and make hauocke of their lōg gathered riches:
And disco
                  •
               ering that there was an Englishman in companie,
that tolierated these hie wordes, hee beganne spitefully
to bra
                  •
               e him: But on 
                  •
               he soden, the spaniard sound the temper
of the English-mans fingers: so that shame, to repaire
his disgrace, compelled the Spaniard to offer combat: Monseur
Dobart very honorably vndertooke that the English-Gentleman,
should the next morning by six of the clocke, be
ready to crosse the Riuer of Poo, with the spaniard, to commit
eithers cause to God, and their swords This was mutually
agréed vpon, but by breake of the daye, the spaniards
brags vanished like bubbles, & be himselfe slipt away without
giuing any bon-giorno, so that the English Gentleman
could haue no further reuenge, sauing that in the place of
this controuersie, finding this Italian sentēce to be writtē:
Le parole son femine, & i fatti son maschi. 
               
                  〈◊〉
                in dispight,
wrote vnderneath: Donques gli spanioli son femine, et gli
Inglese son maschi: and truly the h
                  •
               aste of the house, with
many dispightful words of the spaniards proude & naughty
behauiour, to his perpetual blame, hath faithfully promised,
that the subscription should not be rased out, without being
secretly new written againe: But the spaniard had reuēge
inough by the Gentlemans owne contrymen: for Monseur
Dobart (as hee thought to honour him) imparted this accident

to certaine Englishmen at Bologna: among whome,
there were that so posted the matter to Rome: as when the
poore Gent. arri
                  •
               es there, hee was stayed at the gate, nowe
called Porto del populi, and there was kept eight daies, hauing
no other bed but the bare ground, and well neare starued
for want of foode: In fine, all his other Bollitines and
Warrants to trauell being taken away. On the s
                  •
               daine the
Stappado was hanged forth, and the Gentleman vpō paine
thereof▪ commanded presently to depart: to whome was deliuered
a Vollitine for Naples. What violence hee further
sustained, his humour will not agree to open it: for I am
sure, he hath bene seldome hard to pursue any mās disgrace,
and neuer knowne publikely to bem
                  •
               ne his owne hard fortunes,
which haue beene many, and violent: And albeit, his
name be here concealed, yet if any exceptiō be taken against
this report) let me be in all places reproued, if he euery way
approue not the same. And albeit Sir, the matter be in some
sort perticuler: yet (as I haue sayde) it showeth what hatred
the insolencie of the Spaniard eng
                  •
               ndreth where he ruleth,
which can establish no gouernment: Besides, by his lauish
words, it may be seene what hauock he would make: if hee
could execute his prowde desires: But if the Englishman
farre frō succour, feareth him not in his owne dores, I hope
(I truely prophesie his discomfiture, vppon an euen hande:
I leaue the rest to the vewe of your best leasure: and if according
to the greatnes of your honorable desire, you may
haue libertie to aduenture your person, in this honorable
seruice, I beseech God to blesse all your attempts,
ioyn
                  •
               tly with all those that shall
vndertake the
same.
            
               Your Worships by bounden dutie.
George Whetstone.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT
Valiant Gentlemen & Souldiers,
that are, or shalbe Armed vnder the Ensigne
of Sainct GEORGE: In recompence of their
worthie aduentures, Heauen, and
euerlasting honor.
            
               GOD with S. George, Allon, braue Gentlemen,
               Set Speares in rest, renew your auncient fame:
               Rush on the Pikes, the Cannon do not shen,
               Your Ancestors, with passage through the same,
               This Prouerbe raisde, among the French, their Foes,
               Vous es fi fier, que vn Anglois.
            
            
               The
                     •
                   art as fierce, as is an Englishman,
               The French still say, and proofe the same did teach:
               Turne you the french into Castillian,
               it hath a grace in such a loftie speach:
               Your cause is good, and Englishmen you are,
               Your foes be men, euen as the french men weare.
            
            
               The force of death, that raiseth many feares,
               In crauin harts, which courage doe dispise:
               Long liues the man, that dyes in lusty yeares,
               In actions where honour may arise.
               And wherein may you honour more expect,
               Then wronged men, to succour and protect.
            
            
               
               The Lyon prayes, vpon the stoutest beast,
               yet lickes the sheep, the which the wolfe hath woūd:
               So worthy mindes, proude lookes, that feareth least,
               doth helpe to raise, the wounded from the ground.
               Like Lyons then, the Armes of England shield,
               Pray on your foes, and pittie those that yeld.
            
            
               I say no more, but God be your good speede,
               And send you (hap) which I did neuer taste:
               And if this Booke, you do witsafe to reade,
               You cannot thinke, your labour spent in waste,
               VVhich doth containe, the Morall rules of those,
               That followed Mars, in thickest preace of foes.
            
            George Whetstone.
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the honorable Reputation
of a Souldier, with a Morall Report of the
Vertues, Offices, and (by abuse) the disgrace
of his profession.
            
               
                  AT what time,
               Reputation of a Soldier. 
               Ambition,
the Impe of miscreate Enuy,
vpon desire of Soueraigntie, begat
Warre: Necessitie, Inuentresse
of all Pollicies, Artes, and Mecanicall
Craftes, deuised many Engines for Warre:
the vse whereof, gaue first reputation vnto the
Souldier, who euer since hath beene honorably
esteemed. And although, for difference of Aucthorities
and Offices, requi
                  •
               it in Martiall gouernment:
There is Generall, Lieutenant, Coronell, Captaine,
Ensigne, Corporall, &c. Yet the hyest to the lowest,
only glorieth in the name of a Souldier. Alexander,
Caesar, and the greatest Monarques, vsually cal'de
the meanest Souldiers, Companions, Fellowes, &
alwayes greeted them by such like familiar salutations:
Caesar, would thus vsually incouradge his
Souldiers: Companions, & Frēds, saue that (by your
Election) I commaund, there is no difference betwene
you, and me, and therefore the meanest, that best deserueth,
may one day steppe into my place. A highe incouragement,
to bee valiant, when valour, by gouernment,
is able to raise a man from the Carte,
to be a Soueraigne Captaine: And certainly, Millitarie
Iustice
               Millitarie Iustice. in Martiall Gouernment, is more indifferent
then Ciuill Iustice: For, the one taketh

knowledge of euery man that is valiaunt: and the
other will scarre looke on a number that are vertuous.
            And by this Iustice Millitarie, Viriat,
               Viriat. the renowned
Portugall, that in many victories sheathed his
sword in the Romains Entrailes, was in his youth
a sheepharde, & the sonne of a sheepharde.
            
               Arsases,
               Arsases. king of the Parthians, was a common
beggers sonne: yet in remembrāce of his great vallour
and worthinesse, after his decease, they called
the kings his successors, Arsasides.
            
            
               Agatocles,
               Agatocles▪
                the mangnanimous king of Cicile,
was the sonne of a Potter: and in remembraunce
thereof, among other vessels of golde, hee was alwayes
serued with some of earth.
            
               Prolomie,
               Ptolomie. king of Aegipt, of whome the succeeding
Kings were called Ptolomie, was of base parentage.
            The Athenian, Isicrates,
               Isicrates. the most illustrous in the
Art Millitarie, whome Artaxerses king of Persia, oftentimes
made Lieutenant of his Army, against
the AEgiptians, was a Coblers sonne.
            
               Eumenes,
               Eumenes. one of the most valiant of Alexanders
Captaines, was a poore Carters sonne.
            And albeit, among humaine kingdomes, none
might be compared to the Empire of Rome, yet, by
Martiall Iustice, men of most meane rep
                  ••
               ation,
became Emperours.
            
               Elius Pertinax,
               Elius Pertinax. Emperour of Rome, was an Artificers
sonne.
            The Emperour Dioclesian
               Dioclesian. that illustred Rome,
with so many triumphant victories, was a Scriueners

sonne.
            
               Valentian,
               Valentian. was a Shoomakers sonne.
            The Emperour Probus,
               Probus. was a Gardeners
sonne.
            The renowned Emperour Aurelius,
               Aurelius. was of an
vnknowne parentage.
            
               Marcus Iulius, Licinius,
               Marcus Iulius, Licinius, Bonosus. and Bonosus, which occupied
both the Empire, the one came from the
Carte, and the other from keeping of a schoole.
            Many other were Emperous of Rome, whose
Auncestors were of no account, which (for breuitie)
I omit: so that, descending to kinges, and meaner
Princes whome this Iustice aduaunced.
            
               Tarquinius Priscus,
               Tarquinius priscus. king of Rome, was a Merchants
sonne of CORINTHE, and banished
his Countrey.
            
               Servius Tullius, the most renowned king of the
Romaines, who for his worthy victories triumphed
thre times, was the sonne of a poore seruaunt: and
therefore was alwayes call'd, Servius.
            
            
               Lamutius▪
               
               Lamutius: king of the Lombards, was the sonne
of a meane Harlot.
            The mightie King Tamberlaine,
               Tamberlaine. was in the beginning,
a poore sheephard.
            The right noble Romaine, Caius Marius,
               Caius Marius who
for his invincible courage and vertues, was seuen
tymes Consull of Roome, came of a base parentage.
            The most vertuous and valiant Captaine, the
father of Frauncis Sforce,
               Frauncis Sforce. whose children and issue
were of long tyme Dukes of Millan, was a poore
labourers sonne.
            
               Many other by Martiall profession (in which
tyme Iustice was truly administred) were in this
manner, from the lowest degree aduaunced to the
hyest honour. And that the basenes of parentage
might be no blemish, to those that deserued wel: nor
noble blood,A straight lawe. a preuiledge for those that did amisse:
the Gretians, by a lawe, sorbadde him the Tombe
of his Ancestors, that added not some glory to their
Monuments.
            
               Alexander the Great,Alexanders Iustice. lying vpon his death-bed,
being demaunded, who should bee his heire? magnanimously
answered:Iustin. Lib. 3 the worthiest: so great was
the Iustice of his minde, as hee preuiledged not his
sonne Hercules, his brother Arideus, nor the Infant
in his wife Roxanaes wombe, before a straunger of
better desart. This regard and reward of good deseruinges
were the causes of so many Illustruous
Captaines in the auncient common Wealthes.
            The prudent Romaines founde out the bene
                  •
               ite
that proceeded of the rewarding of Souldiers, and
therfore they deuised many honours and rewards
to recompence their good seruices. When any Captaine
had any notable victorie, hee (after thankes
giuen to the Gods) presently mounted vppon a
Theatre, and generally praised the whole Army: thē
calling the Bandes and Squadrons that fought
most valiantly, he praysed euery Souldier by his
proper name, calling him Companion and friende
of his Countrey, and withall gaue to euery one as
he deserued, as to some, Crownes: to others gauntlets,
and to many Harnesse, with such deuises as no
mā might weare, but such as had deserued the like.
            
               The Consull Papirius,
               Tie
                     •
                  s 
                     〈◊〉
                   lib
                     •
                  o & 30 with such like ornaments
proper to euery mans desarte, for one victorie, rewarded
fourteene Centurions, & one whole Squadron
of Souldiers.
            
               Scipio, did the like in Spaine, wherein euery mās
merite was written: There were many Crownes
or Garlandes proper for speciall seruices: as,Crownes or garlandes, giuē for proper seruices. whosoeuer
deliuered the Cittie of Rome, or Campe of
the Romanies, from any sharpe or dangerous siege,
he was recōpenced with the Crowne Obsidionale:
               Obsidionale.
and he and his companie that did this seruice, were
honored, as men that had deliuered the Cittie orPli. lib. 16 & Aul. Gel. Lib. 5.
Army from death.
            
               Quintus Fabius, for deliuering Roome from the
dangerous assault of Haniball, had this Crowne.
            
               AEmilius Scipio, was in this manner Crowned
in Affrica: And for the like seruice, Calfurnius & the
valiant Lutius Cincinius were crowned. Then,
whosoeuer deliuered any Citizen of Rome, and slu
                  •
               
one enimie without shrinking from the place of this
seruice, he was rewarded with the crown Civique.
               Civique.
This was a recompence of great honour: for the
meanest Souldier that obtained this Crowne, in
the open feasts and Theaters, was placed next to
the Senators, who vpon his entraunce, rose frō their
places to do him honor. Many Romaines obtained
this Crowne, especially the most valiant Cineinius
before named, wonne it fourteene times. These
Crownes were of flowers or such like, but yet of
more reputatiō then the other of gold. The Crown
Murale was of gold,Murale. and was giuen vnto him that
first scaled the wall.
            
               
               Manlius Capitolin, Quintus Trebelius, and diuers
others, gained this Crowne. The Crownes Castreuse
and Nauale
               Castreuse 
                     •
                  auale. were likewise of Golde: the one
was due vnto him that in fight first entred the barriers
of his enimies: the other, at Sea, that first
entred the enimies ship And of this Crowne, Marcus
Varro, Marcus Agrippus, and many other noble
Romaines, thought no scorne. There were other
Crownes, and speciall honnours giuen vnto the
Romaines, which (for breuitie sake) I omit: & which
is worthie of regarde. In distrubutiō of these honnours,
the noble and the innoble Souldier, by birth
was regarded alike. Besides, the Romaines Captaines,Honorable names, giuen vnto the Romaine Captaines.
in honour of their victories, had their surnames
after the Countries, which they conquered:
the one Metellus, for the subduing of Iugurthe: of Numidie,
was called Numidique: the other Metellus, for
subduing ye king of Macedone, was surnamed Macedonique.
Lucius Mummius, was named Aca
                     •
                  que,
for the 
                  •
               ubduing of Acaye, and Corinthe.
            
            
               Brutus, for ye subiecting of Gaule, was named Galloys.
The two noble Scipioes, the one was call'd
Afriq
                     ••
                  
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Carthagique, for his victories in Affrica
& at Carthage. The other was surnamed Asiatique,
for the cōquering of Antioche: and for being the first
that displaied the Romaine Ensignes in Asia: many
othe
                  •
                
               Romaines had such like honorable surnames,
in triumphe of their victories: but these may suffice
to showe the honorable reputatiō of a souldier, how
he was in the auncient & florishing commō weales
reuerenced of the graue Senators, and generally honored
of the publique weale, where the gouernmēt

Is Monarchie,
               Monarchie. the soueraigne & sole Commander, is
girded with a sword, and glorieth in the name of a
Souldier: where it is Oligarchie,
               Oligarchie. where a fewe of
the best gouerne, the chiefest person hath a charge
of the Martiall affaires. The Romaines whē they
changed their gouernment, by banishing of their
tyrannous kings, imployed their chiefe Cōmander
(the Consul) abroad in the warres: In the like reputation,
were the Captains in the famous common
weales of Athens & Lacidemonia.
            
            Whē 
               Cyrus deliuered the lewes out of the great
captiuitie of Babilon, hee sent them home vnder the
cōduct of their Captaine Zorobabel: and their chiefe
sacrificator Iosue, by which estates they were gouerned,
vntill Aristobulus vsurped both the title of
king and chiefe sacrificator.
            The base segniorie of ye Mecanicall people, called
Democratia, wherin the baser sort, as handy craftsmen
gouerne in time of warre, are gladly ruled by
the worthy Captaine.
            The most magnificent Triumphes, first deuised
by Dionisius or Dennis,
               Diodi. Lib. 6. Pli Llib. 2. surnamed the free Father,
and imitated by the Carthagenians, by the testimonie
of Iustin, onely were dedicared to the honour of
the victorious Captaine:Iustin. Lib. 1
                     •
                  
                But as the Romaines exceeded
all nations of the worlde in power, so in this
glorious pompe, they tooke awaye all possibilitie,
for men to bee more honored: the circumstances,
howe euerie estate of the Common wealth did seruice
and reuerence vnto the victorious Captaine,
howe crowned kings were lead vppe and downe,
as his Captiues, howe that no magnificence that

arte or mans wit could deuise, was wanting the
hundred part of the glorye whereof sufficed to glut
the beholder: All which particularly to reporte,
would co
                  ••
               aine a greater volume, then is appointed
for my 
                  〈◊〉
                purpose: In reformed gouermēts,
where excesse of Apparel was defended: as in that
of King Ferdinādoes, who erected the Knights of the
band, and in the straight Commandement of King
Phillip le Bel: and (with your fauour) in the straight
lawes and Proclamations of England, Gold, siluer,
and al maner of brauery is dispensed within Martial
showes: by reason of which apparāce of honor
and reputation due, and giuen vnto the Souldier,
a number of yongelings aduance their thoughtes,
and thirst after the like glory: Of which alluremēt
grewe the old saying: Dulce bellum in expertis▪
                But
if all his daungers, distresses, woundes, and many
times, prodigall losse of life, bee ballanced with his
glory:The honorable reputation of a Souldier dearily bought. the grauer sorte will iudge his honorable reputatiō
to be deserued, or at ye least dearily bought:
how that he is bound to march in the depth of winter,
and the heate of Sommer, to lye vpon the bare
ground: and which is worst, to fetch his meate out
of the Canons mouth, or to sterue in the besieged
towne: with many deadly dangers, which the toūg
of him that hath felt them, can deliuer better, then
my pen that haue but heard them. The consideration
of all these peri
                  •
               s, iustly moued the graue Senators,
with these magnificent Triumphes and honorable
rewardes, to arme their Souldiers) with
an invincible courage: and yet (w
                  •
               th your patiēce)
they durst not put their honour simply vppon their

Souldiers valiācy: how resolute soeuer they were
in execution, the wise Senatours were fearefull to
direct.
            And certainly, the religious Ceremonies that
the Romanes vsed before they attempted any war,The religious Ceremonies that the Romains vsed before the attempted warre.
reproueth the incōsiderate warres of many Christian
Princes, that neyther aske aduise of God, nor
seeke satisfaction with quietnesse.
            If any man brought the Romaines tydinges of
some Prouince reuolted, or of any other iust cause
of warre: the Senate first sent to the Offenders,
frendly requiring them to returne to their obediēce:
& if they continued their contempt, they thē created
their Captaines for this expedition: But before any
prosecution, they caused their Sacrificators to
make praiers vnto the gods: after this, the Senate
assembled themselues, and went vnto the Temple
of Iupiter, and there solemply swore, that so oftē as
the enemy (against whom they moued war) would
seeke new conditions, or craue pardō for their offences
committed, that their clemēcy should at no time
be denyed. This done, the Consull elect for the enterprise,
went vnto the Capitoll, and there made a
solempne vowe, that if he retourned with victorie,
he would offer vnto the Gods some special pretious
thing. After this, the Banner of the Eagle (which
was the auncient Ensigne of Rome) was displayed
in the field called Mars, by which the people were
warned, that, during the tyme that the Citizens, &
their parents were in the warres, that they should
neyther celebrate feasts, or publicke spectacles: finally,
a Preest mounted vpō the gate, called Salarie,
               
caused a Trumpet to be soūded, to sommon the men
of warre, and there euery particuler Captaine receiued
his ensigne: by this it was publikly known,
that they set not forward their Armies, before they
had appeased and honored their Gods.
            The Athenians, neuer moued warre before the
Philosophers and the graue Common-wealthesmen,
had aduisedly considered, whether the same
were righteous or no.
            The Israelites, prosecuted the warre, by derectiō
of the Prophets, as appeareth by m
                  •
               nyexāples
of the olde Testament: when the Captaines and
Souldiers, were thus sacisfied by the Prophetes,
& graue common wealthes-men, that they should
in the extreamest degree, but sacrifice their bloods,
in the seruice of God, the safetie of their Countrey,
and their owne immortall honnour: Small is the
wounder if they lightly regarded of life, and proudely
encountred death:Spes famae, Solet ad virtutem impellere multos. Sole desire of fame, & zeale
to do their Contrey seruice, moued many (that had
no thought of the immortalitie of the soule) to bee
wilfull executioners of their owne liues.
            
               Plutarke,
               The working of fame. writeth, that in Phrigia, there was a
great gaping of ye earth, out of which swelled great
waters, that ouerthrewe many houses.
            
               Ancurus, king Midas sonne, hearing that Gods
Ire would not be appeased, vntil some one mā leaped
into the Gulfe: Desire of fame (which those
heathen men reputed an immortall life) hastened
Ancurus, to leape into that Gulfe (as hee thought)
with the losse of his life, to rid his country from this
outragious water. Curtius, the noble Romane did
the like vpon the like occasion.
            
               The two worthy Lacedimonians, Spartius & Bulides,
voluntarily bowed their neckes to the gallowes, to
make satisfactiō for the offence of the Lacedemoniās,
who contrary to the law of all nations (which protecteth
euery Ambassadour, both in time of peace &
warre) slew king Xerxes Ambassadour.
            
               Themistocles, Mutius Scevola, and many others
might bee ioyned with these examples: but especially
the acte of Codrus, the last king of Athens, is
worthy remēbraūce:Iustin. Lib 
                     •
                  . it was foretould by the Oracle
at Delphos, that if the Athenians would bee victors,
their kinge must needs be slaine.
            When Codrus vnderstoode that the libertie of
his countrie, stood vpon the losse of his life, hee pre
               
                  •
               ētly
in the habit of a slaue, entred the campe of the
Pelloponians and Dorians, his enimies, and quarelled
vntill he was slaine. Beholde the noble resolution
of the auncient Captaines, a nūber feared not
death, & almost euery one hated a dishonorable life.
            The Souldiers of Caesar, many tymes died desperatly,
rather then they would bee the seruile prisoners
of their enimies. Among many, ye most hardy
attemps that the Iewes made vpon Vespasian,
               Ioseph Bel. Iude. &
his sonne Titus, to bee delinered of the Romane seruitude:
this one example of their proude disdaine
of life, shewed their litle feare of death. When God,
to chasten the greeuous sinnes of the Iewes, suffred
them (notwithstanding their invincible courage) to
be slaine by the Romanes, & of a number that were
slaine there, being but fortie & one left aliue: which
few, rather thē the Romanes should haue any glory
of their captiuitie, by the drawing of lottes, they

appoincted one to be the executioner of an other.
            The Earle of Shreusbury, who in Henry the sixte
his time,Hawles Cro. was so feared in Fraunce, as the frenchmē
to scarre their Children, as we doe by Robyn good
fellow, haue to this day a by-word, Garde le taulbot,
being (by the enuious contentions in Englande) left
almost succourlesse in Fraunce: In fine, was beset
with a great power of french men, beyonde all possibilitie,
for his strength to ouercome: and albeit, hee
had good meane to escape by flight, yet, hee courageously
abode their incounter, and vpon this resolution,
he thus sayd vnto his sonne: Sonne (quoth he)
thou art yong, and mayst with thy honour flye: But I
am old, and haue had my life honored with many victories,
all which I should loose, if I should deferre my
death (which by course of nature, cannot bee farre of)
by a tymerous flight: Therefore, I am bound to staye:
What should his sonne doe, but euen which he did?
followe the fortune of his father: and so like as they
liued,Needelesse desperatnesse not allowed they dyed valiant men. This presice preseruation
of honor, neither the deuines, nor many polliticke
Martialistes, do allowe: the one absolutely reprouing
desperate ende: the other, forbidding a mā
wilfully to dye, when by his death, hee neither benefiteth
his frend, nor hurteth his enimie: And yet,
the greatnes of these mens courages, are to be honored,
although not necessary to be followed. But
necessitie many tymes approueth resolute bouldnesse,
to be honorable, profitable, and necessarie.
            As, at the Moūtaine Antilliban, in Arabia, Alexander
being a foote,Plut. devit. Alex. farre off his Army, through care
that he had of his Tutor Lysimacus, who in a maner

was tyred with trauell: and being bee-nighted, and
out of his waye, hee perceaued that his barborous
enimies had made diuers fires in the Mountaine,
by whome he must passe: and therefore, as his best
remedy in that extremitie, he sodenly set vppon one
of the cōpanies, slue two of the saluadges, and like
a Fury with a firebrand in his hand, he made a passage
vntill hee came vnto his Campe: And by this
hazard, hee both preserued him selfe, and those that
were with him:The dangerous aduenture of Alexder. But his hardiest aduenture was
among the Malians, the stoutest people of ye 
               Indians,
who hauing scaled the walles of their Cittie, his
scaling ladder broke: and seeing that his Enimies
assaulted him, sharply with thieir Darts, he sodenly
leaped among the thickest of them, who with the
noyse and shining of his Armour, so feared his
enemies (supposing that a light or sprite, went before
him) they fled on euery side: and when in the
end they assailed him, hee set his backe to the wall,
and fought against the Malians, vntil his Army had
broke into the cittie, and both rescued him, and subdued
the Malians.
            
            The like aduenture of Caesar, rūning desperatly
vppon the fierce Neruij,
               The successe of Caesars dangerous aduenture▪
                saued the remnant of the
Romaines, who had that day beene all slaine, if Caesar
had not incouraged them with this little care of
life. The Senate so honored Caesar for this victorie,
because the danger was great: as they ordained,
that the Sacrificators should doe sacrifice vnto the
Gods, and that there should be solempne procession
fifteene dayes together, without intermission, hauing
before neuer made the like ordināce at Rome,
               
for any victorie that euer was obtained. The dangers
of war are oftentimes such, as necessity spurreth
the valiant Gentleman, to runne vpon the like
perils: and therein is true valiancy seene: For, many
wilbe 
                  •
               orwarde, where the hazard is indifferēt,
that haue no legs to follow such exploits: And 
                  •
               or y•
this seruice is many times required of the worthie
Souldier, without execution whereof he can neuer
be famous.
            The Souldier of all men ought to set the feare
of God before his eyes,The feare of god most necessarie for Souldiers. to haue a pure conscience, &
to be of good conuersation, least in running vpō the
pikes, he falleth into hell fire. His state is like vnto
a man that is 
                  •
               icke (for death wayteth vpō 
               Mars,
as duly as vpon Surfet:) And surely, he that retourneth
safe out of the 
                  •
               ield, escapeth as great a danger
as he that is recouered of a mortall infirmitie:
and as men commonly see nothing but holy & good
matters among men that are sicke, so, the conuersation
of the auncient Romane Souldiers, was
purged from dissolute, and vngodly behauiour.
            The faith of a Souldier, is at this day a cōmon
pr
                  •
               testatiō, but in those dayes, was neuer violated.
            
               Alexander, surnamed Seuerus, had so well a gouerned
Army, as his companies were reputed to
be rather Philosophers thē Souldiers. The Souldier
was in that gouerment pryuiledged as a sick
man: The T
                     •
                  staement Millitarie,
               Testament Millitarie. Ioseph de Bel. lude. was allowed.
            The Bequeast that Artorius made to his friende
Lucius, and his heires (at the stege of Ierusalem) for
the inheriting of his lands, Titus commanded to be
executed: & as men that ar sicke (dispose their goods

to their children & frendes, so the Romanes by a publique
law, enacted, that the sonne of euery Souldier
that was slaine (how young soeuer hee were)
should inherite the Paye of his father:Pet. Mesi. That this
prouision being made for their posteritie, their souldiers
might be the lesse affraid of death, into whose
power, continuall danger subiected them. The case
so standing, that the Souldiers glory is wrought
out of hazard, and the benefite of his seruice, proceedeth
from the perill of his life: It is (as I haue
sayd) requisite, that his conscience & conuersatiō be
alwayes holy: and then euery day hee may boldly
say as Cra
                     •
                  inius, sayd to Caesar:
               Plut devit. Caesar. 
               I will before night
be praised, either aliue or dead. For, in both estates,
the vertues and valiant are, and shalbe alwayes
commended: and as it is the principall duety of a
Souldier to be hardy and resolute in execution:Clemencie, a worthie vertue in a Souldier. so,
it a hye vertue in him to be mercifull, after victorie
obtained. For as the Iudge deserueth more commendation,
that winneth men from stealing, then
he that pardoneth no offence: euen so the Captaine
is farre more worthie prayse, that with wisedome
and linitie, bringeth the enimie to a peace-able obedience,
then hee that hardeneth their hartes with
cruelties and oppressions. For as the Athenians
wrote vnto the Lacedemonians: There be the fruits
of warre, the losse of the vanquished is certaine, and the
Vanquishor gaineth nothing by his losse. Theaft, murder,
&c. are foule vices, yet is the Iudge honorable,
that chastiseth thē, & he more honorable y• banisheth
thē: euen so, war which is cōposed of these & many
other mischiefs, cōmēdeth ye worthy Souldier, that

with his sword dryueth this monster (Warre) foorth
of the Cittie gates, and by clemencie, out of the Cittizens
harts.
            What greater victorie had euer Augustus Caesar,
then in pardoning of Lutius Cinna.
            
            This Cinna conspired against Caesar,
               Clemencie of Augustus. and was
found in his Enimies tents, whome Caesar (not onely
pardoned) but also highly aduanced: notwithstā
               ding
all this, Cinna practised Caesars death: for, the
rootes of Malice, ar seldome plucked vp with kindnesse:
Neuerthelesse, the Emperour sent againe for
Cinna: When Cinna was come, hee caused a chaire
to be set him which done, Th'emperour opened all
his benefits towards Cinna, and of Cinnaes ingratitude,
in seeking of his life: These circumstaunces
abashed Cinna: But Caesar ending his expostulation,
thus comforted Cinna. Cinna (quoth hee) I once
gaue thee thy life being my enemie, and now I giue it
thee being a traitor, and a paracide.
            
            
               Cinna (being vanquished with this clemencie)
became so faithful and assured a friend to Caesar,
               A difference betweene Tyrannie and Clemencie. as
Caesar made him his heire: See here what loue, the
obedience that proceedeth of Clemency, breadeth:
when the fearefull obedience that is forced by tyranny,
awaighteth but a passage for treason.
            
               Augustus, might haue executed Cinna, and so
haue beene rid of a dangerous enemie: But in pardoning
of him,Caesars Clemency. he purchased a faithfull frend.
            
               Iulius Caesar, had neuer beene so great a Monarke,
if hee had not gloried in the forgiuing of his
enimies: Yea, hauing ouercome Pompey the great,
he entertained all Pompeys frends, with suche clemencye

and curtesie, as many of them honored him
with faithful seruice. When he had ended the Ciuil
warres, hee shewed such clemency to his enimies,
that bore armes against him,A Temple erected in honor of Caesars clemencie. as there was a temple
erected in honour of his Clemency. In so much,
as when Cicero sawe, that Caesar set vp Pompeys
Images, he sayd: Behold, Caesar setteth vp Pompeys
Images, that his owne may stande the surer.
            
            And certainly (though Caesar set thē vp of a magnanimous
disposition) Cicero spake the trueth in
derision: for Clemency setleth loue and good-wil in
subiects,The clemencie of Alexander the great. which is the best gard & safety for princes.
            
               Alexander the great, was highly renowned for
the Clemencie that he vsed towardes his enimies:
Especially, when the stout messadge of Iadus the
chiefe Sacrificator, moued him so purpose the destruction
of Ierusalem: Neuerthelesse, when Iadus
putting on his Garments of preesthood, and accompanied
with the people, cloathed all in white, humbled
himselfe before this great King, Alexander,
gratiously receiued him: and entring peaceably into
the cittie, he not onely gaue rich gifts to the Sacrificatour,
but shewed great liberalitie towardes
all the people.
            The courage of these great Monarkes, conquered
kingdomes by force: and their clemencie, millions
of people with loue.The death of Caesar reuenged by the common p
                     ••
                  tplc
            
            It is a wonder what a tumult the people made
in Rome, whē 
               Caesar was treacherously slaine, they
so honored him for this vertue, none of the Senators
durst stirre forth of their dores, nor none of the
Conspirators abyde the Towne: they slewe all

               Caesars suspected enimies, and fyred many of their
houses.
            On the contrarie part, Tamberlaine, and other
cruel Tyrants, were neither beloued a liue, nor moned
after death.The vice of incontinency The dissolute and wantō behauior
of our modernt Souldiers, which haue ye courage,
but not the gouernment of the auncient, greatly
slaundreth their profession, and displeaseth God.
            When God deliuereth any Cittie or towne into
their hands, they (especially) the Spaniard and the
Italian) take small compassion of the Inhabitantes
afflictions: but to iniurie them in the hyest extreamitie,
as the sweetest part of their spoile, they most
impiously, and barbarously abuse honest matrones
& deflower their daughters: Which vnpardonable
and vnsufferable offences, the vengeance of God
still followeth: and therfore this Turkish wickednes,
that stinketh before god & mā, is to be banished
or rather to be punished in euery Christian Army.
            The Continencie of Alexander, Scipio, and many
other most illustrious Captains,Continency a speciall vertue in a Souldier. at worthy presidents,
to brydle the intemperate affections of the
multitude of Souldiers.
            
               Alexander, vsed the wife,The Continencie of Alexander. daughters, and mother
of the mightie Darius, and other most beautiful Ladies
of Persia, with so honorable & chaste a regarde;
as he tooke awaye all suspition, that should make
them feare to be dishonored or deflowred. He would
oftētimes say, that the Ladies of Persia, made mēs
eyes sore to beholde them: but notwithstanding,
preferring the beautie of his continēcie, before their
sweet faces, he did neuer suffer himself to be alured,

yea, he so much hated vnchaste affectiōns, as hearing
that Damon & Timotheus vnder Parmenioes charge,
had forced two of their fellowe Souldiers wiues:
He wrote vnto Parmenio, if they were found giltie,
to put them to death, as brute beastes, & destroyers
of mankind: yea, so vnspotted was Alexanders fame
in this vertue, that Darius
               Darius prayer. his enemie prayed to the
gods, that if the time were come that the kingdome
of Persia must needs haue an ende, either by deuine
reuenge, or by naturall change of earthly thinges.
Then graunt (good Gods, quoth hee) that none but
Alexander may sit in Cyrus Throane, to recompence
the great honour, that in my misery, hee shewed to
those I loued best in the world.
            
               Aulus, Gellius,
               The Continencie of Scipio. equalleth the continencie of the
most noble Romane Captaine Scipio, with the chastitie
of ALEXANDER. Scipio, entring by
force of Armes into the new Cittie of Carthage
(among other captiues) hee was presented with a
most faire Damosell, young, and of a most excellent
proportion: who, notwithstanding, hee was in the
flower of his youth, so vanquished his affections,
as he did no dishonest act with the mayde. And afterwards
vnderstanding that shee was of a noble
house, and betroathed to a great Lord of Spaine, hee
sent to seeke him forth, and deliuered the Damosell
vnto him, in no point dishonored:Pet. Mes. de Cho. mem. lib. 2 and withall augmented
her dower, with the monie that was payd
for her fathers raunsome: An acte of great continencie
and honour, in a victorious Captaine, towarde
his captiue.
            
               This Scippio was the most illustrious captaine
that euer Roome fostered: Hee,Commendation of Scipio for his glorius victories,
was surnamed African and Carthage: hee was
called Prince of the Senate: which dignitie, was
giuen vnto none but such as had obtained the Type
of all honour: he vsed such discipline in his Army, as
his meanest Souldiers seemed, to bee graue Senators:
and as Plutarke sayth,De▪ vitae Scip. among all his other
charges, he specially commanded, that the wemen
which were taken in the warres, should bee kept
from being defiled: Worthy exāples for Generals
and other Officers of charge, in Martiall gouernment
to imitate, that their wisedomes and examples
may bridle the inordinate affections of inferiour
Souldiers.
            And as companiōs with this beastly sinne,Temperance in dyet, requi
                  
                     •••
                   in a Souldier. the
well gouerned Souldier is forbidden Gluttonnie
and drunkenesse, as two mortal enimies of his profession:
For the Souldier must many tymes indure
hunger, thirste, cold, trauell, and other sharpe miseries,
which pampered and delicate bodies cannot
indure: Besides, when the body is stuffed with delicates,Ease the spoile of a Souldier.
the minde is dull, & desirous of ease, which
is the vndoer of a Souldier, who ought to haue his
handes or his minde alwayes occupyed: The one,
wounding his enimie in the field: the other, working
out pollicies to intrappe him as hee lyeth in
campe. Alexander the great, to keepe his men in
breath,Alexander enemie to Idlenesse. when there was intermission from warre,
accustomed himselfe, and his people to take great
paines in hunting of wilde beasts: especially, those
that were of most fearce natures: & euery man, to

show his agillitie & strength, was inioyned to vā
               quish
(or to bee vanquished by) the beast which hee
vndertooke: In so much as Alexander himself fighting
one day very dangerously, hand to hand with
a Lyon, after the victorie hardly obtained, an Ambassador
of La
                     •
                  idemon tould him, that it seemed by
the egernesse of their fight,He must not bee idle that worketh for a Kingdome. that his grace and the
Lyon striued, which of both them should bee king:
Yea (quoth Alexander) and he that wilbe the king of
kings must alwayes be thus occupied.
            He was so temperate of his dyet, as when the
Princes Ada, of meere goodwill, sent him many dilicate
dishes of meate: He sent her word, he knewe
not what to do with them: For his gouernor Lyonides,
appointed him for his dinner, to rise before day,
and to march in the night: and for his supper, to eat
but a little at dinner: A spare dyet for a Prince, yet
necessary for him that wrought for the whole world
to haue his bodie hardened and prepared for all
dangers.
            
               Haniball & Iugurthe, could neuer haue punished
the Romanes so oft, if that with wonderfull paines,
they had not placed their aduauntages, neither
could they haue taken halfe the paines, if their bodies
had not beene prepared with a temperate and
thinne diet.
            The temperaunce of Iulius Caesar, in eating and
drinking, is vpon many occasions commended, and
it well appeared by the ablenes and exercise of his
body, hee vndertooke great matter, and therfore, it
behoued him to bestur himselfe: And (sure) dilligence
(which ouercommeth the mightiest thinges) dwelled

in hym: when his Souldiours were at rest, hee
deuised his worthiest Stratagemes, and yet he so
tyred them with such dayly trauels that they cryed
out,Plut. devit. Ces. 
               To what ende doth this man hale vs after him, vp
and downe the world? Should not Caesar think when
hee seeth our blood and woundes, that we are mortall
men, and feele the mise
                     •
                  ie & paine that other men do?
But neuerthelesse, Caesar marched: and they for
shame could not tarry behinde.
            The Souldiers that carrieth, subduing minds,
by regard of these worthy exāples, will (no doubt)
dyet their bodies for to indure, paine, as faulkeners
do their flying Hawkes: and he that wayeth, what
dangers, dishonors, & ouerthrowes, haue followed
feastings, drunkennesse, and Idle dalliaunce, will
(if he regard his honour) be more affrayd of a wā
               ton
banquet▪ then a bloody battaile.
            Wine, and delicate cheere, were the baytes that
Cyrus layde to kill Queene Tomyris sonne, and a
great part of her Army: That daye that Alexander
first delighted in the drunkennesse and effeminate
delicasie of the Parsians, he ouerthrew his owne life
and glory: For in his drunkennesse, hee put his best
Captaines to death: and in reuēge was poysoned
himselfe.
            The Romaines so hated this drunken and voluptuous
exercise, as whē 
               Lucius Pius, had brought
the Sarmates vnto a voluntary obedience by his often
banquetting, and making of them good cheere,
and at his retourne to Rome, demāded to triumphe:
The Senate not only denyed him this honour, but
in disdaine of his drunken victorie, they put him openly

to death, and for his further reproche, they
wrote this Epitaphe vpon his Tombe:

                  Heere Lucius Pius, Consull lyes,
                  Who not with Armes in Fielde:
                  But with Wine, mirth and Table-cheare,
                  Did make the Sarmates yeelde.
               
            
            THe Senate not yet content, adnulled all that
Lucius had done, and by their letters remitted
the Sarmates into their auncient libertie. And certainly,The Romanes punished and hated dishonorable Conquestes.
this worthie vertue shined in the Romanes,
they refused to make a benefite of any thing that
was dishonorable: and for that the president is necessarie
for all Souldiers to follow, this one other
shorte example, shall not bee impertinent to the
purpose.
            
               Fabritius, being encamped before the Citie of
Fidena, a Schoolemaister of the Towne, in hope of
some great preferment, stole foorth and presented
Fabritius with the children of the most worthy Citizens:
The Cōsull saw, that this was a good meane
to become Lord of the Cittie. Neuertheles, he refused
th' aduantage: & for his hyre, he boūd the Scoolemaister,
and caused the boies with rods to whippe
him into the towne: to recompence which honorable
fauour, the Cittizens willingly payed tribute
vnto the Romanes.
            
            What would y• heathē 
               Romanes (who were thus
precise in matters of honor) iudge of many christiās,damnable pollicie
                     •
                  .
who seldome refuse offred aduaūtages against the
enimies? yea (which is dānable) very oftētimes, hire
Athiests, and such earthly Furies, to poison, murder,

and betraye annointed Princes and their soueraignes.
Their Censure coulde be no other, but that
they them selues feared God: and that such Christians
and their instruments followed the Deuill.
            
            But to continue further with Millitarie documents:
it is not inough that the Souldier be valiāt
in execution, mercifull after victorie, chaste of body,
temperate in eating and drinking, and a hater of
Plenes:Obedience especially required of a Souldier▪
                But obedience, is also specially required
of a well gouerned Souldier: A mutinous and disobedient
person, is in a campe like a scabbed and
rotten sheepe in a fould, an instrument of his owne,
and a number of his fellowes destructions.
            The Romanes had a speciall regard, in the chastising
and purging of this faulte, as worse then a
plague in an Army: they, without respect of persōs,
punished disobedience, as appeereth by the seuere
lentence, that the Consull Titus Manlius gaue vpon
his owne only sonne, whose disobedience was both
honorable and bene
                  •
               itiall to the Romanes: but they
esteemed not of that benefite which nourrished a
mischiefe.
            The Consull, commaunded that no man should
fight, without his direction.
                  
                     •
                   seuere example.
            
            
               Genutins Metius, one of the enimies pricked forth
& challenged Manlius sonne. Yong Manlius thought
it a foule shame and dishonour to refuse Genutius:
and therefore, couragiously set vpō the challenger,
ouercame and slewe him, and was of all his fathers
Souldiers, highly commended But the Consull
vnderstanding of this matter, called for his
Sonne: and tould him, that he commaunded that no

man should fight, without his derection: and for as
much as he had broke the order which is to be kept
in war: by which thitherto Rome had beene aduanced
to great honour: and therefore, sonne (quoth he)
since the choyse is so hard, that I must either forget
the common weale, or else depriue my selfe of thee,
in whome I tooke (priuatly) most delight in, I will
that the common weale take no hurt: and therevpō
he willed the hangman to take his sonne, & to execute
on him the punishmēts, due vnto those that by
euill example, hurt the discipline & obediēce of souldiers:
which was to binde him to a stake, to whipe
him, and afterwards to behead him.
            The like sentence, Brutus gaue of his Sonnes,
for that contrary to a generall Commaundement,
shey wrote but letters to call Tarquinius in againe.
            If there worthie Captaines, 
                  •
               or light Trespasses
thus sharply punished their Sonnes, what hope of
fauour may the priuate Souldier expect, that rashly
& disobediently breaketh the orders of the Leaders?
euen the fauour that a Rebell deserueth in
a peaceable gouernement.
            For,The difference betweene rash and necessary bouldnesse. as bould and carelesse running vpon death,
is honorable and meritorious, when in Martiall
iudgement such resolutenesse in a fewe, may be the
safetie of a number, according to the Italian saying:
Beato colui, chi puo far beato altrui: Happy is he, that
can make another man happy: Euen so, needelesse
and vnprolitable rashnes, by wilfull falling vpon
the enimies Sword, is reducul
                  •
               us, daungerous, &
very dishonorable: for as there is a saying in Martiall
pollicy: Hee that flyeth the field, may retourne

againe, and annoy his Aduersarie: when he that is vnprofitably
and rashly slaine, possesseth his enimie with
the glory of his death, without feare of reuenge.
            
            As did the vntemperate Capadocians,
               An intemperat
                     •
                   parte. who enuying
the victorie of Perdicas, inclosed them selues
within their Citie, & with fire consumed the same,
ioyntly with them selues, wi
                  •
               es, children, & goods:
And by this vnnaturall hardinesse, made Perdicas
spoyle (in trueth) to bee small, and their owne after
fortune to be nothing: But in the reprehension of
rashnes and disobedience, in a Souldier, there is
no intent,Cowardlynes reprehended. any way to fauour cowardlines: but rather
to reproue the same, as a fault as dangerous,
as indis
                  •
               rete bouldnesse.
            For the Coward doth not only hurt with his own

                  •
               eare, but by his running awaye, a number are discomforted,
and follow for companie,A pollycie to harden a Cowarde many times to
the perill of the whole Army: And therefore, Astiadges
to make his Cowardes hardy, thrust them in
the face of the enimie, and placed approoued Souldiers
at their barks, with charge to kill them if they
turned their heades.
            
               Titus Liuius & Iulius Frontinus, writeth, that Appius
Claudius, and Marcus Anthonius, punished the
Cowardly Romanes (which were very few) in this
manner: The squadrons and bandes, by whome
the enimie had passadge, drewe cuts, and of whome
soeuer the lot fell, he presently was put to death.
            
               Damatria,
               A sharpe example. a woman of Lacedemon, hearing that
her sonne had not fought, as became a Lacedemonian,
presently at his retourne, shee slewe him with
her owne hāds, as one that was sory she had borne

so cowardly a sonne. And surely, hee, that commeth
into the fielde, and is a
                  •
               earde to fight, must the rest
of his life, looke to liue like an Owle: but small circumstances
suffice in this point: For Englishmen,
to whom I direct this Treatise, as the learned Sir
Thomas Smith writeth,De Rep. Ang. are a people naturally that
feareth not death, & by cōsequence, carelesse of their
enimie: But on the contrarie part, Englishmen are
men of much desart,Enuie a daungerous passion in a Souldier and therefore, Enuie and Emulation
raigneth mightely among them: For Enuy,
alwaies assaileth worthy men, and these foule passions
haue beene the scourges (or more properly, the
ouerthrowes) of the most worthy men and Gouernments.
The Athenians, had no other remedie against
this poison, b
                  ••
                to deuise a law, called Ostraci
                     •
                  me:
               The Athenians remedie for Enuie.
by which as the lottes fell out, some of their
principall men were yeerely banished, and many
tymes the lots fell of the best benefactors of the cō
               mon
weale, who were banished by the ingratitude
of the common people. Enuy, raigned strongly
among the Romanes, but there were to many occasions
of aduauncemēt, as their Enuy brought forth
honorable effectes: for that vertue, being there the
ladder of aduauncement, euery one sought by worthines
to clyme the 
                  •
               yest degree.
            When Porsinaes hoaste,An honorable kinde of Enuie. dangerously besieged
Roome, Cocleus was highly honored for a peece of
Seruice about a woodden bridge, which the noble
Mutius Sceuola so enuyed, as to doe his countrie a
greater seruice, he in the habit of a pedler, entred into
the Hetruian campe, euen vnto the kinges tent,
and there slewe the Kinges Secretary in steede of

the king: Sceuola was taken vpon the fact, & boldly
confessed his determinatiō: The king to increase
his torment, commanded that hee should be burned
to death with a torch: by peace-meales, in his own
presence: Sceuola (cōstantly) without change of coū
               tenance,
endured the burning of his hande, which so
abashed the king, as hee deliuered Sceuola, & made
peace with the Romanes, for feare they would haue
many Sceuolaes to endanger him, when hee should
lacke Secretaries to doe him the former seruice: This
was the Enuy that rained among the Romanes,
while vertue iudged mens demerites: but the commō
Enuy, wher she hath passadge, is like a swine
in a garden, a destroyer without regarde, and in a
Campe, a very subuertion.
            And for that this is a cōmon fault amōg the greatest,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , a fault among the gre
                     ••
                  est.
the Generalls of Armies, ought to haue a speciall
care thereof, least the miserie bee generall before
the mischiefe be suspected.
            Moreouer, because it is a passion vncurable. I
would to God, the Enuious would Counsell themselues,
as the two worthy Enimies. Cretinus Magnesius,
and Hermias did.
            King Mithridates, being at warre with theie
Countrey,A worthy example. 
               Cretinus Magnetius, gaue his cōsent that
his great enimie HERMIAS, should be captaine
against Mithrida
                     •
                  es: and in the meane season, he solemply
protested, to banish himselfe his Countrey,
least there might some tumult or businesse arise by
their factions: But Hermias knowing Cretinus to be
the better Captaine of both, for the loue hee bare to
his Country gaue that honour to his enimie, & banished

himselfe vntill the warres were at an ende:
If euery man would follow this worthy example,
that Monster Enuy, might very well take priuate
reuenge, but should neuer worke publique distruction,
as she doth (for the most) where she cōquereth.
A great many duties binde a man to preferre the
loue of his Con
                  •
               trey before an enuious desire of reuenge:
but I pray god a litle grace bridle y• enuious
mās affectiōs: for it is to be 
                  •
               eared, if prayer preuēt
n
                  •
               t,Disdaine a foule fault 
                     〈◊〉
                   a Souldier. coūsell will do litle good against this mischiefe▪
            
            There is another foule common fault, to be hated
of a Souldier: which is, in thinking ouer well
of himselfe, to di
                  •
               daine another that carrieth not so
proude a countenance: For Contenaunce is so great
a deceiuer, as it brought foorth this Adage, Fronti
nulla fides: but as the slender Grayhound, byteth as
sore as the strong Mastife, and ouertaketh sooner:
euen so, a weake man may haue more strength in
his head, then a mighty in his body.
            The prudent Sertorius, made proofe of Catoes
graue, saying: (Ingen
                     •
                  o pollit, 
                     〈◊〉
                   vim natura negauit)
by a pretty exāple.A pro
                     •
                  itable example. Hee had in his campe: A litle,
weake, but yet a pollitick man, and amōg oher Souldiers
a great, big, boned, braineles Lubber: he had
also two horses, th' one fat, lusty, & with a thick taile
th'other a litle leane horse, & almost without a taile:
Sertorius, appointed the litle 
                  •
               eeble mā to plucke of
the great horse tayle: and y• big & sturdy Souldier,
to pluck of the few ha
                  •
               res, yt were of the leane horse
taile: The weake man, whome good education, had
giuen wit & pollicie in the place of strength, pulled
by three or iiij. haires at once, & so quickly of a long

tayle, left no taile: The other a good strong yeomās
body, tugged at the whole taile, and wrought vntill
he sweate: but sty
                  •
               red not a haire: An example
of double pro
                  •
               it & instruction: The ackt of the weak
man sheweth that a handfull of witte, is worth a
horse loade of strength: and the bootles, tugging of
the strong man, witnesseth the mightie force of a

                  •
               ewe, that are firmely vnited together: and the diuision
of the great tayle, the confusion of a multitude,
that are among themselues deuided.
            It is then a principall vertue in a Souldier, to
intertaine his companion with milde conuersatiō,
& a great part of his safetie, to be vnited vnto him,
in assured frendship.
            This disdaine and proude vpbraiding of men,Originall of disdaine.
proceeded first from the Dunghill: And therefore,
vnmeete to haue place, in Court or campe, where
Gentlemen, & onely men of reputation, should liue.
            
               Disdaine (as I haue sayde) came from the Dunghill:
And of such a Gentleman, Claudian thus writeth:
Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in Altum:
Then let disdaine bee proper to a Dunghill minde,
who hauing no Ornamentes of vertue, holdeth his
placeby proude & disdainfull behauiors.
            But the Souldier and euery man that thir
                  •
               teth
for true honour, must holde this for a principall, that
Reputation consisteth in a mans owne wel doing, and
not in an-other mans disgrace.
            
            It is a good course then for euery man, to honour
himselfe with good indeu
                  •
               urs: and a great blame
to dishonour another with infamous wordes: For
art hath made no man so perfect, but that hee may

dayly learne: nor nature no man so imperfect, but he
may be an instrument of some good purpose.
            
               Asinius, Caesars Barbor, the fearefullest wretch aliue,
whose minde was giuen onely to feare & mistrust,
by his tymerous suspect, saued Caesars life, in
discouering the Treason of Pothinus and Achillas.
            
            
               Caesar,
               The seru
                     •
                  ce of Caesars 
                     •
                  arber. had not a veryer wretch, then the Barbor
Asinius in his whole Army: nor neuer a Captaine
that did him greater seruice.
            Euery mā is not mad for all purposes: but his
seruice that is any way profitable, is no way to be
disdained.
            
               Alexander the great, wrote a booke, which hee
called Remembraunces for euery day,
               Alexanders Boo
                     •
                  e of dayly rememberaunces. which contained
neither scoffing nor disdainefull vsadge of the
simpler sort: but contrary wise, how he helped their
Ignoraunces, with good coūsels: Instructed them in
pollicies, and appeased euery small contention, before
it grew to a quarrell.
            He that wilbe worthy, let him looke into worthy mēs
doings, & follow the exāples of the worthiest.
            No man can haue a greater light, then of the
Sunne, nor better instruction, then from the wisest.
            To conclude, it is a most honorable vertue, and
a necessarie duty in a Souldier,A good Souldier ought to be studious in matters of Pollycie. at leasurable times
to be studious in matters of pollicie, and alwayes
when his hands are idle to haue a working minde.
            
               Caesar the best Captaine that euer liued, was so
addicted to study, as there was a question: whether
he were more inclined to the Launce, or to his booke?
who being one day in a mortall danger, at Alexandria,
to saue himself, he leaped into the water, and

uing a Booke in his hande, he had such care thereof,
as he held that hande vpon his head,Pet. Mes. 
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  end. and wrought
for his life with the other.
            
               Alexander the great,Plo
                     •
                   devit. Cae
                     •
                  ar. was so addicted to Homers

                     ••
                  iades, as he appointed the most magnificēt Iewell
boxe of Darius to keepe the same. In the tyme &
vnder the reignes of the famous Monarks & Captaines,
learning, and learned men most florished.
            The reason was, the Leaders of Armies, were
great louers of learning.
            
               Antigonus, king of Macedone, to bee instructed in
knowledge, by his Letter, thus saluted the Philosopher
Zenon.
            
            The king Antigonus, wisheth health to the Philosopher
Zenon: I know well that I passe thee in riches
and fauours of fortune: But I must confesse that thou
farre passest me, in the true felicitie, which consisteth in
the knowleadge, discipline, and study of the liberall
Sciences: and therefore, I desire the accord, that I may
haue thy companie, &c.
            Alexander, hearing that Aristotle had written
certaine bookes of naturall Philosophie, wrote vnto
Aristotle in this maner: Truly, Aristotle, thou dec
                  •
               auest
my desire, in publishing of this speculatiue Philophie:
which (I thought) should properly, haue
honored myselfe: For, know thou, I rather desire to exceede
all men in knowledge and learning, then in richesse
and dominions.
            
               Caesar wrote his owne Comentaries, & diuers
other bookes.
            
               Pirrhus, the most worthy Captaine, king of the
Epyro
                     •
                  es, (that many times punished the Romanes)
wrote diuers bookes: Especially, one of the precepts

of warre.
            There were diuers worthy bookes, found in the
Tents of Haniball, which he earnestly studied.
            I might adde many other examples, of right famous
Captaines, that were specially wel learned:
and to say trueth, learning is the most pretious Ornament
of a Souldier, and the necessariest vertue.
            Couradge,Prince Edwardes vict
                     •
                  
                  rie. hath obtained great victories: But
pollicie hath gottē wonderful & (almost) incredible.
            Prince Edward, king Edwarde the thirds sonne,
by pollicie ioyned with manhood, only with 8000.
men, ouercame king Iohn of France, and his Army
of threescore thousand men: In which ouerthrowe,
king Iohn, was taken prisoner and sent into England,
who seeing the graue Consellers that were attendant
of the king: Shooke his head, and sayd These
fellowes (quoth hee) were they that brought me into
England: attributing his ouerthrow to the graue directions
of the kings Counsell.
            The victorious king Henry the fift, with lesse
then fifteene thousand men, whereof many were
sicke and diseased,The Battel of Agincourt is Fraunce. with a pollicie of Iron piked
stakes, ouerthrew the whole power and flower of
the Nobilitie of Fraunce.
            
            The wonderfull ouerthrowes, that haue beene
giuen by politicke stratagemes: which were euermore
the directions of the learned and well studied
Captaines, doe in a maner commaunde Martiall
Professors, to hunt after newe Stratagemes, and
deuises to annoy the Enimie.
            He that is studious, and occupieth his leasurable
times, in working out of aduauntages, is likely

to hurt ye enimie more by his deuises in y• campe,
then by fighting in the field.
            
               Cicero, was not naturally giuē to follow Armes,
as appeared by his saying: Cedant Arma toge
                     •
                  
                yea
                  •
               
for that by his pollicy and wisedome, hee deliuered
Rome from the dangerous conspiracie of Cattiline:
He (by dispensation) was recompenced with the
Crowne Ciuique.
            
            The dangerous and mortall engines of warre,
were the ingenious deuises of ye learned Captains.
            The Po
                  •
               t Lucretius saith▪ that in the beginning,
men only reuen
                  •
               ed their cholor, with scratching &
byting: afterwards they fel to throwing of s
                  •
               ones,
and to sight with truncheons of woo).
            It was long before the hatred and malice of
man founde out this pearceing Iron, hid of the intrailes
of the earth.
            The AEtolians, were the first that brought the
Launce into the 
                  •
               ie
                  •
               de.
            The Lacedimonians deuised the Sword and the
Hachet.
            The AEgiptians,
               Pli
                     •
                  . lib. 7. cho▪ 16. the Healmet and the shield.
Sci
                     •
                  us, the sonne of Iupiter, deuised Dartes and
Arrowes.
            
               Eusebius writeth that Moyses deuysed many engines
of warre.Lib. de prep
                     •
                  
                  ratiō Euanget lique.
            
            The Athenians inuented the Scorpion or Arbaliste:
but all these were light in respect of Gūpouder,
& other Artillery: Which (some saye) were inuented
by an Alman, whose name is not knowne: and certainely
worthyly, as one vnworthie of memorie.
            These, being the engenious Inuētions of men,

there are (no doubt) more 
                  •
               idden secrets to annoye
the enimie, which the study of the carefull Martialistes,
no doubt, may worke out.
            And considering, that pollicie neuer so much abounded,
and mischiefe and iniquitie exceedeth the
same: So that, to ouerthrowe & confounde the enimie,
all feare of God and humaine charitie is banished.
Therefore, to incoūter such furies, the Souldier
that fighteth in a iust quarrell (in my opinion)
in the feare of God, and Christian allowance, may
doe as the wise Phisitians doe, expell one poyson
with an other: and yet, with this Iudgement, that
milder courses be first attempted.
            As before this most Christian and charitable
succour, which her sacred Maiestie (annointed by
gods prouidence) to be the comfort of all Christian
afflictions, sendeth to relieue the oppressions, of the
long aflicted Inhabitants of the Lowe Countries,
hath beene effectually desired, and lightly regaded.
            And therefore, you worthy Gentlemen, which
are armed in Gods and her Maiesties seruice: for
that your quarrell is grounded vpon compassion &
Iustice, and polliticke iudgement, for the safetie
of your owne Countrey, I hope (which thousands
desire) you shall returne attired, with your enimies
ouerthrowe: Which God graunt, to his
glory, and your euerlasting
honour. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   