
      
         
            
            
            A Remembraunce of the Life, Death, and Vertues, of the most Noble and Honourable Lord Thomas late Erle of Sussex, Vicount Fitz-water, Lord of Egremount and Burnell, Iustice of An Ayer, of all her Maiesties Forrestes, Parkes, Chaces, and Warrantes, on the South side of Trent, Captaine of the Pensioners & gentlemen at Armes, Lord Chamberlaine of her Maiesties Honorable Household, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and of her Highnesse most Gratious and Prudente Pryuy Councell.
            VVho deceased at Barmesey the 11. of Iune 1583.
            
            The report of George VVhetstones gent.
            
               Formae nulla Fides.
            
            LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe and Richard Iones 1583.
         
         
            
            
            To the right honorable Sir Henry Ratclif, Knight, Earle of Sussex, Vicount Fytz-water, Lord of Egremount and Burnell. George Whetstons wisheth accomplishment of honorable and perfect desires.
            
               
                  RIGHT NOBLE EARLE, in former times, it was held so deepe an office of iustice, to eternize the memories of worthie personages deceased, with sumptuous monuments, and learned Epitaphes, as in the ouerthrowes of warre, the dead were ransomed, to haue honorable funerals, at as hye a price, as the liuing Captaines, in hope of further seruice. One of the chiefe of the seauen wonders of the world, was the sumptuous sepulchre of king Mausolus, which his louing wife Artimisia caused to be erected: and in aduantage, she hyred with rich rewardes the most famous Poets of Grece to register his life & vertues. The performing of these louing and naturall dueties is the cause, that the memory of so many famous men (long since ingraued) is at this day so fresh, and to posteritie the incouragement to vertue so great. And to say the truth, the Cronicles of good mens actes, are the guydes of wel doing: on the other side, the blaming of vitious deedes, is the bridle of euill attempts. The noble Emperor Alexander called Seuerus, would often times say, that his firmest motions to do well proceeded of this cause, that Historiographers should write well of him, by the warrant of good desart, and furthermore hee feared to iniury any wryter, lest he should defame him through a froward and malicious disposition. Your Honorable Lordship in solemnising most sumptuously the funerals of the thrise noble Lord and your deare brother, the late Earle of Sussex, fully assureth the world, that you regarded his worthinesse farre more then his wealth. And to giue him his right, the full report of his vertues, would be a taske as troublesome, as to gase against the Sunne painefull. But for that in greatest things, it sufficeth to show a good will: Much moued by the passion of a cōmon sorrow for the death of so gracious a Lord, but farre more by the generall bruite of his diuine and heroicall vertues: I haue written this small remembrance of his mightie merits, no better garnished, then precious stones set in brasse: protesting that I onely haue re
               
                  ••
               ued my Instructions of vpright fame: stopping one of my eares when affection

praysed: and the other when enuy detracted. So that (right honorable) you may greatly pacifie your naturall sorrow with this precious comforte. That this briefe regester of his worthynes common to the world: May be an Image of honor to the wise: which present I humbly present vnder the protection of your Lordship, as the shadow of your selfe. Being the heire of your magnanimous brothers honours by law, and of his vertues by nature. No more but the Lord protect your Lordship in health and happines.
            
               
                  Redie to do your Honor seruice. George Whetstons.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Remembraunce of the most Noble, and Honorable life, death, and vertues, of Thomas, late Earle of Sussex, Vicount Fitz-water, Lord of Egremount, and Burnell. &c.
            
               WHylom of Macedon, the mighty King,
               By Homer pend,The magnanimus saving of king Alexander when he vewed Achilles Tombe and Epitaph. 
                  Achylles life did reade,
               Who forthwith wisht, his owne renowne to ring
               
                  Homer aliue, and Alexander dead:
               Desire of Fame, Contempt of life so bread,
               And trueth to say, mans life is but a breath.
               VVhen Fame outliues, Enuie, Time, and Death.
               
            
            
               The hope of Fame, as Pallingene doth write,
               Of yore mens minds,Spes Far
                        •••
                      solet ad virtutem impellere multos. with vertuous thoughts did crown
               The Monuments, that Hystoryes resight:
               Of worthies dead, which liue in bright renown.
               (when millions mo, a shallow graue doth drown.
               Are spurs to thrust, the Coward on the pykes.
               And dobbles force, when as the valiant strikes.
            
            
               Yet farre more good, then fame vnto the dead
               the registers,The benefite of Cronicles of good mens liues containe:
               for in the same posteritie may read,
               the way to worke their owne and countries gaine,
               withall to shunne the faultes which honor staine.
               which well forewaid, it is each wryters charge,
               of good men dead to show the liues at large.
            
            
               
               My selfe for one, who worst may pay this due,
               but want no will, more able wits to whet
               this many a day haue laid in open viewe,
               their liues and deathes, that did by vertues set
               not fed with hope, rewardes thereby to get,
               for most men know, it is no way to thriue,
               to prayse the dead, but flatter men aliue.
            
            
               But God forbid the dead should lose his right,
               and shame befall, the flattrer at his need
               some skill I haue on good mens tombes to wright
               no grace at all at vaine mens bordes to feed,
               
                  The confusion of flatterie.and now too old the flattring art to read:
               yet thus my name, shall with the best remaine,
               when flattrers vade, like thunder, smoke, and raine.
            
            
               Well let this goe, and fall I to my taske,
               a common griefe doth charge my Muse to wright
               a sowresweete song for such his friendes as aske
               for Sussex Earle, most true and noble knight
               of vertue and vallor, the mirror bright
               with much adoe, who vanquisht is by death
               vanquisht, not so, but onely reau'd of breath.
            
            
               
                  The order of the Romain funerals.His purple robe, doth shew his honor sound,
               his armed sworde, the mettle of his hart.
               his forward leg in S. Georges garter bound
               shewes that he would not from his standard start
               his staffe of peace a witnes is of art:
               then no man dead may iustly iudge this lord
               who liuing vsde, both Cesars pen, and sworde.
            
            
               
               But to discribe this worthie Peere at large
               in vertue he did blase his noble race,
               in peace, in warre, a man most meete for charge,
               whome chaunge nor chaunce, could maske with double face
               a Tutch that tryes faire semblance often bace.
               he dreaded these, one God, one king, one law,
               and of the rest, he stoode no whit in awe.
            
            
               In tender yeares whilst vertue might engraue
               within his plyant minde, her sacred heast
               he bent his eare, to heare the counsels graue
               that Science taught and wrote them in his brest
               thus still with time his worthines increast
               withall so staid when youth was in his pride,At nyntene yeares of age, he was captaine of a great charge of Demilances.
               
               as then he wist a vvaightie charge to guyde.
            
            
               Ambassador,
                     Quene Mary
                     ▪ He was Ambassador about the mariage of Queene Mary and king Philip a mariage to intreate
               betwene the Queene and Philip king of Spaine
               
               this Earle was sent, who in this message great
               behau'd him selfe so nobly, wise and plaine
               as with successe much honor he did gaine
               and waighing Armes beseemed best this lord
               the king gaue him a rich and costly sworde.King Philip gaue him a most rich sworde.
               
            
            
               And sure the sworde,Armes the proper attire for the nobilitie. becomes the noble best
               vpon his necke a shepe-hooke hath no grace
               God and S. George, Alloune, set speare in rest
               Soundes through the field, where honor geues the charge
               
                  AEconomie is neuer drawne on targe
               her dwelling is a sheepe-fold or a stall
               For Mars and Minerua the lordings hall.
            
            
               
               
                  The preuileges of the romaine CaptainesOf yore, the sword, these priuiledges had,
               while Rome triumpht, her Captaines in the field:
               Might breake the lawes, the sacred Senate made.
               The Soldyars wil, engrau'd in sword, or shield.
               To cunning quirkes of Lawe, would no way yeald.
               The Cause,Millitary Testament. there liues, in howerly danger stood:
               Therefore their actes, held lawful, iust, and good.
            
            
               
                  Queene Mary made him deputy of Ireland and sent after him a patent to be Iustice of an Aire, of al her Forrests &c. On the south side Trent. And made him Captaine of the pentioners and gentlemen at armes.wel, of the King, this sumptuous sword receau'd,
               This Lord in hart, vou'd to deserue the same:
               And time wel prou'd, his vow he not deceiu'd▪
               
               His puisant hand, the Irish rude did tame:
               And of their heads, did buyld a Fort of Fame:
               But Enuy which, at worthyest dedes doth spurn:
               Did raise a blame, which to his praise did turn.
            
            
               
                  Queene Elizabeth.when home he came, he proou'd him self so iust,
               As in his brow, the Queene his vertues read.
               She found that he, returned truth for trust.
               
                  His saying. Alabius iniguis & a lingu
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , 
                           •
                        her avit me Deus, quo
                        
                           •
                        iam cor Regina is mani
                        
                           •••
                         ci
                           ••
                        .
                  And with new trust, she gaue his truth her meed.
               which made him wright, as he had cause in deed.
               From wicked lips and tongues, thou Lord hast set me free:
               Because my Princes hart, is in the hands of thee.
            
            
               
                  The true renowne of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .Hir hart, hir head, hir rule, and blessed Raign,
               The King of kings, doth gouern with such grace:
               As that the world, hir fame may scarce contain.
               In Enuies spight, which shines in euery place,
               As Summers Sunne, doth in the Saylers face.
               And therfore Iust, this Lord should thus confes.
               when thousands may, as much as he expres.
            
            
               
               Wel when he thus, had put suspect to flight:
               His Princes grace, by vertue soon he wroght.
               The Starre appear'd, most perfect in her sight.
               Then Enuies frownes, he set as light as naught.
               For Merit him, in credit dayly brought.Her maiestie sent him Ambassador vnto the Emperour.
               
               In Ambassadge, he to Vienna went
               Who from the Queene to Th'emperor was sent.
            
            
               His waighty charge,The Queenes Maiestie made him president of Yorke. Rebellion in the North. with faithful seruice done,
               Home he return'd, with honor for his toile.
               And straight was made, the President of Yorke.
               
               In such a time, as vprore kept a quoyle.
               And arm'd the North, vnto their proper foile.Pius 5. Pope of Rome.
               
               Through hope, that Im-Pius, of Rome then pope:
               By his crossing, could blesse them from the rope.
            
            
               Dismaid no whit, to heare this lowd Allarme,
               
               For wel he wist,The peaceable victory against the Northen rebels. that traytors had no might.
               Her Highnesse frends, and subiects he did arme:
               And with a fewe, the Rebels put to flight:
               Yer that, the Princes power could come in sight.
               without bloudshed, this broile thus ended he,
               Saue such as died, by iustice on a tree.
            
            
               The stur appeas'd, and al in order set,
               He left his chardge, and to the Court did hy:
               For seruice true, where he such glory gat:
               As that he seem'd, a Pearle in Princes eye:
               No fault in him, til death she could espy.
               And therfore now, she caus'd his trauels cease:
               And wild him rest, vpon a staff of Peace.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The Queenes Maiestie made him Lord Chamberlaine of her most honorable houshold.Lord Chamberlaine, she of her house him plac'd.
               An office great, and neare vnto her selfe,
               Thus stil he rose; whom spight would haue disgrac'd.
               No Perry serud, to set him on the shelfe:
               Who only sought for honor, not for pelfe.
               He serud his Prince, and sought his Countreys good.
               And for them both, aduentured ofte his bloud
            
            
               When blessed peace his trenching sword did sheath,
               A Laurel bowe, he managed as wel:
               In counsell graue, he neede not sit beneath.
               As time gaue cause, his words were short and sure.
               His iudgements sound, and likely to endure.
               He neuer lean'd to fauor, gaine, or hate:
               But still aduis'd what best auail'd the state.
            
            
               
                  He was a gratious fauorer of oppressed men.His hand that oft the enemy did lame,
               He reacht to those whose succors were dismayde:
               His valeant hart that no mischance could tame,
               Did melt to ruth, when wretches cride for ayde.
               VVhose cause to pleade, his tongue the mighty frayde.
               His eye that had in forraine practise sight:
               was neuer fixt vpon the poore mans right.
            
            
               In this: that he each Christian language spake,
               He honord much, but seru'd his Soueraigne more:
               Intreatment good, Ambassadors to make,
               No man more prest, nor yet more meet therfore.
               whose reach, their wyles so cunningly would shore.
               As oft they sayd, by Alligorie thus.
               Monstrant viam, Astra Regibus.
            
            
               
               But wel he knewe the starres were thrall to wit,
               And therfore walkt in wisdomes perfect way:
               Who finding where a friend of his had writ,
               Hei: nescio quo me vocant fata.
               He vnderneath replyed, Fata falsa:
               And prou'd withall, his answere true in this:
               Sapiens dominabitur Astris.
            
            
               On such sure ground, thus buylded he his hap:
               Slie fortune he did neither trust nor feare:
               Stil as he walkt, he sawe the wyly trap,
               That Enuy set, the vertuous to snare:
               And of the same, through wisdome did beware.
               So that his foes had euermore the foyle,
                     Pericles, spoyling the coū
                     try of Sparta, his souldiors spared hys land to bring him in suspition of the Athenian Senate, who to preuent the suggestions of Enuy, gaue the said land frely vnto the common wealth. Iust
                           ••
                        . lib. 3.
               
               As those that spar'd Pericles land to spoyle.
            
            
               
                  O happy man that hadst thy vertues tride:
               As golde in fire, through enuy and suspect.
               
                  O happy Queene, which had so true a guyde,
               In peace and warre, to gouerne and dyrect,
               Happy Commons, whose weale he did respect.
               Thrise happy Realme, that had him for defence:
               He blest alone, that death hath tane him hence.
            
            
               But for his losse, why should we mone, or mourne:
               All humaine flesh a dying day must haue:
               The stoutest men, that euer Armes haue borne:
               Maugre their wils, were borne vnto the graue.
               
                  Asaiels life, his swiftnes could not saue.
               
                  Sampson, Caesar, and Alexander great:
               Were foylde by death, that all the world would beat.
            
            
               
               This Tyrant yet, no easy Conquest had:
               Although he charg'd, and charg'd this Lord again:
               In spight of whom, whose wished life dyd fade,
               Like Marble Stone, with mysling drops of rayn:
               So stoutly he, endured grief and payn.
               But to no boote, auayl'd this valyant strife:
               The hower approacht, that must dyssolue his life.
            
            
               Yet as the Horse, that stricken is in war,
               His Rider brings, from danger to be torne:
               So brought this Earle, his deadly wound thus far,
               when as he seem'd, a threshed eare of Corne.
               when as flesh, bloud, and humors al were worne:
               His noble hart, did foster stil his breath:
               Vntil his soul, had foyld, the deuil and death.
            
            
               For Nobles lore, his life a Pharos light:
               His vallor great, the Image of renown,
               His end doth shew, al sorts of men to fight.
               In spite of death, theyr soules with ioy to crown.
               For when that sicknesse came to pluck hym down.
               As one that had both life and death in scorne:
               Saue for his sins, he neuer seem'd to mourn.
            
            
               My tyme is come (qd.he) prepare my Hearce,
               
               The monster death, no prayer may intreat,
               His naked breast, the Cannon cannot pearce.
               Euen as the weak, he wounds the strong and great,
               He holds for fish, what commeth in his Net.
               The Prince and Peere, to saue hym from the graue,
               No Charter haue, more then the wretched slaue.
            
            
               
               A heauy tale, vnto the worldly wight,
               That hath helth, welth, and in his bowels peace:
               which buyes and buylds, and wallowes in delight:
               That sits him down, and byds hys soule take ease:
               But foolish man, know that thou shalt decease.
               The Thunderbolt, the strongest towers teare,
               And Time in Time, what worldly is wil weare.
            
            
               what is become, of Caesars Equipage,
               
               Of Pompeys Rule, of Alexanders Raign:
               Of Samsons Strength, of Salamon the sage.
               Of Tullies skil, of Mydas golden gayn:
               Of them, and al, this only doth remayn:
               They liu'd like Gods, and leaue as men did take.
               And for their pompes, haue large accompts to make.
            
            
               If rule and raign, were seuer'd from this checke.
               who then could blame, the man that would be great.
               The mighty may, both Lawe and order break;
               Command his wil, rob, spoile, outrage and beate.
               And none that dare, with vengeance once him threat.
               Til death appears, then thought of former sin,
               That neuer ends, his torment doth begin.
            
            
               I wish man would, this morral Rule but heede:
               The end is that, that maketh Fortune good.
               The thoght of death, more better thoughts would breed,
               VVhich certaine is, the ende of flesh and bloud:
               His worldly cups, would seem but dregs and mud:
               Ten thousand times he would contemplate thus:
               Nemo ante obitum beatus.
            
            
               
               No man on earth, in happy state doth liue:
               The Prince that rules, a thousand feares inclose:
               Enuy, the Peereful many a check doth geue.
               The Magistrate for cares can scarce repose:
               The Soldyar standes in danger of his foes.
               The Lawyers gayne is bought with toyle inough.
               
                  A paynful life, is following of the plough.
            
            
               For Adams fault, man with this curse is borne:
               He (vvretch) his bread, vvith svveat of brovve shal eate,
               Not meant that al should worke as men forlorne:
               But that al sorts with toyle, or care, should svveat.
               Their mindes should moyle, vvhose hands are smooth & neat
               VVhich felt, and vvaide, vvhat vvise man vvil not crie:
               Vt essem Christo, cupio dissolui.
            
            
               VVith this aduise, his flesh he mortified,
               
                  His most godly end.And to his soule such comfort he profest:
               As those vvhich savve hovv Christianly he dyed:
               Admyr'd to heare, the Scripture he exprest.
               
                  The good Deane of Paules, in his funerall sermon.The Deane of Paules, thus openly confest.
               Though Glorius fame, his mortal Combats crowne,
               
               His fight with death, was far of more renowne.
            
            
               
                  He tooke a most honorable and prudent order in the disposement of his worldly causes.Yet ere he dyed, that none should him misfame:
               His worldly vvil, he made such regard:
               As for his debtes, vvas order in the same.
               He vvild, that none should of their due bee barde.
               His seruants paynes, he nobly did revvarde.
               VVhich done (qd.he) vvhen death he savve to prease:
               Vaine world farewel, my soule thee leaues in peace.
            
            
               
               Thus godly he, did end his noble life.
               VVhose losse is vvayl'd, vvith many vvatry eyen,
               VVhile vvord doth last, vvhose fame vvil here be rife,
               VVhose soul in heauē, vvhose Corse the tomb doth shrine
               VVhose vertuous deedes, in good mens brests doe shine.
               And therefore iust, that euery eye may see:
               VVhereas he liues, this Epitath should be.
            
         
         
            An Epitaph vpon the death of the most noble Lord Thomas Earle of Sussex, Vicount Fytz-water, Lord of Egremount, and Burnell. &c.
            
            
               Heare vnder lies Syr Thomas Ratclife knight,
               Of Sussex Earle, and many honors moe.
               VVhose vertues oft, put enuy vnto flight,
               VVhose knightly force, both Fraunce and England know,
               True to his prince, and euer had bene so.
               To hawty to craue, ready stil to giue,
               Image of grace while he on earth did liue.
            
            
               
                  Viuit post funera virtus.
               
            
         
      
   