
      
         
            
            
            SIR PHILLIP
Sidney, his honorable
life, his valiant death, and
true vertues.
            
            A perfect Myrror for the followers both of Mars and Mercury▪
               
Who (in the right hardie breaking vpon the Enemie, by a few
of the English, being for the most part Gentlemen of honor
and name) receiued his deathes wound, nere vnto
Sutphen the 22. of September last past, dyed
at Arnam the 16. of October following:
and with much honor and all possible
mone, was solemnely buried in
Paules the 16. of February
1586. By G. W. gent.
            Whereunto is adioyned, one other briefe Commemoration of the vniuersall
lamentation, the neuer dying praise, and most sollemne funerall of the
sayd right hardie and noble Knight. By. B. W. Esquire.
            Dedicated, to the right Honorable the Earle of Warwicke, by
his Lordships faithfull Seruant George Whetstones.
            
            Mors honesta, vita ignominiosa preferenda.
            
            Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman.
            
               
               
                  FUIMUS
                  The Right Honble. Charles Viscount Bruce
of Ampthill (Son and Heir Apparent
of Thomas Earl of Ailesbury) and Baron
Bruce of Whorleton 1712
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the Right Honorable
my especiall good Lord and
Maister, Ambrose Earle of VVarwick, Baron
Lisle, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter,
Generall of all the Queenes Maiesties Ordinance,
through her Highnesse Dominions, and of
her sacred excellencies most honorable and
prudent priuie Counsell, be heaped
the true rewards, of his godly
and honorable vertues.
            
               RIght Honorable, albeit that sundry
of the (Manifold) louers, of
your most worthy Nephewe, of
deare memorie, Sir Phillip Sidney
Knight, haue alreadie witnessed,
their true affections, in publishing of passionate
Poems, Epitaphs, and Commemorations of his neuerdying
vertues: yet I hope, my later writing
shall finde intertaynment of your Lordship, & fauour
amongst those, that truely loued him. Considering
that my slacknesse to the world, proceeded
from a diligent search, to set downe his deuine and
heroical gifts, according to truth: though vnpossible
to giue them the life & grace, which shined in
his actions. The learned Lypsius was not deceiued,
when in beholding of this noble Gentleman,
he aduisedly sayd.
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE,
Anglia est flos regionum, & tu flos Anglia,
England is the flower of Kingdomes:
And thou the flower of England.
            Enuy his onely enemy, will not deny, but that
the comfort of his wisdome, (combined with all
morrall vertues) was the rising sonne of England,
and that his mortall abilities, were generallie admired,
and especiallie feared where the Englishe
are not beloued: your Lordship needeth not this information,
to knowe his inestimable valewe, when
he was like to possesse your temporal honors
after death, and was sure of your vertues in his life.
            His losse will make his goodnes best knowne,
and soone mist in England, notwithstanding the
recordes of his life, are profitable for our posteritie,
and holy workes, that reuiue him after death.
My remembraunces of this worthy Knight, now
with God, I hūbly present, vnder your honors patronage,
to whom he was most deare, and neare,
that your Lordshippe allowing of my god intent,
I may deceaue the enuious findefault, of his Idle
censure.
            The Lord be with your Lordshippe in all your
affaires, for whose health, and honorable prosperitie,
I doe dayly pray, and to the ende will constantly
remayne.
            
               Your Lordships faithfull Seruant
George Whetstones.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the right Honorable my especiall
good Lord, Ambrose Earle of VVarwicke, Baron
Lisle, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Generall
of all the Queenes Maiesties Ordnaunce, through her Highnesse dominions,
and one of her Maiesties most honorable priuie Counsell.
T. C. wisheth increase of all Honor and Vertue.
            
               ALthough (right Honorable) to bring fire to the
Altars when the Sacrafice is ended; or Epitaphs
for the dead whē their funeralles are halfe forgotten,
is to wish for rayne when the haruest is
past: yet considering with my self the neuer dying vertues
of the worthie once hopefull Gentleman of England Sir
Phillip Sidney Knight, a mā so beloued of al, as obliuiō feareth
to perswade time any waies to impaire his immortall
fame: & seeing that all in heart & diuers in their labours
did bewayle his losse, painting out in Poemes & Epitaphs
his vertues & their owne sorowes: amongst whō a gentleman
and seruaunt of your Honors George Whetstones, had
before his going into the Low Countries writtē learnedly
an Epitaph of his life and death: although destinie and
fate hath too vntimely ended his daies: yet sith his works
before his departure were dommitted to my hands, I,
thought it my dutie and held it as a religion, first not to
depriue the gentleman of that due which his willingnesse
and labours did worthely deserue: secondly for that his
workes bewrayed the vertues of such a Paragon of our
time: and lastly & not the least cause, for that your honors
seruant had dedicated his Poems to your Lordship; whose
Epistle as he wrote it to your honor I haue prefixed. These
considerations (right Honorable) moued me to attempt
the impression of this Epitaph, which I humbly present
vnto your Lordship: desiring your Honor to vouchsafe of
my good meaning, and not to misconster of my boldnes.
In which hope testing, I commit you to the Almightie.
            
               Your Lordships in all dutifull seruice
to commaund, Thomas Cadman.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               COurteous reader, diuers of my frendes
(that haue obserued, my former readines,
in exposing the liues and vertues, of
many worthy personages deceased, that
their good examples might liue, in the
imitation of their posteritie) have charged
me to be to remisse, in setting forth
the life, death, and vertues, of the most learned, right valiant,
& best beloued gentleman, Sir Phillip Sidney Knight.
But I satisfied my frendes, with this reason that I certifie
vnto the generall reader, vid. that the error that I sawe
some hasty writers to commit, for lacke of true instructiō,
and the iniurie that they did, vnto so worthy a gentleman,
in publishing his History, not hauing knowledge of the
one halfe of his vertues, (to shunne the blame of two such
capitall wronges,) moued me, to be headfull, that I published
nothing but truth of so true a Knight. Frō this feare,
through zeale proceeded my slownes in writing, which
cannot come to late, when good Sir Phillip Sidney liueth
euer. And for the comfort of those that loued him, or
would be like vnto him, I further say, that the imitation of
his vertues, will eternize their praises, whether they liue
long, or die soone: for vertue is immortal. Thus wishing,
the wish of al good desiers to the frendly
reader I ende, commending vnto the
same my ready seruice.
            
               G. W.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the life, death, and Noble vertues
of the most Aduenturous Knight
Sir Phillip Sydney, &c.
            
               
                  LOng liues the man, that dyes in lusty yeares,
               In actions, that Life, and death dispise:
               
                  Alexander
                  King Alexander was poysened by the envie of Antepater beinge but 24. yeares of age. the chiefe of Royall Peeres,
               
               (Who won one World, and wisht another rise.
               That he too worlds, or one might cōquer twise)
               In prime of youth, in Enuies bane did light:
               Yet liues through fame, in spight of euery spight.
            
            
               And what is Life (the Life of fleshThe frailtie of fleshly life. and blood)
               A moments ioie, a blast, a blase, a breath:
               A bitter-sweate, that yeldes no sauery good,
               A certayne cause, that bringes vncertaine death.
               A rustie swoorde, closde in a paynted sheath,
               Which being drawne to sett the soule at large:
               They onely liue, whom vertue hath in charge.
            
            
               Fame is the life,Spes famae solet ad virtutem impellere multos. and ioy of valient sprites,
               Desire whereof, both driue them on the Pike:
               Happe Life, happe death, who first at dangers smites,
               In Countrie cause, both either fortune like.
               Death cannot daunt, though death them dead doth strike,
               And these be they, that Fame with name doth Crowne:
               When shallow Graues the multitude do drowne.
            
            
               Of such a one, and equall with the beste,
               My muse is bounde, the praises to reuiue:
               
                  
A Knight he was, that with the formost prease,
               Where martiall menne, for highest honor striue:
               Within whose breaste, the graces all did hiue,
               His name (that liues) was Phillip Sidney Knight:
               His death blames (not the foe, but) fortunes spight.
            
            
               Whom to reuiue, Mars and the Muses meete,
               In Armor faire,The order of the auncient Romayne funeralls. his hearse, the haue arayde:
               And on the same, a robe downe to the feete,
               About his Healme, a Lawrell wreath is brayde,
               And by his Swoord a Siluer penne is layd,
               And either saide, that he their glory was:
               And either sight, to see him vade like Grasse.
            
            
               But to discribe, this worthis Knight at Lardge,
               His Life, his death, his giftes from mothers wombe▪
               
               Beseemes the Muse that Homer had in chardge,
               Who wrote so well vpon Achilles Tombe.
               As Alexander wisht,The magnanimious desire of Alexander. that he were dead:
               So Homer liu'd, his victories to spreade.
            
            
               And for my Muse, (that worst may pay this dewe)
               I well may say, the dead the doth adore:
               Azeale that thriues, God wot but with a fewe,
               Flatry doth liue,It is flattery to praise the liuing, and lustice to Commend the dead. not at the dead mans dore.
               Liue-men haue eares; when Tombes are deafe and poore,
               Yet thus my name, shall with the best remayne:
               When such froth vades, like Thunder, smoke and rayne.
            
            
               Now to this Knight, his house, or Birth to blaze,
               May well be spar'e, his praises to procure:
               The Iuy bushe,His father henry Sidney lord presidente of Wales and his mother the Duke of Northumberlands Daughter. is but a Needles gaze,
               To sell the Wine, which of it self is pure.
               So sw
                     •
                  tte a Grape, grewe on no Thorne be sure,
               
                  Sidney his sire, and Dudley was his Dame:
               Parentes well knowen of Honnor and of fame.
            
            
               
               In tender yeres,The sweet disposition of his youth promised much honor to his elde yeares. where one instruction might,
               Grafte Lore and Grace: by which men Honor knowe:
               His vertues blasd so cleare in all mennes sight,
               As by the same, a number did foreshowe.
               What frutes in fine, vpon those blomes would growe.
               Euen these (the best) Loue,
                  He was in his tyme and for his continuane reputed the best scholer in Cambridge. 
                  loyaltie, and Zeale:
               
               To God, to Prince, and to the common weale.
            
            
               His wisdome shewed, while Learning might engraue,
               Within his pliant minde, her sacred heaste:
               He bente his eare to heare the Counsells graue,
               That science taught,
                  His trauaile and knowledg in forayne languages. and wrot them in his brea.ste
               Thus stil with time, his worthines increaste,
               His name, his fame, his vertues full of grace:
               Was spread, admir'd, and lou'd in euery place.
            
            
               To decke his minde,He was honorably intertayned of forayne Princes. with Language, and with Lore,
               In greenest youth, to trauaile he was sett:
               By forrayne toyes, he sette but little store,
               Sound knowledge was the Marchandize he fette.
               And he abroade,He was alwaies riche in his martiall and decent in his vsuall apparrell. such worthy praise did gett,
               As Princes when his fame they vnderstoode:
               They honor'd him, by all the meanes they could.
            
            
               The Frenche he sawe, and at their follies smil'de,
               He sildome did theire gawdes in garments ware:
               In Italy his youth,He spake the French and Italian language, but their vices defiled him not. was not begilde.
               By vertue he, their vices did forbeare:
               Of this bie-speache be euermore had care,
               
                  An English-man that is Italionate:
               Doth lightly proue a Deuell incarnate,
            
            
               The Germayne plain,He fauored and was much beloued of strangers espetially the Germaynes. his humor best did please,
               They lou'd him much, he honor'd them as farre:
               And when the good, he gleaned had from these,
               Home be return'd a perfect man, to serue,
               
                  
His Prince,He brought Riders and other men of qualitie into England. and Countrey, both in Peace and Warre.
               And after him, men Qualited did baste,
               And for our good in England he them plaste.
            
            
               He oft did reade,He alwaies was a speciall fauorer of Soldiers. which well he did regarde,
               That prudent Peace, had still to Warre an eye:
               And therefore he the souldier good prefarde,
               Whose life, himselfe, in Ireland did trye,
               Till Essex di'de the flower of Chiuallry,His seruice in Ireland in the life of the late most noble Earle of Essex.
               
               And euermore, the Lawrell with the Launce:
               He excerside his Honour to aduaunce.
            
            
               What may be said, to praise this knight to much:
               Yea what suffice his vertues to extoll:
               In greenest yeares,He was Ambassador to Condole the Emperors death being then not 22. yeares of age. his grauety was such,
               As he was sent in message to Condole,
               
               The Emperours death, which rites he did inrowle,
               With much regarde, of that most follome grace:
               As that his name, still liueth in that place.
            
            
               In Court he liu'de, not like a Carpet knight,
               Whose glory is in garments, and his tongue:
               If men but knew, the halfe that he did write,
               Enough to tyre, a memory so young.
               Needes must they say the Muses in him sounge,
               His Archadia,
                  His Archadia, a booke most excelently written, vnmacht for sweete deuise:
               Where skill doth iudge, is held in Soueraigne price.
            
            
               What else he wrote,The last sheppards calenders the reputed worke of S. Phil. Sydney a work of deepe learning, iudgment & witte disguised in Shep. R
                        •
                     les. his will was to suppresse,
               But yet the darke, a Dyamond cannot drowne:
               What he his workes, the finest wittes doe gesse,
               The Shepheards notes, that haue so sweete a sounde.
               With Lawrel bowghes, his healme, long since, haue Cround,
               And not alone, in Poesie he did passe:
               But eu'ry may, a learned Knight he was.
            
            
               
               
                  Plesses rare worke,
                     Phil. de Pless. de Veritate relig. Chr. vndertakē & a great pa
                        •
                     t translated by S. Phi. Sidney, and at his request ended by M. Arthur Gowlding. of true Religion,
               Confuting those, which no Religion holde:
               In vuglar speech, by him was well begonne,
               A Learned worke, more pretious farre then Gold.
               Worthy his paynes: and worthie double folde,
               If his penne might, the hole with English fitte:
               Whose wordes are waid by Iudgement, Arte, and witte.
               
            
            
               The faulte that makes, the wisest seeme vnwise,
               A selfe conceite,His temperance showen by his embleame Spero. in wisdome to exceede:
               Was farre from him: the worde in whose deuise,
               
                  Spero, his hope, did from desire proceede.
               Honour to gaine, by many a worthie deede,
               On Hope, truth, zeale Learning, and the Launce:
               He built his fame and had no foe but Chaunce.
               
            
            
               In peace he liu'd,He was generally beloued of all men. admired of the best,
               In peace he liu'd, beloued of the worste:
               In peace he liu'd, and neuer man oppreste,
               In peace he liu'd, and euer, with the first.
               Layde helpe on those, whom fortune had accurste,
               And to be short, the rising sonne he was:
               That comforted and shinde in eu'ry place.
            
            
               But sith Sonne,
                  The mutability of the world and worldlie thinges. 
                  Mone, and Starres of Heauen must vade,
               And all thinges else, the Worlde conteynes belowe:
               Man can accompte, his glory but a shade,
               His earthly Life, the slaughter of a blowe.
               As well appeares, by this our Common woe,
               
               The worthy Knight of whom this good I sing:Enterance vnto his unfortunate death.
               
               Bids sounde the Drome, his follow knell to ring,
            
            
               But ere it towles, the sorrowe of his death,
               (The griefe of Prince, Peare, and euery state)
               Let me first showe, the cause, that did unsheath,
               His trenching Sword (In peace which shund debate)
               
                  
Euen chiefely this to coole the Spannish hate,The first cawses that sent the English forces into the Lowe Countryes.
               
               Who arm'oe with wroth against this happy Isle:
               Our Neighbours burn'de, to make a way for spoyle.
            
            
               For when we heard the out-cries of the Dutch,
               And how their foes, did make their will a lawe:
               Theire harmes, that neare, did now our safety tuche,
               The Lyon make (that keepes the Wolfe in awe,
               That neuer yet did feare the Eagles clawe,)
               And mildly first, did Licke the wounded sheepe:
               Then sent the Beare, the scattered heard to keepe.
            
            
               To speake more plaine,Tch Earle of Lecesteer accō
                     panyed with a smale number but yet men of such valewe as at sundry times, dismaid and dared the Prince of Parmaes whole power. though this instruck'ts the wife,
               Our Soueraigne Queene, that both the Lyon beare:
               With pittie mou'de, to heare her neighbours cries,
               Whom Tyranny, in peeces still did teate.
               Shee Lecester sent, to awe that common feare,
               And with him went, in this iust cause to fight:
               A stoute small bande, that many put to flight.
            
            
               Among the best, and with the first in fielde,
               This worthy Knight, inflam'd with countries zeale:
               His couradge arm'd,He went vnto his Gouermēt before the going ouer of the Earle of Lecester. to dye eare he would yeilde,
               His Horse and Lawnce, to serue the common weale.
               He now preferd, and that a mighty deale.
               Before his Landes, his after hope, or UUife:
               Yea (Curtius like) more then his proper life.
            
            
               Of Flushing he,He was made Lord Gouerner of Flushing. Lord Gouernour was made,
               A charge of truste, which he with truth did keepe:
               The bording foe, did finde he was no shade,
               He wakte them oft,By his prudency he discouered the practis of La. Mote who went ab
                        •
                     ut to intrap him. when they had lust to sleepe.
               And wacht his charge, as shepheards doe their sheepe,
               His hede at home, his Arme was in the field:
               To garde the fcend, and make the foe to yeilde.
            
            
               
               He crost the Seaes, not (like to some) for showe,
               No waighty cause,The death of his honorable father and mother drew him not from the execution of his charge. could make him leaue his charge:
               His Parents deathes, and many causes moe,
               Were colours iust, to set his zeale at large,
               
                  Flushing then wailde, to misse her trusty Tardge,
               
               He viu'de her loue, and for to do her good,
               He vou'de her ayde, and sealde it with his blood.
            
            
               His louing Wife, then came to houshold there,
               The happiest Wife,He was marryed to the daughter and heire of the right Hon. Sir Frauncis Walsingham by whom he had Issue a daughter. and now the heauiest wight:
               To sir Frauncis Walsingham, she was heyre,
               Of goodes, and giftes, beseeming such a Knight.
               The droomme now soundes, the worthy men to fight,
               A Garrison, his charge, well arm'de to shielde:
               He forwith leaues, and posted to the Fielde.
            
            
               As time, and cause, did will assaile the foe,
               Arm'de with the first, still with the last he fought:
               
                  Axell be wonne,The towne of Axell was taken by himself being chiefe of the forces there and eke at Dewsborough,
               
               He well made knowne the vallor of his thought.
               At Zutphen last where as his death he cought,
               With charge, on charge, and most by men of name:
               His death enrowles, a fight of lasting fame.
            
            
               Which thus fell foorth:A breiefe of the valiant seruice done by the English neare Zut. the 22. of Sep. of September now past,
               The 22. the foe in armour bright.
               Into the Towne, did with some vittaile haste,
               And made a bragge, but never ment to fight.
               But who can stay the hounde, the Heart in fight,
               Or Mars forbid, to venter on the foe:
               In open field, that proudly maketh showe.
            
            
               
                  Caesar alone,Plu. de uit. Cae. De vitae Alex. on the fierce Neruij ran,
               
                  Alexander leap, from a Cittie wall:
               And by himselfe, the selfesame Cittie wan,
               So we that did, proude Caesar sometime gaule.
               
                  
Whom no mans power, could euer yet appale:
               That day made knowne, the auncient English deede:
               Their Uallors left, vnto their worthy seede.
            
            
               A hunting fight, this Skirmidge may be calde,
               Of eager Dogges, for as a Leash we fee.
               A heard of Deare,These serued on horsebacke The Earle of Essex. doe scatter, kill, and gaulde,
               Our men but fewe, with furie so did flée.
               Upon their foes that some amased be,
               Essex that day reui'ude his Fathers name:The Lord W. Sir. W. Russell. Sir Iohn and Sir Henry Nor. Sir. Th. Parrat. S. Hen. North. Sir. Ihon. Win. 10. Wot. Esq.
               
               Lord Willowbye chardged like a fiery flame.
            
            
               Worthy Russell that will to no man yeilde,
               That day sawe light, euen through the hinmost foe:
               Stoute Norrys darde, the Spanyard to the fielde,
               
                  Parrat stroke downe Gonsago with a blowe.
               The yonger North did forward courage showe,
               
                  Wingfield did serue like to a hardy knight:
               And Wotton preast into the hottest fight.
            
            
               
                  I. Fis. cf. F. For cl. l. H. es. W. H. es. F. V. es. C. Bl. Es. I. H. es. B. Wh. es. Rie. Ha. ge. Ri. F. ge. W. Wr. gen. Cap. Swa. &c. Fisher, Fortescue, Haydon, Hungate, Veare, Blunt,
               Hynd, Hawle, Whetston, Fulford, Vdal, Wroughtō, Swane
               With moe of name the foe did foyle and front,
               The smallest feare that day was held a shame.
               And sure the foe will quite vs of that blame,
               Counte Hannyball was left in field for dead:
               And Captaine George, Lord Willowby Captiue lead.Count Hann. Gon. was mortally wounded but yet aliue. Capt. George taken prisoner. These serued on foote, the Lord Aud. Sir. H. Vmp. Sir W. Hatton Sir W. Standly Cap. Cosby. Cap. Tho. cap. Marten Walt. Browne &c.
               
            
            
               On foote that day Lord Audely serued well,
               
                  Vmpton Hatton, as forward as the best:
               
                  Standly (now staind) is hard Skirmidge fell,
               
                  Cosby deserues, his Honour with the rest.
               
                  Thomas was slaine, and Mertayne at that Feaste,
               
               
                  Browne ventured far, and so did many moe:
               Unknowne to me, whose fames their names will showe.
            
            
               
               But oh to shade,Sir Phillip Sidney wounded with a Musket shot in the thigh. this glory with our woe,
               Hardy Sydney, much like to Mars in viewe,
               UUith furious charge, did breake vpon the foe,
               A Musket shot, his stately horse then slewe.
               He horst againe, the fight did soone renewe.
               But fortune, that at his renowne did spight:
               A bullet sent, that in his thigh did light.
            
            
               The wound was déepe, and shiuered the bone,
               His hart was good, and manly bare this Crosse:
               UUith courage stoute, he did suppresse the mone,
               That many made, which did behold his losse.
               
                  Vdal then lite, softely to leade his Horse,
               Let goe quoth he,A signe of greate courage. till I fall to the grounde:
               The foe shall misse the glory of my wounde.
            
            
               Foorth of the fielde, with courage stoute he rode,
               To searche his wounde, their skill the Surgions showe:
               VVhat might be bought, to do him any good,
               UUhat might be wrought, to mitigate his woe,
               What might be sought, to salue his mortall blowe,
               Was bought, wrought, sought, his wound, his griefe, his life
               To cure, ease, saue, but (O) the fatall knife,
            
            
               Had grau'de his wounde, too deepe to drawe long breath,
               Had forg'd his griefe, too sharpe to relish ease:
               Had thrust his life, into the mouth of death,
               UUhat now remaines? since nothing may appease
               The Monster Death, that feedes of his disease,
               Euen onely this, to shewe his godly end:
               For soueraigne praise, did with his life contende.
            
            
               UUhen death he felt, lay heauie in his wombe,
               UUhen life he sawe, made haste from him to flye:
               My glory now (quoth he) must be my To'mbe,
               In which I coulde, forbeare a while to lye.
               
                  
Not that I faune on Life,He desired respit of life for the seruice of his cuntrie & profit of his Seruaunts. or feare to dye,
               But) of meere zeale: if with gods will it stoode:
               I respit wish, to doe my Countrey good.
            
            
               For why as yet, my seruice is but greene,
               My yeres are young, and brought forth Leaues of late:
               The blomes were faire, but yet no fruit is seene,
               I studied haue, to benefit the state.
               To execute I am fordid by fate,
               My Countreys weale, by me is newe begone:
               The hope is lost, my Glasse is broke and roune.
            
            
               My Life is now, euen at the will of death.
               A chaunce not strange, although the chaunge be great:
               For he that names, his Sworde out of the sheath,
               Can hardly say, that he shall scape vnbeate:
               Unlesse he flye, ere cause both sound retreat,
               The name of Warre is sweete, the praise is fame:
               But hazard beares, twixt Life, and death, the game,
            
            
               And sith my Luck, lightes on the worser Lotte,
               In worth I take, what desteny did drawe:
               My louing frends, for you I greeue, God woe,
               My seruaunts true, that held my will for Lawe.
               Although my will, thereof still stood in awe,
               Your losse is greate, because I lou'd you well:
               Receaue my loue, and so to both farewell.
            
            
               With that he sight'd their deepe dismay to mind,
               And turn'd his head, but left with them his hart:
               As he that reads his laste request shall finde,
               Brother (quoth he) to you I must imparte.
               Three thinges of waight,Three waightie preceptes vnto Sir Robert Sidney his Brother. impresse them in your Harte,
               Feare God, and liue: loue well my frendes: and knowe,
               That worldly hopes, from vanitie doe flowe.
            
            
               
               Wordes like himselfe, the Counsells of a frende,
               Which Somary, all wisedome doe containe:
               The feare of God is life, that both not end,
               When all thinges faile, the loue of frendes remaine.
               Yea all thinges else, are pleasure mixt with paine,
               
                  Caesar was slaine, and Pompey lost his head:
               Their climing thoughts, their owne decaies haue bread.
            
            
               He felt a change, betweene our life, and his,
               That mens vaine hopes, so soundly hath discribe,
               The healthfull talke, but the true feeling misse,
               Of heauenly ioyes, which in the soule abide.
               Flesh like the worlde, and relisheth his pride:
               It feares not death, vntill it feele the paine,
               Who knoweth least, knoweth then this worlde is vaine.A difference betweene the cogitations of the healthfull and the sicke.
               
            
            
               Who did compare,Caius Marius was of that cō
                     stant cowrage as he smiled whiles his thygh was a cutting of. his wound, with patient paine,
               Said Marius liu'de, in Sydneys haute desire:
               UUho saw his death, his life perceaued plaine,
               UUas wholy bent, by vertue to aspire,
               UUho heard his wordes; his wisedome did admit?
               They were so chard'ge, with grace and graue aduise,
               As they will liue, by vsage of the wise.
            
            
               A smaller wound,He liued 26. dayes after his mortal wound. leaues many in the fielde,
               A greater hurte, his hart could not dismay:
               A moneth welny, was spent eare he would yeelde,
               Himselfe to death,Sir Anthony Gweuarro highly commendeth the Epitaph of Basko Figueria the Portugall, which was: Here lyeth Basko figueria much against his will. whom death could not affray.
               And when that time, brought on his later day,
               Demaund was made: If hee ne fear'd to dye:
               No whit (quoth he,) because I liue thereby,
            
            
               But vrged more, then néeded in his state,
               He grauely did, this perfect answere giue:
               My death shall (like my life) dissembling hate,
               To tell you plaine,* to dye I doe not geeue.
               
                  
And yet of both, I rather wish to liue,
               Which who gaynesaies, vnwisely spends his breath:
               He fayne would liue, that most both prate of death.
            
            
               The cause is showne, why he desired Life,
               For publique good: but to our common woe:
               Our sinnes did drawe, and sharpe the fatall knife,
               His vitall threade, to cutte and shread in two.
               That his sweete soule, might forth of Prison goe,
               Which forthwith fle
                     •••
                  , to Abraham his breast,
               Where now it raynes, and still shall liue in rest.
            
            Mors honesta, ignominiosa vita preferenda.
            
               
            
         
         
            
            A commemoration
of the generall mone, the honorable
and solemne funerall made for and of
the most worthy Sir Phillip Sidney
Knight by B. W. esquire,
            VVHen winters bitter blast,He was wounded about the faule of the leafe. the trees began to bare,
            Sweet Sydney slaine, downe fell our hope & piller of welfare:
            He was the rising sunne that made all England glad,
            He was the life, and light, of those that any vertues had.
            He was the muses ioy, he was Bellonas sheilde,His vertues and vallor.
            
            With in the Towne he was a Lambe, a Lion in the Feild:
            His Life bewraed a loue, that matched Curtius zeale,
            His Life, no Life, contempt of death, to serue the common weale,
            No gift, nor grace, there was, but in his vertues shind,
            His worth more worth than Flaunders wealth now by his lasse we finde:
            For when his sacred soule,Mone at his departure. did forth his bodie flie,
            Ten thousand shrikes persude the same, vnto the starry Skie,
            The stowtest Souldier then shewed feminine dismay,
            And with their teares, did wash his wound, that brought him to decay:
            Some kist his breathlesse mouth, where wisdome flowed at will,
            Some raysd his head, that lately was the treasurhowse of skill,
            Where truth and cowrage liu'd his Noble hart some fealt,
            Some layd their hands vppon his breast, where all the vertues dwelt
            Some eid his closed eyne, that wacht the poore-mans need,
            And when they did vnwrap his thygh, his wound did make them bleed.
            O honer derely bought they crid, & monde this chaunce,
            So shoke his hand, and sayd farewell, thow glory of the Launce:
            
               
Outcries soone spread his death,The King of Scots wrote a passionate Epitaph. the mone ranne farre and nere,
            What was he then that mourned not, the dolefull newes to heare.
            The King of Scots, bewrade his griefe in learned verse,
            And many moe their passions pende, with praise to decke his hearsse
            The Flushingers made sute his breathles corps to haue,Great cost was offered to his funerall at flushing.
            
            And offered a sumptuous Tombe the same for to engraue.
            But oh his louing frendes, at their request did greiue,
            It was too much he lost his life, his Corse they would not leaue:
            And so from flushing porte, in shippe attyr'd with blacke,The ship that brought the bodie attired and painted with blacke.
            
            They did imbark this perfect Knight, that onely breath did lack.
            The winde and Seas did mourne, to see this heauie sight,
            And into Thames did conuey this much lamented Knight:
            Vnto the Minories, his bodie was conuayde,
            And there vnder a martiall hearse, three Monthes, or more was staide.
            But when the day was come, he to his graue must goe,
            An host of heauy men repair'd, to see the sollome showe:
            The poore whom he good Knight, did often clothe and feede,
            In fresh remēbraunce of their woe, went first in mourning weede
            His frends and seruants said, was thought a heauy sight,
            Who fixt their eyes vpō the ground, which now must howse their Knight:
            To here the drome and fife sendforth a dolefull sound,
            To see his coulers late aduaunst, lie trayling on the ground.
            Each ornament of war thus out of order borne,
            Did pearce ten thousand harts with griefe, which were not namd to mourne:
            Some markt the great dismay, that charg'd his martiall bande,
            And how some horsemen walkt on foote, with battel-axe in hand.
            Some tould the mourning clockes his gentlemen did weare,
            What Knights, & captaines, were in gownes & what the haralds beare
            Some markt his stately Horse, how they hong downe their head,
            As if they mourned for their Knight that followed after dead.
            But when his noble corps, in sollom wise past by,
            Farewell the worthiest Knight, that liu'd, the multitude did crie:
            Farewell that hon'rd arte, by lawrell and the Launce.
            Farewell the frend (beloued) of all, that hadst no foe but chaunce.
            His sollome funerall beseming his estate,
            This by the Heraldes martialled, the more to mone his fate:
            
               Three Earles & other Lords, the Hollands states in black:
            With all their trayne then followed: and that no loue migh lack.
            The Mayor and Aldermen in purple robes there mourn'd,
            And last a band of Citizenes, with weapons awkeward tourn'd
            In follome wise did bring this Knight vnto the grounde,
            Who being their best owed at rest their last adew to sownde.
            
               Two volley of braue shot, they thundred in the skies,
            And thus his funerall did ende with many weeping eies:
            Vpon whose Monument in letters writ with Gould,
            This Epitaph deserues to be, for all men to behould.
         
         
            Of the most worthie and hardy
Knight Sir Phillip Sidney
the Epitaph.
            HEre vnderneth, lies Phillip Sydney Knight,
            True to his prince, learned, staid and wise:
            VVho lost his life in honorable fight,
            VVho vanquisht death, in that he did despise:
            To liue in pompe, by others brought to passe,
            VVhich oft he term'd a diomond set in brasse.
         
      
   