
      
         
            
            THE CENSVRE
of a loyall Subiect:
            VPON CERTAINE
noted Speach & behauiours
of those fourteen notable Traitors, at the place of their
executions, the xx. and xxi. of September, last past.
            As also, of the Scottish Queen,
now (thankes be to God) cut off by iustice, as the
principal Roote of al their treasons. On Wednesday
the 8. of Februarie 1586.
            
               Wherein is handled matter of necessarie instruction
and comfort for al duetiful Subiectes: especially,
the multitude of ignoraunt people.
            Feare GOD: be true to thy
Prince: and obey the Lawes.
            At LONDON
Printed by Richard
Iones, dwelling at the signe
of the Rose and the Crowne, neere
Holborne bridge.
         
         
            
            CVrteous Reader: my good friend M. G. W. at his departure into the
Countrey, left this most honest worke to be censured by me: being
right well assured, by the continuance of our true friendshippes that
I would not deceiue him with a flattering iudgment, and (trust me) vpon a
considerate reading, I found it a little book, containing a large testimony
of his loyalty to his Prince and country, a sweet comfort, and most sound
counsail for good subiectes: concludi
                  •
               g by many fair examples of Traitors

                  •
               oule endes, that the reward of treason is distruction, and after death,

                  〈◊〉
                infamie. The matter agreeing with the condition of this troublesome
time, I haue aduentured to possesse thee with the benefite thereof,
before I made account vnto him of my liking: which is, that no good subiect
can mislike the same, and I made the more hast herein: because some
wicked persons that will not be admonished, haue now by new conspiracy
desired our publique sorrowe▪ and by their discouery haue brought an vniuersall
ioy into the church of God. Giue God thankes▪ for his wonderfull
presentation of her Maiestie, and the confusion of her enemies, serue
him, and read this booke, which trulie promiseth thee, that 
                  〈◊〉
                miscreate
persons shall neuer prosper in their deuices. No r
                  •
               ote but feare God, and
thou shalt fare well.
            Thy louing friend, T C.
         
         
            
            To the right honorable, Sir
William Cicill, Knight, Baron of Burleigh,
Lord high Treasurer of England, and one
of the Queenes Maiesties most honora
               
                  •
               able
and prudent priuie counsell a long
continuance of honour and
prosperous estate.
            
               RIght honorable and prudent Lord, the
vngratious Emperor Commodus, vpon
the accusation of a guilty consciēce,
caused fourteen or fifteen discreete Roman
Gentlemen, to be thrown into the
riuer of Tyber, for no other offence, but because they
soberly talked, of the the vertues of the good Emperor
Marcus Aurelius, his father: alleadging that they could
not praise his father without the reprouing of himselfe:
and certainly, although Commodus did euil, he spake
the trueth: for the cōmendation of vertue, is euermore
a reproch to vice: which principall (right honorable)
considered of the one part, by your manifold, seruices
done vnto the Queenes most excellent maiestie, to her
blessed realm, & generally to the true church of God:
and of the other side, weyed by the most odious treasons,
conspired by many rotten subiectes, whereof iustice
lately hath cut off certaine of the principall, whose
vile purpose reached to the life of her sacred Maiestie,
the subuersion of their countrey, and generall callamity
in the church of God: no other conclusion can followe,
but that the reuerence of your publique seruice,
will alwayes reuiue the hatred of their treasons, and
that the reproch of their treasons, will neuer suffer the

reuerēce of your fidelitie to die. Therefore (most graue
Lord) desirous to honour (withall duetifull affection)
your godly vertues, as the comforte of all good men:
and also to acknowledge some especiall fauours shewen
vnto my selfe, vnder your sound protection, I present
(for the generall instruction of my countreymen,
the subiects of England) my obseruances of certain noted
speach and behauiours, of those fourteene notable
Traitors▪ which lately suffered for their treasons: trusting
that this censure, by the sentence of all good Subiects,
will merite the acceptance of my former bookes,
which hetherto haue escaped the disgrace of publique
reproofe. Protesting, in the behalfe of my writing, that
my desire hath euermore bene, to instruct all men, and
not to iniure the worst of the wicked. And now to conclude,
that vertue may haue her sample by your Lordship,
and vice her shame by these traitors, in the name
of experience, I aduise all men, who
                  •
               e heades clime aboue
the height of their present conditions, to make
loyall and honest actions, the ladders of their aduancement:
which will commend them with a beloued life,
or an honorable death: whē treason is the hatchet that
seuereth life, and ioyneth infamie vnto death. The
Lord be with your Lordshippe in all your affaires: for
whose health and honorable prosperitie, the good subiectes
of England continually pray.
            
               Humbly at your Lordships commandement. G. W.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Censure, in forme of a
Dialogue, of certaine noted speach and behauiours,
of fourteene notable Traitors,
at the place of their executions. &c,

                  The speakers,
                  Walker, a godlie deuine,
                  VVeston, a discreet Gentleman.
                  Wilcocks, a substantial Clothier
               
            
            
               West.
               
                  NEighbour Wilkcocks, you are well
welcome home.
            
            
               Wilk.
               I humbly thanke your worshippe.
            
            
               VVest.
               What is the best newes at
London?
               
            
            
               Wilk.
               The best newes, are, fourteene of those
ranke traitors that sought to bereaue the Queenes
most excellent Maiestie of her life, (which God long
preserue) haue made their confessiō at the gallowee▪
for my eies saw their traiterous harts burned, and
bodilesse heads aduanced to the view and comforte
of manye thousands of people.
            
            
               Walk.
               You sawe a happie sight, for the quietnesse
and safetie of the Queenes most excellent maiestie,
and general comfort for al good subiects, and
a fearefull example to al traitors: but for asmuch
as they offended in the highest degree of treason, as
traitors resolued to kil the Queens Ma. (whose life,

almighty God long preserue▪) to spoile he
                     •
                   nauie, to
cloy the ordinance, to kil some of her maiesties honorable
priuy counsel, to moue a generall rebelliō, and
what in them lay, to procure a forraigne inuasion:
all which, beeing treasons of such danger, as the
least of them closed vp the doores of mercie: it seemeth
conueniente, that theire executions shoulde
be with more seuerity then the common iudgemēt
of Traitors.
            
            
               Wilk.
               Their iudgements and executions were
alike, saue that the first seuen were executed with
lesse fauour, then the latter seauen.
            
            
               VValk.
               What difference was there in theire
executions?
            
            
               VVilk
               Their iudgements were to be drawn to
the place of execution, there to be hanged vntil they
were halfe dead, their bowels to be brente before
their faces, &c. And truly the first seauen, as the most
mallitious (if there be anye difference in treason)
were executed somewhat neere the seuerity of their
iudgement: the other seauen were so fauouraby vsed,
as they hung vntill they were euen altogether
dead, before y• rest of their iudgemēt was executed.
            
            
               VValk.
               Their treasons were so odious as Perillus
Bull or the extreamest crueltie that pollicy may
inuent, wold be too milde to punish them: so that the
least fauour that might be showen vnto them, was
a token of exceeding mercye in her Maiesty, and
mildenes in the iustice of England.
               
            
            
               West.
               There were neuer people gouerned with
more mercie, then the people of England vnder the
raigne of our moste gratious Queene Elizabeth,
                  
(whose prosperitie the Lord long continue: and truly
I heard many wise men say,Comparisons by her maiesties mercie. that the greatnesse
of her maiesties mercie (applyed to an olde prouerb
Ouer much pittie spoileth a Cittie) is verie daungerous
to the peace of England: and some haue taken
example, by a fable of a frozen serpent, that a pittiful
husbandman found, which he reuiued at his sire:
but as soone as the Serpent had gotten strength, it
stong the husbandmans children: euen so these hollowe
subiects (I pray God I may not safelye name
most Papists) which run into many dangers of the
lawe: yet her Maiesties mercie so fauoureth them,
as it is to be feared they liue, but to recouer strēgth
to persecute her maiesties subiects.
            
            
               Walk.
               In very deede, mercie breedeth presumption
in the wicked: but no doubt almighty God (that
for the crueltie, which raigned vpon the earth, drowned
all the world, saue onely Noah and his famelye)
is so well pleased with mercie, as he seldome suffereth
it to be the cause of inconuenienre, especially,
where temperate iustice is ioyned with mercy: and
although the example of he pitifull husbandman
and the frozen serpent, may be well applied vnto
her Maiesties mercie, and the papists malice: yet
when the serpent stong his children,The beginning of presumption is mercie and the end is destruction. the husbandman
grieuouslye beate him: euen so, when these
kinde of people, turne her Maiesties mercye to
publique disturbance, Iustice will doe her office,
so that they shal hardly escape the censure of her maiesties
lawes.
            
            
               West.
               God bring them to shame and confusion

but Neighbour Wilcocks, I pray you shewe vs thē
names of the Traitors, and manner of theire executions.
            
            
               Wilk.
               Upon the twentith day of September,
being tuesday, Iohn Ballard a Priest, and first perswader
of Babington to these odious treasons, was
laide alone vpon a hurdell and six others, two, and
two vpon a hurdell, were drawne from Tower
hill,The place of their execution was somtime the meting place to cōsult of ther treasons. through the cittie of London, vnto a fielde at the
vpper end of Holborne, harde by the high way side
to S. Giles: where was erected a scaffolde conuenient
for the execution, and there vpon a paire of gallowes
so high, and withal, the place was so rayled
to keepe off horsmen, as the people might plainely
see the execution.
            
            
               West,
               I am much deceiued if there were not a
great multitude of people assembled to see the execution.
            
            
               Wilk.
               I cannot number the thousands, but by
computation, there were able men enough, to giue
battaile to a strong enemie: but one thing I especiallye
regarded, that although the assemblye were
wonderfull great,The multitude shewed no motion of pittie at the execution of the Traitors. and the traitors all goodly personages,
clothed in silkes: & euerie way furnished to
moue pittie: & that the order of their execution, was
a fearfull spectakle: yet y• odiousnes of their treasōs
was so setled in euery mans heart, as there appeared
no sadnesse or alteration among the people, at
the mangling and quartering of their bodies: yea,
the whole multitude, without any signe of lamentation
greedylye behelde the spectacle from the
first to the last.
            
            
               
               Walk.
               Truly, they that beare dutiful hearts
towards the safetie of the Queenes Maiestie, &
peace of their countrey, would not but greatlie
reioyce in their destruction, which sought the general
subuersion of the estate, beside the kind affectiō
& motherly loue yt her Maiestie published
by her gratious letters, vnto the L. Maior and
state of London:
                  Her Maiestis louing affection, towards her good subiects. wherein her Maiestie protesteth
(and sundrie of her gratious proceedinges
fullie witnesseth,) that she desired no longer to
liue, then while in the whole course of her Maiesties
gouernment she carried her selfe in such
sort, as might not onely continue their loue and
goodwill, but also encrease the same, are causes
strong enough to commaunde the multitude to
reioice in nothing more, then in the destruction
of those that pretend any hurte vnto her Maiesties
person. But good neighbour Wilcocks continue
your purpose concerning their execution.
            
            
               Wilk.
               The first day the Traitors were all
placed vpon the scaffolde,The order of the Traitors executions. that the one might beholde
the rewarde of his fellowes treason.
Ballard the Priest,
                     Iohn Ballard, the Priest, executed. who was the first broacher of
this treason: was the first that was executed, &
after that his bowels & traiterous heart were
thrown into the fire, (his head seuered from his
shoulders,) was set vpon the toppe of the Gallowes.
            
            
               West.
               By the way I praye you what confession
made this traiterons Priest, at the time of
his death.
            
            
               Wilk.
               He denied not his treason, died an

obstinate papist, & in his protestation, he doubtfullie
said, if he had offended y• Q. Maiestie, or any
mā els he was sorie, & so cōditionally desired
forgiuenes: & to declare (at full) his traiterous
mind, he said, I am sory I haue bin so 
                     ••
                  ādalous,
but most sory I haue bin so remis in my delings
            
            
               Walk.
               The malicious affection of his heart towards
the Q. maiestie, appeared euē in the trē
                  bling
passage of death: yt whereas his treasons
were so impious,Balla
                        •
                     ds sophisticall asking of the Q Maiestie forgiuenesse. odious, & dānable, as the most
wicked, (I meane his confederates for the most
part) confessed as the cōmon fame goeth, yt they
exceeded the greatnesse of her Maiesties mercie
which may not be measured, where there is any
measure in offēding, & yet in his desire of remission
at her Maiesties hands, he added this cōditiō,
(if) as one that doubted if he had offēded her
highnesse: wel, leaue we this dissembling traitor
a pray to the crowes, & his soule to Gods iudgemēt:
good neighbour on with your tale to y• next.
            
            
               Wilk.
               Next vnto this priest,
                     Anthonie Babingtō, Esquire. executed. 
                  Anthony Babington
was made ready to the Gallowes, and in
euery point was handled like vnto Ballard.
               
            
            
               West.
               Little may be the mone, bad was the
best: but what obserued you in his end?
            
            
               Wilk.
               A signe of his former pride, for whereas
the rest,A note of Babingtons pride. through the cogitation of death were
exercised in praier vpon their knees, and bare
headed, he whose tourne was next, stode on his
feete with his hat on his head, as if he had bene
but a beholder of the execution, concerning his
religion he died a papist, his treasons were so
odious, as the sting of consciēce perswaded him

to acknowledge himselfe to be a most grieuous
trespasser against God & the Queenes maiesty.
            
            
               West.
               I wonder that men are so bewitched
with the inticements of these Iesuits,Note this controuersie. as they
holde it a holly matter to lay violent hands vpon
the Lordes annointed: & at their death their
owne consciences perswade thē, that the immaginations
of such wickednes is damnable.
            
            
               Wilk.
               Pride,Causes of rebellion. enuie, and ambition are the
rootes of treason, the body of treason is murther
and all that mischiefe may deuise, the fruites of
treasons are ruines of kingdomes and common
wealthes: the generall reward of treason is the
destruction of traitors: and for that, shame and
perpetual infamie lead thē to the Gallowes: to
collor if it were possible their treason they make
religion their ground of rebellion: and with this
holly showe strengthen themselues, but when
Iustice hath deliuered them to the Hangman,
death sommōneth their wickednes before their
consciences, and then the feare of Hell maketh
thē openly to confesse the matter to be dānable,
which they took to be a holly ground of rebelliō.
            
            
               West.
               I am well satisfied, now good neighbour,
forward with the rest.
            
            
               Wilk.
               Next vnto Babington,
                  Iohn Sauadge, Gent. executed.
                   
                  Sauadge was
made ready for the execution.
            
            
               west.
               This notable traitor (as ye same goeth,
was y• mā yt cōferred wt D. Gifford at Paris, & by
the cōfirmatiō of y• english fugitiues at Rhemes,
was resolued to kil y• Queenes Maiestie, whose
defence the God of hoastes euermore be.
               
                  It is likewise said that vpon the apprehension
of Ballard the priest, Babington hastened this Sauadge
to dispatch his resolution: and that he only
deferred the matter, but for making of a court
like sute of apparell.
            
            
               Walk.
               God by sundrie examples,Gods prouidence in frustrating of Sauadge his resolution. preserueth
the innocent from the violent handes of the wicked,
euen in the pride and greatest hope of their
purposes. Hāmon erected a Gallowes for Mardocheus
the Iewe, and he and his tenne sonnes
suffered therupon, the false Iudges had got sentence
of death against chaste Susanna, but by deuine
prouidēce the stones dashed out their owne
braines:The odiousnes of treson in Gods sight but where the practize tendeth to the
murder of annointed Princes, the odiousnesse of
the matter, so highly offendeth the Maiestie of
God, as he miraculously hath defended notable
Tyrants, from the murthering swordes of traitors.
Comodus was a wicked Emperor, and to
kill him the traitor Quintianus waighted at the
entring of the Amphiatre:
                  Tirants miraculouslye preserued frō Traitors handes. his daggar was redy
drawne, his heart was resolute, and his hande
was striking the stroke, the Traitor cried, This
the Senate sendeth thee: by which fore-warning,
Quintianus was staied, and the Emperor escaped
vnhurte. The day before Scevinius determined
to kill the Archtyrant Nero he put an olde
rustie Daggar to grinding, he made his testament,
he franchised his bonde men, and got rowlets
in a readines to wrappe woundes in:
by which tokens Milcheu: his seruante, gathered,
he wente about some waightie purpose,

and so accused him to the Emperor: Sceuinnius
straightwaies confessed that his entent was to
haue slaine the Emperor. If God plucketh wit
and prudence from Traitors, that purposed to
kill such notable Tyrantes, it is constantlye to
be beleeued, that with the shield of his strength
he wil defend righteous princes: among whom
our most gratious Elizabeth is crowned with
the soueraigne renown of vertue, in which dignitie
the king of kings long continue her Maiestie.
The murther of a prince is so odious, as nature
crieth out against it.Mute persons and yong babes cry out against the murther of Princes. King Craessus had a
yong sonne that from his birth was mute, and
yet when one of king Cyrus Souldiors taking
him for a cōmon person, was redy to kil him: the
infant cried out O kill him not, for he is the king
my father.Peter Messire in his Cron. of memorable things. Lib. 1, Cap. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  A
                        •
                     iben Ragel in his Iudicials, reporteth
a stranger matter of a kinges sonne of his
Countrey, that brake foorth of his mothers intrals
to giue his father warning of his enemies
& presentlie after his birth cried out. I am born
in an vnfortunate hower, to be the messenger of
no better tidings, then that my father the king
is in present danger, to loose both his life and
Kingdome.Eccle. 10, Which notice signified, the infante
presently died: we hereby perceiue howe the
person of an anointed Prince, is so sacred as nature
maketh a passage for suckling babes and
domb personnes to deliuer the same from danger,
and withall the traito
                     •
                   is 
                     •
                  o open to destruction▪
                  Num. 16.
as the preacher faith to the traitor, a birde
of the aire shall bewray t
                     •
                  y vo
                     •
                  ce, and with her

feathers she shall bewray thy wordes. Dathan,
Corath, and Abiran, they and all that they had,
went down quicke into hell because of their rebelliō,
which is a great witnes of the saying of
S. Paule, who forbiddeth to resist against the
Magistrate.Ro
                        •
                     . 1
                        •
                     . 
                  For he that resisteth receiueth vnto
himselfe damnation. And certainely whosoeuer
marketh the sequel of treason, shall find an hundreth
examples to one, to proueth end of Traitors
to be miserable.
            
            
               West.
               Upon Gods prouidence in
                     •
                  rustrating
the mischieuous purpose of Sauadge the Traitor,
M. VValker you haue deliuered matter of necessarie
instruction for all subiects, especially the
common multitude to learne, whoe are manye
times tempted to rebellion with allurementes
of godly and honest apparance when it plainely
appeareth that there is no warrāt (yea that destruction
followeth) to rebell against tiranous
Princes.
            
            
               Walk.
               The serpēt inticed Eue, and Eue Adam
to disobey Gods commaundement, in eating the
forbidden fruite: with this subtill perswasion,
If you eat of this fruit, you shal not dy the death
but your eies shall be open, and ye shall be as
Gods, knowing both good & euill: euen so, with
subtill perswasions,The Popes practises to moue rebellion. are the simple multitude euer
more drawne vnto rebellion. When the noble
king Henrie the eight, banished the Popes
imperiall authority out of England, the Popes
instrumēt Cardinal Poole thought ciuil cōmotiō
to be the rediest way to bring y• same in againe:

and to bring his purpose to the better effect, he
perswaded the Northrē men, that no man shold
eat any dainty meat in his house, neither should
any one be married but he should pay a tribute
for the same vnto the king. In king Edward the
sixt his daies ther was almost a general rebellion
throughout England: the papists tempted
the commons to rebellion, with perswasions to
throw down inclosure, and for them selues foysted
in, to haue their olde religion, and acte of six
articles restored, the banishment of straungers
hath bene the cause of many cōmotions: but my
counsail is that my louing brethren the subiects
of england,Counsail against rebellion▪
                   opē not their eares to such pleasing
perswasiōs, lest rebellion enter into their harts,
and so vengance light vpon their whole bodies:
vpon the holliest ground of rebellion, destructiō
of traitors haue euermore growen. The Northren
men had but a bad proofe of two rebellions,
when they had the crosse and banner of fiue
wounds borne before them. God placeth kinges
in their kingdomes, and he alone wil haue the
dissoluing of them: If Princes be good, let vs be
thankfull to God for them, if they be tirannous,
let vs looke into our sinnes for God sendeth Tyrants
to punish the sinnes of the wicked,Tirantes are the scurges of Gods 
                        •
                     engennce. whoe
saith, I will doe vengeance on my enemies by
my enemies. God (saith Iob) maketh the H
                     •
                  
                  pocrite
to raigne for the sinnes of the people.
In Osea (God speaketh thus.) I will giue
thee a Kinge in my surye. And in Esaye.

Assur is the rod and staffe of my furie. Be Princes
good or bad, let subiects be obedient, least (for
their disobedience) God take away the good, and
double the tyranny of the bad.
            
            
               West.
               I would this sound counsell were grafted
in all mens hearts: then no doubt the rotten
branches of rebellion, woulde soone be cut off:
now good neighbour on with your matter.
                     Robert Barnwell, Gent. executed.
               
            
            
               VVilk.
               When Sauadge was executed, Barnwell
was made readie to die.
            
            
               VVest.
               And what of him?
            
            
               Wilk.
               He died an obstinate Papist and for
his treason he made conscience his best excuse.
            
            
               VValk.
               He had had but a rotten conscience
that was infected with the murther of a vertuous
Queene: and since his conscience was so
bad, I hope but a fewe that heard him, but forbad
their conscience to pitty him, other then charitably
to be sorrowful for his error, which was
damnable.
            
            
               Wilk.
               After Barnewel,
                  
                     Chediock Tichburn Esquire, executed. 
                  Tichburnes turne was
next, he was a goodly yong Gentleman, and
certainly his humilitie and moue, moued much
compassion, he was not setled so much in papistrie
as the other: but he was so much setled to
the proud humor of Babington. as his head could
no longer settle vpō his shoulders. In his mone
(which I very well marked) he compared his
state to Adam, who said hee was placed in Paradice,Tichburnes lamentaion moued many 
                        •
                     o pittie.
and ther inioyed all the pleasures of the
earth, he was onely forbidden to eate of the
fruite of one tree: but for his trasgression, he not

onely procured wretchednesse and miserie vpō
his owne heade, but vpon the heades of all his
posteritie. So (ꝙ he) I that wanted nothing, but
had helth, welth, and friends, and so might long
haue liued, if I could haue forborn to haue bin vntrue
to my prince. But alas for my offēce I haue
brought my self vnto this miserie, by which my
good mother, my louing wife, my four brethren,
and six sisters, yea our whole house, neuer before
attainted, is infamed, and our posterity for
euer like to be vndone.
            
            
               Walk.
               His lack of grace is to be lamented and
by his ouerthrowe al men are warned to make
choice of good company: for the olde prouerbe is
beri
                     •
                  ied. Euill companie corrupt good manners.
And truly the iniurie that he hath done vnto his
wife,A good exā
                     ple to forbid vs the felowship of the wicked. his mother, and to so many brethren and
sistirs: and to conclude to his whole posterity, is
a fearefull example to feare men from treason,
especially the Nobility and better sort of Gentlemen:
for they thereby not only lose their life, &
liuing, but the honor of their house is corrupted:
neither seemeth it an iniury against reason,
that in punishment of treason, a number beare
the burthen, and blot of one mans fault: when
for the vertue, and dutifull seruice of one man, a
nūber in his posterity receaue both honour, and
many other temporall blessings: further in his
confession, or comparing his offence to Adams,
                  
                     •
                  t concluded, he likened her Maiestie to the pleasaunt
and glorious fruite, so pretions in Gods
eies, as he forbad Adam and all other to lay violent

handes vpon, & thus by the mouth of her
enemies, God causeth her sacred excellencie to
be blazed.
            
            
               West.
               You put me in remembraunce of a tale
that a Gentleman, a trau
                     •
                  lor once told me, who
being at Rome when Pope Gregorie ther liued,
and finding at the English Colledge, ouer the
armes of England, a Phenix drawn, which the
Pope did appropiate vnto himselfe: the Gentlemā
dutifully reuerensing her maiestie as his soueraigne,
and Phenix of the worlde: in scorne of
the Pope wrote these verses.
               And reason good the Lion should,
               the Phoenix stand belowe:
               For though the leaues bewray the tree,
               the fruit the goodnesse showe.
               Applying in secreat zeale, the construction therto,
of this sēce. The armes of England to leaues
as but the generall badge of her kingdome, and
the Phenix he did propriat to the vertues of her
maiestie, as her excellent beautie, and glorie of
the world. And of the contrary parte, the matter
was wel takē, I know not by what mistaking.
            
            
               Walk.
               It is like enough that the meaning
was perceiued, for the pollicie of the Pope and
his fauourers is to turne all to their honours,
that in the market place blazeth not their dishonor:
as for example: A pleasant Frier being appointed
to preach before the Pope and his Cardinals,
who marking, with what maiestie and
pompe, they entred into S. Peters church▪ as one
rauished wt their brightnes, he scoffingly cried

out:
                     •
                  y of S. Peter,
                  A pleasant sermō before the Pope. fy of S. Paule, sy, fy vpon their
beggerlye Apostels: what reckoning is to bee
made of their religion, whē the honor therof cōsited
in casting forth of deuils, clensing of Lepors,
raising the dead, in making the blinde to see, the
deaf to hear, y• domb to speak, & the lame to go:
the good they did was to beggers, & their liuing
was as beggerly, bareleg, & barefoot, they wā
                  dred
from country to cuntry, their raiment was
simple, their diet thin, & their deaths violēt. But
honor & reuerence be to the Popes holines, the
glory of his religion is visibly seene: he is able to
make kings, & to dispose kindomes: his raimēt
is of golde, & his victuals the plētie of the earth,
he dwelleth & dieth in pallaces, & is buried like
a God. &c. This sermon was so wel liked as the
Frier was inuited to dine with the Pope, who
to relish his good sermon, excused himselfe by y•
weaknes of his braine, yt could endure no strong
sauor: when his meaning was de
                     •
                  aunded, hee
aunswered, since Emperors & kinges kissed his
holines feet, he thought his lot would be but to
kisse the homeliest part of his holines, al which
was wel taken: & yet perceiued to be vnhapelie
mēt. For if ye Pope shold reuenge euery dry bloe,
he & his Cardinals would soone set Rome in an
vprore: but if you make no publique professiō of
y• gospel, for al other offēces Rome wil beate wt 
you, & for a few peterpēce ye pope wil pardō you
            
            
               West.
               God blesse me from such pardons that
bring many men to the gallowes.
            
            
               Wil.
               
                  Tilney, one of y• Q, maiesties pensioners,
                     Charles Tilney a pensioner executed.
                  
next vnto Tichburne made worke for the Hangman.
            
            
               VVest.
               By statute lawe, it is pettie treason,
for a seruāt to murther his maister or maistris,
being but a subiect: how detestable a treasō is it
then, for a sworne seruant to lay violent handes
on his annointed Prince? The offence being in
the extreamest degree of sinnes, the punishment
ought to be according to the seuerest censure of
Iustice.
            
            
               Walk.
               Euery mans houshold wel gouerned,
resembleth a common wealth, wherein seruāts
ought to liue in the awe and subiection of Subiects:The antien
                        •
                      serui
                     
                        •
                     ude of ser
                     
                        ••
                     n
                        ••
                     .
and among the Romans there was an ancient
lawe, that aucthorised the maister to punish
the offences of their seruants with death:
but the wicked pollicy of men hath alwaies bin
such, as where open power was to weak, ambition,
enuie, and money allured the familliar
seruants, and meaner persons to Emperours,
Kings, & men of al estates, to lay violent hands
of their maisters and to betraye them to death.
Iudas one of the Apostels, betraied our sauiour
Iesus into the handes of the Iewes. King Alexander,
was poisoned by his phisition Thessalus:
the death of the Emperor Commodus was compassed
by the practize of his sister Lucilla. Many
haue had their banes by their wiues, as King
Candaulus: some by their sonnes, as the greate
Turke Baiazet the nienth. &c. but innumerable
that haue ben destroyed, by the treason of their
seruants.
            
            
               
               West.
               I hope these odious attempts wil discouer
them: and for that they are crept into seruices
of accompt, by subtilty, it shal be the part
of euery good subiect to certify their Lords (who
are perhaps vnacquainted with their religion,)
of such dangerous seruants.
            
            
               Wilk.
               The last of these seauen that suffered
was Abingtō,
                  
                     Edward Abington Esquire, exxcuted. his father was an officer of good
credite in her maiesties house, and for many aduauncements
was bound to say, God saue good
Queene Elizabeth: but his sonne was a notable
Papist, an Archtraitor, and at his death did all
that in him lay to settle a feare in the heartes of
the ignorant multitude,Abingtons threatnings. with a speach, that ther
could not choose but be a great effution of blood
in England very shortly.
            
            
               VValk.
               Gods prouidence maketh it apparāt
that y• prophises of traitors proue not euermore
scripture: Throgmorton the traitor said, before
one yeare were expired the prosperitie & peace
of England should be tourned into general callamitie,Examples of great cōfort to the godlie, and of no les terror to the wicked.
but the date thereof is out, and I hope
the destiny past. No doubt he knewe of a number
of mallitious enemies vnto the state, and
with the spirite of their wickednesse, he blundered
foorth his prognostication, but let all good
subiects to their comfort, and Traitors to their
confusion, knowe that the wicked diggeth a pit,
and falleth therein himselfe, and who treadeth
down the hedge a serpēt shal bite him,Prouerb. 
                        〈◊〉
                     , ther is no
wisedome, there is no vnderstāding, there is no
counsell against the Lord, The horse is prepared

the day of battaile, but the Lord giueth the victory.
The Iewes had S. Paule in prison; yea fortie of
thē vowed that they wold nether eat; nor drink,
vntil they had flaine him: but God (according to
the Psalmist,) in a due time defended him, yea in
that distresse, he came and stode by Paule, & thus
comforted him, Be of good cheare Paule, for as
thou hast testified of mee at Ierusalem, so muste
thou beare witnesse also at Rome. The Angell of
the Lorde led Peter foorth of prison, the Angell
of the Lorde defended Sidrack, Mi
                        •
                     aack, and Abednago,
in the burning fire: the Angell of the
Lorde stopped the Lions mouthes that shoulde
haue deuoured Daniell: the Angell of the Lorde
with a drawne sword, tould Io
                        •
                     ua, that he was
the chiefe of the Lordes hande: A comfortable
saying, and a true experiment: that this holie
Angell of the Lord, with a drawne sworde (although
not visibly seen) stādeth between the godly
& their enemies and then though the wicked
come armed,The digraces of the Pope, since K. Henrie the 8. first vnmasked his abhomination. with horses, chariots, & an hoast of
men, they shal be ouercome with their subtil deuices,
& their twords shall go through their own
harts. The lord wil haue the p
                     •
                  ide of y• vncleane
Pope abased, & al the world striue in vain to set
him vp again, if his friends look into his disgraces,
since victorious King Henrye the eight, first
vnmasked his abhominatiō:Cardinall Poole moued the frēch K. against K. Henrie the 8. they shal finde no
cōfort to take his part: he was thē in his strēgth
& the greatest princes of christēdome, his friend,
yea for the Popes cause they were K. Henries
greatest enemies: the Pope sent Cardinal Poole
ambassadors to moue the French K, against the

K. of England: the French made many braggs
but bit little the mighty Emperor Charles the 5.
prepared a great Nauie, at the Popes request,The pope stirred the Emeror Char, the 5. against K. Henry 8.
to trouble the peace of england: the fauoring of
whose inuasion cost the Marques of Exe
                        •
                     ers head
but this attempt prospered not, but which had
likelihood to do more hurt, then all the boast of
forrain power: by the practize of Cardinal Poole
20000 rebels in Lincolne shire,Cōmotion in Lincolnshire, by Cardinals Poles meanes dismaid by the kings power. for religiōs sake
had put themselus in armes, but when they
vnderstood of the K. power cōming against thē
they cried for pardon, & least their chieftaine D.
Mackerel monk, called captain cobler, to the censure
of iustice. In february following the Pope
by his instrument, cōpassed a meer cōmotion in
Yorkshire,
                  Rebellion in the North by Gods prouidence quieted. of 40000. rebels, but by the prouidēce
of God, the night before the armies should ioine
they were seuered, by a mighty fal of water, in
somuch as vpon a part by the captaines of both
sides, the rebels were appeased; & departed wt
                  out
blodshed: in the 3. yere of K. Eward the 6. the
Pope to set vp his authority in Eng.
                  General rebellion in K. Ed. the sixt his daies punished and pacified. by his seditious
instruments moued generall rebellions
through Eng. but they were ended wt the destruction
of the kings rebellious subiects. Q, Marie
though vnsound in religion, had the better hand
against her rebels: whom no doubt; God therin
fauoured, for her godly father K. Henry the 8. as
he did the Idolater Abdias for his greate grandfather
Dauids sake: But the manifold disgraces
which our soueraign lady Q. Elizabeth hath giuen
vnto this bloody pope, (out of whose tirany,
euē frō her very cradle, the Angel of ye lord hath

miraculously deliuered her maiesty) open the incomparable
strength of Gods prouidence, and
offer cause of admiration to the whole worlde:
when (for our sinnes) Queen Mary committed
both the word and fworde, to the hipocrisie and
tyranny of the Cleargie, good lady, her life was
assayled with a thousand publique and priuate
practises, but the Angel of the Lord, stil stode between
her and her harmes, and from the fetters
of aduersitie, loosed, and crowned her Maiestie,
with the supreame dignitie of this Realme, and
as a prognosticatiō of his ruine by her renown:
the yeare that God placed her royall throne, he
displaced these christian Princes,The Popes friends dropped away, whē Queene Elizabeth was crowned. the Popes
great friendes. The Emperor Charles the sift,
the Queene of Hungarie, Queene Mary of England,
two kings of Dēmarke, Bona, Sferza Queen
of Polonia,, Henrie the third, the French king, Ierolme
Pruoli Duke of Vennice, Hercules Daeste,
Duke of Ferrara,
                  A figure of the popes fall. and Paule the fourth, Pope of
Rome, that these setled friēds of the Pope being
remooued, other princes better affected, or at lest
not so hurtful, to the passage of the gospel, might
occupy their places, the Pope and all his fauorers,
while their strength yet lasted, shot to depriue
her maiestie of her crowne and dignitie,
God so strengthned her maiestie, as by her power
the French were dishonorably driuen out of
Scotland, and by her wisedome,Victorie against the French. both Realmes
were deliuered from forraine bondage, yea the
King of Scottes is bound to confesse, that from
God, and her Maiesties goodnesse, he and his

posterity possesse a kingdome: this peaceable victorie
against the french, discomforted the Pope a few
yeares:Victorie against the northren Rebel. in fine, Pius Quintus set D. Morton, an english
fugitiue, a worke, to raise a commotion in the
north parts: the Earle of Northumberland, the Earl
of Westmerland, and others entred into open rebellilion:
the very sound of her Maiesties power dismaed
them, and happy was he, that could run fastest
away: the principals fled, but escaped not the iustice
due vnto traitors:The Earl of North
                        •••
                     derland beheded the Earle of Northūberland was
soone broughte vnder the censure of her maiesties
lawes, and according to his deserte, was beheaded
at Yorke:
                  Misery of the Earl of westmerland. the Earle of Westmerland, euer after for a
bare allowance, was subiect to the proud controlement,
of euery raskal Spaniard: Felton, to drawe her
Maiesties subiects from dutiful obedience, set vppe
the Popes Bul vpon the Bishop of Londons gates,Felton ex
                        •
                     
                     cuted.
but (God be praised) the hornes that shold haue gored
the innocent, turned into a halter to hang maister
Felton: the Pope expected no good successe by open
force, and therefore he now armed his practises
with Machiuels pollices.Madder and Barlowe executed. 
                  Madder and Barlowe were
made instruments, to murther some principal Maiestrates,
but their confusion was speedy, & their
purpose frustrate. This wily Pope, with an ambicious
humour,The Duke of Norfolke, beheaded. then infected the principal Pear and
most popular subiecte of England: his treason was
so dangerous, as the person of the Queens maiesty,
and the peace of England, could not be in safetie vntill
the Duke was set lower by the head: in whose
confusion by Gods prouidence the peace of England
was no waye troubled: the conspiracie of Throgmorton,

Apleyard,
                  Q. Elizabeths death practised by nigro
                     
                        •••••
                     . 
                  Brooke, and others, had no better
successe, then in helping some of those wicked members
to the gallowes The Pope & his instruments
seeing the pollicie of man, preuailed not against the
Lords annointed, they set the deuill a worke to destroy
her sacred maiestie. The notable traitor Doctor
Storie (whom God woulde haue cutte off,D Storie ex
                     
                        ••••
                     ed. by the
censure of her Maiesties lawes) confessed that certaine
persons (of whome there is yet, that liueth by
vertue of her princely word & mercy) vndertooke to
destroy her excellency by Nigromancie: but the deuil
had no power, where the Angel of the Lord was
the shielde of his annointed:Stukelevs treaton frustrate. by the solliciting of the
Athiest Stukeley, the pope tooke hart of grace, by open
force to alter the godly gouernment of England,
and for his better strength, Stukeley thought to haue
compassed the K. of Portingals armie, after an ende
of his battail with Mulei Maluco, King of Feze, and
Marocoes,
                  Stukeley slaine. but Gods prouidence turned his hope, to
an idle fancy, for in that battail, the K. of Portingale
was slaine, his army was discomforted, and Stukeley
was cut off, from disturbing of the peace of England.
But yet of keepe the Popes purpose a foote,
Iames fitz Morrice an Irish Traitor, tooke vpon him
to be the Popes captaine: a man both for courage,
iudgemente, and experience, better armed to doe
mischiefe then Stukeley: and to make passage for
forraigne power, he conuayed himselfe into Ireland,
where he soone allured the Earle of Deasmonde, sir
Iohn his brother, and others vnto rebellion: but
such was Gods iustice (when the Traitor Fitzmorrice
least thought to be surprised) hee was casuallie

slaine, before he saw any successe of his treason.The traitor Fitzmorrice slaine. D.
Saunders supplied his place, and after him followed
the Italian and Spanish forces:The Popes forces in Ireland put to sword. it was Gods good
pleasure, to giue her maiesty sohonorable a victory,
as not one man escaped to carrie newes, saue a very
few that were spared toreporte the mercie and
power of her Maiestie:D. Saunders died of a fre
                        ••
                     zie in the mountaines. Doctor Saunders wandred
vp and down in the Mountaines like a rogue, and
died of frensie: the Earle of Deasmonde was driuen
to liue like a begger in the Mountaines, and to
finish his miserable life,The Earle of Deasmond beheaded. after his accustomed and
sauage maner, had by an Irish man his head strokē
off in his Caben: sir Iohn his brother like a Wolfe
in the wooddes wandring to seeke some pray,Sir Iohn of Deasmond beheaded. was
taken and headed after his owne vsage: when the
practize of the Pope concerning open rebellion was
thus rent in peeces, necessitie droue him, by his vagrant
Iesuits in euery corner to sound sedicious Schimeons
proclamation, which was to entertain murtheres,
theeues, A thiests, & all maner of discontented
persons, into the seruice of the pope, to the intēt
that they should murther the Q. maiestie, and alter
the state of this gouernmēt, both in matters of religion
& pollicy: these Iesuits in disguised habits, some
like ruffiās, some like seruingmē, & ye most like courtiers
transformed themselues at pleasure like vnto
Protew,
                  Campion and diuers seditious Iesuits executed. and made their night walks like owles,
not wtstāding Gods prouidēce hath deliuered their
Champion Campion, and diuers others of thē, into
the hands of Iustice, & Iustice by orderly trial after
ward condemned Campion, and some of the most
malitious of the Iesuits to the Gallowes, whereof a

number of good subiectes wondred at their deformities,
and plainely saw that the Lord of hoasts, heaped
the deuices of the wicked vpō their own heads,
and shewed foorth the vncomely priuities of Bebilon,
according to promise.
            
            
               West.
               With your fauour sir,originall of the Iesuits. I the lesse maruel
yt these Iesuits, sow their seditiōs in such disguised,
warlike, & ruffianly order, and intice men to violent
murther, without difference of persons, when their
first founder Ignatius Layola was a spanish souldier,
who decreeped with woundes, to keepe himselfe
frō begging in age, disguised himselfe with the habite
of holinesse, and with counterfeit miracles began
this holy order, not vnlike to the curtisanes of
Rome, who when the sale of their bewtie is past,
professe themselues Nunnes to get them a liuing
by cloister brokadge in their age.
            
            
               Walk.
               in very trueth since the time that it pleased
God,Rebellion coulored by relig
                        •
                     on. to make the glorie of himselfe, and the passion
of his sonne Iesus to be knowne and reuerenced
among the Gentiles: the godly embraced religion
to nourish their soules: and the wicked dissembled
religion, to pamper their carnall bodies, and when
that experience discouered, that the multitude were
like vnto a barrel that is ready to receaue euery liquor,
and that with hasty running they followed euery
new doctrine, the ambitious Athiests straight
deuised some new forme of deuinity, to rob God of
his glorie, many men of their liues and liuelyhode,
(but which is most to be lamented) huge milliōns, of
their saluation: in the primitiue church there were
such a huge sight of heretiques, as christendome resembled

a mighty armie,Ambition and enuie is the cause of alheretiques. wher the souldiers vnder
a number of seuerall Ensignes followed seuerall
Captaines, for after euery heretique followed a
multitude of people. The enuious Monke Sergius,
through enuy that his heresie in Cōstantinople was
put to silence, deuised the damnable secte of Mahomet,
and to strengthen his purpose, he picked foorth
Mahomet, the most proud, arrogant, and insolent
person of Arrabia to take vpō him to be a prophet, &
by magick wroght such counterfeit miracles, as to
this day a great part of the world are led 
                     〈◊〉
                   his error.
One Ismael seeing what force followed the banner
of new religion, deuised a religion different frō
                  Mahomets, & by the strēgth of his followers, grew
in fine to be the great Sophie of Persia, the vnnatural
enemie to the great Turke. The number of orders of
Friers, had their beginning for the most part from
ambition, or enuie, and to this day there is a malitious
hatred among them, as whosoeuer wil read
Erasmus dialogue, called Funus, shal well perceaue,
& seing the knaueries of the old orders of the friers
waxed so publique as the date of their credite weared
out: your reason is probable that the wounded
souldier Layola deuised this newe order of Iesuits,
vnder the habite of holinesse, to sustaine his age
in the reputation of his youth, and at this day
there is in Italy a newe order, called the fellowship
of the Trinitie, wherin are Tinkers, Tailers,
Tilers; and al mecanicall crafts men: and questionles,
if some notable Nigromancer to worke some
false miracles, would enter into their 
                     •
                  raternitye,
the dignitie of their order, would soone out way the

                  
                     •
                  redite of the Iesuits: but to our former pupose, if the
Deuill and al his furies ioyned with the pope & his
disciples, their pollices should take no effect against
Gods prouidēce. The murthering Iesuits thought y•
they had sped of their purpose, when they had ouercome
the hairebraine Gentleman Sommeruile,
                  Sommeruile hanged himselfe. to
murther her Maiestie (whome the Lorde alwaies
keepe out of the violent handes of traitors) indeede
they had picked foorth a dangerous instrument, as
a man so graceles, as he was fearles, to lay violent
handes vpon him selfe: but in his confusion was
seene the Prophesie of the Psalmist: His owne
tongue made him to fall, and all that hearde him
laughed him to scorne, he was first discouered by
the suspition of his owne speach and by his ouerthrowe
it was perceaued, that God shotte at him
with a swift arrowe which wounded him, he made
such haste to his deserued death: as this Traitor
hanged himselfe the night before the appoynted
day of his execution.Arden executed, The close Traitor Arden,
was by Sommeruils discouery brought to confusion.Throgmortō executed.
The dangerous traitor Throgmorton as cunningly
as hee disguised his odious treasōs was intrapped
in the snares which he set for his Countries destruction:
and worthelie died with the sword which
he had whetted for the innocent. The odious Athiest
Par
                        •
                     ie had the rewarde of his fellowe Traitors:
he had the place and opportunitie (which prudence
I hope will keepe al other suspitious persons
from) and yet as graceles as he was the very maiesty
of her Maiesties countenance made him loose
his resolution,Parry ezeeu
                     
                        •
                     ed. with the selfe same vertue that appeared

in the faces of the two magnanimous Romanes:
Marius and Crassus, where of the one with
the motion of his eies, and the other with the stoutnesse
of his speach, redeemed themselues from
death: The prouidence of God in bereauing the
traitors of so valiant a Captaine, as the Earle of
Northumberland, euery good subiecte to his comfort
perceaueth,Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland slew himselfe with a dag. who had so deeply entred into disloyaltie
as his owne cōscience condemned him, and therfore
to saue the honor of his house, slew himselfe. If
the popes instruments had iudgement to way, that
no one that actually practised her Maiesties death,
or depriuement, hetherto escaped the visible vengeance
of God: if her Maiesties goodnes, and their
duty could not moue them to loue, yet the assurance
of punishmēt, and the continuance of shame, might
feare them to be disloyall: but alas, those whose
hearts are hardned, haue their iudgements blinde,When it pleseth God to harden the harts of the wicked, he likewise blindeth their iudgements.
and their affections swift to run vpon destruction.
Pharao was warned with diuers plagues: that hee
should not hinder the departure of the children of Israel
forth of Egipt: yet he would needs follow them
to his vtter destruction. The report of the Souldiors
concerning the glorie of Christs resurrection, suffised
to haue conuerted the Iewes,
                  Visable warnins of God turned to strengthen the errors of wicked. but to their condemnation,
the Deuill & money sealed this errour
in their harts, that his disciples stole him away by
night. Gods iustice strooke Mahomet with the falling
licknesse to make him knowe, and repente
his blasphemie, but to strengthen the peoples
misbeleefe, the deuil taught him to say, that his passion
proceeded of the cōference with an angel whose

deuine presence, his earthly shape could not endure
vpon the principal day of the sauage murther in
Paris, as a token that Gods word should florish in
dispite of their crueltie:A dead tree bore greene leaues, when the sauage murther at Paris was in execution. a withered tree bare greene
leues in the churchyard, that receiued many a murthered
carcasse, and yet the papistes on the contrary
part, applied this prophising example, to the second
florishing of their Romish church: thus blinde
they are, in the successe of their errours and wickednesse,
as euermore they turn the presage of their ruines,
to the apparance of their prosperitie, & with
these vaine hopes, Babington, and his fellowe traitors,
were ledde vnto the follies and falles of the aboue
named vnloyall subiects: and therefore howsoeuer
they perswade themselues, and threaten
the multitude with a change of their prosperitie: so
long as we feare God, and be true to her Maiestie,
our peace wil vndoubtedly last, and the disturbers
thereof, are like to taste their fortunes, that bought
the horse Seian, whose maisters had euermore miserable
endes.
            
            
               VVest.
               You haue answered a matter which raised
much feare, and a great deal of speach amongst
the common people, so comfortably and truly, as
cannot but be the cause of great ioy and contentmēt
vnto the ignorant multitude, and no doubt a spectakle
of great terror vnto Traitors, to punish whose
offences, no torture can be to violent: This Abington,
was the last of the first seauen that were executed:
but forasmuch as the common brute was, that
the other seauen condemned and iudged, should be
executed the day following, I would gladly know

if you saw their executiōs? what speaches they vttered,
& what behauiour they vsed at their death?
            
            
               W
                     •
                  lk.
               I stayed to heare,
                     Thomas Salsburie Esquier executed. and see the order of their
deathes, and according to the generall expectation
of the whole multitude, the daye following being
the 21 of September, Salsburie was laid alone vpon
a hurdel, and other six, two, and two vpon a hurdel,
were drawne from Tower hill, through the cittie of
London vnto the former place of execution.The latter traitors executed with ez
                        •
                     eeding fauour. 
                  Salsburie
was the first man that suffered, and in all points
was handled as the seauen that suffered the day before,
saue that he and the latter sir, were executed
with this fauour, that they were suffered to hang
vntill they were fully dead, before the rest of their
execution was performed.
            
            
               West.
               It seemeth by their sauourable handling
that although the greatnes of their offences, egged
the sworde, to take away their liues, yet the outward
signe of their repētance obtained some compassion
at their deathes.
            
            
               W
                     •
                  lk.
               In very deede, albeit that Salsburie was
blinded with the superstition of papistrie, euen at y•
point of death, yet he mildly acknowledged his greeuous
offence, towards the Queenes maiesty, and in
his last commendation, charged all Catholiques,
(for so he onely accompted the Papistes) that they
should leaue to attempt to set vp their religion by
violent hand: and by double and treble repeticion,Violence 
                        〈◊〉
                      bidden by Salsburie,
he counselled them to pacience, and earnestly forbed
them all maner of violence.
            
            
               Walk.
               This gentleman by his execution, shewed
all traiterous papistes, the assured reward of treason:

and by his profitable admonition, a more necessarie
doctrine for them to followe, then the seditious
perswasions of al the Iesuits in the world: he was a
Papist at point to die, so that it stādeth with reason,
that through the onely working of his censcience,
he published to the world, that the violent courses
of Subiectes were odious, when we doubte n
                     •
                  t
but Ballard and other Iesuits, had once blowne into
his eares, that the same was meritorious: all maner
of violence by which the life of man is taken away,
is murther, except the execution by the sword
of iustice, which belongeth to the Kinge, and
his ministers, onelie where the gouernemente
is Monarchia: excepte also the violence done in
righteous warres, and other slaughters by causualtie.
And whosoeuer looseth his life by any other
violence, the same man is murthered: whose
blood, GOD will seuerely punish. GOD punished
the murther committed by Caine with a
moste bytter curse: and yet, that there might bee
no protection in murther,The odiousnesse of murther. GOD saide himselfe,
That whoesoeuer slewe the reprobate Caine, it
shoulde be auenged seauen folde. GOD requireth
the blood of innocents, at the handes of Kinges and
annointed Princes. To punish the faulte of King
Dauid in seeking the death of Vrias, GOD tooke away
the life of the childe which Dauid had by Vrias
wife: furthermore, in the time of King Dauid, there
was three yeares famine, and Dauid, demaunded
the cause why? and the Lorde saide, it was for
Saule, and the house of bloode, because he slewe

the Gybonites. According to the opynion of Erasmus,
the consenter in murther is as guiltie as the
dooer, Iudas that betraied Christ, and Pilate that
adiudged him death onelye to please the Iewes,
carried the burthen of murther in their consciences,Iudas and Pilate died by the r
                        •
                     own violent hands.
and by the horror thereof, wrought their owne destructions,
that either mighte die by the violent
hande of the moste wicked personne aliue. The
heathen men at Milite, when they sawe the viper
to hange vpon Paules finger, euen from the
verye hatred of nature, they murmured and saide:
This man must needs be a murtherer, whome, though
hee haue escaped the danger of the 
                        •
                     ea, yet vengeance
suffereth not to liue. Nature taught the Infidels to
beleeue that vengeance followeth murther. And
then reason may perswade Christians to assure
themselues, that the blood thristie are worse then
Infidels, and cannot escape the sworde of vengeance:
seeing then that Kinges, if they shead anye
bloode otherwise then by the sworde of iustice,
and Iudges, if they adiudge death for hatred,
feare, or gaine, by Gods righteousnesse are punished
as murtheres: What may they expecte,
that in corners laye violent handes of annointed
Kinges, or without collour of authoritie, murther
the innocente, If the eies of their vnderstanding
were not blinde, they mighte see a
doubtefull successe in their purpose, and the open
consution of themselues. I haue reade of a number
both of good and 
                     •
                  adde Princes and also of
other, which haue bene bereaued of their liues by

the violent handes of secreat traitors: but among
a hundred, you shall hardly read of one murtherer,
that hath escaped the torture of Gods vengeance.
Brutus and his partakers, murthered Iulius Caesar,
but not one of them escaped a violent death: yea, the
common people so loued Caesar, as to be reuenged,
they violently ran vpon all the friendes of Caesars enemies,
and by way of instruction the opinion is generall,
that if for our sinnes, it had pleased God, to
haue suffered our most excellent queene to haue sallen
into the violent handes of these vilde Traitors,
her maiesties louing subiects being the most of the
better sorte, and the whole sway of the commons,
would without respecte of persons, haue violently
intreated euery knowne Papist, as the Romane
multitude did the friends of Caesars enemies: and to
continue this terror to murthering Traitors, with
latter examples: the Archbishop of Pisa, together
with the kindred of the Saluiatij, the famely of Pazzie
and other the ancient houses of Florence,
                  Conspiracie of Florence murther pretēded against the Medeci punished. enuying
the popular fauour of Segnior Iulian and Lawrence
de Medeces, who thē principally gouerned the state
of Florence, conspired to murther the two Medeces.
To preuent suspition, and to bereaue the brethren of
publique succour, which in the streetes they were
like to finde, the conspirators made choice of the
church for their slaughter house: and vpon a Sonday
at mid mas, one of the conspirators slew Signior
Iulian, & Laurence de Medeces by Gods prouidēce
escaped into the Saccristiar
                        •
                     y•
                   suddain brute of this assault,
set al the cittie in an vprore, the conspirators
cried, liberti
                     •
                  : and the multitude life to the Medeci, &

vengeance vpon the conspirators: to be briefe, with
in the space of three howers the Archbishop of Pisa
was hāged, Ieames Saluiatij, Ieames de Pazzi, Anthony
de Volterro and diuers others of the cōspirators
were slaine in the furie of the people: Barnard Bandyn
was led naked into the market place and there
hanged: the rest of the conspirators, their seruants,
and fauourers, were in this sort ouerthrowne, and
which is moste grieuous: their posteritye haue euer
since bene subiects to the Monarcall gouernmente
of the house of Medeces. Galeas the sonne of Frauncis
Forze, and Duke of Millen, for his odious vices and
extreame tirranny, was generally hated of all the
people of the cittie, he slew his mother, and by fear
of force, abused the greatest part or the virgins and
faire women of Millen, so that to redeeme the Citie
from this seruitude, and tyrannie, three yong Gentlemen
of anchient howses in Millen, conspired the
Dukes death, their names were Charles viscounte,
Iohn Andrea, and Ierolme Olgiat: these gentlemen
kept their resolucion, & as the Duke was attentiuely
hearing of mas, said by the Bishop of Coma,
they so violently assailed Galeas,
                  The murther of the tyrant Galeas Duke of Millen pun
                        •
                     shed. as they left him
dead in the church, God suffered this vengeance to
light vpon the tyrant, yet in his iustice would not
suffer the cōspirators to escape vnpunished, Andrea
and Viscounte were both slaine in the hurley burley
of the people: Olgiat was afterward apprehended
by the ministers of iustice, and albeit he redeemed
the Cittie frō a great bondage, yet for that the good
that they receiued, proceeded from an euil action in
Olgiat, they executed him as a cōmon traitor. The

late King of Scottes,
                  Murther of the late K of Scots punished. was villanously murthered:
the greatest fauourers & (according to published records)
the greatest procurers of the saide murther,
were by common iustice drawne to commit, almost
all the murtherers into the hands of the hangman,
and such as escaped, or were not bounde vnto
the censure of law, could by no meanes shift themselues
from the vēgeance of God. Iohn Iarugo that
first assailed the godly prince of Orrenge, had the cō
                  mon
reward of traitors, and the most odious Athiest
Balthazar Serack that slew him: notwithstāding ye
blessing of the pope,Murther of the godlie prince of Orenge punished. the cōmēdation & threatning of
the king of Spaine, exchanged the pistoll where with
he slew the prince, for tortures to execute himselfe.
I could aleadge infinite examples to disswade men
from violent murther, which Gods prouidence many
waies preuenteth, whē his iustice neuer leaueth
ye murtherer vnpunished. It is a special pollicy that
the Iesuits vse, to draw yong gentlemen to these desperat
treasons: for if they had iudgmēts to obserue
ye infortunes of such practisers, or experience to looke
into the currants of time: they should see the attēpt
as vaine a matter, as to throwe stones against the
Starres, or with a knock of their head, to leauell a
mountaine, that seek to displace a beloued Prince.
            
            
               West.
               I pray God the good counsel of this traitor
Salsburie may settle obedience in al mens harts,
and the better to bridle the malitious affections of
the disloyall, they assure thēselues by their outward
apparance, that the multitude will entreate them,
(and all their partakers) as the Romanes did the
quellers of Caesar, or as the Florentines did the conspirators

against the Medeces.
               
            
            
               Wilk.
               After Salsburie was with al possible fauor
executed, Dun was stripped into his shirt,
                     Henry Dun gent executed. who seemed
very penitent for his grieuous offēce, & after yt
with very earnest perswasion, he had likewise disswaded
the Romish catholikes frō attempting any
matter of violence, was executed with exceeding
much fauour.
            
            
               West.
               This Dun, as the report goeth, liued (reasonably)
wealthely: but it seemeth, the humour of
the man, was not contented with a reasonable vocation,Ambitious humour of Dun.
as appeared by his vain imagination, who
in Trinitie terme last, cōming into the kings bench
office, among other pleasant speach to one of his familiars:
you wil marueil (ꝙ he) to see me within one
quarter of a year to walke vp & down with twenty
men after me: where vpon an acquaintance of his
plesantly answered, ye he feared he shoulde first see
him followed to the Gallows with a thousand mē.
            
            
               Walk.
               
                  Dun shewed his desire,The roote of rebellion. and the other red
his destiny, & in this obseruance, you haue showen
the working cause of most treasons: for though to
draw ye affections of the multitude, religion or some
other publique benefite be the pretence:Admonit
                        •
                     on for the ambitious. Ambitiō, &
desire of dignity is y• welspring of rebelliō: but these
yt wil fly without wings, are like to fall before they
be wise, he yt is born to be a seruāt ought in no wise
to looke for double and treble attendants: dignitie
is like a Phane on a high tower, which is subiect
to the chaunce of Fortune, as the other to the
chaunge of the winde: and whoe so will sitte
therevpon sure, hee muste like the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,

get experience with slowe climing, least in taking
a swifter course, like vnto a birde, he be remooued
with the least stone that is throwne: I mean with
the least disgrace of fortune: if mens mindes grow
bigger, then their natural conditions, there are many
examples of vertue to imitate, which haue raised
sundrie men from the carte to the hiest degree of
honour, when in climing by treason, many millions
of honorable estates, die dishonorably, and to their
posteritie leaue no better inheritance then infamy,
let the ende of this traitor be a warning example to
all ambitious humored men, that destruction followeth
presumption, and that the climing of pride
will haue a falle.
            
            
               Wilk.
               When the execution of Dunne was finished,
                     Edward Iones Esquire executed.
the next that plaied his parte was Iones: this
Traitor by that which was easie to be gathered
of his behauiour at the Gallowes, was a close papist
of a shrowd reach, and a very dangerous member
in this common wealth: for notwithstanding
he protested, he disswaded Salsburie from this odious
enterprise, his owne tale shewed that his counsaile
proceeded of a fear that he had, that the proud
humour of Babington threatned an ouerthrowe of
their purpose, rather then of any dutieful zeale that
he bare towards the safetie of the Queenes maiesty:
for he neither would himselfe discouer his treason
of the highest degree of treasons, neither did hee
councell his friende Salsburie to preuente his owne
danger in discouering the conspiracie of his companions:
yea, when the odiousnesse thereof broke out
into publique knowledge, contrarie to the general

duetie of a good subiect, and in contempt of a special
warrant derected vnto him, he not onely refused (as
he himselfe confessed) to apprehēd Salsburie being in
his house, but so far as he might, succored him, after
that he was published to be of the most wicked conspiracie,
one especial thing that, neuertheles, moued
a number to pitty him aboue the rest: with behemēt
wordes he protested, that though he was a Catholique
in religion, yet he so deepely weyed the liberty
of his countrey, as that he would and euer was redy
to spend his life in withstanding any forraigneForraign i
                        •
                     
                     uasion reproued by Iones.
enemie: French, Italian, Spanish, or whatsoeuer. The
tollerating of muasiō, by whose opinion was so far
from nature, and christian duetie, as no excuse nor
punishment might satisfie the crime.
            
            
               West.
               It is a wonder that papists, who holde it
damnable to harken to the counsels of Protestants
are not admonished by the censures, and warnings
of papistes themselues, at the point to die: but contrary
to the iudgemente of their fellowes consciences
in that fearful passage, they follow the seditious
perswasions of Iesuits, that they shal greatly work
the libertie of their countrey, in deliuering the same
into the handes of forraigne gouernors, otherwise,
they would neuer haue giuen succour and aid, to the
Italian forces in Ireland, or (as it is one especiall
point of their treasons) in all their conspiracies to
practize a forraine inuasion.
            
            
               Walk.
               Those whose hearts it pleaseth God to
harden, haue neither eies to looke into their owne
danger, nor iudgement to consider of their owne benefit,
and no doubt this traitor, hauing his conscience

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
prepared to die, saw the odiousnes, and vnnaturalnes
of this kind of treason, which the corruptiō
of his life litle respected, or rather fauoured, for as
the case standeth with the Papists (God be praised
for blessing her Maiestie and the Maiestrates with
such prudent foresight) he that setteth his hearte to
treason,Forraigne inuasion vnnatural. inclineth his affection to forraign inuasion,
as otherwise out of hope to see the wished successe
of his desire: but since it pleased God to commend by
this publique enemie, the natural liberty of a mans
countrey: and by conclusion, to discommend his 
                     •
                  ellowe
traitors who continually labour the bondage
thereof. It shall not be amis for our instructions
to enlarge our conference with the odiousnesse and
and vnnaturallnesse, and the Papists owne daungers
contained in this Archtreason: we see that if
two Mastiues egerly fight, neuertheles, at the sight
of a Beare, they part themselues and flie vpon their
natural enemie: forraigne seruitude is as vnnaturall,
and odious, to euery Nation, as the Beare to
the Mastiue. To be ridde of which seruile yooke, atExample by the Iewes.
such time as Titus Vespatian belieged Ierusalem:
notwithstanding there were thousandes of the Citizens
dailye slaine with ciuill traies, yet at euerie
assault of the Romanes, the Iewes ioyned so assuredly
together, as if the multitude had beene but one
hand: we reade in Chronicles of a number of good
men that haue ben ingratefully & vnkindly intreated
of their own country: and of a very few so badde
(vntil this wicked age) that preferred a stranger toExamples of louers of their country
the gouernmēt of their natiue country: Themistocles
the good Athenian, was vniustly banished Athens &
for succour was driuen to go to K. Artaxexces, the Athenians
                  
sworn enmy: Artaxerxes glad of this aduantage,
laboured to guide his army against Athens: &
whē the Captain could no longer wtstand the kings
importunitie
                     •
                  , he drunke buls blood and died, rather
then he would reuenge the ingratitude of his country
with forraigne bondage: there was mortal hatred
betweene two worthye Captaines, Cretinus
Magnetius, & one Hermias, so y• the whole countrey
was occupied wt their discord, but whē the K Mithridates
assailed their countrey, Cretinus Magnetius volūtarily
banished him selfe, that y• ielosie of their hatred
might not hinder y• publique seruice of his valiant
enemy Hermias: y• traitor that for his priuate aduancement
laboreth to betray his country, would if
his countries danger so required be loth to follow y•
exāple of K. Codrus, who vnderstāding that y• liberty
of his country stood vpō the losse of his life, he presently
in the habite of a slaue entred the camp of the
Peloponians, & Dorians, his enemies & there quarelled
vntil he was slaine: to do their countrey seruice,
Ane
                        •
                     rus, K Midas son, & Curtius, voluntarily leaped
into a deuouring gulf of y• earth: Caius Graccus sacrifized
his own daughter, & y• noble Roman Seuola aduētured
alone to kil Poisinus in his camp. In auciēt
time mē bore this zeal toward their country y• a nū
                  ber
in de
                     •
                  ence thero
                     •
                  , ran vpon violēt death. If these
general traitors had but experiēce, to cōsider of ther
own thra
                     •
                  dom, they could not be so redy to welcome
y• forraign enemy wt one hand, as they woulde, bee
forward to throwe him forth with al their force, the
Popish Cleargie who
                     •
                   with Cardinall Poole say,
Roma mihi patri
                        •
                      est, helpte the Spaniarde into

                  England, the king of Spaine and his counsellors, laboured
for the Monarcal Diadem, and as the time
then serued, they thought, and it is verye like, they
had wrought diuers of the Nobilitie to fauour their
purpose:The purpose of the King of Spaine in Queene Maries daies. it is easie to be iudged, the euill that they
meant vnto their enemies, when they purposed to
deale thus with their friends: they determined first
by their help to cut short such of the nobility as they
found contrary to their desire, and then they meant
to make their friends safe with honorable dignities
abroad whereof, they should take such sound possession,
as they should neuer see England again: as whosoeuer
hath seene a letter in forme of an admonition
written by the godly martyr M. Iohn Bradford to
the nobilittie of England, may more largely perceiue:
Bernardin de Mendoza, y• late ambassador for Spain,
(who trained Throgmorton a principall traitor,A pollicie of Barnardin de Mendoza. and
many others no doubt vndiscouered, to make a passage
for a forraigne inuasion,) after his forced departure
out of England, diuers times hath said, that
if he had continued stil in England he wo
                     •
                  d not haue
left a Papists head of anye account standing vpon
their shoulders: meaning, that before the comming
of the Spanish power, to leaue no man of estate or
reckoning, that might lawefullye looke to strike a
stroke in their gouernment, for the Spaniard will be
Domine, fac 
                        •
                     otum, wheresoeuer he ruleth: & where
is then the reckoning of those traitors, that look for
dignitie by this vnnaturall treason.
            
            
               West.
               You haue already red their fortunes, and
I praye God both by the falles and follies of these
traitors, that all English men may haue their harts

(to withstand the forraigne enemye) strengthened
with the protestation of Iones his tongue, at the
hower of his death. Amen.
               
            
            
               Wilk.
               After Iones had paide the price of his treason
with all possible fauour,Iohn Trauis & Iohn Charnok Gent. executed.
                   
                  Charnock was excecuted,
and after him Trauis, both men as it seemed bewitched
with an ignorant deuotion, for that in their
endes there was nothing to be obserued, but their
praying to our Lady, calling vpon Saintes, ioyned
with a number of ceremonies, crossings & blessings,
so that it appeared,Their ignorant deuotion dāgerous. that in their prayers they were
bound to a forme more then vnto faith.
            
            
               Walk.
               The Pope can finde out no instrument so
constant for his purpose, as the ignorant per
                     •
                  on bewi
                     •
                  ched
with his superstitious deuotion, for he resolutely
followeth whatsoeuer is giuē him in charge:
such a one was hairbraine Somme
                        ••
                     ile, that intended
to kil her maiestie, whose life (as the life of Englands
happines) God long continue: and such an other
was young Iarugo, that first wounded the godly
Prince of Ora
                        •
                     ge, whoe was so simple, as hee
perswaded himselfe that the Pope had the power,
and would cause him to doe the deed inuisible, and
therefore the Pope was wont to practise moste rebellions
by the ignorant multitude, who so long as
they were blinded with his errors, were euer constant
in the execution of his pollices, and certainlye
although the simple ignorance & error of these two
traitors, were to be bemoned, yet the dāger of their
treasons considered, their executions were verye
necessary both for example, & her maiesties safetie.
            
            
               West.
               You say very truly.
            
            
               
               Wilk.
               When the Hangman had giuen these
two sencelesse papists his heauy blessing,Robert Gage G
                           ••
                        t. executed.
                   
                  Gage prepared
himselfe to dy: he began his protestation, that
there was neuer a subiect more bound to a Prince,
then his Father was to her Maiestie: and from that
true acknowledgement of her maiesties gratiousnes,Her M
                        •
                     gratiousnes commended by this traitor.
                  
                     •
                  ell to excuse himselfe of the odious trealons
for which he died: but vpon so weake a ground, as
the simplest indgement then present, founde by the
order of his own confession, that he was a dangerous
instrument for the Pope: he confessed that he
accompanied Balla
                        •
                     d the Seminarie Prieste into
Yorkshire,
                  Gages hipocrisie. and that he wrote a letter for the saide
Prieste, to a French man or a Spaniard of accompte
beyond the seas, and in al the course of his confession
in indifferent iudgmēts he accused him selfe to be a
hollow subiect and a sound Papist.
            
            
               West.
               This cunning traitor Gage, coulde neuer
haue made a confession of more infamye vnto himselfe,
then in acknowledging y• Queens most excellent
fauour, shewed vnto his father, which a dutiful
sonne ought to esteeme a benefit vnto himselfe: & so
to dauble reproch his treasons, he condemned himselfe
of ingratitude: which vnnatural fault, Per
                        •
                     ander,
euermore sentenced wt death: but in my opinion,
if y• Queen were les mercifull,her maiesties mercy renow
                     
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Rome the papists would be
more faithful: for truly their punishment is so mi
                     •
                  de
as by the faith o
                     •
                   an honest man I heard in Rome,
a Popish Prieste in the presence of other 
                     •
                  ugitiues,
wish to be her maiesties p
                     •
                  soner in the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   rather
then to enioy his liberty o
                     •
                   con
                     •
                  cience in R
                        •
                     me.
               
            
            
               VVilk.
               It is verye likely, that the 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
Priest,The almes of Rome. was regarded in Rome as olde dogges
are with their maisters, when the date of their hunting
is out, the sentence of their hanging is at hand,
for I haue heard, how those marked people (that holy
scripture wils vs to beware of) are welcome to
Rome, and no lesse rewarded of the Pope, when
those y• by their outward coūtenance promise not a
rebellious spirite, are enter
                     •
                  ained neither with the
one nor the other.
            
            
               West.
               You put me in remembrance of a special
difference, that I obserued in Rome, which wel confirmeth
your opinion, and is not impertinent to our
conference: being in Rome, Anno dommini 1580,
there was presented vnto the Pope a notale English
shifter, who named himselfe Seamer, a one eyed
person, and such a one as had abused sundry greate
estates in Germanie: this man being in want, and
withall vnlearned as he could hardly read English
was a suter to the Pope to be entertained into the
English Seminary,The disposition of the discribed by these exāples and ther to be instructed in the
profession of the Iesuits, he soone obtained his purpose,
and with a blessing of crownes was shortly
after commended to Rheames, and what there
became of him I haue not heard: at the same time,
there came to Rome an English Gentleman, wonderfullye
dronken with the zeale of the Romishe
religion, he had sometimes a proper lyuing, and
good store of mony lefte him by his father, which for
the most parte he consumed in the fellowship of the
Papists: in fine, he was enioyned by his confessor,
(I thinke vpon pollicye because he hadde little
lefte to maynetaine him) to resrayne from the

drinking of wine and from the eating of all manner
of flesh: in the execution of which pennance, (for that
in Italie there was smal store of fish, and no beere or
Ale, he was for the moste parte, driuen to liue with
bread and water: this Gentleman was so strickt in
obeying pennance, and so deuout in the Popes holinesse,
as of a number of Papists he was derided:
& of some other tickled, that he was a very Sainte
vpon earth: but what woulde Rome and all the
Seminaries of Italie doe for this ignorant and deuout
Gentleman? Unto the shame of all Papists, I
truly certifie, that with many a weary step, in the
deepe of winter he arriued at Rome: he was (not
without some repining) entertained wt eight daies
allowance in the English Colledge: but one daies
succour aboue, he could not compasse: he laboured to
be admitted into the fellowshippe of the Iesuits, he
was flatly denied, and in recompence of al his toile,
charge, & zeale, he was constrained to leaue Rome
with a bare purse, to seeke some new blinde aduenture,
his vsage made me to abhor the hipocrisie of
Papists, and inwardly to lament the blindnesse of
my poore countryman: we departed from Rome together,
my selfe minding to go vnto Vennis, and he
to Madona Deloreta. To showe all the follies of the
man in our iorney were tedious,A blinde deuotion. and more ridiculous:
at euery two miles end, there was (lightlie)
a Chappel, and where he found our Lady, or any other
Saint fair painted, he would there kneel down
and pray, but if the Images were in bad attire, he
euermore past them ouer with the salutation of his
cap: many a mile he stepped foorth of his way, to

reuerēce some old friers relick: at Loreto he turned
their lewd lie of our ladyes house into English, & to
purchase the Iesuits fauour,The Papistes faine our Ladies house was by miracle brought from Ierusalē into Italie. he did al the dueties of a
Romish Catholique: but for all his sure, they woulde
not admit him into their society: thus wandred he al
the dead winter, from religious house, to religious
house in Italy, & yet for al his pennance, and straitnes
of life, the poore Gent. coulde not gette a resting
place, the reason was as you haue saide, and I wel
obserued, he shewed an apparance of an ignorant
                     •
                  
zeale, and no signe of a dissentious spirit.
            
            
               Walk.
               Wel, leaue we these dissembling Iesuits to
the iustice of God, who visibly punisheth them with
shame, & the most of their instruments with destruction,
and now neighbor Wilk. I pray you showe vs
what obserued you in y• end of y• last of these traitors
            
            
               Wilk.
               The last that suffered, was one of the
Bellamies,
                  Ieremie Bel
                        •
                     amy Gent. executed.
                   his countenance discouered him to be a
setled papist: & as he could say little to saue his life,
so at y• gallowes he said nothing to desēd his death.
            
            
               West.
               Although this traitor had but a dul spirit,
yet it seemeth he had a mallitious heart: he and his
friēds succoured Babington, & some of his coemates,
when feare of the lawe, and shame of their odious
treasons, made them to shrowde themselues like a
Fox in the couert:One of the Bellamies hanged himselfe in the Tower. & it seemeth that they were as resolute
to followe the treasons of Babington, as they
were ready to relieue him from the daunger of the
lawe: otherwise if this Bellamies brother had had an
innocent conscience, he woulde neuer with violente
handes haue hanged himselfe.
            
            
               Wilk.
               God be praised that these rotten branches

are thus cutte off: but if his prouidence preuent not
the mischiefes, it is to be feared that of the root there
wil grow many other, apt to bring foorth the fruite
of publique disturbance.
            
            
               VValk.
               In very trueth, necessitie hath made the
bloody deuices of the Scottish Q. so common, as no
good subiect may iustly be forbidden, to deriue the
cause, both of forraigne, and domestike conspiracies
from her vnprincely heart: our sacred Q. Elizabeths
mercy hath many yeares contēded with a number
of fearful admonitions, to preserue both the life and
honor of this most vnkinde queen: when the Scottes
her own people pursued her life,Bookes written against the Scottish Q. forbidden in England. and printed her defame,
the Queenes Maiesty entertained her, as Augustus
did his enemye Cinna: she gaue her her life,
that many waies sought her own life: and was so
carefull of her honour: that she forbad the bookes of
her faults, to be conuersant among her english subiects:
which almost in euery other nation wer made
vulgar: but Cinna after three times forgiuenes, became
(none so) faithful to Augustus: when this Scottish
Queen, being three times thrise forgiuen, remaineth
(none more) bloodily infected to Queene Elizabeth:
her own hand writings be witnesses. During
the whole course of her abode in Eng. which may be
properly called a protection, and no imprisonment:
ther is nothing more manifest, then that her mallice
thirsted the death of her own life. The currantes of
her practises were so general: as euery good christian
prince know as much, and certified her Maiestie
no lesse: in fine, seeing y• her pretēdings were not only
against the person of her Maiestie, but that they

also reached to the change of christiā religion: some
zealous members of the Church of God,A book long since written in french to sentence the bloody Proceedings of the Scottish Q with death in publique
writing did set downe, the daunger of her Maiesties
mercye: and in christian pollicy shewed by
many waightie reasons, that God deliuered the
Scottish Queen vnto the sword of her iustice, as he
did many Idolatrous Princes, into the handes of
the Kinges of Israell: but our most gratious queen
notwithstanding these continual aduertismentes,
with a magnanimous heart digested all this danger:
yea, she was so farre from reuenge, as shee
yeelded not to make her subiects partakers of the
                     •
                  e
forraine counsels▪ whom next vnder her, they principally
concerned: Lastly, when the continual importunities
of her louing Subiects, by all the Estates
of Parliament, tyred her Maiestie with petitions
to proceed to the sentence of her own lawes,
her clemency found out delay, when Iustice would
admit no excuse:The Scottish Q. executed on wednesday, the 8. of Feb. 1586. but the delaye of execution prooued
so dangerous, as the safety of y• Queenes Maiestie
(was in iudgement of the wisest) held desperate,
so long as the Scottish Queen liued: & (therfore)
to the vnspeakable griefe of y• Queenes Maiestie:
though (otherwise) to the vniuersall ioy and
desire of her subiectes, Iustice was executed vpon
this vngodly Queene, vpon Wednesday, the 8. of
Februarie 1586.
               The Lord be praised: who is the protector of our
gratious Queen and al her good subiects, and who
(hetherto) with his holy hand hath giuen her these
peaceable victories, so wonderfully, as al y• world
is occupied with the admiration therof, & that the

same God may blesse her highnesse, with a long &
peaceable life. I beseech you accompany me to the
Church, where with thankeful heartes, we may
praise him for many receiued benefites, and with
zealous spirites, humbly pray for the continuance
of the same.
            
            
               West,
               With right good will we are ready to
accompany you, and God for his sonnes sake either
turne the mindes of those that miswish her
Maiestie▪ or speedely bring them to the shame and
confusion of these Traitors before named, that
haue worthely suffered for their most odious treasons.
Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   