
      
         
            
            
            A commendation of Muſicke, And a confutation of them which diſprayſe it.
            
               
                  WHen firſt within the corps of man, dame Nature built her bower:
               She ſaw what troubles eke & thral, was bent them to deuower.
               To whome ſhe gaue as in reward, a pleaſaunt note or ſound:
               Their carkes and cares to dryue away, wherby much eaſe was found.
               Whereof in children proofe is had, whome nurſes haue in charge:
               How ſoone they ſtop and ſtay their cry, when ſhe doeth ſound at large.
               The Plowman eke, and Carter both, with eaſe doeth paſſe away:
               In ſingyng of ſome mery note, their tranayle all the day.
               Wherefore to Lady Nature I, doe render prayſe and wyll:
               By whome not onely man alone, but byrdes in ſong hath ſkyll.
               The Poetes fayne that Amphion, who buylded Thebes towne:
               Did fyrſt inuent the pleaſaunt note, whereby he got renowne.
               To Dioniſius ſome the name, and ſome contrary wyſe:
               To Zephus, who Euſebius ſayth, the ſame dyd firſt deuyſe.
               
                  Solinus ſayth that men of Crete, by ryng and ſound of braſſe:
               By Thacbadianes doeth Polibius ſay, inuented firſt it was.
               In déede I thinke ſoone after that, dame Nature made the ſound:
               That Reaſon did the meaſure make, the concord and the ground.
               And then in Mercury firſt it wrought, as auctour of the ſame:
               The which euen hée (as worthy prayſe) did publiſh and proclame.
               Then Reaſon, as one not full ſuffyſde, did ſeeke for to deuyſe:
               Some inſtrument to geue a ſound, by whome there did aryſe
               A foreward wit in Mercury, for to inuent the ſame:
               Who made a Harpe of fyſhes bone, a Tortes cald by name.
               Which hée by Nilus ryuer found, the fyſh was dryde away:
               And nothyng but thrée ſinowes left, whereon he ſought to play.
               But when they gaue a ſound agayne, thus doe the Poetes fayne:
               He made a Harpe much lyke that bone, by thinuent of his brayne.
               Thrée ſtrynges to it did he apply, a Treble Baſe and Meane:
               The which he made for to accord, in Muſickes pleaſaunt vayne.
               Then he it to Apollo gaue, as gyft of wonderous weyght:
               And he the ſame to Orpheus handes, made redeliuery ſtreyght.
               Some thinke Amphion firſt it found, and ſome to that ſay no:
               And ſome in Tuball thinke the lyke, but that can not be ſo.
               Then Pan the Pype, Apollo eke, the Shalme he did inuent:
               Then Dauid Regalles ſought to make, by Reaſones whole conſent.
               And Orphen firſt, with Linus nexte, and Arion alſ by name:
               
                  Timarias, and Trezenius both, thereby did purchaſe ſame.
               Nor Cibell yet, with Piſes too, their labour ought did ceaſe:
               But in the ſame did ſore apply, their cunnyng too encreaſe.
               Thus haue we proued by Poetes lore, how auncient Muſicke is:
               And now I meane by Scripture playne, to proue the lykeiwis.
               We read how Dauid daunct and ſoung, before the Arke of God:
               And how his wyfe which flowted him, was by the Lorde forbode
               For hauyng chyldren any more, but barren ſhould ſhe be:
               Whereby I proue that God is pleaſde, with ſuch lyke armony.
               When MirIam with the Iſraelites, the red ſea déepe had paſt:
               And Pharaos hoſte were drowned all, who did purſue them faſt,
               Then tooke they Timbrelles in their handes, and to ye Lord ſang prayſe
               For that he was their ayde and ſhyeld, to paſſe the daungerouſe ſeas.
               The Shepherdes eke, and Angelles both, we read how they reioyſt:
               When they once heard and vnderſtoode, the byrth of Ieſus Chriſt.
               We ſée by this what Muſicke is, we néede no better proofe:
               The Scripture is a buckeler good, in Muſickes right behoofe.
               In Fucſius, and in Galen both, who lyſt to looke ſhall fynd:
               How much that Muſicke doeth appeaſe, the dolours of the mynd.
               You know what tauntes Themiſtocles, in banket did ſuſtayne:
               When he good muſicke did diſprayſe, accoumptyng it but vayne.
               They iudged his learnyng much the worſe, becauſe he did defye
               That, which all men did much eſtéeme, regard and eke ſet bye.
               I pray you was not Socrates, whome crooked age had caught:
               With Muſickes ſkyll and armony, as one with Cupid fraught?
               And ſayd that concord was the ground, and eke the ſure ſtay:
               Without the which nothing is good, this could that wyſe man ſay.
               And meaſure is a mery meane, and meane who doeth embrace:
               Of euery vertue hath the ground, which bryngeth man to grace.
               This haue I doen in Muſickes cauſe, my pen now wyll I reſt:
               Syth that I haue that worthy ſcience, as famouſe once profeſt.
               And who that ſéekes the loſſe of it, néedes muſt I ſpeake my mynd:
               A great diſprayſe is to his wit, his wordes are coumpted wynd.
            
            ¶ FINIS.
            
               (ꝙ) Nicholas Whight.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Alderſgate ſtrete, by Alexander Lacy: dwellyng beſyde the Well.
         
      
   