
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  GEORGE, by the diuine prouidence, Biſhop of London:
               
               To all and ſinguler Archdeacons, Deanes, and their Officials, Parſons, Vicars, Curates, Churchwardens; and to all other Eccleſiaſticall Officers and Miniſters within my Dioceſſe of Winton, and the ſeuerall Pariſhes thereof, Greeting.
            
            Whereas Letters haue been lately addreſſed vnto vs from the moſt Reuerend Father in God, the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterburie his Grace, recommending, according vnto ſpeciall directions, by him receiued from his Maieſty and the Lords of the moſt Honourable Priuie Councell, the publication of a Diſcourſe written by Captaine Richard Whitbourne, concerning New-found-land, and a Collection to be thereupon made in all the ſeuerall Pariſhes within this Kingdome of England: And that by my ſelfe and my Officers I would giue my beſt furtherance thereunto. Now, foraſmuch as the publication of the ſaid Diſcourſe tends principally to the aduancement of his Maieſties Plantation already there begun, by inciting Aduenturers thereunto, as well for the propagation of the Goſpell in that Countrey, as alſo for many great benefits that may be there gotten to all ſuch as will be Aduenturers therein; and likewiſe for the generall good and inriching of the whole Kingdome, and not be any way burdenſome, or hurtfull to any of his Maieſties ſubiects, as by the Diſcourſe it ſelfe, herewith ſent vnto you, doth more at large appeare; And for that his Maieſty and the Lords of the Councell haue ſo well approoued the ſaid Captaines good endeuours herein, as to recommend him in an extraordinary manner; That towards his great trauels, charge, and expence of time, with ſeuerall Commiſſions, and otherwiſe in this buſineſſe; and towards the Printing and free diſtributing his Bookes, and his ſeuerall great loſſes receiued at Sea by Pirats and otherwiſe, in aduenturing to further the ſaid Plantation, and partly diſcouering the good which may come therby vnto all his Maieſties ſubiects; The voluntary bounties of all his Maieſties ſubiects ſhould be collected to his vſe and behoofe, as by their Lordſhips Letters, and his Maieſties pleaſure thereupon ſignified, which is Printed in the forepart of the Booke, doth appeare. Theſe are therefore to pray and require you my Brethren of the Miniſtery, in your ſeuerall Pariſh Churches and Chappels, thorowout my Dioceſſe of London; That within one Moneth next after the ſaid Captaine Whitbournes Booke, with this my Letter, which I doe allow to be Printed, ſhall be by him, his Aſſignee or Aſſignes brought vnto any of you, you ſignifie vnto your Pariſhioners in ſo friendly and effectuall manner as poſſible you can, vpon ſome Sabbath day, in the time of Diuine Seruice, and when no other Collection is to be made, this my Letter, and the ſcope and intent of his Diſcourſe, and ſeriouſly ſtir vp and exhort them to extend their bountifull liberality herein; which you the Churchwardens are to collect, after the due and vſuall manner from ſeate to ſeate, and ſuch of the Pariſhioners as ſhall be then abſent, to collect their gratuities at their houſes, and ioyntly with the Miniſter endorſe the ſumme and place where it is collected, in letters, and not in figures, vpon theſe Letters, and then ſpeedily returne both the money and Letters, vnto Mr. Robert Chriſtian, Gent. at his houſe in Knight-rider-ſtreet, neere the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul in London, whom the ſaid Captaine Whitbourne hath intreated to receiue the ſame to his vſe; that all ſuch money and Letters may be ſpeedely redeliuered ouer to the ſaid Captaine Whitbourne, or his lawfull Aſſiſignee or Aſſignes.
            
               
                  Giuen at my Palace at London, 
                     the 16. of Septem. 1622.
               
               Geo. London.
            
         
      
   