
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  CONFIDITE EGO VICI MVNDVM. IO.XVI.
                  A SERmō Preached at Pawles Crosse on Sunday the thirde of Nouember 1577. in the time of the Plague, by T.W.
                  
                  Imprinted at London by Francis Coldock. 1578.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               In the name of God Amen.
               
                  IT HATH bin an olde prouerbe of proofe (right honorable & dearly beloued &c.) Veritas odium parit, That Flatterie bréedeth frendship, & Truthe brīngeth hatred: and therefore it hathe wanted no maner of practise, bycause it is of so good experience both in Courte and Countrey, and I woulde to God not in the Churche it selfe. Neuerthelesse, as the true minister of God ought to kéepe himselfe vnspotted and vndefiled from all offences: so especially must he be frée from the great contagion of so foule a faulte, alwayes regestring

and remembring yt goldē sentence worthy an Apostle. If I were a māpleaser, I were not the seruaunt of God.
                     Gal. 4. And yt none can serue two maisters,
                     Math. 6. our maister himselfe hath taught vs playne ynough in ye Gospel, that God and Man or Mammon, that God and Ba
                        •
                     l or Belyall, can at no hand be serued togither, for God must be serued alone: so yt Peters saying is fyrme, and out of questiō true, that whē both cānot be serued togither, it is better to obey GOD than Man:
                     Acts. 4. & the reason for conclusiō is very great: For it is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of God: a more perilous lapse by oddes to come into his fingers who can deale with body & soule, & cast both into Hel than into ye danger of mā,
                     Math. 10. be he Prince or Tirant whatsoeuer, who cā but prison or persecute the body only, but must let the soule alone. Wherfore it is mete that we being rauished of al outward respectes, & setting before our eyes the feare of God only,

shuld wholly employ our selues vnfaynedly to please him, & to speake those things chiefly whiche shal be most acceptable vnto him: for loke how the doctrine of the Prophets & Apostles doeth concerne you, & so ye cōmandemēt of god to thē, reacheth vnto vs: & though they wer al dead & gone long agoe, yet God is aliue stil, & his word endureth for euer: & as there is no other doctrine for you, so is thereno new cōmandemēt for vs. Loke what authoritie they had thē, & ye same haue we now, though not in the same sort,
                     For it vv
                           ••
                         extraordinarye.
                   nor afterthe same measure of giftes, yet al of the same grace and spirit, as you may read Ephes. 4. He gaue some Apostles, some Prophets, some Euāgelistes, some Pastors. &c. Al the prophets hadde not like giftes, nor all the Apostles equalitie of graces:
                     Peter is not chiefe Apostle, then in respect of his Apostleship.
                   yet hee that had least was a Prophet or an Apostle, as wel as he that had moste, bycause of the same spirite, or else shoulde ther be Magis & Minus in our ministers.

Now bycause their giftes be diuerse, some more, some lesse, according to the proportiō and measure of Gods spirit, thereafter is oure portion: and yet all that are lawfullye called and orderly qualifyed, are the vndoubted Ministers of the Lorde: and (howsoeuer you wyll answere the contrarye) it is as truely sayd of a Pastor now, as it was euer of any Prophet or Apostle thē, He that receiueth you receiueth me, & the contrary,
                     Luke. 10. Verse. 16 He that refuseth you refuseth me. Wherefore, how base and simple so euer we séeme, we are the ambassadours & seruants of god.
               Two principall notes doe arise by due consideration of this that I haue sayde. Firste, that againste flattering falsehode, we vse faithful flatnesse. Secondly, that contrary to childishnesse & folly, we shewe wisedome and discretion: and these beeing ioyned together, are the moste necessariest of all

the number of graces, whiche concerne a Steward, without the which he shall doe his maister but simple, small, and very slender seruice. Wherefore séeyng one Christe is the soule & substance of all Scriptures, the only marke of both Prophets and Apostles, and the onely matter of all their doctrine: as Paule curseth all aftercommers that shall Preach any other Gospell, yea though he be an Angell: so he pardoneth no predecessor that hath broched any other doctrine, though he were a Prophete. Let vs then with Trustinesse (the first note) ioine Wisedome, the secōd also, as two legges to goe withal, or handes to labour in the haruest of the Lorde. I am not héere to giue out anye rules, or to prescribe preceptes of wisedome, for I am not so skilfull to teach that way: I had more néede learne a great deale. Neither is it my purpose to reprehende anye of my bréethren, for I knowe no such cause, and if there were, yet as this

place is vnméetest of any, so is my person vnfyttest of all: only this I saye at a venture, I would we were al as wise as I hope we are faithfull: and howsoeeuer we excuse our selues before God, we can not iustly be accused among men, no not ye carping enimie himselfe, who commeth for the same nonce, can conuince vs the contrary, but that wée kéepe touch with the veritie written, & speake wisedome, not of mā nor Apollos Oracles, nor inuentions and fables of mans brayne, but the infallible truth of the holye Ghost. Wisedome is to deuide & cut the word kindly, to breake this bread skilfully, to giue euery man his portiō as a good disposer, to the godly counsaile his part, to the weake comforte his, to the wicked correction hys, to the obstinate condemnation his, for so the word is profitable, and the word is plentiful, euen for euery sore a salue. And howsoeuer I shall deale in diuiding, I am sure I am well ynough for

the choosing of my texte, for while I thought to fytte a plaister for the féete, I saw the head diseased, and finding the whole body in the same pickle, I knew not what to doe: full fayne I woulde haue deliuered anye péece of scripture rather thā this, but I could not so ridde my handes of it, till it hadde passed my mouth: turne whether I would, and euery place was lyke vnto it and plentifully expounding it, so that whylest I soughte a texte, I founde a Sermon, A Sermon of the Prophete Sophonye to Israell. I praye GOD make it a profitable Sermon to London. Amen.
               Giue me leaue therfore to be plaine I praye you, for I professe no other thyng, and if I could otherwise, yet of purpose I would deceiue all such curious commers, as neyther hunger nor thirst after righteousnesse, but with itching eares delighte themselues wyth strāge things which are forespokē of in

the .2. Tim. 4. And it shall be a good note for me now, and for al my bréethren for euer héereafter that are planted in thys Citie, to be knowen by this marke of playne speaking: not that familiaritie in you hathe bredde contempte in vs, for there is no suche cause but that your contempte of God shoulde bréede boldnes in vs which are his ministers: and there is such a commaundemente, and therfore as we sée more than other, so are we bound to say more, except you would haue vs sée all and say nothing. And though héere I shall say nothyng, but that that hath bin sayd, yet that is no shame to me. But I woulde fayne knowe of all that hath bin sayde, what hathe bin done, whiche is, or may bée a great shame for you.
               Desperate were the dayes of Ieremye, wherein superstition and sinne (as two scorpions) were growen so ranke, that high time it was for the very safegard of Gods remnant, that the sounde

of vengeance, the exclamations of wee. and terrible threatnings of God, shuld be giuen out to terrifye and staye a
                     •
                   many as he had appointed to repente. And oure age being in no better case, but well worse, hath extreame néede of eiulation, and exclamation of the like woes and curses, to stoppe (and it maye be) the intollerable abuses of our time, to turne (and it be possible) our stubborne and stony hartes at length vnto the Lord.
               It is lamentable (my brethren) that the husbandmans corne can fynde no good ground, but the enimies tares not sowne but shed and scattered, doe yet take roote, prosper and preuayle, to the vtter choking and smothering of the Lords haruest. But as where the word is not preached, there the people perish: So where it is plentifully deliuered, and the people wilfully negligēt, there is déepe damnation and vtter distruction shortly to be loked for. Our Sauiour

truly sayd, the Haruest is greate, and the labourers are fewe:
                     Mat. 9. Verse. 37. let vs follow his coūsel therfore & pray the Lorde of the haruest, to sende in more paynefull and faithfull labourers, leaste the Bore of the woodde doe roote vppe the vyne, leaste the cockle doe ouergrowe the corne, leaste the Diuell make hauocke of altogither. And in this prayer, let vs commende vnto him, his vniuersall Church, and specially England and Irelande, and herein particularlye our most gracious soueraigne Queene Elizabeth, and all hir moste honourable Counsellers, the whole ministerie, and euerye priuate member of his body, praying for the reste, that in his good time they may be plāted in, or else supplanted out, that if they wil neuer bee good, that they may yet neuer do harme vnto Israel which is of God. Amen.
            
            
               
               
                  Wo to that abhominable, filthie, and cruell Citie, she heard not the voice, she receiued not correction, shee trusted not in the Lord, she drew not neere vnto hir God, hir Rulers within hir are as Roring Lions, hir Iudges are as Wolues in the euening. &c.
                  
                     
                        Text. Zophony
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  THis Texte maye well be deuided into foure partes as it lyeth, and séeing the words themselues doe leade me to so good an order, I will contente my selfe, and not séeke to be wyser than the holy Ghost.
               The firste and principall parte is a gréeuous accusation of the whole state of Ierusalem both for life and religion.
               Secondlye, an enumeration of

the particular causes thereof.
               Thirdly, a reprehension of the persons, but especially of Magistrates and Ministers. And fourthly, a denouncing of woes and plagues against thē.
               For the firste, it is wonderfull to sée, that nothing will doe the wicked anye good. And agayne, there is nothing can doe the godly any harme. All the woes in the world will not make the wilfull once to beware, but to the faithfull seruaunte of God one worde is ynough. When the Lyon roreth, who quaketh not?
                     Amos. 3. verse. 8. and when God threatneth, who is not afrayde? Wide open were all the Prophets mouthes, and euery one cryed woe, but words are but winde, and will not preuayle with the wicked, who are sworne to sinne, and solde ouer to worke wickednesse without measure, And Gods owne children sometymes are taken tardy too, and threatninges are in vayne euen to thē. But as where wordes will take no place, there

blowes must be put in proof. So where one nor other can doe anye good at all, there remaynes nothing, but a horrible expectation of destruction. Neuerthelesse, the verye reprobate and cursed wretch should quake at Gods checke, who though he haue no holde nor hope of Eternall life for lacke of faith, yet to auoyde the verye bodily plagues and miseries of this mortall life, shoulde tremble and shake at his irefull and fearefull Iudgements.
               Gods threatnings haue a tw
                     •
                  folde operation and effect: the one in the chosen, and it toucheth them verye néere, and turneth their hearts, and humbleth them in all their soule,
                     Ionas. 3. verse. 5. as Niniuie may be a liuely example: the other in the wicked, and they are made more obstinate, froward, and hard at the hearte, and thereby more inexcusable, as the example of Pharao in Egipt doth testifie.
                     Exodus. 9.10. Chap.
                  
               
               It is and hathe bin euer a mercifull manner of our God, to speake before he

strike, and he is not by & by at a worde and a blowe neither, but giueth time and space for repentance:
                     Ioel. 2. verse. 13. but and hys patience be wounded once, then hys wrath kindleth as the coale, and flameth as the fire, and no man is able to abide the rage therof. Flintie and peruerse were this people, and this Prophet preuayled not amongst them: hée was one of the last that preached to them before their captiuitie into Babylon. Yet I trust better of you, and pray better for you, and am perswaded that you will doe those things that wée warne you of, though we thus speake as Saint Paule saide of the Thessaloniās. 2. Eph. 13. Cap. Let this driue you somewhat more néere your selfe,
                     VVhatsoeuer a man sovveth, that shall he reape. Galath. 6. verse. 7. As Adam and Cayne did.
                   that God will not be mocked, and when hée accuseth, it is but lost labour to excuse, and as his word endureth for euer, and euerye iotte thereof is perfecte & to bée performed, so these woes being a parte of his word, can not returne in vayne,

                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
                  
thy Prophete, yet be perused and read Ieremies bookes as it seemeth, and foūd out the Prophecie of the peoples captiuitie .70. years, which he calles w
                     •••
                  s, that so long Iuda shoulde lye by it, and that for theyr transgression. And the Angell Gabriel reuealed to him afterward, that the Lord in mercy would yet restore them seuen fold again, that is .70, times seuen, which amoūteth or multiplieth in accoumpt to 490. yeres, and then this Messias should come. Ieremy here speaketh indefinitelye, and sayth, the time commeth, where the present tyme is put for the future (as I take it) not to expresse the shortnesse, but the assuraunce of the tyme, when Christe shoulde come.
                     Eccle. 3. verse. 1. The Wyse man sayth, all thinges haue a time, and it is a high poynt of wisdome to knowe the tyme of all thinges, but to knowe this tyme of all tymes, is wisdome of all wisdomes. The Prophetes foreshewed it to the Iewes, but yet he was chieflie receyued of the Gentiles, for he came to
                     Iohn. 1.
                  
his owne, & his owne knew him not: I pray God for the second triumphant & kingly cōming it fall not out so, that to whō he is most preached, they be least prepared. How long was it I pray you yt Israel longed to come out of Egipts bondage? and how lōg loked Iuda to be deliuered frō Babilons captiuity? But for ye great fréedom indéed, from ye perpetual & euerlasting thraldom: by this onely Messias, there were very few or none. Right so play we in these dayes: we are very carefull for the times and seasons, concerning our worldlie affayres. A prisoner duely wayteth his delyueraunce: a prentise styl thinkes on his fréedome, and both keepe iust accoumpt of euery day: yea the sicke man leteth not one houre escape, nor misseth not a minute, but styll longeth for his health: but for our great delyuerance & departure hence, it is not only the last but the verie least care: when friendes & Phisitions forsake vs, we trust yet in our selues, for no man is so olde, but

he thinks he may be older: and no man is so sick, but he hopes he may recouer:Where the Philosopher endes the Phisition begyns, and after the Phisition, commes the Diuine when senses and all are gone. and the last messenger shall styl be for the Mynister: the daunger sure is verie great, and euerie man is not sure to be at Christes right hande iuste when he dieth: and repētance is not in our own hands: thou trustest to thy ende, & thy end bringeth distrust, for the greatest assault is in thy weakest estate. As I would not haue any mā to distrust god, no not specially in the ende: so woulde I not haue any to tempte God, and trust onely to the ende: and yet I saye all is well that endes well. This example is plaine inough of Christes cō
                  ming to the Iewes, prophecied & prophecied againe, and yet not vnderstood. So the naturall example of our mortalitie, and dayly dropping away, might moue reasonable men to take hede, & it warning woulde serue, to teache vs to watch & waight for his comming, or to be prepared & prouided for our going.
               
                  Sayth the Lord. Looke what the Lord

hath sayde, and that is sure to come to passe in al pointes as he hath sayd it, for God is not as man is, mutable in repenting his promises, albeit he is sayd to repēt that euer he made man. Gen. 6. It is but to expresse the hartie hatred he beareth against sinne, & against their sinnes of the olde worlde: or else why do we so confidentlye buylde, and constantly assure our selues of the inexplicable comfort of euerlasting saluation: but bicause of his woorde which is immutable? & hath he sayd it? nay, he hath sworne it,
                     Heb. 6. verse. 18. Psal. 33 he that commaūded the heauens & they were made, and but spake the woorde and they stoode fast, standeth styll vpon his honour, and wyll perfourme what he promiseth, in number waight and measure, as he hath giuen his woorde for some testimony, and examples. Why dyd not the fyre consume those thrée thrust into ye burning Ouen,
                     Daniel. 3 verse. 25 was it not hote enough? or did it not burne, when the verie flames did lycke vp those tormētors that put them

in? and what is the reason but yt it shall be so? and why did the Seas so spie the Lord? why ranne they backe and were afraide, & became as a wall to Israel, and ranne together againe to drowne Pharao & all his hoast? 114. Psa. but this that it shall be so:
                     Psal. 14. Why did not the Lyons in theyr den, snatch Daniel rather before he came to the grounde,
                     Daniel. 6 & teare him in peeces, than lye styll before him as Lambes, & no Lyons? but this, ye water may not wette, though it be a great Sea: fyre may not heate, though it be a flaming fyre: many Lyons, many hungry Lions, may not touch a seely man, when the Lord hath sayde it shall be so, for heauen and earth shall perishe, and vanish as a scroule, but his woorde endureth for euermore.
                     Math. 13
               
               
                  That I wyll raise vp the right braunch Dauid. This alludes to that raysing of séede to a mans brother, if he dye without issue, as it is in the lawe. Here we must note, howsoeuer God promised to Adam, the Womās séede shal breake

the serpentes head. Gen. 3. Howsoeuer to Abrahā
                   in blessing I wyl blesse thée, and in multiplying, I wyl multiply thy seede as the starres of heauen, or as the innumerable sandes of the shore: and howsoeuer to Dauid, thy seede shall endure for euer, & thy seate as ye Sun, &c. That is, how so euer the couenauntes, or mercifull promises of God made to our Forefathers, did differ in circumstaunce, yet do they all agree in effect & substaunce. Againe, howe soeuer the Prophetes dreamed dreames, or sawe visions, whether they prophecied some plainer, some darker, some as it were farther off and mysticall, some more euident and neare, as the spirite gaue them vtteraunce: Yet all inspired from aboue, spake in effect one and the same thing. And there can not be founde any contrarietie in al ye doctrine of the Prophets of God, thā is possible to be in the spirite wherewith they were inspired. The marke they all shotte at, is Iesus Christe,
                     Luk. 16. verse. 16. the ende of the whole lawe and

the Prophets which were vntyll Iohn: and this partycular Prophecie which I haue in hande, as I tolde you, concerneth the pacte or couenaunt with Dauid, but not in the Iewish sense. But looke howe it was promysed of God, so is it prophecied of Ieremie, and right so hath it bene perfourmed in Iesu Christe: for the vnitie of Gods spirite is styll one, and indiuisible as the dietie. Why, some Iewe may obiect, is it not plaine? that Salomon, Ezechias,
                  
                     Obiection.
                   and Iosias, being lawfull Sonnes and succeders of Dauid, were raysed of God as righteous braunches? I aunswere, that it is God in deede, by whose power all Princes do raigne,
                     Solut.
                   and through his authority they haue their seates: It is he which rayseth them vp, and raseth them out againe at his pleasure, which turned out Nabuchodon
                        •
                     
                     zer as a Beast in his iustice,1. Esdr. 9 and in his mercie made the sheephooke of his seruaunt Dauid, to be a Scepter ouer Israell. But all that propagation or

Princely posterity raysed of God, was not without the meanes of man: and this is immediatly of God him selfe, a great difference. And if you wyll go further, and aske howe this braunche should be raysed then? I aunswer, that first you must circumcise your hartes & eares, least you thinke it an impossibilytie,
                     Iohn. 3 verse. 4 as Nycodemus thought of a mās regeneration: so you hauing ye vayle of fleshlinesse, and the foreskinne of filthinesse, shall vncleanlie and grosely imagin of this blessed generation or raysing:1 Cor. 1 v
                           •
                        rse. 14 for carnal man sauoreth not those thinges that are of God.
               This done, I saye he was begotten of God, conceyued by the holy ghoste, incarnate in the sanctified wombe of ye Uirgin Marie, euen in the fulnesse of time according to the Scriptures: and it is parte of the Articles of our Christian beléefe: which none of all Dauids posteritie coulde saye,
                     
                        
                           •
                        sal. 51 no not he himselfe, for he was conceyued & borne in sinne.
               
                  But here maye a more strong and mighty obiection be gathered than before as it seemeth,
                     Obiection.
                   and all by my owne saying: for is it lykely, or is it possible, that he shoulde be rightlie called, the ryghteous braunche of Dauid, which came not of the séede of any man, of all that stock, before so many Kinges good and bad, of which euery one yet naturally descended, and were his sonnes after ye flesh? I aunswere,
                     Solut.
                   though I say he was not begotten of any man, yet I do not say, that he came not of yt stocke therefore: for Ihesse, Dauids father, was the roote, & Dauid as the braunch: Marie the Uirgin was the flower of Dauides braunche, and Christ our Sauiour was the fruite of Maries blossome. Therefore is he called the sonne of Dauid in the Genealogie by Math. 1. and often in the new Testamēt,
                     Math. 1 comming in deede of that Trybe, kyndred, or stocke.
               He is called therefore the righteous braunch for thrée respectes.
               
                  
                  Thre cause
                        •
                      why Christ is called the rightuous braunch of Dau
                           •
                        d.
                  First, bicause he came of the same kyndred by his mother.
               Secondlie, bicause of those degenerating bastardes, Roboham, Manasses, and the like wicked Princes, who notwithstanding, were of his lyne, yet followed not a foote of Dauids wayes, but defiled his seate, and prophaned the Sanctuarie, and turned his Scepter another waye. And as he is not a Iewe, which is a Iewe borne: nor he a true Israelite, which is so called: nor all are not Abrahams sonnes, that are after the flesh. Roma. 9. No more maye they be called ryght braunches of good Princes, which beare no lyke fruite, although that otherwise they be their owne sonnes.
               Thyrdlie, he is called the ryghteous braunche, in respecte of the good Kinges also, Salomon, Iosias, Ezechias, and those fewe more, which not onelye were of Dauids loynes, but also dyd treade in hys steppes, and

walked in the waye of Dauid theyr Father, in obedience to the commaundement of the Lorde, in setting foorth the true seruice of the GOD of Israell, in fyring the supersticious Idolles, cutting downe theyr groues and wooddes, to the ruine and spoyle of their Idoll aultares, which farre better deserued the tytle of Dauids righteous braunche, than anye of the wicked Kinges forespoken of: And yet they are not this braunche neyther, but onely, and trulie, and properlie, it is Iesus the Messias. You wyll thinke then that I do to much wrong to them which were lawfullie begotten Sonnes, and laudablie raygned Kinges, whiche came of his séede aryght, and raigned righteouslie in the seate to, and yet not the true braunch? I shall satisfie you, if you marke, and that in a worde: I do not denye them to be the right braunch according to the flesh, and so is Christ to, but I

deny them to be the ryght and righteous braunche, for so is Christe alone: for such a sprygge or stemme, neuer sprouted out, neyther of Abraham, whose Isaack was so increased, nor out of Dauid, whose kinges so succeded, nor out of all generations againe, for the fountaine is too fowle, & our petigrue must be fetcht frō Adam which is earth: and this seconde Adam is the Lord from heauē. 1. Cor. 15. And the reason is, that those excellent vertues, and Princely qualities of wisdome, iustice, & Religion, in any of those good kinges, the sonnes of Dauid, or in all, it was in them but as shadowes, and vnperfect figures of him in whome dwelleth the fulnesse of all goodnesse, So that he onely and alone, is this ryghteous braunche.
               Here we maye sée the infinite loue of God towardes his Church, neuer forsaking hir, but in hir first fall renuing of hir with promises: in hir forgetfulnesse, reuiuing of hir with prophecies,

that shée myght styll hope, an
                     •
                   not be confounded for euer. And if the Patriarkes and men of God, in elder tymes receyued such plentyfulnesse of ioy and gladnesse, in the onely promyse of the Messias, whereby their faith was full: What flowing, and ouerstreaming vnmeasurable cōfort should we reape, to whome those prophecies do mynister more, than to the Prophetes them selues. 1. Peter. 1. For kinges and Prophets haue desired to sée what we haue séene, and yet sawe it not, but in the promise only. Luke. 10. They lyued in the tyme of the promise of this branch: and ye Apostles lyued as it were vnder the shadowe of his leaues: but we lyue as vnder the fruite it selfe. For the tyme of Grace, the longer, and the later it is, the more mercifull it is to them that shall be saued. And howe graciouslie he hath dealte with vs of Englande besides, maye not passe vnspoken of in planting a ryght braunch to raygne ouer vs, not a bastarde

bramble, as Abimeleche was, the sonne of a bonde woman, as ye maye reade, Iudges. 9. The Uine, the Oliue, the Palme, the Figge tree, and the rest, chose a Bramble to be their king: Who beganne with murther, raigned in crueltie, and dyed in bloud. But ouer vs hee hath planted a peaceable Prince,Englands happinesse. the ryght braunche of hir royall Father, and moste worthye King, Henrie the eyght: kéeping all good steppes of hir prodecessors, going farther in Religion than many of thē, (if not than any of them). The Lorde leade hir farther, styrre vp hir counsell to comforte hir, strengthen hir kingdome to kéepe hir, lengthen hir lyfe longe to raygne ouer vs: And though I maye not saye as the Olyue trée to beare fruite, yet to florishe as the Palme, to be freshe as the Lawrell, to be stronge as the Oake, to spreade abroade as the Ceader, and to be an olde Tree of continuaunce, as the Cypre: and though she be fruitlesse

one waye, yet fructifie hir O Lorde many wayes, with g
                     ••
                  d and faythfull subiectes, that sh
                     •
                  e and wée, as well graffed braunches maye abyde styll in the stocke, and tarye in the Uine, and fructifie by the operation of Gods holye spyrite vnto eternall lyfe in Iesus Christ. Amen.
               
                  VVhich King shall beare rule. Here he is proclaymed Kynge by the Prophete, heade of his Church, and Prince of his people. Trayterous are all other heades then, monstrous, and rebellious of King or Caesar, or Turke, or Pope, or Deuyll, lyfting them selues aboue this King, which must beare all the rule. He is sayde to be our Prophete, our Prieste, and our King: a Prophete, being a fulfyller of all that they spake, and the ende of them: a Priest, to fynishe all the Sacrifices of the olde Lawe, by one suffycient and most blessed oblation of his owne body vpon the Crosse: a King, by rulyng and gouerning his Church, hauyng full

aucthoritie alone ouer the same, being annointed not with the confections of balmes or spices of swéete odors, but with the holy Oyle of gladnesse aboue his fellowes.
                     Psal. 45.
               
               
                  
                     Obiection.
                  But what rule bare he, some wyll say: could he come simplier than borne in a Manger, despised of the Doctors, had in derision of the multitude, spytted on, and most spitefully dealt withall? alas, what crowne ware he, but a crowne of thornes? or what King was he, being so poore, & so persecuted, that it was not possible it shoulde be he that is here prophecied. Thus they looking for a Princely appearing, in power, aucthoritie, and wealth, and to haue an earthly kingdome restored (as they dreamed) receyued not the King of Kings: and therfore though they aske for the daye of the Lorde, the daye of the Lorde, yet haue they nothing to doe with it when it commes, for it is darknesse and no lyght vnto them.
                     Amos. 5. And yet as naked, poore, and simple, as Christe

                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
                  
bulles, are all beasts, which thinke that God and Idols, the Sacrifice and the Sacraments, Circumcision and Baptisme, the lawe and the Gospell, nay that fleshe and the spirite, and God and Man may be ioyned togither, are but commō pedlers and patchers of Christ coate, which had no seame in déede: this is to buylde but with vntempered morter, and to bodge vp a house, which will neuer abide the triall. Wherefore my counsayle to you all is, that as many as finde themselues faulty, doe presently yéelde in their hartes to the Soueraintie of Gods holy worde, betake themselues wholy to reade it, to heare it, and to meditate there in, which is all sufficient to instruct vs, and able to saue our soules: that wée vomit out all superstitious poynts contrary therevnto: that this be the line and leauel of al our life, the touchstone of all truth, whereby Antichrist and his adherēts, that is, the Pope and his hyrelings are described

and conuicted, and The Lambes of Christes flocke, nourished, comforted, and preserued for euer.
               
                  
                     Couetous Atheists, but if of any side, of Papists, for it is moste gainefull.
                  And there are a thirde sorte who haue embraced this presente worlde, and therefore haue made shipwracke of Conscience, and these sayle frankly to Spayne, to Rome, and Hell had any vauntage, I thynke surely they woulde venture a voyage. This was touched the laste Sunday, and I had bene well preuented in it, if sicknesse had not otherwise hindred mée: yet this I adde, the ignoraunt Idolatrer is more excusable farre, for thou doest it with a Conscience of euill,
                     For his ovvne cō
                        science is against him Iames. 4. verse. 17. and to hym that knoweth howe to doe well and dothe it not, to him it is sinne with a witnesse. Iames. 4. Agayne he is but a simple Idolatrer, but thou a double and Diuelishe dissembler bothe before God and Man. But some will say vnto mée, and you were there you woulde tell mée another

tale: I cannot tell what I would doe, but what I and thou shouldest doe that I canne tell:
                     So playde Peter vvhē he sayde he vvould die before deny christ. Math. 26. verse. 35. I will not bragge before the battell, nor triumphe before the victorie: I thanke GOD I am not there, but that is no péece of excuse for thée, and if thou were but a beholder of suche Sacrilege, yet (Salua Conscientia) with a saufe conscience thou muste not bée silent and so betray the truthe. But and thou become an actor once,
                     That is, svvallovv any iote of hir pestilēt doctrine.
                   and doe participate wyth them, if thou drynke but one droppe of the Chalice of the whore, it is toppe full of deadly poyson: or if thou breake bread at the table of Deuils (for drinke thou canst haue none) what leporous case is thy whole soule in, the poyson whereof though many haue concealed for a tyme, yet hath it boyled and broken out, at the length, to the destruction of theyr bodyes,
                     Papistes proue traytors apace.
                   and fearefull daunger of theyr soules.
               Yet many thynke they may safely

doe it and kéepe their conscience cléere, as they beare themselues in hande: but as well may they denie Christe on earth, and as safely too, whome he hath surely promised to denie in heauen.
                     Math. 10. verse. 33.
               
               1 First, though God be a spirite and must be worshipped in spirit and truth,
                     Iohn. 4. verse. 24. yet the body belongs to God also, bothe bycause he made it, and chiefly now bicause he hath redéemed it. Wherefore doth the Scripture else commaund our handes to be lifted vp, & our knées to be bowed downe, but that it is vnlawfull to offer them to any seruice of Sathan? But if you wil néedes stande in it, then must you condemne Sidrach, Misaak, and Abednago: you must count all the Martirs fooles, and the prophet Dauid, who sayde,
                     Psalm. 16. he woulde not once name their Gods in his lippes, nor mention them in his mouth.
               2 Secondly, if I should graunt that God is to be worshipped with the hart onely, yet it must be with a single hart

I trust: but that is a double harte that speakes one thing and dothe thinke another, whose minde is cleane contrary to his mouth. For all the mēbers of the body are but ministers & expressers of the minde, although the tongue be chief thereof: ful faine I sée they would serue God and Man, and they are answered by Christ himselfe, it cannot be.
               3 Thirdly, if they will néedes gyue their soule to God, and their body to the Deuill, let them be sure that God will haue eyther bothe or none: for as he made bothe, so hath his Sonne bought both: so that as the soule and all hyr powers are due vnto God, so likewise the body and all his partes are déepe in dette and bound vnto the Lorde, to serue him in holynesse and rightuousnesse al the dayes of our life. But these good felowes incline toward the errour of the Manichees, & make two beginnings, god & the deuill, but in truth they are rather Atheists, which serue no God at all, except

their belly be theyr God, or else it is so by halues, with suche lame knowlege & rotten faith, with such a woūded cōscience & a wicked harte,
                     Gods seruice requireth a vvhole and perfect mā.
                   as it is detestable & abominable before the Lorde.
               I will say nothing of Gentlemē trauelers, yt hold in good sadnesse this diuelish opinion, Cū fueris Romae Romano viuite more, whē thou art at Rome liue after ye Romish maner: but they learne their lesson so perfit there, yt a great number cānot forget it here: & therfore let them remēber another saying, Roma recipit bonos reddit malos, Rome receiueth good mē but returneth euil mē. Wel, that I may tell you what I thinke & no more, surely a mā may be a very naughty person & yet a good seruant (I speake it not to maintayne vnhappinesse, God forbid) but he cā neuer be a right Romaine & a faythfull subiect. For the other matter wherwith Israel is here to be charged & England to be condēned, is, that she answered not in déede what she professed

in word, & for ourselues it is past cry (I fear) for we are both helples & hopelesse in this point, & therfore they for al their fayre lookes & Pecocks taile, were yet abhominable & filthy Hypocrites, & cursed in the sight of God, euen as a strumpet neuer so richly deckt, & it be with purple veluet, stincketh the viler rather in the sight of honest matrones: for there is no vice more pestilent, than that that is like vertue: there is no such Iudas kisse, as with an Apostles face: there is no suche deceyuing Diuell, as like an Angel of light: & there is no such dissembling citie as Ierusalē for hypocrisie. Wherfore I pray you was christ so gētle to Publicanes, ouer he was to Pharisées? & why is God so earnest wt Israel, in ye .1. of Esai. Why offer you so many sacrifices? I am ful of your burnt offerings, I haue no pleasure in the bloud of bullockes,
                     And yet he cōmaunded them.
                   I hate your newe Moones, I cannot away with your sabboths & solemne méetings, I am wery

at my hart with them, offer me no moe oblatiōs &c. but that the seruice of God apointed by those sacrifices was vtterly peruerted, & no truth in their dealings: There is nothing prouoketh god more, thā when with a cloke or colour of religiō his people shall wallow in sin or superstitiō.
                     Psalm. 50. verse. 16. Read ye. 50. Psal. Unto the vngodly man, sayde God, why doest thou preach my lawes, & takest my couenant in thy mouth, wheras thou hatest to be reformed, & hast cast my wordes behind thée? So be you well assured, yt it is not inough to haue a gospel in our mouths, but we must expresse the truth therof in our liues: it is not inough to haue a name of a Christian, but to be founde a Christiā in déede. Many haue a shew of godlinesse saith S. Paul,2. Timot. 3. but they haue denied ye power thereof. If nature helped not Abrahams owne children, but bycause they lacked Abrahās workes, they are called Deuils sonnes, Iohn 8. alas what shall a naked name without

vertue, a bare tytle without veritie, profite vs at all? Doth not Christe foretell of such in the day of iudgemēt? who haue done manye thinges in his name,
                     Math. 7. verse. 22. and yet when all is done he knoweth them not? Math. 7. Surely the blinde charitie of Papistes dothe laye sore to the lame and halting faythe of Christians: Our knowledge shall but helpe vs to Hell, if we do not that wée know: for the seruaunte that knoweth his maisters will and doth it not, must looke for many stripes: and to whome more is giuen, more is to be required. We haue receyued plentifully, but if we yéelde barrenly, Christe cursed a figtrée, surely he will not spare thée. The Author to the Heb. 6. sheweth,
                     Hebr. 6. verse. 7. that the grounde that drinketh in the deaw, or receyueth the rayne falling oft vpon it, and yéeldeth fruite,
                     Vnfrui
                           •
                        tfull earth vvithout vvater, so vnfruictfull man vvithout the vvorde.
                   is blessed, but the barraine and vnfruitefull is to be cursed and burned. The Are is at the roote of euerye trée, and iudgement

is not farre, & by his fruit shall euery mā be knowen, & no fruite aswell as naughty fruite, is both for ye flame.
               It was abhominable before God for Israel to sweare, the Lord liueth, & yet to deceyue, Ier. 5. to fast, and yet to do no lesse violence:
                     Esa. 58. verse. 4. to wash, and yet to be vncleane: to sacrifice, and yet to sinne: to kéepe Sabbothes, & yet to tumble in al sensualitie. For swearing, it was neuer so cōmon, & custome maketh it nothing in these dayes, in euery place, in euerye person: ye magnificēt name of God, who is glorious, great, & fearefull, is tossed to & fro as a tennis ball, & that for very trifles. The Iewes yet whē they heard blasphemy, woulde rend theyr clothes. It woulde gréeue a Christian hart to heare at euery word an othe, at euerye lye an oth, bying & selling is not without lying and swearing,
                     And therefore not vvithout stealing.
                   but if ye mouth yt lieth slayeth the soule Wisd. 1. what déepe damnatiō euen in the nethermost hel remaines for the periured person?

There would be some exquisit punishment for such helhoundes, & séeing God wil not hold them giltlesse, lette al Magistrates that feare God condemne thē to some paine, for they are past shame. And bycause I spake of Sabbothes, knowe you yt euery day is a Christian Sabboth, yet one amōgst the rest was specially cōmanded to the Iewes,
                     Ievves Sabboth Saterday, Christians Sonday.
                   and commended vnto vs both to reste oure bodyes & our beasts: but the chiefe end was for Israel to go to ye Sanctuarie, & for vs to come to the house of prayer. The ceremonie of ye seuenth day is not muche amisse, and yt the number of .7. signifieth perfectiō, you may oftē reade in scriptures, especially in the Reuelatiō. Of churches, stars, spirits, trūpets, seales, Angels, and al appeared by seauen, as a most absolute & perfect nūber, multiplyed in it self, albeit this is somwhat mistical, yet no harme followeth if we say God rested ye. vij. day to shew vnto vs ye perfectiō of his workes, & laboured .vi. days, to giue vs an exāple of

vocation. It may be not one of the least causes, that God ceassed the seauenth day to beholde the excellencye of his creatures, and though he séeth them alwayes, from whose eyes nothing can be hidde, yet to take delight in their assemblings, singing of hymnes, in their praying vnto hym, and praysing hys name, in their reading and hearing his word. And if he looke downe on oure Sabbothes, what shall he finde I pray you? euery daye euill, and the Sabboth worst.
                     Ephes. 5. Redéeme the time for the dayes are euill. If the Apostle saide so then, what woulde he say if he liued nowe, when the Lord can not haue a péece of a daye, no, scarce of the Sabboth day, which he hathe so charged to be kepte, and straightly commaunded to be obserued? But it was to the Iewes you will say: it is true indéede, for those solemne and ceremoniall assemblies, sacrifices, and feasts: but otherwise there hath bin euer in the primatiue Church

and from the Apostles, some obseruation of one day among the rest, and for speciall consideration, albeit the whole life of Gods chosen is a perpetuall sabboth, and euery day sanctifyed, and euerye houre holy vnto them. Assuredly we come nothing néere the Iewes in this pointe, for on oure Sabbothes, all manner of games and playes, bankettings, and surfettings, are very rife: If anye manne haue anye businesse in the world, Sonday is counted an idle daye: If he haue none, then it is bestowed in other pleasure. Trahit sua quenque voluptas, Euery man followeth his owne fansie. And the wealthyest Citizens haue houses for the nonce: they that haue none, make shift with Alehouses, Tauernes, and Innes, some rowyng on the water, some rouing in the field, some idle at home, some worse occupyed: thus what you gette euelly all the wéeke, is worst spente on the Sabboth day, according to the Prouerbe, Il gotten,

ill spent: blame not your seruantes if they follow your example, for youre prodigalitie makes them vnthriftie. But what accompt? how answer you? is this the Lordes daye or no? if it be, howe intollerable, nay howe accursed & moste condemnable are these outragious Bachanalia, Lupanaria, I can not tell what to call them, such as Heathē menne were euer ashamed of (I am sure,) and therfore practised better maters, although prophane exercises: but ours sauors so of Venus Court and Bacchus kitchin, that it may rightly be entituled an abhominable and filthy Citie: and withoute doubte London shall iustifie hir elder sister Hierusalem, if in time she turne not to the Lorde. I saye nothing of diuers other abuses, whych do carrie away thousands, and drowne them in the pernicious vanities of the worlde. Looke but vppon the common playes in London, and sée the multitude that flocketh to them and followeth

them: beholde the sumptuous Theatre housee, a continuall monument of Lō
                  dons prodigalitie and folly. But I vnderstande they are nowe forbidden bycause of the plague, I like the pollicye well if it holde still, for a disease is but bodged or patched vp that is not cured in the cause, and the cause of plagues is sinne, if you looke to it well: and the cause of sinne are playes: therefore the cause of plagues are playes. Quicquid est causa causae est causa causati. Shall I reckon vp the monstrous birds that brede in this nest?
                     An olde reason.
                   without doubt I am ashamed, & I should surely offende your chast cares: but the olde world is matched, and Sodome ouercome, for more horrible enormities, and swelling sins are set out by those stages, then euery mā thinks for, or some would beléeue, if I shold paint thē out in their colours: without doubt you can scātly name me a sinne, that by that sincke is not set a gogge: theft and whoredome: pride and

prodigality: villanie and blasphemie: these thrée couples of helhoundes neuer ceasse barking there, and bite manye, so as they are vncurable euer after, so that many a man hath the leuder wife, and many a wife the shreuder husband by it: and it can not otherwise be, but that whiche robbeth flatlye the Lord of all his honor, and is directly against the whole first table of his law, shoulde make no bones of breache of the second also, which is toward our neighbour only. Wherefore if thou be a father, thou losest thy child: if thou be a maister, thou losest thy seruaunt: and thou be what thou canst be, thou losest thy selfe that hauntest those scholes of vice, dennes of Théeues, & Theatres of all leudnesse: and if it be not suppressed in time, it will make such a Tragedie, yt all London may well mourne whyle it is London, for it is no playing time, (and euery man bethinke him wel) but time to pray rather: but faith is fainted,

and when the sonne of man coms, shall he finde faith vppon the earthe? Blessed is the seruant whom when his maister commeth shall finde doing not playing, but working,
                     Luke. 18. verse. 8. and doing not euill but good, for that is our dutie that are Gods seruauntes, but Sathans slaues do runne another race.
               
                  And cruell Citie. This is the other parte of his accusation, wherein whether hée allude to that generall breach of this commaundement (Thou shalt loue thy neyghbour as thy selfe,) for as Charitie in this respecte performeth the law, so Crueltie breaketh the same, and therefore is it sayde on thys word (Loue) dependeth the whole law and the Prophets, bycause all their labours haue no other ende than to raise vp our affections, al our desires and delightes to be in loue with God, and to moue oure compassion and tender bowels in charitie towarde our neyghbour: or whether by this worde (cruell)

he meanes a speciall vice, whiche is couetousnesse, euer vnmercifull: and it is néerer the sense, for that I reade in some translation, Vae direptrici ciuitati, Wo to hir that is a robbing Citie: It was boldly done of Zophony to call them all théeues: surely deceypte deserues no better name: and therefore as Dauid counsayles you in the sixtie and two Psalme,
                     Psalme. 62. verse. 10. O trust not to wrongs and robberies, gyue not your selues to vanities, if ryches encrease, sette not your heart vpon them.
               Héere is the difference, that Théeues steale wythoute the compasse of mans lawe, and dye for it, and you doe it wythin youre compasse, and escape: they in the hygh wayes, you in youre Shoppes: they playnely ynough, but yet wyth force: you vse no force indéede, but suttletie is youre shifte. Well, though the lawe bée on youre syde, and layeth no Item to youre charge, yet I am assured, the Gospell

is cléere agaynste you: and therefore remember the lawe of GOD and hys barre, where though the countrey quitte you héere,
                     
                        Let him that stole, steale no more.
                     
                     
                        Ephes. 4. verse. 38.
                   yet thy conscience shall condemne thée there, and GOD is greater than thy conscience.
               Couetousnesse is the roote of all euill: that is no euill,1. Tim. 6. verse. 10. but hathe issued out thereof, Auri sacra fames, quid non mortalia Pectora cogis (sayeth the Poete) What dothe not the loue of money make a manne to doe? Idolatrie, Adulterye, Murther, Thefte, Lying, Swearyng: yea Treason, bothe agaynste Chryste and Chrystyan Kyngdomes, are the naturall fruites of thys monstrous trée, and the bitterest Berrie that thys roote beares.
               I hadde almoste forgotten (Usurye) a yonger Spryg, and later graffe indéede, than anye of those I shewed you before: but yet for mischiefe, it

doth surpasse them all (excepting euer Idolatrie) I thinke in my conscience the Deuill is the only life thereof: and as a man hauing manye children, yet sometimes the last doth most resemble his father, so can not I sée the Diuels countenance, complexion, and condition more liuely naturall in any one, thā in this bramble of Hell. How oft wyll you heare of this geare withoute amendmente? there is small or no hope left for aftercommers to do any good at all therein: and yet we must speake stil against it for all that. The Prophetes hadde not all successe, nor the Apostles preuayled euerye where, and Chryste hymselfe ceassed not to giue it oute, though he knewe the peruersenesse of the proude Pharises would not learne Wisedome, nor receyue Counsayle of the Lorde. As a nette full of birdes, so are youre hooses full of thinges gotten by deceypte,
                     Ieremy. 5. sayeth Ieremie: will you neuer enter thys in youre accompte?

when I haue gotten the whole worlde and lost my owne soule, what haue I gotten? or what shall I gyue to buy it agayne? no no, there is nothyng left, you muste lette that alone for euer .49. Psalme. It cost more to redéeme a soule, not gold, nor syluer, but the precious bloude of Iesus Chryste,1. Peter. 1. verse. 18. as of a Lambe vndefyled. &c. It were a golden sentence therefore, and worthye to be prefixed ouer all youre reckonings and dealings, whiche the wise Kyng hathe,
                     Prouerbs. 4. ver
                           ••
                        . 2
                        •
                     . Kéepe thy hearte wyth all diligence, for thereout springeth life. Shal I not saye that you are couetous and cruell? can you for conscience denie it? if slyght wares and lyghte waightes: if lying wordes and false othes wyll proue both, then maye I safely conclude both. What trade can you name me that Sathan is not as frée of as the best? I list not to blowe vppe youre skirtes, or to shewe youre sh
                     •
                  me abroade, but youre selues doe not hyde

it, and it is displayed in a manner to all the worlde: youre entertaynemente of Sathan is so good, you preferre hym, and plucke hym in wyth both handes, and many trulyer serue him, than the Lord, himselfe: and therefore as Saincte Paule sayeth, Romaynes .6. you are hys seruauntes whome you obey.
                     Rom 6. If you be out of obedience of God, you are straightway out of seruice, and by consequent out of wages: and wherefore else is the Diuell called the Prince of thys worlde, but for hys multitude of Subiectes: the waye to Hell is wyde and broade, and manye doe trample and runne in it.
               I can compare couetous menne to the Gyauntes in Noahs tyme, whyche were not onely cruell,
                     Gen. 6. but fylthye wyth the daughters of men, whyche broughte in robberye and spoyle firste into the worlde: suche monsters were theyr fathers, and suche Camels are

theyr Chyldren, and therefore it goeth harde wyth them, and there is a sore tryall remayning for them: For it shall bée easyer for a Cammell to goe through the eye of a nedell,
                     Math. 10. verse. 24. than for suche ryche menne to enter the Kyngdome of God: or to the foule carrion Rauen, whyche flewe out of Noahs Arke, and returned not agayne, béeyng deteyned or holden backe wyth the fylthye styncke of carrion dead bodyes that were drowned,
                     Gen. 7. euerye garbage or baggage is good ynough for them, Duleu odor lucri ex re qualibet, The sauor of gayne is swéete out of the vylest thyng: Or to foolishe Esau, whyche for a messe of pottage dyd make awaye hys inheritaunce. They maye saye they are Abrahams Chyldren long ynoughe, but Abraham hadde two Sonnes, the one of a bondewomanne, whyche was Ismaell: So

                  Hagar is youre mother,
                     Gen. 21. and you resemble muche the enuious children of couetous Laban, an Idolater, who mighte well be youre father, for couetousnesse is Idolatrie: Achabs example dothe declare youre faulte,
                     
                        •
                     . Kings. 21. verse. 19. and dothe it not threaten your punishment? I am wearie to enter the common beaten discourse of thys byting and dogged sinne, nay deuouring and diuelishe sinne Usury. But for shorte and long, this you haue to trust vnto, that if Syon bée buylt wyth bloud, and Hierusalem with iniquitie,
                     Miche. 3. verse. 10. Syon shall bée ploughed vp, and Hierusalem made an heape of stones. London builds apace, beware of bloud and iniquitie, for it is not Tyre, nor it is not Sydon: it is not Gomorrah, nor it is not Sodom: it is not Iherusalem: it is not Syon: it is not London: nor it is not Englande, that shall so escape scotfrée, and swéepe stakes wythout all measure, but GOD shall recken wyth

you in his rage, & giue you a tast of his anger, as an earnest penny in this life, of euerlasting paines in ye life to come, if ther be no ho. And if you bréede Cockatrice egges, of whiche whosoeuer eateth he dieth, and he that treadeth on them, Serpentes come vppe: if you weaue the Spyders webbe, whiche makes no clothe:
                     Esay. 59. verse. 5. if the déedes of wickednesse and the workes of robbery be in your hands, well you may looke for health but it is farre from you. Of the seuerall sortes of wicked braunches, all sprouting out of this poysoned body (vsury) couetousnesse beyng the roote of all, I leaue to speake at large: as of Masters detayning seruaunts wages, it is a crueltie and cōmes of couetousnesse, a roring sinne whiche shall make the wringers houle for it, if they repent not in tyme:
                     Collos. 4. verse. 1. remember you haue a Master in heauē, and let not the hyrelings wages tarry with thée al night, as many make them reape their labour for

theyr paynes: such grubbers there bée, whiche grynde the faces of the poore, and lurche them as they list,
                     Esay. 3. verse. 15. vsing them worsse than many a man woulde vse a beast: they coste more, and are as déere in Christes eyes as thou, and more precious too, and thou kéepe that way, for the ende thereof is destruction: this is a great faulte of Gentlemen in the Countrie, and of some in the Citie too, as harde harted and mercylesse as the beste: take héede least in the bitternesse of theyr griefe they curse thée, and their crie come vp vnto the Lorde.
               I say nothing of exequutors, which may wel be called executors, for spoylyng of Orphanes, infantes, and widdowes, which are theyr owne caruers, and begger and beguile them to whom the right belongs. And here my thinkes I sée the secrete iudgements of God on goods ill gotten, as Dauid sayeth, thou scrapest and canst not tell for whome: thou rakest into thy clouches and

knowest not who shall possesse thē, perhaps thy exequutor, & perhaps a straunger, sometimes thy enimy, and sometimes thy owne sonne (and none soner) shal consume and scatter abroade, what thou with toyle and turmoile, with vexing of thy body and ventryng of thy soule, hast miserably scratched togither in all the dayes of thy life: it is flushe in a yéere, nay sometymes in an houre, if they fall kyndly too it, as many yong maysters doe: suche prodigall prancks haue made a cleane riddaunce of fayre possessions in a shorte tyme, and theyr punishment is righte for it, that seyng they are so forwarde too beginne where theyr parents lefte, they muste be fayne to make an ende where theyr fathers beganne: thus misery méetes with prodigalitie, and prodigalitie endes in misery as it is méete: and I would bothe olde and yong would marke this lessen well, & learne to do wel with Mammon whilest they haue it, for either the man,

or Mammon, or bothe will away at length, and cannot tarrie still. It is an olde verse and forgotten of all, Da tua dum tua sunt, post mortē non tua sunt: Giue thine whyle they are thine, for after death they are none of thine.
               I am led by occasion of these words to another kinde of crueltie, and it is very néedefull now to be hearde, in good time be it spoken therfore, I pray God: and this growes out of the bowels of couetousnesse too, and beareth hardnesse of harte, and as Christ foretolde so is it come to passe,
                     Math. 24. verse. 12. ye charitie is waxed cold. But as it is an argument of the whole worldes ouerthrowe when vniuersally winter shall come ouer charitie, so is it strōg as a conclusiō of the cōfusion of ye citie that hath lost the heate of christiā loue and pittie: if thy enimy hunger, féede him: but we are so farre out of charitie, that wée woulde féede on him rather,
                     Prouer. 25. verse. 20. though Salomon himself counsell vs, or a greater than Salomon, euē our

Sauiour, commaunde vs the contrary: and herein he goeth, so farre that many are content to let him goe alone. When he bids vs loue our enimies once, that goeth harde,
                     Math. 9. verse. 44. and it is agaynst Adams adamant harte: yet muste wée so be perfect as our father is perfect. But wée are so far out of square, that we scarce loue our fréendes, euery man is so in loue with himselfe, and Christes newe commaundement is made no commaū
                  dement, loue you one another.
                     Iohn. 15. verse. 12. I cannot denie but that there is a generall prouision for the poore in this Cittie, and your Hospitals finde good reliefe, (God be thanked for it) for he doth it, but euery priuate mans deuotion is very smal, & I shreudly suspect, that priuy almes come shorte, your shoppes haue so shaped you after this worlde. The Pharisées were prodigall for prayse, I would Christians would learne to be liberall for very shame. It were well and some would not take away that ye pore haue,

such clinchers there are: but as he that giues vnto the poore lendeth to the Lorde, so he that taketh or stoppeth away from the poore taketh from the Lord: or else how should that be true, I was hungry you gaue me no meate,
                     Math. 25. verse. 35. I was thirstie, you gaue me no drinke, &c. Shall our mayster commaunde vs to sell and gyue,
                     Marc. 10. verse. 21. and shal we gayne and yet giue nothing? whose seruaunts are you, iudge your selues, that you be not iudged of the Lorde: surely his whom you obey. Rom. 6. Well, what say you, and the poore lye vnder euery wall, and crie vnder euery stall, and die in the streates in the tyme of the Gospell? vndoubtedly there muste néedes be crueltie with extremitie, you will say, & therfore surely I say, that as this Citie is lamentable for the multitude of ye poore and wretched mē, so is it more to be lamented for the miserable riche mē: why did Iames else say, wéepe & howle for the
                     Iames. 5. miseries that shal fal vpon you you

riche men: but that bicause you eate Gods people as bread, your selues shall be eatē as flesh, & you shalbe but a pray to ye enimy & auēger, & come to a miserable ende for it.
                     Obiect.
                   But some will say vnto me, what néedes all this, I am sure we kéepe good houses, & spēd largely, & deale liberally, and therfore this is a slaūder (in a mater of truth say I for the greatest number:
                     Solut.
                  ) In déede there is a miserable sparing, & you will auoyde yt well inough: & there is an vnmeasurable spē
                  ding, & you ar wise inough for yt too: but there is an vnmercyfull profusion, and what say you to that?
                     Amos. 9. verse. 4. ye Prophet Amos saith of thē in his time, they lye in beds of Yuory, not so costly a woodde at that time, as is to be found in the beddes of our age, cōparing time with time, and place wt place, or howsoeuer they bettered vs in yt wood, we passe thē all for curious work: ye prophet names no doune beds nether, perhaps ye fethers was thē the only vse, but now, nicenesse is more

daintie thā so, & couetousnesse more cunnyng for the turne: theyr drinkyng of wine in bolles, doth shewe that curious wrought goblets, and counterfaite Hypecrice was not then knowne of olde: they noynted themselues with swéete odors, but we perfume our selues with the déerest muske: they did eate the fat calues out of theyr stalles, & the yonglings out of theyr flockes, but wée are farre beyond them, for Ueale and Mutton is to grosse for our diet, nay ye Sea with all his fishe, the ayer with all his byrdes, and the earth with al hir beasts cannot satisfie our beastly appetites. A Cooke among prophane menne was a straunge arte, and banished out of some common weales, as a superfluous science to make menne eate more than néedes: but in England, it is a great occupation, and in London a very riche company. I speake it not agaynst the necessary vse of them, but agaynst the néedelesse abuse of such as are cunning

and curious, and very costly to no purpose: & he is counted ye finest Cooke now adays that cā inuent new fashiōs, new deuises, & new disguises. None of al this could Amos charge Israel withal,
                     Amos. 6. verse. 6. and with al this is Englande too truly to be charged. Well, lette vs sée what this wrought in them, surely this, that no man was sory for the affliction of Ioseph: and can there be any lesse effect in vs, the cause being greater? or is not the Diuell so wise nowe as he was then? Surely riche men to spende are franke and frée, but the poore fare neuer the better. So Diues spente largely,
                     Luke. 16. verse. 19. for hée fared deliciously euery day, but Lazarus coulde not gette a crumme for all that: hée spéedes well that gettes a cruste in these dayes. But you will say in déede, he was harde harted and mercylesse, and wée trust that there is none suche now: I pray GOD there be not: I marke this yet, whether to cause your Charitie, or to condemne your

crueltie, GOD doth so appoynt it, that the story of Diues and Lazarus is the oftenest Grace at euery riche mans table, I hope for the beste. I will helpe you a little to my power, and put you in remēbraunce of this, least you should deceyue your selues,
                     Math. 26. verse. 11. The poore shall you haue alvvay vvith you, but not mee.
                   bycause that Diues is dead, and yet hée is aliue, and so of Lazarus who is dead, and yet he is aliue also: for though Lazarus be in Heauen, yet Lazarus is on earth, and Diues is on earth, and Diues is in Hell. Goe to now you riche menne, take héede, and beware of cruelty, and pray for charitie: you are but stewardes, lay it out: you are no Lordes you may not lay it vp: Make you fréendes of the wicked Mammon, whyle you haue time, for your tyme is not for euer, and perhaps it is not long.
               
                  She heard not the voyce. I wil runne ouer the particular causes as briefly as I can, for I haue bene long, and I am afrayde of the tyme.
               
                  This firste faulte is the Originall cause of all erroure, bothe in Religion and liuyng, and it hath bredde monstrous Heresies and mischieuous enormities at all tymes, (especially in the Churche) whyle wée haue lefte the voyce:
                     Ierem. 2. verse. 
                     
                        •
                     . and when Hierusalem had committed those two euils, to forsake God, the Well of lyfe, and to digge broken Cysterns, that woulde holde no water, it was no maruayle that God gaue them ouer to strong illusions, and to beleue lies, to knéele to euery péece of wood, and say these are our Gods. First they harde it not bicause ye greater sort gaue no eare to the Prophets: & so London heareth it not, for though here be a great assembly, yet what are you to all the rest? This is a general plague, that the fewest flocke to the church in euery place. Secondly bicause they hard it not effectually: & so wée are guilty too. We preache not (my brethren) bicause you should heare vs only, & for no other end:

For so wée wer as good hold our peace, or make a noyse with our féete as with our tongues, but that you should do, also,
                     Luke. 11. verse. 28. for none are blessed but they that heare the worde, and kéepe it: Whiche fault is greater iudge you, not to come at all, or to come, and not to heare, or to heare and not to follow? as good neuer a whitte as neuer the better: the audience of ye dead bodies vnder your féete, is as great and greater, is as good and better, than you, excepte you minde to folow that you heare, for so Christ said, let the dead bury the dead,
                     Math. 8. verse. 22. but followe you me. If the worde be the power of God, as it is, Hebrews. 4. Let it worke somewhat in you for shame. I can tell you thus much, you shal gyue accompt for that you haue hearde thys ninetene yeares long, GOD will call a repetition, you can expresse no greater contempt agaynst God, than so lightly to accept of his worde.
               For our liuing. Thy word (O Lord)

is a Lanterne to my féete (saith Dauid) and a light vnto my steppes: whereby then shall a yong man or an olde man,
                     Psalm. 119. or all menne safely direct themselues, but by the worde of God? whiche layeth downe rules for all estates, ages, persons & degrées. Here is the Fathers dutie & the sonnes, the maisters and the seruauntes, the Princes and the peoples, the Magistrates & the Mynisters, which while Ierusalem heard not, shee cared not which hande shée tooke, for the vngodly haue no feare of God before theyr eyes,
                     Psalm. 10. bycause they know nothing of the worde as they ought to knowe. So playes the Pope, he wil not be tried by the worde (but he shall whether he will or no in the day of iudgement,) lette him ryde on cocke horse, nay on mens backes, & treade on Emperours neckes, and kéepe a coyle like the Diuell in euery kingdome of this worlde, hys exaltyng vp to heauen, shall but déeper plunge hym into Hell, for not

hearyng the voyce. Obedience is better than sacrifice, and the holy Ghost alwayes wiser than menne: God is true, and all men are liers: the golde that is purified seuentimes, is not so perfect as his worde: wherefore all adders too, or takers fro,
                     Reu. 22. are accursed. Heare O heauen and harken O earth, sayde Esay, Esai. 1. in his tyme,
                     Esay. 1. verse. 2. and what may wée say in our tyme, it would grieue your harte to tell a tale to a poste, and it woulde encourage vs well to speake to willyng menne. I will hyde nothing from Abraham,
                     Gen. 18. verse. 19. sayde God, for hée will shewe it hys chyldren, and teache it his posteritie. Would GOD that as you are not alwayes chyldren but somtimes fathers, so you were not alwaies learners but sometimes teachers. I woulde you were all preachers. Numeri. 1
                     •
                  . verse. 29.
               
                  She receyued not correction. This is a secōd cause that the prophets warnyngs were but winde, but this

worde shal burne as fire, and make the people smoke for it. As doctrine is cold without reprehēsiō, so are threatnings in vaine without correction. This made Ionas so angry with himselfe, that he wished death again,
                     Ionas. 4 bicause he thought it a discredite that God had not so dealt with Nyniuie as hée had pronounced. But the anger of manne dothe not accomplishe the iudgements of God: and he is mercyfull to spare, & rightuous to reward, when & whom he wil. I would to God, the case were so with this Cittie nowe, as it was with Niniuie then. The incurable malice of Israell, euen of Gods owne people is here displayed and expressed, that neyther wordes nor blowes, neyther speakyng nor striking, neither gētle promises nor sharp reprehēsions, neither faire meanes nor foule coulde do thē any good at all: for if prophecying wold haue serued ye turne, why? early and late, she lacked none: or if punishment could haue wrought the

feate, for dearth, sworde, captiuitie, plague, &c. shée wanted not: warning by wordes dothe worke with many of Gods chyldren, but correction winnes them all:
                     Bycause they are reprobate.
                   and nothyng will doe with the wicked till condemnation come. Hée is sayde to receyue correction that is bettered by it, as Ezechias the King, Dauid the Prophete, Ioseph the Patriarch, Iob the holy man. It was good for all these that GOD had humbled them: but where there is no fruyte, there all is loste, and that correction is not receyued. As a potion taken for health, if it worke not, there muste bée a quicker, or else the disease remayneth still: euen so if one punishmente will not doe, a kynder muste bée putte in proofe, and as where the Physition ceasseth of the seconde attempt, hée seeth small signe of recouery, and that mans state is daungerous: euen so where GOD giues ouer and lettes alone, there is no hope

of remedie: and that mans case is desperate, for whome hee loueth,
                     Reu. 3. verse. 19. he chastiseth, and scourgeth euery sonne that hée receyueth: and if you be not vnder chastisemente, that is, if you receyue not correction, whereof all his chyldren are pertakers, then are you bastardes and not sonnes, Heb. 12. but it was farre otherwise with this people,
                     Heb. 12. verse. 6.7.8. they were as Horse & Mule, in whome there is no vnderstandyng, nay the Oxe dothe knowe hys owner, and the Asse his maisters cribbe, but Israell will not be made to knowe hir God,
                     Esay. 1. verse. 3. it is a stiffenecked people, she wyll receyue no correction, she hathe cast the yoke of obedience ouer hir shoulders: why shoulde yée be stricken anye more (sayeth Esay) séeyng that you are euer falling away?
                     Verse. 5.
               
               Lette vs nowe sée this in our se
                     •
                  ues, whether wée haue anye correction or no, and if we haue, whether we receyue it as we ought to do. God hathe

played the fathers parte, in sparing vs from Famine, from Battell, from the Sworde, and from Captiuitie and bondage, the common euentes of Warres: and hée hathe visited vs wyth a gentle plague, the disease that Dauid chose.1. Chron. 21. Verse 13. And what hathe it done? it hathe mended, as manye as it hathe ended, not one that hath not bin sicke is the better, where as the good chylde is in awe, and dothe as muche at the shakyng, as at the strykyng wyth the rodde: nay I maye saye to you, manye haue bin visited, and are recouered, but for theyr lyfe and conuersation, they are the worse: and doe they receyue correction then? excepte hée shoulde rente asunder the verye Heauens, and breake the Cloudes, and come downe hymselfe to visit, I thinke wée are at a poynte for all other visitations. I remember what the wicked man sayeth in hys hearte,
                     Psalme. 14. There

is no GOD: but lette vs not egge hym too farre. God is prouoked euerye daye, but if a manne wyll not turne, hée hathe whette hys Sworde, hée hathe bente hys bowe and made it readye,
                     Psalme. 7. hée hathe prepared for hym the instrumentes of deathe. It is not ynough to saye GOD SAVE THE QVEENE, & yet by our disobediēce, cause hym to take hyr awaye. Oure Sauioure wepte ouer Hierusalem, for that shée knewe not those thynges whyche belonged to hyr peace.
                     Luke. 10. verse. 41. Englande hathe peace, the Lorde long continue it, and open oure eyes, to sée the thynges that belong vnto it, as well in pietie and religion, as in policie and reason. Happye are they whome other mennes harmes can make to beware. If Fraunce, Flaunders, Spayne, and all the whole Worlde besydes, can not bée a fayre and sufficient warning to vs,

lette vs take héede we be not made an example to all the world.
                     God forbidde.
                  
               
               
                  Shee trusted not in the Lorde. This is the thirde cause, and it is the fountayne of all vnhappinesse, not to depēd of Gods prouidence. This made Israell hunt after Idols so, and putte hir trust in Horses and strength of mē, to bée so cruell in dealing with deceyt. And what shall I saye of oure engrocers, forestallers, forfet takers, Usurers, oppressing Landlordes, of murmuring rich men, that euer are afraid, and neuer haue ynough? that you trust in the Lorde? I will not disproue youre faith, but if you do those things which denye and defye the faithe, which fight agaynste faithe, if you iustifye them of little faythe, that cared but for to morrowe,
                     Math. 6. and youre carke be for a hundred yeares, though your carcases can not tarrye so long.
                     A long liuing and a short life.
                   You maye talke of Gods Prouidence as long as you wyll, and beléeue you he that

list. Youre trust is not rightely in the Lorde: and if you mistrust hys prouidence, by my counsayle you shall mystrust youre owne prouision, and good reason to, for hée will take whether hée wyll at hys pleasure. Thou feele,
                     Though our Landlord be on earth, yet our lyfe Lord is in Heauen. L
                           •
                        ke. 22. verse. 20. thys nyghte shall I take awaye thy soule, and whose shall these thynges bée then whyche then haste prouided?
               Agayne, there are a sorte that goe downe into Egypte,
                     Esa. 31. whome Esay curseth, whyche séeke wyse women, olde beldames, for yong women wyth childe, Witches and cunnyng menne, for thynges loft.
               It was a greate faulte in this people, & Manasses ye Idolater was sorely gyuen to it, to obserue dreames, singyng of byrdes, and the lyke paltrie as manye doe nowe,
                     Popery ioyneth vvith Sorcery.
                   the howlyng of Dogges, the gnawyng of Rottes, the spottes in the hande, the crying of Rauens, the flying of Owles, a sorte

of fonde obseruations and dreames, olde wyues fables, whereby the Diuell deludeth manye, and weakeneth theyr faythe. Saule woulde néedes consulte wyth a Witche thoughe hée hymselfe hadde putte them downe: yet when Samuell the Prophete was deade, so bewitched was Kyng Saule,1. Sam. 2
                        •
                     . but shortlye after, if not the nexte daye, hee ranne on hys owne Sworde. There is a Plague in store for all forsakers of GOD, and séekers to the Diuell: hée dothe abhorre it, and precisely forbydde it in the eyghtenth Chapter of Deuteronomie.
                     Deut. 18. verse. 10.
               
               Nowe for them whyche flye the Plague, whether they trust in the Lorde or no, héere are manye would fayne knowe, and I wyll bée as willyng to declare my opinion therein. I can not defyne it absolutely, or fynallye determine the case, but I leaue

it to my betters, and it is conscience in déede that strykes the stroke of trust or mistrust, and therein euerye manne canne best tell hymselfe: for as thy lyfe dothe declare thée to manne, so thy faithe dothe shewe thée vnto GOD, and Tenera res conscientia est, quae nec tangi nec angi debet, Conscience is a tender thyng, and maye not bée touched nor troubled. I maye tearme it a signe of weakenesse, but not flatte infidelitie, for thou mayest both tarrie and flée an Infidell. And there is a desperate kynde of tarrying with preposterous wordes, whyche I vtterlye mislike: and that same harde opinion flatte agaynste all Phisicke, that the Plague is not infectious, I canne not allowe: they haue no reason to make it good that so saye: but they bryng particulare experience, whych is no proofe at all, as though God coulde not be god, and the Plague infectious.

Let him that hath a gift to tarry, praise God for it, and let him not triumph ouer him that hathe it not: and yet I woulde euerye man were as he. But mans nature is verye frayle, and hys fleshe soone afrayde, and euerye bodye hathe not the like measure of perfection and strength. Agayne, some are more bounde to tarry than other some: as publike persons, the Magistrate, the Minister, the maister of householdes that haue any publike office, charge, or function, let them looke vnto it: and for the rest that flye away, if they doe prouide that their neyghbours doe not lacke that conueniente comforte and sufficiente succoure whyche their presence myghte yéelde, I say it is the safer. But to aunswere rash concluders, whiche are hastie to giue sentence, and do condemne their brethrens conscience, whiche say absolutely, it is lacke of faith, and altogither vnlawfull, it is to flye from God &c. As though God

were the plague. I say, if you wil néeds proue your fayth for your tarying and playing ye men, then must you find a promise for your fayth, or els it is no faith. For eternal life we haue a promise, and therfore a faith: & wher in al the Scriptures haue you anye promise that God wil spare him or hir, that vpō their trust remaine & tarie by it? whereas as godly and as faithfull are takē away, as Infidels and wicked: nay, I think rather the worst are left behinde to amende, and it will be, or to féele a sorer plague. For as Augustine sayth, it is a temptation not to be tempted, so surely may it be a horrible plague not to be plagued, as I haue proued before. Away with that Heathen prouerb, which is too common among Christians: He that dieth this yere, is scused for the next. Nay, he that dieth this yéere, & not in the Lorde, is excused neuer, but dieth for euer. Let vs rather pray the Lorde to enable vs to doe our dutie in all spiritual strength,

and to comfort one another in sicknesse and in health, and let vs beséech the lord to remoue this plague far frō vs, séeing we can not remoue our selues from the plague, the wings of the morning cānot do it,
                     A prayer.
                   for he is euery where. Haue mercy vpon vs therfore, O Lord, according to thy wonted mercy, like as when thou commaundedst thy Angel to cease from slaughter in the time of king Dauid: so if it be thy blessed will, take frō vs nowe this pestilence of mortalitie, and shewe thy louing countenaunce once agayne, and be not angry with vs for euer.
               
                  She drew not neare to hir God. This is the fourth and last cause. As a wilde Asse in the mountayne cōmes not neare his catcher, so Israel withdraweth hir self frō god hir kéeper. Christes crying,
                     Iere. 11.
                        •
                      
                     Vers. 28. Come vnto me. &c. Mat. 11. dothe tell vs that he can not abide that we should wander & stray to any other. To come néere, is not thy bodily going to the church, or Pharisaical pressing to ye high Aulter, but it is a spiritual approching,

euen as God is a spirit. Iohn. 4. Which words S. Iames vseth too,
                     Iames. 4
                        •
                      
                     vers. 8. & expresseth what it is to draw nea
                     ••
                   vnto god: it is to clense our hands, & to purifie our hartes. It cannot be but a great comfort to vs, that God is euery where: & religion doth nothing els but ioyne vs vnto him, as superstitiō doth separate vs frō him: and therfore it is called fornication. Also prayer is a speciall of this generall, wherby we talke with God, & come before his presence, as Abraham talked with God for Sodome, & euery faithful child of God for himselfe. But they that séeke other shifts, & neuer aske of god, as king Asa sick of ye gout, sought Phisitiōs and neuer sought ye Lord, they are runagates frō god, & they shal dye as ye king did, without help: for the Lord is soueraigne, & ruleth al things by himself, and though he lend vs ordinary meanes, yet he leaues vs not to thē alone, but would haue vs séeke all things of him, who is the fountayne of al good things.
               
                  
                  Hir Rulers are as roaring Lions. Least the Prophet should séeme to saye any thing that 
                     •
                  e could not proue, and so slaunder the state of Ierusalem, therfore as he named the faults before, so he commes nowe to the persons also, and that the very chéefe. Note héere howe necessarie it is to come to particulars, and to poynt at, and paint out sinne, in whom soeuer it is. He that speakes generally, speakes to no man now a days, for euery body can post it off, or sport it out so pretily.
                     Iohn. 4. V
                           ••
                        se. 16 As the woman of Samaria by the well of Sichar, was verye pleasaunt with Christ, vntil he tooke hir vp for hir adulterie: So euery man had bin faultlesse héere, and the Prophet had not bin very playne, they woulde haue set as good a face on it as we doe. But as the good Phisition to heale the body doth minister many things agaynst the minde, so muche more shoulde we to heale the soule, deale playne agaynst the body, especially séeing that, Quo grauior

est causa, eo intentior esset cura, The cause béeing greter, there shuld be better care.
               I pray you sée how he calles the best (Beastes) héere, what are the rest then? iudge you: and not only vnder Manasses, but also vnder Iosias a good king, were naughtie Rulers to be found. And héere are names of purpose méete for them, whatsoeuer other titles they take to them selues. As a roring Lion and a hungry Beare,
                     Prou. 28 vers. 15. so is a wicked Magistrate ouer tho poore people, sayth ye wise king. The prouerb of a slouthful slouen is written in the .22. of the Prouerbs,
                     Prou. 22. Verse. 13. that euer when he should doe any good, there is a Lion in the stréete. But and it be true in déede that a Lion sittes in iudgement to deuoure whom he shoulde defende, then equitie shall haue a colde suite: and therfore among many other things it was wisely sayd of Salomon: There the common welth doth flourish where the good do beare rule: but where the wicked strike the stroke, there the

godly hide their heades.
               We haue a most mercyfull and gracious prince, Elizabeth, God in mercy long preserue and keepe hir. Amen. She is a Lambe and no Lion: and where she giues the Lion, it is to be wished that in this sense she had many Lions,
                     God is our keeper.
                   I meane men of courage and valour: But as she hath hands ynowe, so I pray God she haue many harts, and then we shall doe well ynough.
               Héere is the picture of Ierusalem, a monstrous body,
                     For both hir Magistrates and Ministers vvere corrupt.
                   a roring Lions head, a rauening Wolues throte, a Camels neck, a Cormerants hart, neuer an eye but starke blinde, not a right hande or foote, but talants like the Diuell: so that you might rightly borrowe the Poets verse, to say, Monstrum horrendum informe ingens, cui lumen ademptum. And all this is for the crueltie in the Princes, the couetousnesse in the Priestes, and corruption in the people. Suche a foule body was it, that frō top to toe there was no

whole part,
                     Iere. 6. vers. 13. from the head to the héele no sound place: for from highest to lowest they were all set on couetousnesse.
               And héere I could wishe one property yet of a Lion in all our Rulers. They saye the Lion quaketh at the crowing of a Cocke: So I pray God that the threatnings of the worde may worke with them, and quayle them: that the spirite of Elias doubled vpon Elizeus maye bee raysed in Iohn: and that suche men may be founde out as méetest messangers for them, whiche goe not about the bushe, neither are blaunchers, but as playne as a packe staffe, whiche put them in remembraunce what they are, that as the Lyon though he be the King of beastes, yet at length is made a pray to small birds, and then is that saying veryfied, Better is a liue Dogge than a dead Lion. So they although they be greate in authoritie, yet at the last they are but a bayte for the small wormes.
               
                  
                  And her Iudges are as Wolues in the euening. I wil not stand on the curious distinctiō of these degrées, but only shew you some difference of the beasts to whom he resembles thē. A Liō prayeth in the day, a Wolfe in the night: a Lyon catcheth stoute beastes, a Wolfe killeth Lambes: a Lion takes no lambes, as an Eagle takes no flies, A quila non capit Muscas. If a beast humble himselfe to a Lion he is the lesse cruell, but do it to a Wolfe and hee is the more fierce. A Wolfe hath a more rauenous nature, for though he bee ful of spoyle, yet he takes pleasure in the bloud, for he thrustes his snoute into the bowels of a lambe, rooting and noufling for the hart: and therefore in scriptures, the enimies of the Church are often called Wolues, and for no vnlike qualitie are wicked Iudges here resembled to them.
               Whatsoeuer is rightly done of the magistrate, may be sayde to be done of

god himself: & I haue said you are gods. Take héede therfore what you do (sayd Iosaphat a good captaine,2. Cro 1
                        •
                     
                   when he ordayned Iudges) for you execute not the iudgments of men but of God, and ther is no vnrighteousnesse with him. Sit not with his authoritie then to practise your owne crueltie, if you do? you haue lost your warrant, and it is of your self, & you are no magistrate, but a Wolfe: and the widow crie, and the fatherlesse wéepe for his ryght, the lambe is fallen into the Wolues iawes. But the bloud shal crie for vengeāce, and neuer cease, and reuenge shalbe redy, & neuer sleep, for hee that made him shall heare hym.
                     Ecclesi. 4. Verse. 6. Now, as that Iudges case is cléere, that iudgeth thousands in truth and equity, so is his moste grieuous that condemneth but one vniustlye. Remember the righteous God that hath no respect of persons but is a iust Iudge, remember that Potentes potenter punientur: the mightie shal be mightily punished, and mercy

                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
                  
is graunted to the lower sort, but the magistrate shall haue a sore triall.
                     VVisd. 6. Verse. 9. Wyl you knowe who hath set you in youre seate? that same God, that raised iudges vnto Israel. 2. Iudg. Uerse. 16. Wil you know to what end? it is to do away euil from among his people and to iudge thē with iust iudgement.
                     De
                           •
                        tr. 16. and. 19. Put to your helping hand then in the name of God, and let two scales fal from al your eyes that haue to deale in iustice, the one is (couetousnesse) that you may sée right, the other is (cruelty) that you shew no wrōg, and as much as you can, by clemencye, pittie, and mercy, auoyde the name of Wolues. But against the wicked be Lions and spare not, as Iethro counselled his son in law Moses,
                     Exo. 18. Verse. 21. Mark these three notes you that are Magi
                        
                           ••
                        rates.
                   to picke out men of courage, men that feared God and hated couetousnesse to gouern ye people. You had néede of stomack and courage, and to be Liōs some times, for you shal méete wyth diuels else now & thē. Here is suche cutting and flashing, as if men

were Oxen and not Christians. I thinke the sworde you cary should be able to commaund vppe euery sworde into his sheath, or if they cannot rule theyr handes, I am sure you haue authoritye for theyr legges. I reade in the 4. of Genesis,
                     Gene. 4. Verse. 15. that hee that killed Caine a murtherer, should bee punyshed seauen folde: I am sorie it is made so light a matter in our time. I speake not vnto you to make new lawes, I knowe you cannot, but to execute olde lawes, & to bee more exquisite on the tryall of him that hath cutte a throte, than of hym that hath cut a purse. Oh Lord, that a murtherer shoulde finde any one friende in a Christian common weale:
                     For as the body is more vvorth than raiment, so the life is more precious th
                           ••
                         liuing.
                   but of nobles? of Iudges? of magistrates? it were to intollerable: a poore théefe packes to Tyborne, but a manne kyller, a murtherer, can shyfte hys legges oute of the shackle, and slippe his necke oute of the haulter.

In Platoes common welth, he yt killed one was thought worthy death twice: firste for natures duetye, secondlye, for the life he toke away: & shal a Ruffyan kil twice in a Christian estate before he can be met with once? And here I haue a sute to your honours, I wyll not spare to speake, howsoeuer I speede, I shall discharge my conscience yet, and the burden shal be yours: it is to renewe my petition, whiche once I made to your predicessor, for poore condemned prisoners: make no such poste hast I beséech you, that you dāger their soules with their bodies. They are cut off to saue their soule, but & you make no care of that, take héede that you haue not as short a warning, and a more sodayne departing your selues. God hath giuen you faire warning, by many late and lamentable examples, euen of your own Cloke. I discommend not due execution of Iustice, it is no piece of my meaning, but mercy is alwayes better

than Sacrifice. Wherefore let it euer ioyne with your iustice, or else there is no difference betwéene damning & condemning on your part: the olde Poetes had a blind saying, (Dimittamte orco) Ile sende thée to hel, when anye man was don to death: but Christiās haue a better phrase (I trow) & I truste they go to heauē. Wel, to draw toward a conclusion with you which are our honorable gouernour and Maior of this Citie, you must remember that you are chosen in the time of a plague, and therfore in the time of sinne: you are come to a sicke & a sore citie, you must therfore play both the Phisition and Surgeon, you muste awake out of Endimions sleepe, and thrust dilligently your sword of iustice in, to launce out all corruption and bagage which is gathered in the bowels, we stoppe not our nose so at the plague, as the Lord doth stoppe hys nose at our sinne: the stincke of London is come vp before hym, God hath a worke to doe

by you, do not the Lordes worke negligently, for feare of a curse: Tully truely sayde (Magistratus virumindicat) autoritie doth declare a man, whether he Loue superstition or religion, whether he loue Iustice or brybes, whether he be inclined to mercy or to crueltie, & whether he be couetous or liberal: and if hee be a Liō, his pawes: or if he be a Wolf, his iawes wil soone bewray him: the cry of the Orphane & oppressed wil Hunte him and finde him out.
               It cōmes to my minde, those three ships, sēt to Mar. Aurelius Emperor of Rome out of Spain (as I remēber) full fraught wt vagabōds, loiterers, théeues, Iuglers, & Iesters, & in a letter he wrote that these were but the maisters of this misrule, and the captain Roges, but for the scholers themselues three hundered ships would not suffise. To thys end I tell you thys, bycause wee haue more than thrée shippes ful, by oddes. I

wyl not saye, the Cittie is ful: but sure adulterers and Harlottes, théeues and Uacaboundes do swarme in most places of the same, and no marueyle, for Dicing houses, Daunsing schooles, bowling-aleyes, Alehouses, are almoste lawlesse in euery place: me thinkes the policye were as good to note on those places (LORD HAVE MERCIE VPON VS) as on infected houses, & more néede to, euen at this time, if there were due searche, you shoulde finde my words true. Seruice or Sermon, all is one to them. I leaue to tell the ribaldrie, contempte of God, and of good order, blasphemy and vilanous spéeches amongst them, that a mā would take thē to bee rather Diuels than Christians. You cannot haue all of me nowe, giue eare to other when they come, I beséeche you, and in anye case despise not the leaste that the Lorde doeth sende: so shall you shewe in youre yeares

account that you haue kepte your conscience vnwounded, vnburdened, as Samuels was before the Lorde: you may chaunce els to get such spottes and scarres in this yéere, as will not out agayne before the Iudgement daye, the which the Lorde God forbid. Amen.
               And as for thée London, I must néeds say thou art déepe in debte, double and treble daunger doth enuiron thée round about, and compasse thée in on euery side, for thou dost ouerflowe with sinne. Euen as a Cundit
                     •
                   sprouteth out water,
                     Iere. 6. Verse. 7. and as the Sea fometh with myre and grauell: So thou doste discouer thine owne shame. Prodigalitie & pride, deceite and fraud, and all the rest, it was first began in thée: Thou hast infected both Court and Countrey, and theyr bloude will be required at thy hands. Greate néede haue we therefore (my brethren) by our tymely repentaunce to turne vnto the Lorde, that as by our example we haue fetcht them in, so by

our generall lamentation & mourning, we may bring them out again. Who cā tell whether the Lord will yet haue cō
                  passion vpon vs, or no, and staye the thing that is concluded agaynst vs? It was one of the last offers that god made to Israell, when he sayd, Amende,
                     Iere. 6. vers. 
                     
                        •
                     . Esai. 24. or I will withdraw my hart from thée. Now if in his rage he shall sweare that we shall not enter into his rest, and in his anger he shall withdrawe his countenaunce, which hath béene our continuaunce, then soone shall fearefulnesse, the pitte, and the snare, come vpon vs, and all them that dwell in the worlde. The Lord turne our harts rather vnto him: worke in vs timely repentance before it be too late: make vs more obedient to his holy worde, that we maye serue him more truely in holynesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life, that this miserable and paynefull life béeing passed ouer, & ended once, we may receiue an eternall and euerlasting lyfe, which

is the onely purchase of Iesus Christ our onely redeemer and sauiour: to whom with the father and ye holy ghost be al glorie, prayse, and power, for nowe and euermore.
               Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            IMPRINTED AT London by Frauncis Coldocke.
            Anno Dom. 1578. Februarij. 10.
            
         
      
   